Financial services and property group Liberty International vowed on Thursday to change the way the British pensions market works with the launch of a new user-friendly subsidiary.
"The market is poised for change, requiring a fresh approach, and our company will provide this by demystifying pensions for everybody - both individuals and the companies for which they work," Liberty chairman Donald Gordon said.
Liberty has set up its own pensions company, Liberty International Pensions, and will target retail pensions and money purchase pension schemes -- pensions where the benefit is linked to the amount an individual has put in.
Liberty, 69 percent owned by South Africa's Liberty Life, has enrolled the giant British Telecom Pension Scheme, which will pay five million pounds ($7.8 million) for 10 percent of the equity of Liberty International Pensions.
Liberty's Gordon said the move into the British pensions market was an extension of a worldwide shift from defined benefit -- where an individual's pension is related to his final salary -- to defined contribution principles.
This would have "a most profound influence on business practice and retirement savings in the future". In Britain there is also "an urgent and growing need for quality privatised retirement savings which require a radical change in approach and funding techniques", Gordon added.
A rapidly ageing population and low birth rate were combining to increase this need, Gordon said.
Liberty also announced it had teamed up with fund management group Hermes to form Hermes Liberty International Pensions. This will offer specialised investment services to the British pensions industry, with Hermes as fund manager.
BT Pension Scheme is giving the Hermes Liberty joint venture "critical mass from the outset" with a 1.5 billion pound transfer of assets to the new funds, Gordon said.
He said Hermes' expertise in investment management and track record would help the group to provide quality and competitively priced pension services. Hermes called the joint pensions venture a meeting of minds.
"Liberty has the ability and techniques of selling pensions, it also has the systems...and the administration. We on the other hand are good at our particular core areas of investment management...we think that's a very good marriage," Alastair Ross Goobey, chief executive of Hermes, said.
"It really was a meeting of minds on this. Whether it develops further from this we shall see. I think one step at a time is quite enough for us."
He said the venture would probably not be up and running until the first quarter of next year as regulatory approval first had to be obtained for the new group.
As well as selling pensions directly by telephone, Liberty also plans to sell personal pensions at its regional shopping centres, which are held through a majority-owned subsidiary Capital Shopping Centres. These have more than 150 million customer visits a year, Liberty said. ($1=.6395 Pound)
