Financial services and property group Liberty International Holdings on Thursday unveiled a move into the British pensions market in ventures involving the British Telecom Pension Scheme and pension fund management group Hermes.
Liberty is establishing its own pensions company, Liberty International Pensions, which will target both the needs of money purchase pension schemes and retail pensions.
BT Pension Scheme, which owns Hermes, is to pay five million pounds ($7.8 million) for 10 percent of the equity of Liberty International Pensions, with the rest held by Liberty.
Liberty and Hermes said in a joint statement they were also setting up a new subsidiary called Hermes Liberty International Pensions to offer specialised investment services to the British pensions industry, with Hermes as fund manager.
BT Pension Scheme is giving the Hermes Liberty joint venture "critical mass from the outset" with a 1.5 billion pound transfer of assets to the new funds, Liberty's chairman Donald Gordon said.
Gordon said Liberty was "well positioned to take advantage of the changes affecting the UK pensions industry." Hermes' expertise in investment management and track record would help it to provide quality and competitively priced pension services.
David Fischel, Liberty's managing director, said Liberty International Pensions still required approval of Britain's Department of Trade and Industry but was otherwise ready for launch.
Hermes called the joint pensions venture a meeting of minds.
"Liberty has the ability and techniques of selling pensions, it also has the systems...and the administration. We on the other hand are good at our particular core areas of investment management...we think that's a very good marriage," Alastair Ross Goobey, chief executive of Hermes, said.
Ross Goobey said Hermes had approached Liberty International only to find the group had been considering an approach to Hermes.
"It really was a meeting of minds on this. Whether it develops further from this we shall see. I think one step at a time is quite enough for us."
He said the venture would probably not be up and running until the first quarter of next year as regulatory approval first had to be obtained for the new group.
The decision by the giant British Telecom Pension Scheme to transfer assets to the new Hermes Liberty International Pensions funds would give the new venture a boost.
"I would hope it gives some people some feeling of security that BT Pension Scheme, which is after all the biggest in the country, is willing to do this," he said.
Liberty plans to sell personal pensions at its regional shopping centres, which are held through a majority-owned subsidiary Capital Shopping Centres. These have more than 150 million customer visits a year, Liberty said.
Fischel said an announcement would be made on exactly how the retail customer business would work at a future date, adding he could not give details at present. ($1=.6395 Pound)
