A high-profile purge at Deutsche Morgan Grenfell of any managers found to bear responsibility for failing to spot irregular dealings by former fund manager Peter Young is expected next week, banking sources said on Friday.
The investment banking arm of Deutsche Bank is due to complete a preliminary report with accountants Ernst &amp; Young into what went wrong internally and led to the suspension of three Morgan Grenfell Asset Management (MGAM) funds last month and Young's dismissal for alleged "gross misconduct".
Trading in the three funds, which totalled around 1.4 billion pounds ($2.21 billion) and were held by around 90,000 retail investors, was temporarily suspended early in September but resumed after Deutsche stepped in with a 180 million pounds cash injection.
Young, who has had his assets frozen and his passport impounded, is currently under investigation by Britain's Serious Fraud Office, which probes major financial crime.
He has said he was not guilty of any criminal activity and is being made a scapegoat for failings.
A probe into his management of two of the funds in question, which held too high a proportion of unlisted, speculative stocks has been underway since problems emerged.
Both MGAM and investments watchdog the Investment Management Regulatory Organisation (IMRO) have undertaken their own inquiries with forensic accountants carrying out a detailed dissection of trading history of the funds.
IMRO's own investigation, which could lead to hefty punishments against the firm, will take longer to conclude.
There have been conflicting reports over what the ramifications of any sackings following the debacle would be.
As head of the asset management arm Keith Percy's position will inevitably be under review but some British newspapers have suggested key MGAM clients are opposing any action against him while others are said to be threatening to withdraw assets if he stays.
A similar quandary is reported to be exercising the minds of Deutsche Morgan Grenfell (DMG) officials in London and the Deutsche Bank hierarchy in Frankfurt.
Other key managers, including Glyn Owen, MGAM's chief European investment officer and Mike Wheatley, compliance director for the fund management business are also likely to face scrutiny because of their executive responsibilities.
Deutsche Morgan Grenfell said it could not comment on speculative newspaper reports, but the group said when problems first surfaced that it would produce a preliminary report within six weeks.
"We can't comment on any such speculation and we have always pointed out that we would announce potential management decisions after the internal investigation has been finalised," a DMG spokesman in London told Reuters.
From the beginning Deutsche has made it clear that it would take any action deemed necessary to restore confidence in its fund management business and if lapses in internal controls were found, heads would roll.
But despite difficult decisions emerging in the intervening weeks, Deutsche's resolve to give its fund management arm and by association its investment banking operation a clean bill of health, has not faltered, banking sources said.
($1=.6350 Pound)
