Shares in Cable &amp; Wireless (C&amp;W) advanced on Tuesday after investors welcomed news of a deal with NYNEX of the United States and Bell Canada International to create Britain's largest cable operator.
"This was a bold strategic stroke by the (C&amp;W) chief executive," said Chris McFadden, analyst at Merrill Lynch.
The deal, which took only five weeks to complete, brings together C&amp;W's Mercury, British cable company Videotron, Bell Cablemedia and NYNEX CableComms, eclipsing Telewest as Britain's biggest cable operator.
It sent C&amp;W shares soaring, peaking at 476.5 pence before easing back to close up 25.5 at 466.5 pence.
The move is a landmark deal for C&amp;W chief executive Richard Brown, appointed five months ago, and follows the collapse of merger talks earlier this year between C&amp;W and its great rival British Telecommunications Plc.
"The logic is irrefutable...the advantages of scope and size are undoubtedly there," said Societe Generale Strauss Turnbull analyst John Tysoe.
BT said it welcomed the consolidation in the sector and analysts said the move could strengthen the telecoms giant's calls for it to be allowed to provide cable television.
But BT's shares edged lower to close down 4.5 at 353.5 pence and analysts said the new company would give BT a run for its money.
"We had a common vision of what could be done and we have done it with speed and nimbleness," Brown told Reuters. C&amp;W last month replaced BT in a major German alliance with diversified utility RWE that is seen as the main competitor to Deutsche Telekom's dominance as the German market is liberalised.
The new merged company, which will provide integrated telecommunications, information and entertainment services, will give C&amp;W's telephone company Mercury access to 18 million business and domestic customers, Brown said.
The number of homes within its sights will eclipse former market leader Telewest's two million at 2.47 million but it will not be in direct competition as the companies operate in different franchises.
Telewest's shares were boosted by the news, as analysts re-evaluated the potential in the sector, gaining 12.5 pence to close at 135.5 pence.
"This is clear evidence of confidence in the future of the U.K. cable industry," a spokesman for industry body the Cable Communications Association, said.
Around six billion pounds ($7.5 billion) has already been invested in laying out cable networks and a further six billion pounds of investment is planned, the spokesman added.
In a related deal, Videotron is being bought by Bell Cablemedia in a complex transaction involving a $338 million equity investment in Bell Cablemedia by Cable &amp; Wireless. This values Videotron at around $1.09 billion.
Once the merger and Videotron deal have been completed, Cable &amp; Wireless will own 52.6 percent of the new company -- to be called Cable &amp; Wireless Communications -- with NYNEX owning 18.5 percent and Bell Canada 14.2 percent.
The remaining 15 percent will be floated, which analysts said would give it some scarcity value, with listings planned in both London and New York, probably in about six months.
C&amp;W's Brown said he could not detail the financial aspects of the merger because of the new company's planned listing.
McFadden said cost savings should be quite significant, including tax offsets, refinancing of high-yield cable television funding and possibly through staff cuts, along with eliminating duplication in laying cables.
The new group aims to increase revenues by providing a wider range of services to existing customers, offering a combination of telecoms, broadband, data transmission, video shopping and Internet access.
It could also secure more favourable terms for programming from BSkyB, the satellite broadcaster in which Rupert Murdoch's News Corp has a 40 percent stake.
BSkyB shares ended down 18 pence at 678.5 pence. ($1=.7986 Pound)
