Britain's largest cable operator was born on Tuesday from the merger of the British operations of cable and telecoms giants Cable &amp; Wireless, NYNEX Corp of the U.S. and Bell Canada International.
The deal, which took only five weeks to complete, brings together C&amp;W's Mercury, British cable company Videotron, Bell Cablemedia and NYNEX CableComms, eclipsing Telewest as Britain's biggest cable operator.
It is a landmark deal for C&amp;W chief executive Richard Brown, appointed five months ago, and follows the collapse of merger talks earlier this year between C&amp;W and its great rival British Telecommunications Plc.
C&amp;W last month replaced BT in a major German alliance with diversified utility RWE that is seen as the main competitor to the dominant Deutsche Telekom as the German market is being liberalised.
Brown said the merged company, which will provide integrated telecommunications, information and entertainment services, would give C&amp;W's telephone company Mercury access to a total of 18 million business and domestic customers.
Latest statistics show 30 percent of homes which can take cable after an extensive cable-laying drive beneath Britain's streets have opted for one or more cable service.
Brown said the move had been spawned by a common vision.
"We had a common vision of what could be done and we have done it with speed and nimbleness," he told Reuters.
The development was welcomed by the industry, battling to compete with satellite operators such as BSkyB in television services and British Telecom in telephones.
"This is clear evidence of confidence in the future of the UK cable industry," a spokesman for industry body the Cable Communications Association, said.
"The broadband fibre optic network being laid across the UK is the most advanced in the world for delivery to individual homes," he said, adding that around 6 billion pounds ($7.5 billion) had already been invested in building the network and a further six billion of investment was planned.
In a related deal, Videotron is being bought by Bell Cablemedia in a complex transaction involving a $338 million equity investment in Bell Cablemedia by Cable &amp; Wireless. This values Videotron at around $1.09 billion.
Once the merger and the Videotron deal have been completed, Cable &amp; Wireless will own 52.6 percent of the new company -- to be called Cable &amp; Wireless Communications -- with NYNEX owning 18.5 percent and Bell Canada 14.2 percent of the shares.
The remaining 15 percent will floated and the groups intend to list the company in both London and New York. This is likely to take place in about six months.
C&amp;W's Brown said he could not detail the financial aspects of the merger because of the new company's planned listing.
Cable &amp; Wireless Communications "...will provide local, national, international, data and mobile telecommunications, together with multichannel television and Internet services".
Brown said the new company would be the only one in Britain able to offer multiple services which people had to get from different providers until now.
"Cable &amp; Wireless Communications will be the only company in the UK capable of offering a combination of telecoms, broadband, data transmission, video shopping and Internet access."
The group aims to increase revenues by providing a wider range of services to existing customers and increased access to a broader customer base. It will also produce "significant cost savings" by eliminating duplication, enhancing purchasing power and increasing capital expenditure efficiencies.
The new company will be strategically positioned to offer new products like interactive digital services and multi-media products "as they become available", the companies said.
Stephen Pettit, executive director of European operations at C&amp;W, told Reuters Financial Television that the deal would not lead to duplication.
"Both Mercury and the cable companies had strategies to dig up the streets and lay cables and they are looking at the same streets. This gives the chance to do it once and keep the costs down as a result," he said.
Pettit said no other players could match what he described as "a unique force" in the British market.
