Cable and telecoms giants Cable &amp; Wireless, NYNEX Corp and Bell Canada International on Tuesday announced the formation of a major new British cable player by merging the operations of their British subsidiaries.
This brings together C&amp;W's Mercury, British cable company Videotron, Bell Cablemedia and NYNEX CableComms.
In a related deal, Videotron is being bought by Bell Cablemedia in a complex deal which involves a $338 million equity investment in Bell Cablemedia by Cable &amp; Wireless and values Videotron at around $1.09 billion.
Videotron, which was already 26 percent owned by Bell Cablemedia, was the target of a long-running takeover battle, with Cable &amp; Wireless emerging as favourite.
Recent reports said German telecoms group Deutsche Telekom and International CableTel of the U.S. were also interested in taking it over.
Once the merger and the Videotron deal have been completed, Cable &amp; Wireless will own 52.6 percent of the new company - to be called Cable &amp; Wireless Communications - with NYNEX owning 18.5 percent and Bell Canada 14.2 percent of the shares. The remaining 15 percent will floated, C&amp;W told Reuters.
The groups intend to list the company, which will provide integrated telecommunications, information and entertainment services, in both London and New York. This is likely to take place in about six months, C&amp;W added.
Cable &amp; Wireless Communications "...will provide local, national, international, data and mobile telecommunications, together with multichannel television and Internet services" to around six million franchised homes and to businesses throughout Britain, the groups said in a statement.
Richard Brown, chief executive of Cable &amp; Wireless, said the new company would be the only company in Britain able to offer multiple services that until now people had to get from different providers.
"Cable &amp; Wireless Communications will be the only company in the UK capable of offering a combination of telecoms, broadband, data transmission, video shopping and Internet access," Brown said in a statement.
The companies outlined a number of benefits from the new company, saying it would increase its revenues by providing a wider range of services to existing customers and increased access to a broader customer base.
It would also produce "significant cost savings" by eliminating duplication, enhancing purchasing power increasing capital expenditure efficiencies, they added.
As well as the services it will be able to offer immediately, the new company will be strategically positioned to offer new products such as interactive digital services and multi-media products "as they become available", they said.
