Britain's largest home loan lender, Halifax Building Society, said on Thursday it was confident of avoiding any takeover attempt when it floats on the stock market and sheds mutuality for bank status next June.
"We think we can stand on our own feet," David Gilchrist, Halifax's director of corporate affairs said.
The society, currently owned by its savers and borrowers, gave details of the timetable for conversion and flotation, which analysts have said could be worth 10 billion pounds ($16 billion).
The building society's nine million members will vote early next year on the conversion, which it is billing as the largest single extension of private share ownership in Britain.
Gilchrist said a decision to transfer its business to an existing subsidiary rather than to a company specially formed for conversion meant it would lose five-year protection against takeover but underlined its confidence.
Analysts said the consolidation of Britain's financial services market is likely to continue, which could make the large and successful Halifax a possible target.
The flotation will project the society into the top 25 companies in London's blue chip FTSE 100 stock index and Gilchrist said he was confident that shareholders would be convinced by its past performance to reject any bid attempt.
The concersion method raises the voting threshold needed for the plans to go ahead, but Gilchrist said he believed the necessary 50 percent of investing members entitled to vote would be met.
"We have no real concerns as far as the voting is concerned," he said, adding that previous building society conversions achieved approvals of over 75 percent.
"It will be a high-profile exercise, backed up by plenty of marketing," Gilchrist said.
But members eagerly expecting to find out how big a windfall they are likely to receive when they receive free shares will have to wait until January before getting any indication.
The Halifax said its members would be given full details of the conversion plans and share distribution scheme. This will tell them the number of shares they are entitled to and indicate their likely price range, based on prevailing market conditions.
Gilchrist said members would get a "broad idea" at this time, but would not be drawn on what the share hand-out was likely to be worth to the average investor.
He also declined to comment on the cost of the conversion exercise. But it seems likely to provide a boon to Britain's postal service and the printing industry as well as the financial and legal advisors working on the plans.
"The major element of cost is printing and mailing. We will be sending 75 million items of mail," he said.
Halifax members will be urged to vote "as quickly as possible" on the proposals and a special general meeting will be held in February. If members vote in favour, they will be sent details of share allocations in April or May.
Gilchrist said the Halifax had not yet done any market research on how many members would sell or retain shares.
"We are not trying to persuade people one way or another whether to hold shares or to sell the shares," he said, adding the Halifax would sound out members nearer the time.
The society will remind its members that they should have at least 100 pounds in total in their accounts on December 31 1996.
If eligible for a variable distribution of extra free shares they "may need to top up their share accounts to the November 25 1994 level by the date of the special general meeting" to qualify for the maximum number of free shares, the Halifax said. ($1=.6260 Pound)
