Britain's Halifax Building Society is confident of avoiding any takeover attempts once it sheds its mutual status and becomes a publicly quoted bank in June next year, a senior official said on Thursday.
"We think we can stand on our own feet," David Gilchrist, Halifax's director of corporate affairs said in a telephone interview following the announcement of the timetable for the planned conversion and 10 billion stg flotation.
The building society's nine million members -- its savers and borrowers -- will vote on the conversion early next year.  
Gilchrist said the building society's decision to convert by transferring its business to an existing subsidiary rather than to a company specially formed for conversion meant it would lose a five-year protection against takeover.
It will also increase the voting threshold needed to give the plans the go-ahead. But he was confident that it would achieve a sufficiently high vote in favour, of at least 50 percent of all investing members entitled to vote.
"We have no real concerns as far as the voting is concerned," he said, adding that previous building society conversions achieved approvals of over 75 percent.  
"It will be a high-profile exercise, backed up by plenty of marketing," Gilchrist said.
Earlier, the Halifax said its members would be given full details of the conversion plans and share distribution scheme in January 1997. This will tell them the number of shares they are entitled to receive and an indication of their likely price range, based on prevailing market conditions at the time.
Gilchrist said members would get a "broad idea" at this time, but would not be drawn on what the share hand-out was likely to be worth to the average investor.  
He also declined to comment on what the cost of the conversion exercise would be, saying only that a significant element would be printing and postage costs.
"The major element of cost is printing and mailing. We will be sending 75 million items of mail," he said.
Halifax members will be urged to vote "as quickly as possible" on the proposals and a special general meeting will be held in Sheffield in February. If members vote in favour, they will be sent details of share allocations in April or May.
Gilchrist said the Halifax had not yet done any market research on how many members would sell or retain shares.  
"We are not trying to persuade people one way or another whether to hold shares or to sell the shares," he said, adding the Halifax would sound out members nearer the time.
But it was working on the basis that a "large number" would have already planned to spend their windfall and had set up a share dealing system to ensure an orderly market for what will be the largest single extension of private share ownership ever in Britain, Gilchrist added.
Those who decide to sell will be offered a free-of-charge postal service for a limited period while those who keep them can chose between placing them in a nominee company or receiving a share certificate. The Halifax favours the nominee option.
The society will remind its members that they should have at least 100 stg in total in their accounts on December 31 1996.
If eligible for a variable distribution of extra free shares they "may need to top up their share accounts to the November 25 1994 level by the date of the special general meeting" to qualify for the maximum number of free shares, the Halifax said.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
