The "Big Bang" maintained London as one of the world's financial hubs, but 10 years on the role of specialised financial "boutiques" at the heart of the City is under mounting pressure from huge integrated investment banks.
"The wonderful time that there has been for the small boutique since Big Bang is over. The days of the single violinist are past, it's time for the full orchestra," one banking source told Reuters.
The so-called Big Bang of 1986 brought about radical reforms in the way the London Stock Exchange and the British government bond market operated, principally by allowing mergers between merchant banks, brokers and stock jobbers.
It saw the demise of traditional names such as Wedd Durlacher Mordaunt and Phillips and Drew which became parts of Barclays' investment bank BZW and of UBS respectively.
And ever since the initial wave of changes investment banking giants with global aspirations have been hoovering up small players which have carved out a niche for themselves.
U.S. EXPERIENCE SETS THE PACE
In the world of corporate finance this pattern of smaller firms being swallowed up by the large players is set to mirror what has taken place in the U.S., corporate financiers say.
"I believe the world is moving away from small nimble-footed boutiques, which had a wonderful time under the Conservative government. The new world is going to be based around very big cross-border corporate finance. You need a very big broking arm behind you," one corporate financier said.
This need for broking capacity and a dwindling number of independent brokers, combined with increasing regulatory demands for capital, has shrunk the opportunities for boutiques. Even in the growing derivatives market, the amounts of capital needed to play the global markets mean small outfits are hard to sustain.
BOUTIQUES THREATENED BY EUROPE INTEGRATION
Apart from the possibility of an opposition Labour government and perhaps greater restrictions on mergers and acquisitions activity, with the need for companies to prove that a takeover is in the public interest, the other threat to corporate finance boutiques comes from European integration.
Increased bureaucracy and more rigorous European Commission demands on the companies involved in takeovers will mean even greater research capabilities and legal back-up are required by the financiers advising companies on such deals, bankers say.
"Boutiques won't be much good if you have got to take a huge team of analysts and brokers out to Brussels every time you are planning a deal," said one.
With U.S. investment banking mammoths such as Goldman Sachs and Merrill Lynch building increasing roles in corporate finance as well as their traditional broking and trading strengths, this is also putting pressure on the small corporate finance players.
HAMBRO MAGAN FALLS TO NATIONAL WESTMINSTER
A recent casualty is J Hambro Magan, which two weeks ago was sold to NatWest Markets, the investment banking arm of Britain's National Westminster Bank, for an estimated 80 million pounds ($127.3 million).
The prominent corporate finance boutique was set up by George Magan in 1988 and has been involved in some of the biggest mergers and acquisitions in Britain in recent years.
"The new world is going to be dominated by the very big boys," another banker said.
Some commentators say the future of small boutiques is not as bleak as it may appear. They see the demise of some as merely part of a cycle which will spawn new dynamic teams based around talented individuals who may decide to leave a large established firm, take clients and expertise with them, and go it alone.
"It's an on-going process. It's always postulated every time there's a rash of takeovers that boutiques are going out of fashion. But it's the same process as Big Bang. Small firms have developed since. Some have disappeared and been replaced by others," a banking analyst at one U.S. investment bank said.
In cases such as Hambro Magan, the cycle has turned full circle, with the key individuals making significant financial gains for themselves by selling a highly successful business at its peak and coming back into the folds of a larger player.
SMALL FIRMS CAN SELL PERSONALISED SERVICE
But while small firms will never compete for the truly global roles, there is still a place for the personalised localised service offered by boutiques. "There's always a demand for that type of service," he added.
Others agree that in a world where investment banks are attempting to become so-called "one-stop shops", the pressures to sell clients an entire package of products could in fact enhance the position of boutiques, whose advice is perhaps more truly independent as they don't have other axes to grind.
DRESDNER KLEINWORT BUYS LUTHY BAILLIE
Another boutique to have fallen prey to a multi-national banking player with plenty of capital behind it, sophisticated trading and broking operations and global ambitions is the bond specialist Luthy Baillie Dowsett Pethick &amp; Co.
It was snapped up only two weeks ago by Dresdner Kleinwort Benson, the investment banking division of Germany's second largest commercial bank Dresdner Bank.
Peter Luthy, one of the founders of the 15-person bond boutique which was set up in 1990, said the firm's reliance on a market undergoing significant changes because of the interest rate environment and the constraints of size had forced it to seek embrace of a larger partner.
"We learned a hell of a lot. But our business skills are better used in a big firm. The opportunities are better in a big firm," Luthy told Reuters recently.
Such changes will not necessarily end with the small firms such as Luthy's. Banking analysts and corporate financiers alike have for some time been predicting the days are numbered for what one called the "super-boutiques".
This dwindling list of traditional British merchant banks includes Cazenoves, NM Rothschilds, Hambros, Schroders and Robert Fleming. Takeovers here are complicated in some cases by family holdings, but strategic alliances have been suggested as an acceptable alternative in order to compete globally.
"I think even the super-boutiques are going to be struggling over the next five years," the first banking source said. ($1=.6285 Pound)
