Lloyd's insurance market on Tuesday welcomed a crucial U.S. district court ruling in its favour and said it would extend a deadline for acceptances of a 3.2 billion pound ($5.5 billion) recovery plan.
"We have decided in the circumstances we will keep the offer open," Lloyd's chairman David Rowland said after a district court in Baltimore, Maryland, overturned an injunction by U.S. Names -- as investors in the market are known -- who were unhappy with the plan.
Rowland did not say how long the deadline would be extended from noon (1100 GMT) on Wednesday, but insurance sources said it would probably be stretched for several days to allow more U.S. Names to approve the plan.
A Lloyd's spokesman said the ruling had removed the last major legal obstacle to the 300-year-old insurance market's recovery plan, aimed at ending years of turbulence triggered by huge liabilities.
Lloyd's earlier said more than 82 percent of its 34,000 worldwide members had approved the plan, but only 53 percent of the 2,700 U.S. names had given the go-ahead.
"Since we won the appeal, faxes have been flooding in from U.S. Names accepting the settlement offer," a Lloyd's spokesman said by telephone.
Lloyd's hopes the support shown by Names will be enough to declare the plan unconditional when its ruling council meets on Thursday. The plan still has to be approved by the Department of Trade and Industry.
Lloyd's problems began in the 1980s when a fatal combination of negligent underwriting, poor investment advice and a sequence of unexpected natural disasters conspired to bring about losses of several billion pounds.
Long standing Names were for the first time in their lives suddenly faced with the prospect of unlimited losses.
A spokesman for one of the three key litigating British action groups representing major loss-making Names described the successful appeal as "very good" for the recovery plan.
"I think we did better by the settlement than by going through the courts," said the spokesman for the Merrett 418 Names Association, which groups 1,932 members.
Under the proposals, Lloyd's will reinsure its massive liabilities in a new company called Equitas. It is asking investors to help fund Equitas but has offered them a compensation package to help offset their losses.
Rowland said he was delighted by the U.S. ruling, which overturned a injunction granted by a lower court to a group of U.S. Names who wanted more time to study the terms of the settlement.
"I am very pleased. I have believed for a long time that what we are doing is in the interest of the whole society," Rowland told Reuters, adding he did not want to exclude anyone from the offer.
Many of the market's pre-1993 liabilities stem from pollution and asbestosis related claims in the United States, some of them dating back even to the last century.
