Britain's Invesco Plc Monday agreed to merge with Houston-based mutual fund company AIM Management Group Inc. in a deal valued at $1.6 billion, creating one of the world's largest investment management businesses.
The deal is the largest in U.S. fund history, industry experts said.
The combined group will be called Amvesco Plc and have around $150 billion under management. The merger will be paid for with about $1.1 billion in new stock and the rest in cash and debt, Invesco officials said.
"We are creating a prototype company for the future," Bob McCullough, Invesco's chief financial officer, said in an interview.
Invesco Chairman Charles Brady, who will lead the combined group, said it would have "the scale necessary for success as a financially strong and independent business operating in an increasingly concentrated industry."
McCullough stressed the deal was a merger of the two companies, which would focus on growing revenue but retain their individual identities.
"They're buying themselves into the U.S. money management market," said Bruce Brewington, an equity analyst at Putnam, Lovell &amp; Thorton, an investment banking firm in San Francisco.
Martin Cross, analyst at UBS, said Invesco is buying at the top of the Wall Street market, which many experts see as overpriced. He said UBS strategists are forecasting a 15 percent downward correction in the Dow Jones industrial average next year, and if it occurs, it would leave AIM looking rather expensive.
"The deal is exquisitely timed for the AIM shareholders and conversely not so exquisitely for Invesco shareholders," Cross said.
Invesco said it would fund the deal by issuing 290 million new shares to AIM shareholders. These would be valued at about $1.1 billion. AIM shareholders will own around 45 percent of the merged company.
McCullough said another $500 million needed to fund the merger would come in the form of cash and debt.
The merger presented a chance for the two companies to use different distribution channels and approaches. McCullough said he did not forsee any culture clash between the two.
There would be no change in their differing approaches, with Invesco continuing to be a "no-load" house, selling products direct to the customer, and AIM selling its nearly three dozen funds through brokers.
McCullough said the cost of the merger was not excessive.
"There's no question that it is a lot of money, but we view this as a long-term investment for both of us," he said. The long-term commitment was underlined by the fact that almost 50 percent of the combined shares would be held by management.
Both companies were "really active managers" and would stay that way rather than moving to passive management, McCullough said, adding that Invesco's global infrastructure presented a major opportunity.
He denied the heavy exposure to the United States would hinder Invesco from making the most of opportunities in other parts of the world. "We would like nothing better than to find opportunities in Asia and Europe," he said.
The merger would enhance the group's strength in the United States and lead to cost savings, officials said.
McCullough said the merger must be approved by Invesco and AIM shareholders and other approvals were required. The deal should be completed early next year, the company said.
