British property company Greycoat Plc, under fire from a group of shareholders calling for it to be broken up, said on Monday it was confident of getting the support of its institutional shareholders in rejecting the plan.
"I would be very surprised if they (Greycoat's institutional shareholders) would come down on the side of a closing down sale," Greycoat's chief executive Peter Thornton told Reuters.
Thornton said he believed the liquidation proposal by the UK Active Value Fund, which will be put to shareholders in 10-days time, was "ill-conceived and fails to secure shareholder value".  
Earlier Greycoat wrote to its shareholders urging them to reject the resolution, put forward by rebel shareholder Brian Myerson, at an extraordinary general meeting on November 14.
Myerson's Active Value Advisors Ltd (AVA) advises the UK Active Value Fund and is expected to put out its own response to the statement later today.
Last month Myerson said it was time to "unlock the value of Greycoat" as the company's shares stood at a 23 percent discount to the forecast net asset value for 1997.
He said there was "considerable support" for the proposal to dispose of Greycoat's assets and enhance shareholder value.  
Greycoat, which focuses on central London office developments, earlier announced a rise in interim pre-tax profits to 3.8 million stg and predicted a final dividend of 1.2 pence per share.
Thornton said the results showed the company was having a very good year, adding it was well placed to take advantage of favourable investor sentiment on the central London property market. "The whole market is moving in our direction," he said.
The share discount to net asset value had been worsened by the fact that UKAV held 10 percent of the shares and this was overhanging the market, he added.  
Martin Poole, Greycoat's finance director, said the company had got its long-term debt in place, adding that its lender banks were not in any way ruffled by the current uncertainty.
"The novelty has worn off from the bank's point of view," Poole told Reuters. To get rid of the bank debt, which would be required by any liquidation plans, would cost "roughly 10 million stg", he added.
Poole said he expected good growth in the dividend in the medium term, in line with the group's policy of progressively increasing it. "There is no reason why we shouldn't continue at the higher rate of profit," he said.  
While Greycoat does not intend to use further resources on development sites, it is likely to use the cash generated by the sale of its Buckingham Palace Road property for investment.
Thornton said discussions were already underway with several parties, but he stressed the company would not pay over the odds, would not compromise on what it wanted and would not buy anything in the market.
Rather than concentrating on a single asset, there would be two or three purchases or "possibly more". Greycoat had around 50 million stg to spend and this would be geared up to around 50 million stg cash and the same amount of debt, Thornton added.
-- London Newsroom ++ 44 171 542 7719
