KPMG, one of the world's big six international accounting and consultancy firms, believes investment in infrastructure and technology has put it on track to hasten revenue growth.
"We would like to be growing faster and are committed to growing faster," Jon Madonna, chairman of KPMG International told Reuters in an interview on Tuesday.
Earlier the group reported an eight percent rise in worldwide revenues for the fiscal year to September 30, 1996 to $8.1 billion, up from $7.5 billion the year before.
Madonna, who earlier this year said revenue growth in excess of 10 percent was a reasonable expectation, said KPMG had invested heavily in infrastructure and technology during the year and this would pay off in terms of further growth.
He said all sides of the business had performed well over the year but stressed that significant growth in revenues was likely to come from the consulting side of the business rather than from the traditional backbone of auditing and tax.
"If you look at where the great opportunity is, its on the consulting side," Madonna said.
While KPMG's growth rate for the year was lower than rival firm Andersen Worldwide, which last month reported a 16 percent increase in 1996 revenues to $9.4 billion, Madonna said he was not disappointed with the firm's result.
When looked at on a dollar-adjusted basis, the 1996 revenue growth was the same as for the previous year, Madonna said.
But there was still work to be done.
"I said a year ago we need to be growing faster. I just think we have got to do a lot better than that. It's a big ship and you don't turn it around in just a few days," he added.
The investment and strategic moves KPMG had made had ensured it would be in a strong position for the future. "The road we are on is the right road".
Madonna said the firm's partners were agreed that the moves it had made over the year were correct and the fact that everybody wanted faster growth confirmed the need for large-scale investments.
"We are making sizeable dollar investments in terms of infrastructure and product development." This included around $500 million a year on technology and "well in excess" of $100 million on products.
For Madonna the key is what the partnership, which employs more than 77,000 people and has more than 6,250 partners, is doing in three years' time.
The strategy which KPMG has embarked on will not be altered to achieve further revenue growth and areas such as developing new products and establishing a framework of common industries and a common infrastructure across the firm's worldwide business will continue.
Madonna, who believes there will be further consolidation among the big accountancy firms, said KPMG will also stick to growing from within rather than through large-scale acquisition.
The number of major accounting firms in the world has dropped from eight in the mid-1980s to six, with a rise in competition from other types of firms.
But Madonna does not see KPMG making any big buys.
"There will be local acquisitions and mergers down the road but I don't think anything big is on the horizon."
