Top managers in major financial firms need to be razor-sharp if the world's increasingly complex markets are to run smoothly, however sophisticated the regulatory regime, regulators and politicians said on Thursday.
"Management needs to know its business. (It) sets the ethos of the company," Alistair Darling, spokesman on treasury affairs for Britain's opposition Labour party told a conference on financial regulation and minimising systemic risk.
Examples of where rules had been broken by so-called "rogue traders" were a clear sign of management failure, he said.
Christine Cumming, senior vice president at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, also voiced doubts about management's current ability to deal with regulatory problems.
The health of an institution lay in its management and directors, but they were not necessarily properly armed to deal with problems when they arose, she said.
"Do we prepare directors and managers enough?" Cumming said.
Britain's often criticised regulatory system, which relies heavily on so-called "self-regulation," is also under scrutiny.
Darling said that whichever party won the next general election, due by May 1997, the British regulatory system "will be reformed." But this would not mean "tearing everything up or dramatic change," he added.
He said Labour wanted to establish a regulator with sufficient "clout reputation and stature" to deal with its international counterparts.
But it would not create a "Super-SIB," an enlarged version of the top regulator the Securities and Investments Board (SIB), as some commentators have suggested. A Labour government would also attempt to limit the number of regulations.
Darling's call for minimising the regulatory burden by making it as cost-effective as possible was echoed by most of the speakers at the conference.
Angela Knight, Britain's economic secretary to the Treasury, said the government wants to see a cost-benefit analysis applied to all regulations. If they fail to make sense on this basis then they should not be adopted, she said.
Knight also underlined the dramatic effect on the industry as a whole of the collapse of blue-blooded merchant bank Barings in February 1995 was "a more salutory lesson than any regulation" to other banks and financial institutions.
There were calls from both politicians for interchange between industry and the regulators, so that the experiences on either side of the fence could be carried across by individuals.
But while the idea of the regulators being staffed by people with first-hand industry knowledge won support from many of those attending the meeting, the question of how the pay structure could accomodate such movements was seen by some as a serious obstacle to this system spreading.
And while regulators need to keep up with rapid changes in financial instruments and the industry landscape both on a domestic and a global scale, they can never be expected to be one step ahead of the business they are monitoring.
"Regulators should respond to business realities rather than be ahead of business trends," Sir Andrew Large, chairman of the SIB told the meeting.
This would mean regulators becoming increasingly sophisticated to cope with the changing business environment and having to co-operate more and more with their counterparts in other countries.
"The next generation of supervisors will have to evaluate far more complex information and make far more complex judgements," Large said.
