British property company Greycoat is unlikely to crumble under pressure from rebel shareholders who want it broken up or succumb to a merger approach from smaller rival Moorfield Estates, analysts said on Monday.
"I don't think they are on the critical list in any sense or meaning of the word," one analyst said.
A proposal to sell-off Greycoat's assets is due to be put to shareholders at a special meeting on Thursday. It has been put forward by the UK Active Value Fund, which is advised by rebel shareholder Brian Myerson's Active Value Advisers.
UK Active Value Fund bought its 11 percent stake in Greycoat three years ago, rescuing it from receivership. But Myerson's relationship with the firm's management has not run smoothly.
The South African financier's challenge to the Greycoat management has also triggered a proposal by Moorfield Estates involving a share exchange offer for the larger Greycoat, which has so far dismissed the approach.
Moorfield said in a statement on Monday that it had "developed a proposal to add value for all shareholders through a strategy of more active management of the assets of Greycoat".
It said this had been presented to some of Greycoat's larger shareholders, accounting for close to 40 percent of the shares, and an approach had then been made to Greycoat's chairman.
They include merging the two companies by a share exchange and restructuring the assets of the enlarged group.
This would involve a Central London portfolio made up initially of Greycoat's main assets, Embankment Place and 123 Buckingham Palace Road, which would later be demerged.
Moorfield also intends setting up a portfolio of "investment and development property earmarked for immediate disposal to a major property company".
The remainder of the enlarged group would constitute "an investment, trading and development portfolio" and there would be a reorganisation of the management structure to reduce costs by "at least 1.5 million pounds ($2.47 million) per annum", Moorfield said.
While analysts agreed the Moorfield plan was unlikely to succeed, some said there was an opportunity for Greycoat to take over another company with higher profitability so the combined company could capitalise on Greycoat's favourable tax position.
"But they are not going to be flushed out by Thursday," a second property analyst told Reuters, adding that three or four companies had looked "very seriously" at the possibility of joining with Greycoat.
Another possibility would be a larger group such as British Land sweeping up Greycoat, although such an outcome seems remote in the short-term, analysts said.
Myerson's proposed sale of Greycoat's London property assets is seen by some as an unwise "forced sale" which would not achieve shareholder value in what is an improving market.
"Generally speaking a forced sale of their assets would not gain anything in the short term," the first analyst said, adding that with rental growth starting to show through, it made sense to hold onto Greycoat's two largest properties.
"They are vulnerable to any change in market conditions, but it would be a mistake to be forced into a corner and to sell something in a relatively short timescale. It would be totally counterproductive," he added.
But others said the time was right to sell off Greycoat's largest assets. "This is exactly the right time of the cycle (to sell," the second analyst said.
Greycoat shares closed 6.5 pence higher at 155.5 pence while Moorfield shares were unchanged at 30.5 pence. ($1=.6069 Pound)
