Final approval for Lloyd's of London's recovery plan edged closer Wednesday as it declared that over 90 percent of members had accepted a settlement offer aimed at securing the 300-year-old insurance market's future.
Lloyd's said it had been swamped by U.S. investors signing up for its recovery plan after a U.S. appeals court overturned a ruling that had threatened the insurance market's survival. By Wednesday afternoon, 66.7 percent of U.S. members had accepted.
"The level of acceptances speaks for itself. Members have made their views toward the reconstruction of Lloyd's abundantly clear," Lloyd's Chairman David Rowland said in a statement.
Earlier, a Lloyd's spokesman said acceptances from U.S. investors in the market, known as Names, had flooded in overnight.
Almost half of the 2,700 U.S. Names had until Tuesday night held off, with only 53 percent accepting by then.
This followed a decision by a federal appeals court in Baltimore Tuesday to overturn U.S. District Court Judge Robert Payne's ruling in Richmond, Va., Friday to allow U.S. Names more time to consider the plan.
Payne granted an injunction giving U.S. Names more time to consider the plan and ordered Lloyd's to provide further information by Sept. 23. On Tuesday, the panel of judges in Baltimore sent the case back to the lower court with orders to dismiss it.
Rowland said he acknowledged that many overseas members had deferred their acceptance in the light of the Virginia court judgment and the subsequent Baltimore ruling.
Over the last few days, evidence of support for the Lloyd's proposals among its 34,000 investors worldwide has grown. On Tuesday evening, acceptances totalled 82 percent, compared with 75 percent Saturday.
Wednesday's noon deadline for accepting the 3.2 billion pounds ($4.7 billion) recovery plan, under which Lloyd's proposes that Names pay to help reinsure billions of pounds in liabilities into a new company called Equitas, was extended to give all a chance to respond.
Rowland said Wednesday afternoon that under the circumstances it was "fair and proper" to exercise flexibility in pushing back the deadline for acceptances.
Lloyd's said that any formal, longer-term extension would be subject to a decision by its council at a Thursday meeting at which it would consider "the prospect of declaring the settlement offer acceptances unconditional."
This extension will give the market enough time to collect the convincing majority of acceptances, especially from U.S. Names, which it needs to prove its own solvency.
Lloyd's problems began in the 1980s when a destructive combination of negligent underwriting, poor investment advice and a sequence of natural disasters conspired to bring about losses of several billion pounds.
Long-standing Names were for the first time in their lives suddenly faced with the prospect of unlimited losses.
The market is due to submit figures to Britain's Department of Trade and Industry next week in an annual solvency test, and file with the U.S. Treasury and New York Insurance Department later next month.
Equitas may lift off in two weeks if all goes as planned. The recovery plan's success increasingly looks likely, but another challenge by U.S. Names has not been ruled out.
However, U.S. legal sources said overnight that while U.S. investors could in theory attempt to challenge Tuesday's order, it would be difficult to do so successfully.
Despite that, one U.S. Name, Kenneth Chiate, who is chief negotiator for a group known as the American Names Association, said he expected U.S. Names to appeal the Baltimore ruling.
