British merchant bank Hambros, under fire from a rebel Hong Kong shareholder calling for its breakup, reported a return to first-half profit on Wednesday and said the benefits of restructuring should begin to show through.
"We have great confidence in ourselves and what we are trying to do," Sir Chips Keswick, the group's chief executive, said in an interview.
He dismissed efforts by Hong Kong investment manager Regent Pacific Group, which holds three percent of Hambros, to break up the firm in an attempt to realise shareholder value.
"Regent is a three percent shareholder and is perfectly entitled to (its) views. We are perfectly entitled not to share them," Keswick said.
Hambros reported pretax profits of 35.0 million pounds ($57.81 million) for the first half, compared with a 7.7 million pound loss for the same period in 1995.
Some analysts had forecast pretax profits of up to 45.0 million pounds based on a strong performance by Hambros' estate agent subsidiary Hambro Countrywide.
They also predicted an interim dividend range of between 2.5 and 3.0 pence. In the event the dividend was unchanged at 2.5 pence.
Hambros is among a dwindling list of British investment banks which are the constant subject of takeover speculation. However, it has been seen as one of the less attractive targets due to recent poor performance and major provisions for bad debts.
Bad debt provisions for the period were 5.9 million pounds compared with 23.5 million in the same period in 1995.
Asked about the possibility of Hambros becomin a takeover target for a larger international player, Keswick said a public company was always in the firing line but he was happy with the group's direction.
While he could not talk for shareholders in the group, Keswick said he had the impression from discussions with them in the wake of the Regent Pacific move that they were supportive of changes the company had implemented.
Keswick said the group was on track to replace "low margin vanilla business" with increased return per customer business. It had decided the best strategy was to undergo major upheavals for a year rather than piecemeal changes over a longer period in order to achieve this.
Keswick, who forecast the benefits of the changes could take a year or two to come through, said he was pleased the group had moved back into profit, adding that the Investment Group's result had been particularly good.
But Hambros chairman Lord Hambro warned that profits from this part of the business were not expected to match the first half in the rest of the year.
However, he expected "considerable improvement" from Hambros' subsidiaries and, despite a challenging environment for the group as a whole, prospects were good.
Lord Hambro said he would retire from his post in July 1997 and be succeeded by Keswick.
"Chips will inevitably be a hands-on chairman," Michael Sorkin, deputy chairman of Hambros Bank, said. ($1=.6054 Pound)
