British merchant bank Hambros, under fire from a rebel Hong Kong shareholder calling for its breakup, reported a return to first-half profit on Wednesday and said the benefits of restructuring should begin to show through.
"We have great confidence in ourselves and what we are trying to do," said Sir Chips Keswick, group chief executive.
He dismissed efforts by Hong Kong investment manager Regent Pacific Group, which holds three percent of Hambros, to break up the firm in an attempt to realise shareholder value.
"Regent is a three percent shareholder and is perfectly entitled to (its) views. We are perfectly entitled not to share them," Keswick said.
This view was supported by analysts who said the subject of Regent's shareholding and its calls for Hambros to sell its now successful Hambro Countrywide estate agency subsidiary was not raised at their meeting with the company.
Hambros reported pretax profits of 35.0 million pounds ($57.81 million) for the first half, compared with a 7.7 million pound loss for the same period in 1995.
Some analysts had forecast pretax profits of up to 45.0 million pounds based on a strong Hambro Countrywide performance. But they were disappointed by a worse-than-expected showing by Hambros' banking group.
"People are going to be downgrading their figures, they wre expecting better profits from the banking side," an analyst at one large investment bank told Reuters.
He said it was disappointing Hambros had not done better in what were essentially good markets. "Clearly the banking side is struggling to do anything. Countrywide is the star," he added.
Analysts had predicted an interim dividend of 2.5 to 3.0 pence. In the event the dividend was unchanged at 2.5 pence.
Hambros shares closed down 7.5 pence at 245 pence.
Hambros is among a dwindling list of British investment banks which are the constant subject of takeover speculation. But it has been seen as one of the less attractive targets due to recent poor performance and major provisions for bad debts.
"I wouldn't have thought (a takeover) was terribly likely," said one analyst, adding that Hambros did not have the sort of distribution or securities operation an expanding investment bank would be seeking.
Asked whether Hambros was a takeover target, Keswick said a public company was always in the firing line but he was happy with the group's direction.
While he could not talk for shareholders in the group, Keswick said he had the impression from discussions with them in the wake of the Regent Pacific move that they were supportive of changes the company had implemented.
Keswick said it was on track to replace "low margin vanilla business" with increased return per customer business. It had decided it was best to undergo major upheavals for a year rather than piecemeal changes over a longer period to achieve this.
Keswick, who forecast the benefits of the changes could take a year or two to come through, said he was pleased the group had moved back into profit, adding that the Investment Group's result had been particularly good.
But Hambros chairman Lord Hambro warned profits from this part of the business were not expected to match the first half in the rest of the year. But he expected "considerable improvement" from Hambros' subsidiaries and, despite a challenging environment for the group, prospects were good.
Lord Hambro said he would retire from his post in July 1997 and be succeeded by Keswick. "Chips will inevitably be a hands-on chairman," Michael Sorkin, deputy chairman of Hambros Bank, said.
($1=.6054 Pound)
