Shareholders in British property company Greycoat on Thursday left a large question-mark hanging over the future of the group, which is currently facing a break-up demand and a merger proposal from a smaller rival.
Greycoat shareholders postponed for three weeks a vote on a proposal to sell off the company's 500 million pounds ($831.5 million) portfolio in anticipation of talks with predator Moorfield Estates, run by two former Goldman Sachs property analysts.
But Greycoat said it still has to see concrete proposals from Moorfield, which wants a paper merger of the two and then a possible de-merger of Greycoat's largest property assets.
"We have yet to see any detailed proposals from Moorfield. As we keep saying we will consider those proposals once they are received. So far we have only seen one page of vague bullet points," a Greycoat spokesman told Reuters.
The rebel investment fund shareholders which put forward the break-up resolution are the UK Active Value Fund, IMP UKAV Inc and Chaddesley Investments. They control 11 percent of the shares and are advised by Brian Myerson's Active Value Advisors.
But at an extraordinary general meeting South African Myerson asked shareholders to put off a vote on their proposals for a controlled programme of disposals which he has said would significantly enhance shareholder value.
This change in strategy came after Greycoat's chairman Michael Beckett told the meeting it had asked Moorfield to come up with a "full and detailed proposal" which, if forthcoming, it would "consider carefully".
After a vote on postponement, carried by 53 million shares in favour versus about 42 million shares against, Myerson said, "It's an overwhelming vote in favour of shareholder choice. We are supportive of Moorfield in terms of its proposals. We want the board to sit down with them."
Greycoat, which specialises in London property, said last week that the break-up resolution was not in shareholders' best interests and urged them to reject it.
But news of the Moorfield approach surfaced over the weekend, adding another dimension to the uncertainty already hanging over the company and according to some analysts, holding down its share price which closed at 155-1/2p on Thursday.
Moorfield said earlier this week that it would de-merge Greycoat's largest assets, its Embankment Place and 123 Buckingham Palace Road properties, and had earmarked some of its developments for immediate sale to a large property company.
It said it plans to bring the remainder of the enlarged group's assets into an investment, trading and development portfolio and reorganise the board and management structure to reduce costs by at least 1.5 million pounds a year.
Myerson told reporters after the meeting that the British property company would now be forced to talk to Moorfield. "The (Greycoat) board will be forced to sit down and look at the Moorfield proposals," he said.
Myerson said he was delighted shareholders had voted to adjourn his original proposal and repeated that his main object was to create shareholder value.
He added the Moorfield proposals, which have so far been rejected by Greycoat as being too vague, had the backing of holders of 40 percent of Greycoat shares
Myerson said these holders had already seen Moorfield's 40-page document and expressed their support for it, adding that he was "supportive" of both the proposals and the Moorfield management.
"We are supportive of Moorfield in terms of its proposals and we want it (the board) to sit down with them...We expect Moorfield to refine its proposals over the next couple of weeks," he added. ($ = 0.601 British Pounds)
