Privately-owned British investment bank Robert Fleming on Wednesday announced increased pre-tax profits for the first half of the year but warned it would have to contend with some difficult markets in the second half.
Flemings said its pretax profit for the first half of the year had increased by 16 percent to 92.2 million pounds ($154 million), from 79.4 million pounds a year earlier.
Some analysts said the increase was not particularly impressive given market conditions but chief executive John Manser said it was "a very good start" and showed new businesses were "making a valuable contribution to profitability".
"While the outlook for the year seems promising, flat Asian markets and heightened competitive pressures in other markets are factors that we will continue to have to contend with during the next six months," Manser said in a statement.
But one analyst, who declined to be named, said the group would have given a more precise break-down of the performance of its various arms if the results had been outstanding.
Flemings has not had an easy year so far. In July it lost investment banking head Bill Harrison who was poached by BZW, the investment banking arm of Britain's Barclays.
And in August Jardine Fleming, a joint venture with Jardine Matheson, revealed a five-month probe by British and Hong Kong regulators into irregular trades by a former senior fund manager at Jardine Fleming Investment Management.
This resulted in hefty fines and voluntary compensation of nearly $20 million to clients. Regulators also withdrew the authorisation of Jardine Fleming's London-based fund company. In September the company's chairman retired and the group created a new supervisory board.
In its interim results on Wednesday Robert Fleming acknowledged that the problems at Jardine Fleming meant the joint venture had recorded a "marginally lower" interim result than its net interim profit of $63.9 million in 1995.
This was after taking into account provisions "arising from the regulatory issues relating to earlier years", it said. But despite widespread speculation that Jardine Fleming would lose clients as a result of the scandal, it recorded a net trading profit of $82.0 million, an increase of 28 percent.
Robert Fleming said "the shortcomings which gave rise to these problems have been fully addressed", management had been strengthened and the Jardine Fleming businesses were fully compliant with "local and UK regulation and controls".
They were "being further upgraded to bring them completely in line with best international practice," it added.
Any impact these problems may have had on Flemings' overall business was not, however, reflected in the interim dividend paid by Robert Fleming, which announced an increased dividend of 8.0 pence per share, from 7.0 pence.
Flemings said it had seen strong profit growth from its fund management businesses and its securities business had reported "a marked increase in profits aided by a strong performance by UK and continental European broking".
Its capital markets arm had helped companies raise 13.4 billion pounds of new capital while its corporate finance division had completed 43 deals during the period.
It also announced that Manser will replace Robin Fleming who will retire as chairman of Robert Fleming Holdings at the end of March 1997. William Garrett was named as replacement chief executive and chairman of the group executive committee.
Other moves include Peter Jamieson becoming chairman of Robert Fleming &amp; Co and Lawrence Banks who will join him as deputy chairman of Robert Fleming Holdings.
