Privately-owned British investment bank Robert Fleming on Wednesday announced increased pre-tax profits for the first half of the year which it said underlined its ability to remain independent.
"We are committed to remaining independent. These results, our second best interim results ever, show we can remain independent," a Robert Fleming spokesman told Reuters.
Flemings has been widely talked about as a possible takeover target for a larger foreign investment bank, but has resolutely said it would retain its independence.
Flemings said its pretax profit for the first half of the year had increased by 16 percent to 92.2 million pounds ($154 million), from 79.4 million pounds a year earlier but warned it would have to cope with difficult markets in the second half.
Some analysts said the increase was not particularly impressive given market conditions but chief executive John Manser said it was "a very good start" and showed new businesses were "making a valuable contribution to profitability."
"While the outlook for the year seems promising, flat Asian markets and heightened competitive pressures in other markets are factors that we will continue to have to contend with during the next six months," Manser said in a statement.
The Flemings official said the results showed that while Flemings may have been perceived as an Asian-centric bank, it was now a much more international operation and had succeeded in bringing down its cost income ratio.
Flemings has not had an easy year so far. In July it lost investment banking head Bill Harrison who was poached by BZW, the investment banking arm of Britain's Barclays.
And in August Jardine Fleming, a joint venture with Jardine Matheson, revealed a five-month probe by British and Hong Kong regulators into irregular trades by a former senior fund manager at Jardine Fleming Investment Management.
This resulted in hefty fines and voluntary compensation of nearly $20 million to clients. Regulators also withdrew the authorisation of Jardine Fleming's London-based fund company. In September the company's chairman retired and the group created a new supervisory board.
Flemings acknowledged the problems at Jardine Fleming meant the joint venture had recorded a "marginally lower" interim result than its net interim profit of $63.9 million in 1995.
This was after taking into account provisions "arising from the regulatory issues relating to earlier years," it said. The Flemings spokesman told Reuters some clients had been lost, but new clients had also been taken on.
He described the events as a "painful experience." "But we believe we have clearly drawn a line in the sand," he added.
Any impact these problems may have had on Flemings' overall business was not, however, reflected in the interim dividend which rose to eight pence per share from seven pence.
Flemings said it had seen strong profit growth from its fund management businesses adding that its securities business had reported "a marked increase in profits aided by a strong performance by UK and continental European broking."
Its capital markets arm had helped companies raise 13.4 billion pounds of new capital while its corporate finance division had completed 43 deals during the period.
The appointment of Manser, 56, to replace Robin Fleming, 64, who will retire as chairman of Robert Fleming Holdings at the end of March 1997, means Manser would be more involved in business development and winning new business as well as strategy and relationships with major clients and shareholders.
William Garrett, 50, who was hired by Manser as a fund manager in 1970, was named as his replacement as chief executive and chairman of the group executive committee. Garrett will be responsible for the day-to-day running of the group.
