Mention moneylending to most Britons and their instant reaction is "you mean loan-sharks!".
But Britain's established credit companies, which lend to people unable to borrow from the high street banks or credit card companies, say the public image of menacing debt collectors is a far cry from how they conduct their regulated business.
"We are credit collectors. A debt collector is someone who has no relationship with the customer. It's a totally different process," says Eddie Cran, chief executive of the financial services group Cattle's, which runs door-to-door moneylenders Shopacheck.
Such firms are tied closely to the wheeling and dealing of the City of London. Provident Financial, Cattle's and London Scottish Bank are all publicly quoted, profitable firms paying shareholders annual dividends.
People who borrow from them may have had minor civil court judgements against them, be unemployed or simply not want to have bank accounts or credit cards. The firms provide a service others -- except for unregulated outfits -- will not, and while it won't cost a pound of flesh, it is not cheap.
To those used to credit cards or in-store credit the rates may appear outrageously high. But credit companies point out they include major costs such as collection and insurance, are agreed in advance and do not rise if a payment is missed.
So while interest rates may be at all-time lows, these service charges mean the APRs (annualised percentage rate) can exceed 150 percent. To borrow 100 pounds ($167) over 25 weeks from Shopacheck with a five pound weekly repayment costs 25 pounds.
Shopacheck, which started in the 1930s in northeast England, has 2,800 agents. Its average loan is for six months, the average amount 150 pounds and average indebtedness 350 pounds.
STREET COLLECTING
Only a few miles from the City, but a million miles from its hefty salaries and bonuses, Kathy, a self-employed agent for Shopacheck, does her weekly door-to-door collection of debt repayments through the streets of northwest London.
The terraced suburban houses at which she stops are remarkably average. Most have front gardens, some are neatly laid out with blooming rose bushes while others are less well-kept, with tatty patches of litter-strewn grass.
Inside there are the usual consumer trappings of late 1990s British life.
Televisions, video-recorders, washing machines and microwave ovens, even the odd fish tank, are all in evidence, especially when crammed into a small council flat along with children, their toys, pets and piles of ironing.
At each house Kathy, a 37-year-old mother of three, collects sums ranging from two pounds fifty to 20 pounds.
Some customers take loans in the form of vouchers which can be spent only at certain high street shops, while others use the retail service offered by Shopacheck and buy items such as bed linen, beds or barbeques from the firm's own catalogue.
Most of her clients seem to welcome her as a friend, they expect her visits and have the money ready to hand to her. Kathy says that, after eight years, she is a treated as a long-standing family friend or agony aunt by many of them.
Only at one home does the son of the house come to the door and tell Kathy that his mother isn't in. "Fine, can you tell her I'll see her as usual next week," says Kathy.
But getting money back isn't always this easy.
Kathy admits that if a customer threatens her, she passes the problem back to the company, which says it instructs its self-employed agents not to take personal risks.
MONEYLENDERS PLUG GAP IN FINANCIAL SERVICES
"The one thing about credit is that it is easy to give but much harder to get back," says Paul Oliver, a Shopacheck regional manager who has been in the business for 27 years as customer, agent and manager.
He is not alone as a successful businessman who has made use of Britain's long-standing system of moneylending. The managing director of one British bank confided he would not be where he is today had it not been for a money lending firm.
His family could not afford to buy him a suit for an interview. He took a loan, bought the essential attire, got his first job and set himself on the path to greater things.
Oliver says nine out of 10 times business is conducted with the woman of the house and although bad debts are expected, they only reach about four percent a year, which is good going for a business the mainstream lenders won't touch because of the risk.
A recent television documentary showed some moneylenders breaking rules laid down by the Consumer Credit Act. Oliver says he deals harshly with anyone who steps outside the rules.
For Cran firms such as his are plugging a gap in Britain's financial services marketplace and he is keen to correct what he sees as "untrue perceptions" about the business. "What we are actually attempting to do is to deal with customers who cannot get credit through the mainstream lenders," Cran told Reuters.
"It (door-to-door lending) is very high cost and very personal. We have to train people to look after a number of customers," he added. A customer who fails to pay is only pursued through the courts "as a very last measure" and only in "very extreme circumstances" is an outside firm called in.
Cran says Cattle's target market is about five-and-a-half million people, around two million of whom need the discipline of an agent calling to collect every week.
But the stigma involved means Cattle's also offers Welcome, a loans service for people who have bank accounts and pay by direct debit. This "requires a very high rejection rate and an in-depth granting procedure", Cran says.
SHAREHOLDERS REAP THE DIVIDENDS
For Cattle's and its competitors credit is a lucrative business. In September it reported increased pre-tax profits for the first six months of the year of nearly 15.0 million pounds. In 1995 its shareholders received a total dividend of 6.9 pence.
In August Provident Financial, the sector's biggest player, reported first half pre-tax profits of 47.5 million pounds. It said it had seen continued growth in home collected credit and was confident of a "good result" for the year as a whole.
But for customers, things might not be so rosy. While most manage to pay back their loans, some do not. Kathy soon spots trouble. "You can see they are struggling if they start having to scrabble around for pennies," she says. ($1=.5990 Pound)
