British venture capital firm 3i Group Plc on Thursday reported a rise in first half net asset value (NAV) per share and revenue profits but said it had been held back by continental Europe and a strong pound.
3i's NAV for the period rose to 454 pence per share, from 426 pence in the first half last year, while profit before tax rose to 62.9 million pounds ($106 million) from 54.3 million.
"Its a pretty healthy increase. Its held back a bit by continental Europe...the markets have not been that good and there has also been the appreciation of sterling," Ewen Macpherson, 3i's chief executive said in an interview.
Macpherson said a better indication of the group's performance was its British portfolio which had performed "extremely well", reflected in an 18 percent growth in revenue.
There were still plenty of opportunities available, he said, with the sort of companies that 3i invested in doing very well.
There had also been an improvement in general business confidence in Britain, which had improved for the fourth consecutive quarter, according to 3i's latest "Enterprise Barometer" survey.
Of 327 million pounds invested by 3i during the period, 284 million was in Britain.
Macpherson said the prospect of a general election in Britain by May 1997, had resulted in a number of investment opportunities for 3i as some company founders or management teams decided to sell their corporate holdings while the tax regime remained clear.
While the European performance had an impact on the NAV figure, the investment opportunities for 3i on the continent remained good, Macpherson said. Current pricing levels for small and medium-sized European companies in which the group invests were "very attractive".
During the first half of the year, realisation of investments continued at an encouraging rate, with sales worth 122 million pounds in Britain and some 36 million pounds in continental Europe.
Macpherson said the group had "significant plans to expand in Europe" and this was reflected in its decision to open an office in the German city of Duesseldorf in January.
This regionalisation would also involve opening offices in three other German cities -- Hamburg, Munich and Stuttgart -- and the group also plans to extend its presence into the south of France.
The group said it wanted to open its first office in Southeast Asia, in Singapore, early in 1997.
Macpherson said Asia was "an exciting part of the world" for investment capital and Singapore had been chosen as it was a good communication centre from which other parts of the region could be covered.
He said the office would look at opportunities in Malaysia, the Philippines, Thailand and Indonesia but not in China. ($1=.5956 Pound)
