UK investment capital group 3i Group Plc said on Thursday the increase in its first half net asset value (NAV) per share was healthy but had been partly held back by continental Europe and a strong pound.
"Its a pretty healthy increase. Its held back a bit by continental Europe...the markets have not been that good and there has also been the appreciation of sterling," Ewen Macpherson, 3i's chief executive told Reuters.
3i's NAV for the period rose to 454 pence per share, from 426 pence for the same period the previous year.  
Macpherson said a better indication of the group's performance was its UK portfolio which had performed "extremely well", reflected in an 18 percent growth in revenue.
He said there were still plenty of opportunities available, with the sort of companies that 3i invested in doing very well. There had also been an improvement in general business confidence in the UK, which had improved for the fourth consecutive quarter according to 3i's latest survey.
"The confidence in the businesses underlying our portfolio has been so positive," he said. Of 327.3 million stg invested by 3i during the period, 284.2 million stg was in the UK.  
Macpherson said the prospect of a general election in the UK, which must be held by May 1997, had resulted in a number of investment opportunities for 3i as some company founders or management teams decided to sell their holdings in a firm while there was no doubt about the tax implications.
While the European performance had an impact on the NAV figure, the investment opportunities for 3i on the continent remained good, Macpherson said, adding that current pricing levels for the small and medium-sized European companies in which the group invests were "very attractive".  
During the first half of the year, 3i said, realisations on investments had continued "at an encouraging rate". It realised investments of 122.2 million stg in the UK and 35.9 million stg in continental Europe.
Macpherson said the group had "significant plans to expand in Europe" and this was reflected in its decision to open an office in Dusseldorf, Germany in January. This regionalisation would involve opening offices in Hamburg, Munich and Stuttgart.
And the group was also planning to extend its presence into the south of France, he added.  
The group also announced it would open its first office in South East Asia, in Singapore, early in 1997.
Macpherson said the area was "an exciting part of the world" for investment capital and Singapore had been chosen as it was a good communication centre from which other parts of the region could be covered.
He said the office would start small, with a staff of three, and would have a maximum of "half-a-dozen" people for the first year or so and would look at opportunities in Malaysia, the Philippines, Thailand and Indonesia but not in China.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 7719
