The British arm of accountancy firm Coopers &amp; Lybrand, auditors for failed British bank Barings, said on Friday it had issued third party proceedings against nine former directors and employees of the bank.
"Despite the fact that we are not responsible for the collapse of Barings, we face a substantial claim. We are perceived to have deep pockets which are available to those who have lost money while those who were really responsible for the collapse of Barings escape," Coopers said in a statement.
"We may also take additional third party proceedings against other members of Barings management in due course," it added.
Coopers &amp; Lybrand's British firm was auditor for Barings Plc, the parent company. Barings was rescued by Dutch financial giant ING Groep after it collapsed in February 1995 under losses of around $1.4 billion run up by the unauthorised derivatives trades of Singapore-based Nick Leeson.
Leeson is currently serving a six-and-a-half year jail sentence in Singapore for his part in the bank's downfall.
Ernst &amp; Young, administrators to the bank, later issued claims of negligence in audits against accountants Coopers &amp; Lybrand in London and Singapore and Deloitte &amp; Touche in Singapore.
Some commentators estimate the total amount of these writs, which have not been specified, to be around 1.0 billion pounds ($1.68 billion). A Coopers &amp; Lybrand official in London said no amount had been specified on the writ issued against it.
A spokesman at Ernst &amp; Young told Reuters the firm was aware of the third party writs issued by Coopers but said that it was "inappropriate to comment at this stage."
The Coopers &amp; Lybrand official said the third party writs against the nine former Barings directors and employees had not yet been served, adding it had four months in which to do so.
The firm said in a statement that the writs had been issued in the Chancery Division of the High Court against former Baring Investment Bank head Peter Norris and former deputy chairman Andrew Tuckey as well as Ron Baker, Mary Walz, Ian Hopkins, Anthony Gamby, Geoffrey Broadhurst, James Bax and Simon Jones.
Baker's lawyer, Lindsay Hill of law firm Fox Williams, told Reuters he was surprised Coopers &amp; Lybrand had taken the action against Baker.
"I am surprised that Coopers &amp; Lybrand should have taken this sort of action against Mr. Baker. I think the way events have unfolded before the SFA (Securities and Futures Authority) have demonstrated that he has not been in breach of any of his obligations or duties as a director," Hill said.
He said he did not expect Coopers &amp; Lybrand to be successful in any claim against Baker and suggested that issuing the writs had been "a tactical move intended to divert attention away from the main action."
Earlier this month Baker was cleared of most misconduct charges brought by the SFA, a British financial markets watchdog, after a hearing by an independent tribunal.
Norris, who along with Broadhurst was banned from working in the City of London by the SFA in May, could not be contacted by Reuters.
Tuckey, who was deputy chairman of Barings, was not disciplined by the SFA. In March the SFA said it "found no evidence indicating that the insolvency of the group" could be attributed to his actions.
But he had to assure the SFA he would not seek any position in an investment house which would require his registration by the SFA as a senior executive officer or as a director unless his duties were limited to giving corporate finance advice.
Gamby was reprimanded by the SFA in August. He had his registration as a director suspended for a year and was required to pay 5,000 pounds towards costs.
SFA proceedings against Walz, Hopkins and Bax have yet to be concluded, while Jones was not regulated by the watchdog. ($1=.5953 Pound)
