Singapore's Hotel Properties and property group Canary Wharf on Friday applied for detailed planning consent for a development aimed at injecting life into an office-dominated area of London's former docks.
"Life means people who stay here. We looked at what was lacking (in Canary Wharf) and that was life," Thio Gim Hock, executive director of HPL, told Reuters in an interview.
HPL and Canary Wharf, which is owned by an international consortium led by Paul Reichmann and including Prince Al Waleed bin Talal bin Abdulaziz al Saud of Saudi Arabia, formed an 80-20 joint venture for the residential, hotel and leisure project.
The multi-million pound scheme represents the first phase of development of an 11-acre (4.5 hectare) site adjoining the River Thames. It will be part of the landmark Canary Wharf docklands development to the east of the City financial district, home to Britain's tallest building.
The development will be the first at the massive Canary Wharf site since an agreement last year by banks to sell out to the Reichmann-led consortium. The banks had taken over the ownership when the original development company went into administration.
Despite these problems, 80 percent of the offices have now been occupied and Canary Wharf is vying with the London's traditional financial heartland as a site for large global investment banks to locate their new headquarters.
Office blocks have so far dominated the site, however, and Thio Gim Hock said he expects to start building 330 residential units, a five star hotel and sports club early in 1997. They are due to be completed by the end of 1998 or early 1999.
There is already outline planning permission from the London Docklands Development Corporation (LDDC) to develop the site and Canary Wharf's Robert John, a director of the joint venture, believes detailed permission should be granted.
An initial capitalisation of 50 million pounds ($83.95 million) will come from the partners. Further funding is expected to come from sale of apartments and bank loans, although Thio Gim Hock would not be drawn on the financing.
HPL, which has a stake in Britain's Virgin Cinemas as well as interests in hotels such as Four Seasons and residential developments, said in July the Canary Wharf scheme would cost around 250 million pounds, although the total cost is likely to be higher given the estimates for the first phase.
Designer Philippe Stark is to shape the hotel and leisure component of the new development, which will include a glass-covered "infinity" swimming pool which will give the appearance of dropping into the river Thames below.
Thio Gim Hock said Stark will "give some sex appeal to the development", which he says will have a country club atmosphere. He wants the hotel to have its own distinctive character which will be "elegant, understated and aimed at business people".
The developers also envisage opportunities for top-class restaurants with river views on the site.
He expects many of the apartments to be sold to people in Britain, but also hopes for overseas interest and foresees some buyers seeking an investment rather than a place to live. HPL's track-record in Singapore will, he said, encourage interest from the company's home patch.
"I have no doubt that a lot of them will come and buy here."
Work on the Canary Wharf project in the former London docks began in 1987 under Olympia and York, owned by the Reichmann family of Canada.
But in May 1992 Olympia and York Canary Wharf Ltd went into administration and was rescued by a group of banks that had financed the project in October 1993. ($1=.5956 Pound)
