Embattled British property company Greycoat had the immediate threat of a shareholder call for its break-up removed on Thursday, but the firm still faced an unwanted merger proposal from a smaller rival.
Greycoat welcomed an overwhelming vote against the breakup resolution put forward by the UK Active Value Fund (UKAV) and chief executive Peter Thornton said he hoped the group could now get on with its normal business.
"It has cost us a lot of money and a lot of wasted effort and time. What we would like to do is get on with running a property company," Thornton said in an interview.
He was speaking after the vote by Greycoat shareholders on UKAV's call for the sale of all Greycoat's 500 million pound ($811.6 million) assets. Among Greycoat sharholders, 95 percent of those who voted, representing 55 percent of the share capital, voted against the sale.
Shares in Greycoat closed unchanged at 163.5 pence, compared with a year high of 168 pence and a low of 130 pence.
UKAV, which is advised by South African Brian Myerson's Active Value Advisers, said on Wednesday it would abstain at the reconvened extraordinary general meeting.
It argued it had already achieved one of its main aims, the sale of Greycoat's largest asset, Embankment Place, on the River Thames in central London.
It now thought a merger proposal from Moorfield Estates had "considerable merit and could better serve the interests of Greycoat shareholders".
Thornton welcomed the fact that one uncertain element surrrounding the group was over, adding Greycoat had yet to receive the answers needed about the Moorfield merger proposal.
"We still haven't received answers to our 30-odd questions," he said of the Moorfield approach, adding Greycoat was not prepared to embark on a due diligence exercise or open its books to Moorfield without more concrete details of the firm's plans.
Moorfield has suggested demerging Greycoat's largest assets, but Thornton said it had yet to convince him it had proposals that would work.
Moorfield shares were also unchanged at 30.5 pence, compared with a year high of 34 pence and a low of 24 pence.
Thornton said relations with potential purchasers had been established but there were fairly few buyers in the world able to pay more than 200 million pounds ($324.6 million).
But he said he could not quantify how much losing the opportunity of an "off market" sale might shave off the sale price. ($1=.6161 Pound)
