British property group MEPC on Thursday announced a 14 percent increase in pretax profits for the year but said a writedown on a Los Angeles shopping mall had reduced its net asset value (NAV).
MEPC's chief executive said he was pleased with the rise in pretax profits to 140 million pounds ($227.2 million) from 122.6 million pounds the previous year, but admitted disappointment at the fall in NAV to 450 pence per share from 457 pence.
MEPC shares were 11p lower at 441-1/2p by 1218 GMT as traders said the NAV was below market expectations.
"We feel very confident about the whole of the profit statement. The only slight disappointment is on the NAV side," Tuckey said in an interview. Earnings per share rose nine percent to 22.9 pence and the total dividend stayed at 20 pence.
Tuckey said the NAV drop reflected a marginal fall in values both in Britain and elsewhere but it was less than the relevant indices. "We feel that the performance of our UK portfolio, which accounts for 70 percent of the group, is indeed where we would have expected it to be."
He pointed out the valuation date for the portfolio was August 31 and there had been activity and evidence of an improved market since then. "If we redid the valuation for December 1, we would probably get a different answer," he said.
The other factor which had brought the NAV down was the 31 million pound write-down on the valuation of MEPC's Northridge Mall. This had been equivalent to 7.5 pence per share.
"We are convinced this is a temporary write-down because the centre is still getting back on its feet after the earthquake some three years ago. We are quite confident we will get that value back in the next two to three years as the centre re-establishes itself," he said.
And he defended MEPC's decision to give a target NAV of 690 pence per share for 2001.
"We're sticking our necks out...The portfolio is very very different to what it was three years ago and what we're trying to do is give shareholders some feel of where we think the performance is going to be in five years time," Tuckey said.
Tuckey said the full impact of the change of strategy in MEPC's portfolio would take time but there would be progress towards the firm's targets each year.
He said there was a much firmer tone to the markets, particularly in Britain over the last few months. Apart from Northridge, the rest of the U.S. portfolio had performed "extremely well".
MEPC plans to keep the lion's share of its portfolio in Britain, with the remainder in the United States and Australia. It has wound down its European portfolio and has no plans to go back into continental Europe in the immediate future.
Tuckey said the group was keen to make acquisitions, with the proceeds of its European disposals, but that there was a shortage of good stock available, particularly in Britain.
While MEPC has resolved to increase the dividend paid to shareholders, Tuckey said he could not predict when it would be increased although he pointed out that dividend cover had improved to 1.15 times from 1.05 a year before.
"It depends on the forward look, on how the markets are feeling," he said. The market was competitive and good stock was hard to find but Tuckey said he welcomed the prospect of changes to the way the market functioned with more liquidity likely.
($1=.6161 Pound)
