British property group MEPC said on Thursday it was pleased with a rise in pretax profits for the year but admitted disappointment at a fall in its net asset value (NAV) to 450 pence per share from 457 pence.
"We feel very confident about the whole of the profit statement. The only slight disappointment is on the NAV side," James Tuckey, MEPC's chief executive, said in an interview.
Earlier MEPC announced a 14 percent increase in pretax profit for the year to 140 million stg from 122.6 million stg. Earnings per share rose nine percent to 22.9 pence.  
Tuckey said the NAV fall reflected a marginal fall in values both in Britain and elsewhere but said the NAV drop was less than the relevant indices.
"We feel that the performance of our UK portfolio, which accounts for 70 percent of the group, is indeed where we would have expected it to be," he added.
He pointed out the valuation date was August 31 and there had been activity and evidence of an improvement in the market since then. "If we redid the valuation for December 1, we would probably get a different answer," he said.  
Tuckey said the other factor which had brought the NAV down was a significant 31 million stg write-down on the valuation of MEPC's Northridge Mall in Los Angeles. This had been equivalent to 7.5 pence per share.
"We are convinced this is a temporary write-down because the centre is still getting back on its feet after the earthquake some three years ago. We are quite confident we will get that value back in the next two to three years as the centre re-establishes itself," Tuckey said.
"We felt that we wanted to share as much information as we could with shareholders," he added.  
MEPC's decision to give a target NAV of 690 pence per share for 2001 reflected its repositioning of its portfolio.
"We're sticking our necks out...The portfolio is very very different to what it was three years ago and what we're trying to do is give shareholders some feel of where we think the performance is going to be in five years time," Tuckey said.
"We believe we need to share with our stakeholders what it is we are trying to achieve."
Tuckey said the full impact of the change of strategy in MEPC's portfolio would take time but there would be progress towards the firm's targets each year.  
He said there was a much firmer tone to the markets, particularly in the UK over the last few months. Apart from Northridge, the rest of the U.S. portfolio had performed "extremely well".
MEPC plans to keep the lion's share of its portfolio in the UK, with the remainder in the U.S. and Australia. It has wound down its European portfolio and has no plans to go back into continental Europe in the immediate future.
Tuckey said the group was keen to make acquisitions, with the proceeds of its European disposals, but that there was a shortage of good stock available, particularly in the UK.  
While MEPC has resolved to increase the dividend paid to shareholders, Tuckey said he could not predict when it would be increased although he pointed out that dividend cover had improved to 1.15 times from 1.05 a year before.
"It depends on the forward look, on how the markets are feeling," he said. The market was competitive and good stock was hard to find but Tuckey said he welcomed the prospect of changes to the way the market functioned with more liquidity likely.
"I think there are changes afoot and they are changes for the good because what they will allow is greater liquidity for the sector, possibly through derivatives or the property investment trusts that have been talked about," he said, adding that MEPC would be involved in any such developments.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
