It may sound like a dull backwater but the role of compliance has again been thrust into the limelight as yet another respected financial institution was rapped by the authorities this week for breaking the rules.
Compliance officials play a key role in banking and finance, ensuring procedures to safeguard against fraud and malpractice are adhered to from the back office to the board room.
On Thursday British investment watchdog IMRO fined companies in the Robert Fleming group 700,000 pounds ($1.09 million) and Hong Kong's Securities and Futures Commission (SFC) secured voluntary compensation of nearly $20 million from a Robert Fleming and Jardine Matheson joint venture.
These punishments stemmed from compliance violations which also saw two individuals banned from the markets.
A compliance officer at a top international investment bank, who did not want to be named, told Reuters the irregular dealing leading to the probe was "as old as the hills".
And it was something the right checks and balances should have avoided. "I'm surprised that something as old as this has cropped up again. It's the sort of thing that any compliance officer worth his salt should have his eye open for," he added.
The joint IMRO and SFC investigation revealed that Colin Armstrong, a former senior fund manager at Jardine Fleming Investment Management, had made profits for his own account by the late allocation of deals, thereby depriving client accounts.
Compliance industry insiders said a number of red flags might have warned those in charge that something was amiss far earlier and thereby prevented much of the damage.
Larger-than-life characters and big earners are often left to their own devices and not investigated until too late.
Compliance officers first started appearing in London firms about 10 years ago, but the profile has changed significantly over this period, with many coming from the ranks of accountants and lawyers and seeking a career in the area.
Industry sources say top-ranking individuals can now earn as much as 100,000 pounds a year, including bonuses, which although falling short of what dealers earn, is attracting good people.
For a system of compliance with both internal and external rules and regulations to be wholly effective, the personnel involved not only need to be top notch, they must also have adequate resources and the full backing of senior management.
"The chief executive officer is personally accountable for compliance," the first source said. This means ensuring rules are not breached is not only in the interests of the firm, but also a question of self-preservation for the CEO.
In the Robert Fleming Asset Management (RFAM) probe, RFAM's former chief executive Robert Thomas accepted he "bore ultimate responsibility for the compliance failures...". As a result Thomas had his registration with IMRO ended.
In order to prevent the kind of dealing that Armstrong was engaged in, adequate separation between front and back offices, where the deals are struck and where they are processed, and strict rules on the use of personal accounts are critical.
Market sources noted similarities with Barings, where one of the main criticisms was that Nick Leeson, the trader who stacked up the losses which led to its collapse, was responsible not only for executing trades but settling or matching them as well.
This made it unlikely that any discrepancies in his trading would be uncovered in the back office, the sort of loophole regulators such as IMRO look for when they inspect firms.
Insiders said the Jardine Fleming outcome was a good result for the British watchdog, which came under fire for its handling of previous cases. "If you find a major problem you tell them. If it's a serious problem you tell them immediately, you certainly wouldn't sit on it," said one.
And while the incidence of breaches may appear to be on the rise, it can be argued that the trend shows the net is tightening. But even the best systems will not prevent mistakes.
"Even the best of us make mistakes. If you are a large firm problems do arise, if you find them then you take remedial action. There will always be fools, crooks and incompetents," the first compliance source said.
($1=.6420 Pound)
