Members of the Transport and General Workers Union (T&amp;G) at Tradeteam, the distribution arm of the brewing operation of Britain's Bass Plc, are to vote on strike action over proposed pay cuts, the union said on Friday.
The union said in a statement that the ballot of more than 1,000 workers at Tradeteam would start on December 9 and the result would be known on December 20.
Bass said there was no threat to the delivery of drinks to its customers in the run up to the busy Christmas period.
The T&amp;G said the ballot was going ahead after an attempt by Tradeteam, a joint venture between Bass and NFC, to have it halted by a legal injunction failed on Friday.
"Since Bass established Tradeteam in a joint venture with Exel Logistics, management has been trying to cut wages by 100 stg per week and impose inferior working conditions in order to save 10 million stg a year," the union said.
It said Tradeteam had also rejected T&amp;G attempts to establish national bargaining. The T&amp;G said a Liverpool judge had refused to grant an injunction to stop the ballot.
"Bass Brewers Ltd is a very profitable company, which made over 157 million pounds profit over the last year. Their aim at Tradeteam has been to cut the wages of draymen and warehouse workers, many of whom have given over 20 years' loyal service to the company," T&amp;G national secretary for the drinks industry Brian Revell said.
Draymen deliver beer and other drinks to pubs.
"I am pleased that the judge refused the injunction. We are prepared for a long battle with Bass until it honours its responsibilities," he added.
A spokesman for Tradeteam, which is 50.1 percent owned by NFC, denied a trade dispute existed with the union.
"There is no trade dispute with the T&amp;G. Current settlements on pay and conditions between Tradeteam and its staff represented by the T&amp;G have been made with full agreement of the T&amp;G at local branch level," he told Reuters.
"To agree to national wage agreements would mean Tradeteam would be totally out of step with the rest of the industry."
He said the union had been involved throughout the consultation process. This had resulted in the current terms and conditions for staff at each of the local offices at which the T&amp;G was represented, he added.
Bass Brewers said the decision to vote on strike action would not affect beer deliveries over Christmas.
"Obviously the strike issue is one for Tradeteam but we want to reassure customers this will not affect their beer deliveries during or before the Christmas period," Stewart Cain of Bass Brewers told Reuters.
Earlier this week brewer-to-leisure group Bass, the parent company, said it planned to spend 670 million pounds on the business next year, creating some 7,000 jobs.
It said it planned a 300 million pounds investment programme over the next year on its Bass Taverns, converting many pubs to branded concept bars.
