Former Barings executive Ron Baker plans to bring a counter-claim in a lawsuit against him by Dutch bank ING Barings for repayment of a loan he is alleged to have received, his lawyer told Reuters on Friday.
"He (Baker) plans to bring in his own counter-claim into those proceedings and they will be heard together unless some sort of arrangement is reached beforehand," Lindsay Hill, a partner at London law firm Fox Williams said.
ING Barings last month confirmed it was suing Baker for 113,000 pounds ($185,800), representing a 100,000 pound loan allegedly given to Baker when he was at Barings, plus interest.
British merchant bank Barings collapsed in February 1995 amid losses of around $1.4 billion run up by the unauthorised derivatives trades of Singapore-based trader Nick Leeson. It was rescued by ING which formed ING Barings as its investment banking arm.
Leeson is currently serving a six-and-a-half year jail sentence in Singapore for his part in the bank's downfall.
But the saga looks set to run on for some time, with writs filed by administrators of the bank against the former auditors and subsequent third party proceedings being issued against former bosses, including Baker.
Hill said Baker would contest the ING Barings case against him and his counter-claim would be for an unpaid bonus.
"He believes that the monies that he was promised by way of bonus remain due and are outstanding so yes, they will come into the equation in terms of resolving the dispute with ING Barings," Hill said.
Baker would not be the first to attempt to force ING Barings to pay a bonus which had apparently been promised before the collapse of Barings itself and ING's takeover.
But Hill said the decision by a London industrial tribunal on Thursday to reject a claim by another former Barings executive for an allegedly unpaid bonus had no implications for Baker's case.
"It's a different case, it's for different sums of money and the circumstances are not the same," Hill said.
Mary Walz, who was global head of equity financial products at Barings Investment Bank, had her 500,000 pound claim, which she said she was told was "set in stone" by her former Barings bosses, thrown out by the tribunal.
Hill declined to say how much Baker's counter-claim would be for but said the sum was "substantial".
