The debt restructuring package hammered out between Anglo-French Channel Tunnel operator Eurotunnel and its creditors may not be able to withstand any extra financial demands resulting from last month's fire, secondary debt trading firm Klesch &amp; Co said on Thursday.
"The recent fire onboard a Eurotunnel HGV shuttle has now raised fundamental safety concerns, with potentially dire (but as yet unquantifiable) long-term implications," Klesch &amp; Co said in a report on the restructuring plans.  
It said from an investment viewpoint the events "call into question the likely adequacy of the financial restructuring package as currently proposed" but acknowledged the immediate impact on Eurotunnel's revenues "is likely to be minor."
The report said that according to its calculations, the multi-billion pound debt restructuring hammered out between Eurotunnel and a group of 225 creditor banks, which was finally agreed in October, had only left the company with "headroom," or contingency reserve, of 600 million pounds ($990.7 million), or around 67 million pounds a year over nine years.  
"Any development (such as the fire) which has the potential to impact future revenues or operating efficiency, could threaten the suffciency of a financial restructuring package."
Passenger car shuttle services resumed through the tunnel on Tuesday, three weeks after the fire closed the undersea link. The fire on a truck destroyed a freight vehicle and damaged a section of the tunnel. Thirty-four people were injured.  
Rail services for passengers between Paris and London and Brussels and London resumed last week but no date has been set for a resumption of the shuttle service for trucks.
The report said that in the aftermath of the fire the Channel Tunnel Safety Authority would have to consider the design and operation of the open-lattice freight carriers.
"Should (it) decide that fundamental changes will be required to the HGV shuttles, the potential for a reduction in revenues and/or increases in costs could reduce the contingency made available by the restructuring," it added.
Klesch &amp; Co also pointed out the fire had highlighted that Eurotunnel "consists in its entirety of a single, high profile, effectively irreplaceable, hugely expensive and vulnerable operating asset," a factor at the core of its concerns.
