Following a bumper year in 1996, yet more British companies are likely to be takeover targets in 1997, but much of the merger and acquisition activity will be in the form of agreed deals, corporate financiers say.
"We certainly see the first quarter of next year being very active. There are a lot of transactions in the pipeline, a lot of activity," Rupert Faure Walker, head of corporate finance at HSBC Samuel Montagu, told Reuters.
Britain is still regarded as the European leader for takeover activity. "The markets here have always been more open than elsewhere, with not many constraints to other companies coming over here," another senior corporate financier said.
In the first nine months of 1996, 278 British companies valued at 14.4 billion pounds ($23.99 billion) were sold in cross-border deals, compared to 258 firms worth 19.1 billion pounds in the same period a year earlier.
Faure Walker said most of the deals in the pipeline were agreed rather than contested, with a number of strategic mergers reflecting industry rationalisations and cost eliminations. Others said consolidation and deconsolidation would both be driving forces behind activity in the year ahead.
ELECTION TO SET BUSINESS TEMPO
But while the outlook for the first quarter of the year looks promising for the corporate financiers who earn their fees by advising either acquirer or target, political influences are likely to colour how the market progresses, with the result of the impending general election the major force at work.
"The big thing next year is the election," said Faure Walker, adding that the election of a new goverment was likely to introduce a note of caution into the market.
This view was backed by the second corporate financier who said there could be some slowing of activity ahead of the election as companies did their best to avoid a deal being straddled across an election period.
Britain's opposition Labour party has consistently been ahead of the ruling Conservatives in the opinion polls and an election is due to be called by May.
If Labour wins, companies could take some time to adjust to the new environment and could wait until after a first Labour budget before making any significant moves. For a typical large acquisition this could result a 6-9 month period of caution, some industry players said, although others said activity was likely to continue whatever the government.
TAKEOVERS TO TAKE IN MORE SECTORS
A broader spread of takeovers, evident during 1996, is expected to run into 1997 as companies play "catch-up" after a period of caution following the recession of the early 1990s. Formerly publicly-owned utilities, including the few remaining regional electricity suppliers, will be joined by insurance brokers struggling with declining rates and a host of others.
"The inevitable reconstruction of industries will continue. The pace will quicken," the second corporate financier said.
The tendency towards agreed deals also reflected the fact that Britain's Office of Fair Trading had largely referred contested deals to the department of trade and industry (DTI) in recent months rather than agreed bids, financiers said.
REMAINING RECS SET TO FALL
In the electricity sector, the remaining privatised regional electricity companies (RECs) are viewed as likely targets for U.S. predators. Southern Electric and Yorkshire Electricity are tipped to follow recent takeover targets Northern Electric and London Electricity into U.S. hands.
With only two RECs remaining, some analysts suggest attention will now turn to the water companies, with further takeovers among them.
SMALLER FINANCIAL PLAYERS TO FEEL THE PINCH
The financial services sector is also seen as a hot-bed for further takeovers with perennials such as merchant banks Schroders, Hambros, and Robert Fleming all possible targets for larger global investment banks.
Further consolidation among small, specialist City of London and regional boutiques is also likely and Britain's dwindling club of large mutually-owned building societies could also attract attention from larger groups.
In the insurance sector Commercial Union is seen as a likely bid target or merger partner after widespread rumours suggesting talks with the financial services arm of B.A.T. It has also been linked with General Accident and Guardian Royal Exchange.
Among the insurance brokers, talk of consolidation as firms try to cut costs in the face of declining rates and overcapacity has been fuelled by recent mergers such as Lloyd Thompson and JIB. Willis Corroon and Sedgwick have long been rumoured to be possible merger or takeover candidates.
TELECOMS TO RING IN MORE CHANGES
Corporate financiers see the telecommunications and media sectors as providing significant merger activity during 1997, with Vodafone, cable group Telewest and Orange all tipped as possible targets.
There have also been suggestions that Mercury One-2-One may join Mercury Communications and that British Telecom may buy out its 40 percent partner in Cellnet. Energis, the cable company owned by National Grid, has been valued by some at 600 million pounds, while privately-owned Ionica also has long-term plans to float.
Among media companies, HTV, Yorkshire Tyne Tees and STV have all been suggested as possible targets, with Pearson an outside contender. In the growing sector of publicly quoted football clubs, Manchester United has obvious appeal.
OIL AND GAS TO REMAIN IGNITED
The demerger of British Gas into separate trading and transport firms in February has led to widespread market speculation that an oil major could be interested in buying the trading arm, to be called Centrica.
Worldwide consolidation in the oil industry is seen also affecting British firms. Smaller exploration and production firms might be eyed by the big players, all cash-rich after years of cost-cutting and keen to boost oil and gas reserves.
Other firms tipped to face takeover attempts are DIY retailer Wickes, defence to electronics group Racal, auto-components group T&amp;N, construction group Costain and Imperial Tobacco. Energy, currently part of Hanson but due to be demerged next year, is not expected to be left uncourted for long.
Britain's drink companies are entering a period of steady, organic growth which precludes any major acquisitions. But Allied Domecq, Grand Met and Guinness have been dissuaded from pursuing the idea of demergers.
The major food companies are also looking to prune their brand portfolios to allow a more concentrated marketing push behind core brands with international appeal. This strategy will involve disposal programmes and small bolt-on acquisitions.
Bass and Guinness, Associated British Foods and Tate &amp; Lyle are all sufficiently cash-rich to launch sizeable takeovers.
