Britain's Takeover Panel, after battling to defend its policing role of London's busy mergers and acquisitions market against European interference, has ended the year in the spotlight over its handling of CE Electric's bid for Northern Electric.
The non-statutory body has spent much of 1996 campaigning against a framework European Union proposal on takeover bids which it says will lead to multi-million pound lawsuits and harm London's system of takeover regulation.
But on Monday the panel's own role was under scrutiny as the outcome of a bitter bid battle between U.S. group CE and British utility Northern hung in the balance.
"What is going on at the moment is being watched pretty closely. It is a fairly unique situation," a financial services lawyer said.
Criticism of the part the panel has played stems from a 250,000 pound ($418,600) payment made by Northern to one of its advisors, BZW, the investment banking arm of British banking giant Barclays Plc.
BZW said this was a discretionary fee and denied that it was linked to its purchase last week of Northern shares, which had already been allowed by the panel. After it was told of the payment, the panel extended the deadline for acceptances.
After the official close of the offer last Friday, Northern would have remained independent as CE had only achieved the support of 49.77 percent of Northern shareholders. But following the extension, CE said on Monday it had 50.13 percent.
A source close to the discussions said it was "very unusual and maybe unique" for the panel to be in the position of deciding the fate of a company in this way.
This view was echoed by other market participants.
"This is an unndented step the panel has taken," one investment banking source told Reuters of the decision to grant an extension to the offer period at such a late stage.
Northern's fate now lies in the panel's hands. The company has said it wants to appeal against the decision and revert to the result at the original end of the offer period. Acceptances after the initial deadline require the panel's approval.
"They (the panel) now find themselves in a very difficult situation," the investment banking source added.
Any changes in the way in which the panel operates must either come from government, by bringing in legislation to establish a statutory force to regulate takeovers, or from within the body itself, market players said.
Pressure from industry participants could lead to the panel making changes itself. "They can change the "Blue Book" (the rule book regulating takeovers) at the drop of a hat," one industry source said, adding that it had so far managed the system well.
"The panel seemed to be coping well with the upturn in bid activity. The system seemed to be working pretty well," he said. Mergers and acquisitions activity has reached peak levels in recent weeks, with a number of both agreed and disputed bids.
Apart from the potential threat from the European takeover directive, there had "been no major challenges to the panel's authority over the year", he added.
Even if the ruling Conservative Party loses a general election which must be held by next May, market participants said they did not expect pressure for legislation to put the panel on a statutory footing under a Labour government.
"The general feeling is pretty much against it (legislation) and the indications so far ist change it," said one.
