CE Electric, the U.S. energy group, appeared poised to win its hostile bid for British regional electricity group Northern Electric Plc on Tuesday after Britain's Takeover Panel ruled against the target firm.
Late on Monday night the British company lost an appeal to the panel, which polices London's mergers and acquisitions market, to reverse an extension of the offer period for CE's 782 million pound ($1.3 billion) bid to 1300 GMT on Tuesday.
On Monday morning CE, which is controlled by CalEnergy Co Inc, said it had received acceptances totalling just over the 50 percent mark needed for victory. The offer was meant to close last Friday but was extended after an appeal by CE.
This extension was granted because CE raised concerns about the purchase of Northern Electric shares last week by its advisers British merchant bank Schroders and BZW, the investment banking arm of Barclays, and a discretionary payment of 250,000 pounds to BZW but not declared until Friday.
In its statement the panel said it had only been informed of the payment early on Friday but that while "neither element of the fee arrangement was dependent upon the success or failure of the offer", it was "material information which ought to have been made known to the executive" earlier in the week.
Northern in turn launched its own appeal against the extension of the deadline because at the time of the first deadline, CE had only gathered support totalling 49.77 percent and therefore fell short of the total needed to win.
But after a day of uncertainty on Monday, the panel said its appeal committee had "unanimously dismissed" Northern's appeal, that the latest time for acceptance of CE's offer should be extended and "any valid acceptances and withdrawals received by the latter time should be taken into account".
The panel also said the non-disclosure "may have had market consequences affecting the outcome of the bid, bearing in mind the narrow margin between success and failure in this case".
CE officials were not immediately available for comment but Northern, which has fought off CE's approach from the beginning claiming it undervalued the company, refused to throw in the towel and urged shareholders who had indicated they would accept CE's 650 pence per share offer to think again.
"It is now up to the market to decide. If shareholders do not wish this bid to succeed they should deliver withdrawals of acceptances to the Royal Bank of Scotland by 1300 on Tuesday," a spokesman for Northern Electric told Reuters after the ruling.
The spokesman said that in the event of the CE bid lapsing, Northern was willing to "attempt to reach agreement with CE Electric or any other bidder on the true value of the company".
By agreeing to effectively "collapse" a rule which says a bidder cannot come back and bid for the same company within a 12 month-period, the spokesman said Northern was opening the way for shareholders to withdraw their acceptances and reopen the debate about the value of the company.
BZW, which as a result of not declaring the discretionary fee from Northern at the appropriate time will not now be paid this part, said it had done nothing wrong.
"BZW has at all times acted in good faith and has risked its own capital in support of Northern's defence. Our fee arrangement was in no way contingent upon the purchase of Northern shares and the panel has permitted this purchase to stand," a spokesman for the firm told Reuters.
This is not the first time such uncertainty has surrounded Northern's future since it was privatised along with its 11 regional electricity company (REC) peers in 1990.
In 1994 it was the first of the cash-rich RECs to face a takeover and successfully fought off -- partly with the help of an extraordinary 560 million pound defence package -- a bid by conglomerate Trafalgar House, now owned by Norway's Kvaerner ASA.
If CE's bid goes through only two of the original RECs will remain independent, Yorkshire Electricity and Southern Electric.  
"It is now up to the market," Northern said, calling for shareholders to withdraw their shares from CE's offer by 1300 GMT on Tuesday, the deadline for the hostile bid.
"In the event that this bid lapses, the board is willing...to enter into discussions with CE Electric, or any other party, with a view to reaching agreement on an improved offer for Northern Electric," the utility said in a statement.
On Monday morning, CE said it had received acceptances totalling just over the 50 percent needed for victory.
CE's offer had been due to end on Friday, when it had only gathered support totalling 49.77 percent of the total. However, the Takeover Panel extended the deadline after CE appealed, questioning the purchase of Northern Electric shares by its advisers, Schroders and BZW, and a discretionary payment of 250,000 pounds to BZW.
($1=.5973 Pound)
