Increased confidence means a third of British companies expect to raise property holdings over the next six months, according to a survey by the Confederation of British Industry (CBI) and property consultants Grimley.
"Business confidence has strengthened markedly compared with six months ago and companies expect a further pick-up in business, led by domestic demand," said Sudhir Junankar, associate director of economic analysis at the CBI.
"With profitability set to grow faster over the next six months, the upturn in the commercial property market is becoming more firmly based," he added.
The six-monthly survey, which canvassed 645 private sector firms across the range of sectors and regions in Britain, found 32 percent of companies expect to increase property holdings, 26 percent see a reduction and 41 percent do not envisage a change.
"We expect a steady improvement rather than a dramatic surge in property requirements. The net balance on this survey is plus six percent over the next six months," Stuart Morley, Grimley's head of research, said at a briefing on the survey. This, he said was the highest result of the five surveys so far.
The report singled out the distribution, metal manufacturing and chemical processing, transport and communications sectors as those likely to see the largest increases in property holdings while over the last six months the largest increases have been in the retail sector.
Larger companies are most likely to increase their property holdings, reversing a declining trend over the last six months. This, said Morley, could mark the end of the large-scale restructurings which such companies have been undergoing.
"Large companies have gone through a period of restructuring. This suggests that period has come to an end. They are now looking to expand their holdings," he said.
Morley said companies were also "noticeably more optimistic about employment prospects than they were in previous surveys", adding this was "now feeding through into increased property demand", and rents were rising fastest in the retail sector.
Retail was most active in terms of change of holdings and the survey said this should continue. "Not only did this sector see the largest net increase in property holdings over the past six months, it is also expecting the largest net increase."
Areas where growth in demand for property is expected to be greatest are the north west of the country, followed by Northern Ireland, Greater London and Scotland while holdings are expected to fall at a greater rate in the south east,
Town centres, with government encouragement, have become more attractive with 50 percent of the extra retail space in these areas rather than out-of-town.
"This shows a gradual realisation that government policies are beginning to bite, a gradual realisation of the encouragement towards town centres where more companies will be looking for space," Morley said.
Demand for office space is particularly strong in town centres, although the largest companies are still seeking out-of-town floorspace.
According to the survey the main reason for companies to spend capital on property over the next six months "is the need to expand capacity" ahead of spending to replace property or to increase efficiency.
The main constraints companies see to capital expenditure on property are inadequate net returns, difficulty in disposing of property and a shortage of suitable property, the survey found.
