After several shaky starts, Britain's commercial property market looks set to build on some improvement during 1996, but property experts stress there will not be a return to the sort of boom seen during the 1980s.
"This is the "Real Thing'. That is the growing opinion among investors when they consider the recovery now underway in the UK real estate market," said David Hutchings of property consultants Healey &amp; Baker in his 1997 outlook.
Hutchings predicts real rental growth of three percent in 1997 and possible total returns of 15-17 percent for institutional quality portfolios. This should outstrip the return on gilts and may surpass equity returns too, he adds.
But uncertainty ahead of a general election, which must be held by the end of May, means a "gradual but sustained upturn" is more likely than a market boom, he said.
Improved signs of demand, particularly for office space in central London and retail developments, especially shopping centres, have raised expectations. "The feeling is generally that this year is going to be a good one," a senior property analyst at another leading firm of advisors told Reuters.
This view is supported by a recent survey by the Confederation of British Industry (CBI) and property consultants Grimley which was also cautiously bullish. It found increased business confidence meant a third of British firms expect to raise property holdings over the next six months.
The six-monthly survey, which canvassed 645 private sector firms across the range of sectors and regions in Britain, found 32 percent of companies expect to increase property holdings, 26 percent see a reduction and 41 envisage no change.
NO DRAMATIC SURGE IN DEMAND
"We expect a steady improvement rather than a dramatic surge in property requirements. The net balance on this survey is plus six percent over the next six months," Stuart Morley, Grimley's head of research, said last week.
Sudhir Junankar of the CBI said firms expect a further pick-up in business, led by domestic demand. "With profitability set to grow faster over the next six months, the upturn in the commercial property market is becoming more firmly based."
The CBI/Grimley survey predicts such growth will be strongest in the northwest of England, followed by Northern Ireland, Greater London and Scotland.
Larger companies are expected to lead the charge with those involved in distribution, transport and communications citing expanding capacity as the main spur in giving the go-ahead to capital expenditure on property.
The survey found smaller firms, as well as those involved in metal manufacturing, chemical processing, finance and business services, said that increasing efficiency was the main factor influencing plans for investment in property.
INTERESTED INVESTORS
But companies seeking additional or new space are not the only ones likely to fuel demand for real estate during 1997. Hutchings said the recovery underway in the property market is supported by both occupational and investment demand, in contrast to a brief upsurge during 1993.
Property consultant Knight Frank predicts that prime investment yields will be little changed in December from their levels in December 1996.
It forecasts the yield on City of London offices will be unchanged at 5.5 percent, while yields on offices in the area around London's M25 motorway and provincial towns will rise from 6.25 percent to 6.5 percent and from 6.5 percent to 7.0 percent respectively. In addition to offices, investors and property companies are particularly keen on shopping centres. "The prospects for the retail sector are good," the second analyst said.
Hutchings also forsees higher rents during the year ahead, fuelled by a growing economy, a shortage of top quality supply and low interest rates. Although some occupiers will hang back until after the election, occupational demand means rents will rise "at least until new development comes forward".
Some development has already begun and Hutchings says there are now growing signs "that institutional funds will re-enter the speculative development market in 1997" although bank lending for such schemes remains tight.
This is not the case for other projects where bank loans are more readily available and competition to lend for quality developments has led to wafer-thin margins being charged by some banks, particularly German lenders.
LONDON LEADS THE WAY
While the number of cranes over the City of London -- London's traditional financial heartland -- has not mushroomed, development activity has begun to pick up and more can be expected over the next 12 months, market players said.
In London one very visible factor is the heated rivalry that has emerged between the City and Docklands, the former docks area to the east of the capital which is home to the Canary Wharf tower, London's tallest building.
Firms such as U.S. investment bank Merrill Lynch and Britain's Robert Fleming have still to decide on where to relocate, with others such as Close Brothers and Cazenove also rumoured to be in the hunt.
And in the retail sector, last year's sale of former fashion mecca Carnaby Street by Dutch property fund Wereldehave for 90 million pounds "is a testament to the strength of investors' faith in the London market", said Hutchings.
