Even if British media and leisure group Pearson decides to sell its interest in merchant banking group Lazards, the bank would not be under immediate threat from larger rivals, banking sources said on Monday.
Marjorie Scardino's accession last week as Pearson chief executive has prompted widespread talk that Pearson would sell its 50 percent in Lazard Partners, which owns the three Lazard houses in London, Paris and New York.
But a pre-emption agreement in cross-shareholdings between Lazards and Pearson would ensure the partnership has first refusal on its own shares if Pearson decides to sell its stake, thus preventing the family-run merchant bank from falling into the hands of larger and expanding international rivals.
"This (speculation) is prompted by the fact that Pearson has a new chief executive who will obviously want to review things," one senior corporate financier told Reuters, adding that the pre-emption agreement meant Lazards "either stays with Pearson or comes within the Lazard empire fully".
Officials at both Pearson and Lazard Brothers in London declined to comment on talk of a possible sale.
Pearson has a 50 percent stake in London's Lazard Brothers and smaller nine percent stakes in Lazard Freres in Paris and New York. Its 50 percent stake in the umbrella group Lazard Partners was negotiated during the 1980s.
Analysts suggest Lazards does not fit into Pearson's main information, education and entertainment divisions and is therefore a target for being spun off. But banking sources point out that Lazards has been a profitable venture and not a drain.
"It (Lazards) has not required any capital or management time (from Pearson)," the senior financier added.
Pearson, in its 1995 annual report and accounts, points out that its "close ties to the three Lazard investment banking houses again proved their worth in 1995".
It highlighted attributable profits of 39.9 million pounds from the group for that year. If Pearson, described by Michel David-Weill -- senior partner of Lazard Freres in Paris -- as a "great partner" to Lazards since 1919, decides to sever its ties with the merchant bank, there could also be other complications.
The Lazard group, which has successfully specialised in corporate finance advisory work as well as asset mangagment and trading activities, holds 48 million Pearson shares.
The Financial Times at the weekend quoted David-Weill as saying Lazards might decide to sell this 360 million pound ($600 million) stake to finance a buy-back of Pearson's holding.
The newspaper said David-Weill had said the Lazards holding in Pearson was equivalent in value to Pearson's Lazard stake.
Although Lazards's stake has been seen as obstacle to a takeover attempt against Pearson, it might sell its shares on the market but in discussion with the group and "not to a party which could be hostile", David-Weill told the paper.
While Scardino's role at Pearson has been the subject of close scrutiny since her appointment, Lazards have also been in the news, with suggestions of a power-struggle over who will succeed 64-year-old David-Weill.
David-Weill said last week there was no succession crisis at the bank, adding he still had time. Under the bank's statutes, he can remain at the helm for another eight years. ($1=.5974 Pound)
