European privatisations in 1997 could total a record $53 billion, with the telecommunications and utilities sectors expected to dominate activity, U.S. investment bank J.P. Morgan said in a report on Monday.
"Compared with last year, we expect a significantly higher number of IPOs (Initial Public Offerings)...Italy stands out as having the most ambitious (privatisation) programme, at close to $20 billion," said Caroline Meroz, one the survey's authors.
The report said in the run up to Economic and Monetary Union (EMU), European governments "may feel under increasing pressure to accelerate...privatisation programmes to place themselves on track to meet the Maastricht three percent deficit criterion".
Proceeds could be used to reduce government's financial debt, although they cannot be taken into account when calculating the deficit.
It said proceeds of European privatisations in 1996 totalled a record $43 billion, a 30 percent increase on the previous high in 1994, bringing the total value of the European privatisation programme so far to $230 billion.
And the total estimate for the proceeds of privatisations through to the end of the century could total $118 billion, according to the report, which was based on 53 enterprises which governments have confirmed they plan to privatise.
Meroz told Reuters that the utility sector had shown the greatest slippage on scheduled privatisations for 1996 with a completion rate of only 20 percent, but that otherwise it had been "a pretty good year".
This had been fuelled by strong European equity markets which, excluding Britain, rose by 26 percent over the year and also by "the variety of small innovative deals such as share buy-backs," Meroz said.
Such buy-backs could, Meroz said, be used by governments to dispose of residual holdings in companies during 1997.
The report said the energy sector accounted for a larger than expected portion of offerings while the privatisations of Deutsche Telekom and Italy's ENI "together accounted for 25 percent of 1996 proceeds".
Demand for future offerings should be well suppored by growing domestic interest and J.P. Morgan forecasts that foreign tranches will be closer to 40 percent than the 50 percent take-up by foreign investors expected in the past.
"The market has been able to absorb a lot of equities. We think the demand is there," Meroz said, adding there would be strong retail as well as institutional demand.
Some of the major privatisations planned for 1996 which failed to see the light of day were included in the report's 1997 estimates but the rest "may be cancelled (or possibly postponed to much later years) or may be carried out through alternative methods, such as private sales".
But a lack of mix of new ideas, both in terms of sectors and the countries the privatisations hail from, could have a dampening effect on the market in 1997, with privatised stocks seldom able to offer the upside of consumer recovery.
