British yachtsman Tony Bullimore's survival for four days in the icy Southern Ocean owes much to the high-tech safety equipment available to the modern sailor.
This year's London International Boat Show was crammed with gadgets such as the Emergency Position Indicating Radio Beacon (EPIRB). It costs 700 pounds ($1,176) but proved its worth by showing Bullimore's Australian rescuers where to look for him.
Bullimore's ordeal in the upturned hull of his yacht after it capsized in a solo round-the-world race is a far cry from the "Mediterranean marina" which was the centrepiece of this year's boat show at Earl's Court in west London.
Huge "Gin Palaces" abound but the show's organisers were keen to stress "messing about in boats" is not only for the rich.
The smallest vessel on show, the aptly-named Tadpole, was six foot (two metres) long and costs 297 pounds.
Around 800 boats were on display, 20 of them bobbing gently up and down in a giant indoor marina, built specially for the show, an annual event.
The 200,000 visitors had to wear slippers over their shoes to protect the polished decks if they wanted to go on board.
The British boating sector has a turnover of some two billion pounds and the boats on show were not just for dreaming about. Orders totalling millions of pounds were placed in the first week of the show, which ended on Sunday.
TRADITIONAL VERSUS HIGH-TECH EQUIPMENT
The halls were full of the paraphernalia of boating, with stands displaying traditional brass clocks and barometers competing with the latest in high-tech satellite navigation equipment.
If the latest in pump-action lavatories, the smoothest automatic winches or a machine that turns sea-water into drinking water is what you are after, this was the place to be.
Some firms demonstrated state-of-the-art sail materials, whose development owes much to the space programme. Others showed how traditional wooden "clinker" boat-building still has a place in the late 20th century.
The sunnier side of pleasure cruising was to the fore, but, topically, there were also tales of disaster and endeavour.
Among the speakers were a couple who 23 years ago spent four months drifting in the Pacific in a tiny inflatable life-raft.
Motor boats such as the sleek Sunseekers, the latest model of which, the Predator, sells for 1.8 million pounds, dominate one area, but most of the floorspace was dedicated to sailing.
SAILING REFLECTS BRITISH APPROACH TO THE SEA
This, says Tony Beechey, executive chairman of the British Marine Industries Federation, is in keeping with the British approach to the sea and reflects recent Olympic successes.
"Britons have always been more sail-oriented than power, maybe it is something to do with the climate...but we seem to have a stronger sailboat past," he told Reuters.
John Merricks, who with Ian Walker won a silver medal at the Atlanta Olympics in the 470 dinghy class, says boats need to keep evolving if sailing is to compete with other sports, even if this means his class is dropped after the 2000 games.
"It's harder to draw people into the sport with new outdoor activities competing against it," he said. "We need new, fast, exciting and colourful classes."
Many visitors made a beeline for the 49-er, recently selected as a new Olympic class and one of a new breed of "skiffs" --lightning-quick sailing dinghies which appear to fly across the water with both helmsman and crew suspended from trapezes.
They may cost just over 10,000 pounds, but Martin Wadhams of LDC Racing Sailboats which produces the space-age looking dinghy says fitness, skill and the agility of crews are what counts.
"The major thing about the boat is it brings the true spirit of the Olympics. It is going to spawn a new era in sailing." ($1=.5950 Pound)
