Plans for a new type of radio service that could be heard coast-to-coast faced a potential new snag Monday after a top regulator said any company should be allowed to bid for the two available licenses.
Federal Communications Commission Chairman Reed Hundt said he opposed an existing FCC plan to limit a government auction of the licenses to the four applicants that filed with the agency several years ago. The agency is split over the matter.
"The auction should be open to anyone who thinks they can make a business out of" Digital Audio Radio Service (DARS), he told a meeting of the National Association of Broadcasters.
An open auction could net the government a tidy sum.
Hundt noted that MCI Communications Corp. last year paid $683 million to win the last remaining satellite slot to beam television programmes nationwide.
The four DARS applicants are: CD Radio Inc. ; American Mobile Radio Corp., a unit of American Mobile Satellite Corp. ; Digital Broadcast Satellite Corp.; and Primosphere.
"We're not pleased to have heard (Hundt's) remark this morning," said CD Radio Chairman David Margolese. But he cautioned, "We can't read too much into it just yet."
An American Mobile Radio spokeswoman said the company hoped the FCC would limit the applicants to the current four. She also said the company hoped the four would have the chance to decide how to allocate the two licenses "rather than go to auction."
Unlike conventional radio, the new digitally based radio service would offer listeners CD-quality sound and would be broadcast nationwide via satellite.
Listeners would have to purchase a special radio and antenna. It is likely the service will be subscription-based.
Aside from Hundt, Commissioner Susan Ness also favours opening the auction. But she is willing to back the existing plan, if necessary, to allow the FCC to move forward promptly.
The FCC's other two commissioners -- James Quello and Rachelle Chong -- oppose opening the auction.
Chong last week publicly called on her colleagues to move as quickly as possible to complete action on the matter.
The auction issue is the latest controversy to dog the new radio service, which the FCC has been mulling for years.
The four commissioners already were split over whether to require digital audio radio service operators to meet specific public-interest obligations in return for the radio licenses -- much as TV stations now do. The FCC plan faced delays last fall after members of Congress voiced their own concerns.
