The high-energy debate over the television industry's new ratings system moved Thursday to Capitol Hill, where several lawmakers argued the system is flawed -- and some warned a government fix may be necessary.
Industry executives, in an apparent softening of their own position, stressed that the system, barely two months old, is "a work in progress" and that they are not immune to change.
"I have no line in the sand," Motion Picture Association of America President Jack Valenti told reporters after the Senate Commerce Committee held the first congressional hearings on the age-based ratings. They began airing on network and cable-TV on Jan. 1 at the beginning of programmes.
"We will probably make changes as we go down the line," added Valenti, who headed the effort to develop the ratings.
He said some shows probably will be rerated to provide more consistency and that some tinkering is possible, like lengthening the time a rating is shown for a programme. But he did not suggest major revisions as demanded by many lawmakers.
The latest criticism -- backed up with the threat of legislation -- is sure to put pressure on the TV industry.
Lawmakers from both parties contended the ratings are inadequate and that industry executives should adopt a content-based system that spells out the level of sex, violence and strong language in a programme.
They complained that the vast majority of shows receive a middle-of-the road TV-PG rating -- parental guidance suggested -- even though the amount of sex, violence and foul language varies greatly from show to show within that category.
"The current TV ratings system is a little bit like putting a sign up in front of shark-infested waters that says: 'Be careful when swimming,'" Sen. Joe Lieberman, a Connecticut Democrat, told the Senate Commerce Committee.
Training his sights on Hollywood and TV executives, he warned, "Don't force us to legislate again in this area."
The ratings stem from last year's big communications law.
In December, a group of industry executives adopted six categories: TV-G, suitable for all ages; TV-PG, parental guidance suggested; TV-14, parents of children under 14 strongly cautioned; TV-M, mature audiences only; and two categories applying to children's shows: TV-Y, suitable for all children; TV-Y7, suitable for kids age seven and older.
Already, some lawmakers are pushing new laws to alter the system and TV programming.
Sen. Dan Coats, an Indiana Republican, said he will offer a bill to require the TV industry to adopt a content-based system -- a move that industry executives have vowed to fight in court "in a nanosecond" on First Amendment grounds.
"We don't want Hollywood telling parents what is age-appropriate. We just want Hollywood telling parents what is in their shows," Coats told the hearing. His bill also would bar the government from giving TV stations a free channel in the transition to high-definition digital TV.
Others want a law to impose a "safe harbour" period, so that violent shows could be shown only later in the evening unless they carried a specific content-based rating.
But some lawmakers warned against government meddling with the ratings system and said it should be given a chance.
"There are ways to improve what we have here," said Sen. John Breaux, a Louisiana Democrat. He said it should not be government's job to replace parents in the role of screening shows for children.
Valenti likened the system's criticism to judging the career of a new senator "by the performance of his first 56 days in office."
Eddie Fritts, president of the National Association of Broadcasters, indicated the system could be changed in the face of major grass-roots criticism. "It's a work in progress."
