Following years of delay, regulators are set to announce approval of plans to create a new type of radio service that offers CD-quality sound and can be heard coast-to-coast, government officials said Friday.
The four members of the Federal Communications Commission have resolved long-standing differences over allocating the two available radio licenses to the four companies seeking to offer so-called Digital Audio Radio Service, or DARS.
The four are: CD Radio Inc.; American Mobile Radio Corp., a unit of American Mobile Satellite Corp.; Digital Broadcast Satellite Corp.; and Primosphere.
Unlike conventional radio, the new digitally based service will offer listeners extra-clear sound and will be broadcast nationwide via satellite.
Listeners will have to buy a special radio and antenna. It is likely the service will be subscription-based.
The officials, who requested anonymity, said the FCC's approval is expected to be announced soon, possibly as early as Monday.
Despite reservations from two commissioners, the agency has in effect agreed to limit an auction of the two licenses to the four companies -- which had filed applications with the FCC in the early 1990s. The sale is expected by mid-April.
On Monday, FCC Chairman Reed Hundt raised the specter of a potential snag. He insisted an auction should be open to any company that wants to bid, instead of the existing four.
But two other commissioners -- James Quello and Rachelle Chong -- had opposed opening the auction.
The fourth commissioner, Susan Ness, favoured opening the bidding, but was willing to back a limited auction to allow the FCC to move forward promptly.
An open auction could have raised a sizeable sum for the government by attracting more bidders.
Hundt had noted pointedly that MCI Communications Corp. last year paid $683 million to win the last remaining satellite slot to beam television programmes nationwide.
In the end, the government officials said, Hundt and his colleagues allowed the limited auction to proceed, given that the applicants have been waiting years.
"These people applied many years ago," said one official.
"At the end of the day, you can't hold this thing up forever," said another.
An auction date must still be set. But the bidding is expected to be held before April 15.
The commissioners, in resolving another dispute, agreed to require the eventual license winners to provide discounted advertising rates and equal time to political candidates running for federal office.
The commission also put the applicants on notice that the winners could be subject to other public-interest obligations in the future.
