Regulators Monday approved long-delayed plans to auction two airwave licenses to create new nationwide radio services that will be beamed coast-to-coast via satellite and offer CD-quality reception.
The Federal Communications Commission, in resolving a long-standing dispute among its four comissioners, said it will limit the April 1 sale to the four companies that had applied by the end of 1992 to offer digital audio radio -- instead of opening the auction to any company.
The four are: CD Radio Inc. of Washington, D.C.; American Mobile Radio Corp., a unit of American Mobile Satellite Corp. of Reston, Va.; Digital Broadcast Satellite Corp. of Seattle; and Primosphere LP of New York.
To receive the service -- which is at least three years away -- listeners will have to buy a special radio receiver that will cost about $200, in addition to the price of a regular radio, according to industry estimates.
It is likely the service will be subscription-based, with an expected cost of about $10 a month. Operators will be able to offer specialised programming.
CD Radio, which pioneered the digital radio concept, plans to provide 30 channels of commercial-free music programming if it wins one of the two licenses up for grabs.
The company would target persons who drive a lot or live in rural areas and do not have access to many radio stations.
Industry officials say it will take anywhere from three to six years to get the new service operating. "It's a long lead time in building satellites and getting rocket-launch assignments," said Primosphere's Cliff Burnstein.
FCC Chairman Reed Hundt and Commissioner Susan Ness had favoured opening the auction of the licenses to any bidders, instead of limiting it to the four.
But they were unable to get the other two commissioners at the FCC -- Rachelle Chong and James Quello -- to agree.
"I would prefer to assign spectrum licenses through an auction open to all. Closing the auction is the wrong result," Hundt said in a statement.
An open auction could have raised a larger sum for the government by attracting more deep-pocketed bidders.
Hundt noted recently that MCI Communications Corp. last year paid $683 million to win the last remaining satellite slot to beam television programmes nationwide.
The commissioners, in resolving another dispute, agreed to require the license winners to offer discounted advertising rates and equal time to political candidates running for federal office.
The agency also told the applicants that the winners could be subject to other public-interest obligations in the future.
The FCC is ready to unveil plans to auction a separate valuable airwave slice that will be home to a wireless technology that could offer new competition to local phone companies and cable-television operators.
A government official said the FCC plans to announce soon its long-awaited auction plans for local multipoint distribution service, or LMDS, a wireless technology that allows users to zap voice, pictures and data over high-speed networks that also can hook up to the Internet.
"All the issues have been resolved," said the official.
The FCC is expected to bar local carriers and cable firms from bidding for LMDS licenses in their home territories in a bid to bar them from snuffing out potential competition.
