Alcohol and tobacco companies are capitalising on the Internet's popularity and flashy graphics to promote products in cyberspace in ways that appeal to underage youth, said a report issued Thursday.
The Centre for Media Education (CME), a children's advocacy group, called on Congress, federal regulators and health officials to probe the promotions, saying some may be illegal. The Federal Trade Commission already is probing television liquor and beer ads.
"Urgent action is needed to ensure that effective safeguards are put in place to protect young people from the harmful effects of online marketing of alcohol and tobacco," said the report.
"Many of these new forms of advertising, of particular appeal to youth, appear to be inherently unfair and deceptive." Industry officials deny they are targeting youth.
"There's nothing on the Budweiser Web site that a family wouldn't see on an Anheuser-Busch brewery tour," countered Jack Dougherty, spokesman for Anheuser-Busch Cos. Inc. BUD.N , which produces Budweiser beer. He said the company's Web site targets beer drinkers age 21 and older.
The study said alcoholic beverage companies, in particular, have moved to establish sites on the World Wide Web, the multimedia portion of the Internet. It said more than 35 major brands are represented, including Moet &amp; Chandon champagne, Smirnoff's vodka, Dewars scotch whiskey, Samuel Adams beer, Captain Morgan rum, and other products.
The study cited marketing and promotion techniques that use the colourful, interactive features of the Web in ways that appeal to young people. It identified the following:
-- The Budweiser online radio network, "KBUD," which weaves music, rock-star interviews, and music reviews together with beer promotions.
-- Web sites offering interactive games that feature brand characters, including Molson Breweries' "Berserk in Banff" and Jose Cuervo tequila's "J.C. Roadhog Adventure." Molson is owned 40 percent by Molson Cos. Ltd.  MOLa.TO, 40 percent by Foster's Brewing Group Ltd., and 20 percent by Philip Morris Cos. Inc.
The Cuervo site involves an off-road ride with a "cyberrodent" who drives across a desert strewn with empty tequila bottles and other Curevo merchandising icons.
-- Liquor sites with "bridge drink" recipes that disguise alcohol's taste and are more appealing to novice drinkers.
-- Numerous sites offering wine, beer, distilled spirits and tobacco products for sale with few or no questions asked.
Regulatory curbs and fears of political backlash have kept most big tobacco companies from launching advertising Web sites, according to the study. But that may change, it added.
Brown &amp; Williamson Tobacco Corp., a subsidiary of B.A.T Industries Plc, recently began running print ads for its Lucky Strike cigarettes in the San Francisco area in a bid to entice new visitors to the Web site for "Circuit Breaker," an online magazine that collects data on smoking habits and offers free T-shirts.
Brown &amp; Williamson, in response, said the Web site "promotes awareness of events in the San Francisco Bay Area, such as bar nights and adult-oriented concerts."
"The Web site does not contain tobacco advertising or cigarette logos because we're promoting awareness of the events, not cigarettes," the company added.
The study also said some tobacco companies have launched Web sites in other countries, such as Germany, that can be accessed easily from the United States.
"The cigarette industry should refrain from moving onto the Internet to market and promote its products," said the CME's Jeffrey Chester. "If companies fail to comply with the Cigarette Act, appropriate legal action should be taken."
The 1971 law bars cigarette ads on TV and radio and, according to the CME, is applicable to the Internet.
