Regulators are considering extending consumer safeguards for 900-number phone calls to other pay-per-call services that have zapped unwitting consumers with sky-high phone bills for overseas calls.
The Federal Trade Commission Wednesday said it will seek public comment on whether to apply the rules to information and entertainment services that callers dial though a prefix other than "900." The 900-number rules require clear cost disclosures and a means for settling billing disputes.
The newer services offer callers astrological and travel information, psychic advice and phone sex, among other things. Scams among "audio information" or "audio entertainment" services are a growing problem, according to one official.
Officials say providers of the services evade the 900 rules, adopted in 1992, by diverting calls to numbers in such countries as Guyana, the Dominican Republic, the tiny African country of Sao Tome, or the former Soviet Republic of Moldova.
In some cases the first three digits of the number -- such as 809, 758 or 664 -- resemble area codes in this country.
The difference: The overseas calls wind up in countries where the local phone company levies a charge of more than $2 a minute for completing the call. The rate far exceeds costs.
Government officials said this allowed the overseas phone company to provide a "kickback" to the pay-per-call service for each call sent abroad, payments that can drum up business.
"It has probably helped them to establish a modern telephone system," one FTC official said of the foreign phone companies.
Last year's overhaul of U.S. telecommunication law gave the FTC the authority to expand its 900-number rules to cover similar services not accessed by dialing 900.
Those rules give consumers three seconds to hang up after listening to a message disclosing the cost of the service.
A service also must spell out its costs. Calls that cost more than $2 must start with a message disclosing the price and identifying the name of the service.
The rules also ensure that consumers will not lose their phone service if they fail to pay for a 900 call. They also establish a mechanism for settling billing disputes.
The FTC recently brought a number of cases against alleged international pay-per-call schemes and has issued consumer alerts warning of the costs and risks of such services.
Last month it closed three steamy sites on the Internet after consumers complained of huge phone bills to Moldova.
The agency alleged that Audiotex Connection of Long Island, N.Y., and others distributed a sophisticted computer programme that -- unbeknownst to consumers -- caused a computer user's modem to disconnect from their local Internet access company and dial an overseas pay-per-call number to the former Soviet Republic. A lawyer for those involved denied wrongdoing.
Tim Elliott, president of the TeleServices Industry Association, said new rules were not necessarily needed for his industry. "We police ourselves. It's pretty effective."
He conceded, "There are a lot of folks involved in the industry that are -- I don't want to say shady -- but who push the envelope."
