The bold advice some Baby Bells gave foreign regulators on how to open overseas phone markets now haunts the regional phone companies in the struggle over their own monopolies here at home.
Consumer advocates and long-distance carriers such as AT&amp;T Corp. have jumped on the statements as ammunition in their high-stakes effort to pry open the $100 billion local phone market controlled by the regional Bell phone companies.
They said the comments, to European and Asian governments in recent years, not only contradicted the Bells' current views on key matters in the United States but also backed the position of the Bell companies' rivals.
"It's an amazing example of hypocrisy," said Gene Kimmelman, co-director of the Washington office of Consumers Union, a consumer group. "Everywhere they're in as a challenger, they make the very same arguments that consumer advocates and competitors make against their monopoly status in this country."
Overseas units of BellSouth Corp. and U S West Inc., for example, endorsed in 1995 an arcane but important method for putting a price on an existing phone network.
The price applies when a new competitor wants to hook up to the network to create their own phone service. But the Bells oppose that method when it comes to pricing their own networks for long-distance companies and others seeking to offer local phone service under the 1996 communications law.
The Bells are asking a U.S. court to overturn landmark Federal Communications Commission rules designed to spur competition through a similar pricing system, saying the rules are counterproductive and would hurt them financially.
AT&amp;T Vice President Mark Rosenblum said the overseas comments "underscore" that the FCC's rules "reflect sound economic and public policies."
But the Bells called the statements "ancient history" -- some go back more than five years -- and argued it was like comparing apples and oranges. Telecommunications markets and regulation abroad can differ sharply from practices at home.
"The arguments were made at a time before there was a need for a single corporate policy," says BellSouth spokesman Bill McCloskey.
McCloskey said new laws and rules to open the local phone market here -- such as last year's communications act -- were not on the books at the time. "They're digging pretty deep," he said of the critics.
Billions of dollars in profits are at stake in the fight.
Here's a sampling of some of the advice:
-- BellSouth's New Zealand unit warned in 1995 that if a monopoly "fails to accept the benefits" of competition, it "can and will" use the negotiations on opening its local network "to delay and restrict the benefits of competition."
Ironically, consumer advocates, AT&amp;T, MCI Communications Corp. and other potential rivals charge that the Bells have been dragging their feet in the United States.
-- BellSouth Europe the same year urged European officials to require monopolies to price their networks to competitors at levels based on the cost of new, more efficient facilities. Competitors would use the network, or parts of it, to complete their own phone system.
The Bells, by contrast, oppose the FCC's endorsement of "forward-looking" prices. Instead, the Bells have said they should receive payments that take account of the higher cost of their existing phone facilities.
-- U S West told British regulators in 1995 that the use of forward-looking costs was a "fair basis." The carrier said the formula means new competitors do not have to pay for "inefficiencies" in the local company's phone network.
"We're comparing apples and oranges," countered U S West spokeswoman Nanci Bernstrom. She said the accounting rate structure in Britain was "vastly different" from the one here.
Ameritech Corp. spokesman George Stenitzer called comments the company made to Australian regulators in 1990 or 1991 "pretty irrelevant." Critics have cited the statements.
"Anything we said before 1993 does not reflect our position today," he said. "This was a time when AT&amp;T said it had no interest in offering local service," he added dryly.
