Federal regulators and television broadcasters Thursday moved closer to agreeing on a stepped-up timetable for TV stations to begin providing high-definition digital broadcasts within 18 to 24 months.
The issue has been a stumbling block in the Federal Communications Commission's plans to dole out to stations free digital TV licenses in the next two weeks. The new service promises crystal-clear pictures and CD-quality sound.
Under pressure to jump-start the digital age, the National Association of Broadcasters and another industry group, the Association for Maximum Service Television, proposed that 31 stations in the 10 largest metropolitan areas begin broadcasting digital signals in 18 to 24 months.
In some markets, up to four stations would be on the air in the shortened time frame. The top 10 markets include New York, Los Angeles, Chicago, Philadelphia and other cities.
Broadcasters previously had suggested more time was needed, with many stations saying it would take six years to install the needed equipment and put the digital signals on the air.
"I welcome the increased level of commitment for launching digital television," said Commissioner Susan Ness, who is trying to broker a pact between the FCC and the broadcasters. She said the broadcasters' plans "move the ball forward in a very substantial manner."
FCC officials stressed, however, that key details must be worked out -- in particular, how many digital broadcasts would begin over 18 to 21 months, something that is important to TV makers trying to offer digital sets in the key Christmas buying season. Twenty-four months would fall after Christmas 1998.
TV set makers have said they would postpone offering digital sets an extra year if stations delayed significant introduction of digital broadcasts until 1999.
Ness, as a result, said she has asked broadcasters to better detail TV stations' plans to be offering digital transmission by Christmas of next year.
The roll-out schedule has been a key hurdle. FCC Chairman Reed Hundt had proposed that big network-owned stations in the top 10 markets start providing digital signals within the next year. That would translate into 26 large stations.
Broadcasters said that was too quick. Hundt's office gave the broadcasters' latest plan a cautiously upbeat response.
"We're evaluting it. But obviously this is a very healthy dialogue between us and the industry," said Hundt's chief of staff, Blair Levin.
Earlier this week Hundt sharply criticised broadcasters, questioning their commitment to digital TV.
"I'm beginning to wonder if broadcasters really want these licenses," Hundt told a meeting of the National Cable Television Association in New Orleans. "A cynic would think that broadcasters just don't want someone else to have them."
An official in Commissioner James Quello's office endorsed the new proposal as an "agressive roll-out." Officials with Commissioner Rachelle Chong's office could not be reached for comment.
Meanwhile, the FCC still must determine the level of public-interest obligations to impose on TV stations in exchange for the digital licenses, as well as other issues.
