Facing financial strains, companies that won wireless phone licenses at last year's $10.2 billion federal auction are urging the government to take steps to make it easier for them to pay off their bids, industry and government sources say.
Top bidders NextWave Telecom Inc. and Pocket Communications Inc., plus several other winners, have asked regulators for a more lenient timetable to pay the government for licenses to offer a new generation of cellular service, the sources said this week.
NextWave's winning bids totaled $4.7 billion, while Washington-based Pocket's added up to $1.4 billion.
The bids have become loans from the government, with the winners paying interest on the money owed for the licenses.
They want to make the hefty interest payments annually, instead of quarterly. The added time would help the companies, which face rough sledding on Wall Street, drum up money to build "personal communications services," or PCS, systems.
The winners at the 1996 Federal Communication Commission auction, reserved for small firms, paid a price more than double that paid by big carriers like AT&amp;T Corp. in 1995.
"These guys have a ticking time bomb on their hands," a Wall Street source said of the existing payment schedule.
Industry officials also want the FCC to clarify certain repayment rules. And they want the Treasury Department to take over from the FCC the job of payment collection, hoping the department's financial expertise will spell relief for cash-strapped firms.
"Anything that makes it easier for companies to pay is going to make the companies more attractive to investors," said attorney Lynn Charytan of Wilmer, Cutler and Pickering, who represents Pocket Communications.
FCC officials are mulling their options. "Our existing rules provide some flexibility. Whether that's enough flexibility is under consideration," said one agency official.
PCS technology is expected to make the wireless phone a mass-market product, allowing consumers to use different communications services -- such as phone, paging, fax and Internet access -- through a single handheld device.
Earlier this month, NextWave, Pocket and seven other PCS winners asked the FCC to permit annual interest payments.
The companies, in a letter to the FCC's wireless bureau obtained by Reuters, said annual payments would give them more flexibility to tap the stock and bond markets when conditions are favorable.
And they said such payments would let them capitalize on the new World Trade Organization pact on telecommunications. The agreement is expected to make it easier for foreign investment in U.S. communications companies.
The companies said the competitive pressure to build their PCS systems quickly "places a strain" on new entrants to the business, "whose challenge is further complicated by an increasingly cautious domestic investment climate."
Investors are wary of betting on wireless carriers out of fear the market is becoming flooded with competitors.
"I see no reason why the capital markets will be any kinder to wireless companies in '97 than in '96," said analyst Johathan Atkin of BIA Consulting Inc. in Chantilly, Va.
Industry officials also want the FCC to clarify whether a company would be in default on all of their licenses if it misses an interest payment on just one of the permits.
The FCC's rules do not address that issue. The agency is seeking comment on whether to issue a clarification.
FCC Chairman Reed Hundt two weeks ago broached the idea of making the Treasury responsible for payment collection. He cited a "tension created by the FCC's present dual role as regulator of and creditor to the wireless industry."
Advocates argue the changes -- including the more lenient payment schedule -- are in the FCC's interest.
For one, they would mean less paperwork for the agency.
And they said it would be counterproductive for several companies to default on payments. That could hurt the bidding at future airwave auctions and lower the potential price for any PCS licenses the FCC re-auctions after a default.
Some industry officials suggested the FCC may not want to appear too willing to change the rules and be accused of catering to industry interests.
