Age-based ratings like those recently adopted by the United States' television industry entice children to watch programs with a restrictive rating for sex, violence or foul language, according to a study released on Wednesday.
"Restricted ratings seem to produce a 'forbidden fruit' effect," said Joanne Cantor of the University of Wisconsin, referring to motion-picture ratings such as "PG-13" and "R" meant to alert parents to material unsuitable for children.
The TV industry adopted a similar system at the start of 1997 that has come under attack from critics who say it does not go far enough.
The study -- the second of three annual reports conducted by researchers from four universities -- also said the level of TV violence has remained about the same for the past two years.
President Clinton said the study showed that even though steps have been taken to protect children from unsuitable programs, "there is still more to do."
"We cannot transform the system overnight, but each of us -- parents the entertainment industry, government -- has a responsibility to help bring about change for the better," Clinton said in a statement.
The study, funded by the cable-TV industry, covered the 1995-96 season. It focused on 3,235 programs on 23 channels. Over the past two seasons, the report has covered more than 6,000 shows carried by network and independent stations, cable operators and public broadcasters.
The National Cable Television Association commissioned the study three years ago after former U.S. Sen. Paul Simon, an Illinois Democrat, urged the TV and entertainment industries to develop an independent annual report card on TV violence.
The study found that 61 percent of programs contained some violence during the past year, little changed statistically from 58 percent in the prior year's study.
"There is a striking persistence in both the overall amount and style of violent material on television," said Barbara Wilson of the University of California at Santa Barbara.
The study was conducted before the TV industry adopted its age-based ratings, which include TV-PG for parental guidance suggested and TV-M for mature audiences only. It focused on eight ratings system, including the movie industry's ratings.
The study, involving 374 children, found that older kids ages 10-15 were much more interested in seeing a program rated PG-13 or R, which stand for "parents strongly cautioned" or "restricted" audiences, respectively. They were much less keen to watch shows rated G for "general audiences."
"Ratings that urge parental control based on age considerations make restricted programs more attractive, but content labels do not," said Cantor.
Advocates of a content-based ratings system for TV -- such as V for violence, S for sex and L for coarse language -- immediately seized on the findings. Cable networks such as HBO already use a content-based system.
Rep. Edward Markey, D-Mass., said the age-based rating system "leaves parents in the worst of both worlds.
"They are asked to accept an age-based system that they not only don't want, but which they are likely to find makes their job of parenting even tougher than it already is."
But Jack Valenti, head of the Motion Picture Association of America and a key developer of TV ratings, shot back:
"Now let's get this straight. A program rated PG-13 entices children to watch, but a program rated 'sex, nudity, violence' does not. This kind of a survey will give research a bad name."
Valenti added that after 28 years, 79 percent of parents found the movie rating system "very useful to fairly useful."
The TV study also revealed that:
-- 58 percent of violent incidents did not show the victim suffering pain. Only 16 percent showed long-term negative consequences from violence.
-- Three out of four violent scenes contained no remorse, criticism or penalty for violence.
-- "Bad" characters went unpunished in 37 percent of programs.
