In a major victory for television broadcasters, the Supreme Court on Monday upheld a federal law forcing cable-TV operators around the country to carry local TV station broadcasts.
The high court, in a 5-4 decision that surprised many legal experts, affirmed a ruling by three federal judges that the so-called "must-carry" provisions of a 1992 cable-TV law do not violate the cable industry's free-speech rights.
Cable operators, who reach 64 percent of U.S. households, charged that the law amounted to illegal censorship and violated their right to select programming.
But broadcasters and the Justice Department defended the law, arguing that many cable operators would otherwise dump local stations in favour of cable programmes that could generate more advertising dollars.
Solicitor General Walter Dellinger, arguing on behalf of the Clinton administration, told the high court last fall it was "critical" for the government to maintain a "robust array of quality" broadcast programming.
The law -- implemented by the Federal Communications Commission -- requires cable systems to devote up to a third of their channels to local public and private stations that offer such fare as home-shopping, religious and "infomercial" programmes. The shows are beamed via low-power stations.
Writing for the high court, Justice Anthony Kennedy said the must-carry provisions are consistent with the First Amendment and agreed that they promote "important" government interests.
He also agreed with the government that the law's provisions "do not burden substantially more speech than necessary to further those interests."
But Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, in a dissenting opinion, charged that the majority's legal analysis was flawed.
She also argued that the majority showed "an extraordinary and unwarranted deference" for judgments by Congress, "a profound fear of delving into complex economic matters, and a willingness to substitute untested assumptions for evidence."
The decision came as a shock to many. Most legal experts had expected the high court to rule against the broadcasters, based on the scepticism voiced by several justices toward the government's oral agrument before the court last fall.
"We're obviously disappointed, and frankly a little surprised," said Decker Anstrom, president of the National Cable Television Association.
Anstrom said that even before the 1992 law, "cable systems carried virtually every local broadcast station."
Broadcasters were ecstatic.
"We're elated the Supreme Court has recognised the historic importance of preserving free over-the-air television for all Americans," said Edward Fritts, president of the National Association of Broadcasters.
Jim Popham, of the Association of Local Television Stations, said that in the absence of the must-carry provisions, "it was clear that there were stations at risk."
Andrew Schwartzman, president of Media Access Project, a public interest law firm that represents citizens groups, said the decision "underscores the special privileges broadcasters receive."
It also strengthens the Federal Communications Commission's power to force broadcasters to provide free time for political candidates -- among other public-interest obligations -- in exchange for digital-TV licenses the FCC is expected to dole out free of charge to TV stations later this week, Schwartzman added.
