Regulators will host an auction Tuesday that supporters promise will usher in a new breed of nationwide radio service but critics charge may cost U.S. taxpayers millions of dollars in lost revenue.
Up for grabs are two licenses to provide radio programming that will be beamed coast-to-coast via satellite. Digital radio will offer listeners CD-quality sound and specialised programming that can be tuned in anywhere in the nation.
"Americans will be able to travel anywhere in the country, including remote rural areas where radio reception is poor, and enjoy the same high-quality audio and wide selection of programmes the entire trip," said William Caldwell, president of Seattle-based Digital Satellite Broadcasting Corp., one of the bidders at the Federal Communications Commission sale.
The FCC resolved a long-standing dispute among its four commissioners in early March by limiting the auction to the four companies that had applied by the end of 1992 to offer digital radio.
Two of the commissioners -- Chairman Reed Hundt and Susan Ness -- favoured opening the sale to any company wanting to bid. But in the end they agreed reluctantly to limit the auction so the launch of digital radio would not be delayed further.
"The decision to keep the auction door closed may needlessly cost the public millions of dollars," Hundt said when the agency announced its decision.
Hundt said that if other companies value the digital radio airwaves but are "arbitrarily excluded from the auction, it is safe to predict that the auction winners will simply sell their licenses to those companies."
Aside from DBSC, the other three bidders are: CD Radio Inc. of Washington, D.C.; American Mobile Radio Corp., a unit of American Mobile Satellite Corp. of Reston, Va.; and Primosphere LP of New York.
Commissioner Rachelle Chong contended that opening the bidding would have been unfair to the four.
"These applicants have been ready and willing to move forward for some time. The have expended considerable rsources in developing this technology," she said, adding that the first application was filed seven years ago.
Digital radio is unlikely to be on the air for at least three years -- if not longer -- owing to the time it takes to get satellites built and deployed into orbit.
The service will probably be subscription-based, with an expected cost of about $10 a month. Listeners will have to buy a special radio receiver that will cost about $200, on top of the price of a regular radio.
The credit-card sized satellite antenna could be installed in cars, trucks and homes.
If it wins a license, DBSC plans to deliver regional programming throughout the country. It would offer, among other things, children's programming, foreign-language, classical music, opera, all-news, all-sport and educational programmes to targeted demographic groups.
The programming would be offered as an advertising-supported service and as a commercial-free subscription service.
