Two Washington-area firms bid a total of $173 million at a government auction Wednesday for the rights to provide a new breed of radio service that can be heard coast-to-coast and offers CD-quality reception.
American Mobile Radio Corp., a unit of American Mobile Satellite Corp. of Reston, Va., placed a winning bid of $89.9 million at a Federal Communications Commission sale for one of two licenses to offer digital audio radio.
Washington-based CD Radio Inc. put down a top bid of $83.3 million for the other license in a long-delayed -- and controversial -- auction limited to four companies.
Digital radio, expected to be up and running by the latter half of 1999, will be beamed via satellite nationwide and will allow listeners to tune in anywhere in the country. It will be subscription-based and will offer listeners anywhere from 25 to 50 stations of music, news and other specialised programmes.
The small satellite antenna need to tune in the broadcasts could be installed in cars, trucks and homes. People who drive a lot -- or who live in remote areas with few existing radio channels -- are considered prime candidates for the new service.
"We believe this is a better way to listen to radio," said CD Radio Chairman David Margolese. "What we have is the birth of the future of radio."
CD radio expects to begin its service in the second half of 1999, offering 50 channels of programming. Most channels will be commercial-free and offer music.
Margolese said non-music channels could carry ads. Such programming could include all-news, talk and sports formats. He said the cost of the service will probably be $10 or less a month, depending on consumer demand.
To get the service, Margolese said it would cost about $150 to add a chip to a new radio with a digital band.
Lon Levin, vice president at American Mobile Satellite and head of the company's radio unit, said his company expects to offer 25 to 35 channels of news, sports and music. He expects the service to be operational in at least three years.
The auction occurred only after the FCC settled a long-running dispute among its commissioners in early March by limiting the auction to the four companies that had applied by the end of 1992 to offer digital radio.
Two commissioners -- Chairman Reed Hundt and Susan Ness -- favoured opening the sale to any bidder. But in the end, the two agreed reluctantly to limit the auction so that the launch of digital radio would not be delayed further.
Hundt warned that closing the auction could cost taxpayers "millions of dollars" in lost revenues because more bidders could have generated higher prices.
Broadcasters worry that the new service will sap existing radio stations of listeners and ad revenues.
"That weakens a station's ability to do local news, sports, weather, traffic and public service," said a spokesman for the National Association of Broadcasters.
CD Radio's stock surged on news of its auction victory, climbing $5.25 to $12.625 in early afternoon Nasdaq trading. American Mobile Satellite's stock was up 69 cents to $11.50, also on Nasdaq.
