The Federal Trade Commission said on Thursday it approved Time Warner Inc.'s $6.5 billion purchase of Turner Broadcasting System Inc. after the deal was restructured to meet antitrust laws.
The FTC, in a 3-2 vote, agreed to permit the revised transaction after the agency had alleged the original merger proposal would have allowed Time Warner unilaterally to raise cable-TV prices and limit the choice of programmes.
The two commissioners who voted against the agreement -- Mary Azcuenaga and Roscoe Starek -- said there was no reason to order the deal to be restructured in the first place because it did not violate antitrust laws.
Once formally completed, the merger would create the world's largest media and entertainment concern.
The Federal Communications Commission is expected soon to give its approval. Time Warner and Turner have scheduled separate meetings for Oct. 10 to allow their shareholders to approve the transaction, first announced nearly a year ago.
In response to FTC charges, the merger was restructured to curb cable-TV giant Tele-Communications Inc.'s influence over the new company that is to be formed.
TCI, the nation's largest cable-TV operator, now owns 21 percent of Turner stock and would own about 7.5 percent of a combined Time Warner-Turner under the merger, said the FTC. Time Warner is the No. 2 cable-TV operator.
Under the FTC accord, TCI must spin off its Turner stake to shareholders of Liberty Media Corp., a TCI subsidiary. The spin-off is contingent on a tax-free ruling from the government. Otherwise, TCI's stake would be capped at a 9.2 percent non-voting interest in Time Warner.
TCI's chief, John Malone, and other top TCI officials would be barred from participating in the management of the new Liberty Media corporate entity that is to control the shares.
The accord requires Time Warner to carry a second all-news channel to compete with Turner's Cable News Network.
It also bars Time Warner from discriminating in how much it charges competitors for Turner programmes.
"This settlement would preserve competition and protect consumers from higher cable service prices and reduced programming choices by ensuring that competing cable operators, new technologies and future programmers can gain access to Time Warner/Turner's customers and programming," said FTC Chairman Robert Pitofsky.
Aside from being the No. 2 cable-TV operator, Time Warner owns the Warner Bros. movie studios and Time, People, Sports Illustrated and Fortune magazines. In addition to CNN, Turner also owns film and TV studios, a cartoon cable-TV channel and the Atlanta Braves and Atlanta Hawks sports teams.
"We're disappointed that the FTC didn't block the overall deal," said Gene Kimmelman of Consumers Unions. But he added that he was "encouraged" by certain provisions of the agreement "that should limit anti-competitive behaviour."
