Regulators were set Thursday to give broadcasters free licenses to provide revolutionary high-definition digital television that will begin reaching viewers in the nation's top 10 markets within 18 months.
After late-night talks Wednesday, Federal Communications Commission officials agreed on rules detailing the roll-out of digital TV broadcasts, which promise the biggest change in TV viewing since colour pictures were introduced in the 1950s.
Officials said the FCC scheduled a public meeting Thursday at which the agency's four commissioners were expected to approve the rules, overriding objections from critics who say broadcasters are getting a multi-billion dollar giveaway through free use of the airwaves.
The decision by Congress to allow broadcasters to be given the new licenses free of charge has provoked uproar from the likes of former Senate Majority Leader Bob Dole, other key lawmakers, consumer advocates and others. The FCC has valued the digital airwaves at up to $70 billion.
"This is, indeed, one of the largest federal giveaways of the century," said Gigi Sohn, executive director of the Media Access Project, a public interest law firm.
Broadcasters would be required to return their existing analogue licenses to the government by 2006. The government is expected to auction those licenses for other uses.
Digital TV offers crystal-clear pictures and CD-quality sound. It is expected to promote a "computer friendly" TV system allowing viewers to watch programmes while surfing the Internet over the same "smart box."
Already, its pending introduction has started a race between computer makers and TV manufacturers to woo viewers.
The FCC rules are expected to require stations affiliated with the major networks -- ABC, CBS, NBC and Fox -- to begin broadcasting digital signals in the top 10 metropolitan areas within two years, according to officials.
Network affiliates within the top 30 markets would be required to transmit in digital format within 2-1/2 years.
Under pressure from FCC officials, at least two dozen stations have agreed to initiate broadcasts in the top 10 markets within 18 months, according to Commissioner Susan Ness, who was a key participant in brokering the rules.
That would give manufacturers leeway to ship digital sets in time for the important Christmas shopping season in 1998.
Ness said Wednesday the voluntary commitment of major broadcasters to be on air by then and the commitment of TV makers to have sets ready for consumers in those markets at the time "will fuel the rapid rollout of digital television."
The top 10 markets are: New York, Los Angeles, Chicago, Philadelphia, San Francisco, Boston, Washington, Dallas-Fort Worth, Detroit and Atlanta.
"Broadcasters are prepared to voluntarily transition to digital and high-definition TV faster than we converted from black and white to colour TV," said Dennis Wharton, spokesman for the National Association of Broadcasters.
"Consumers will be the big winners once they experience the wonders of high-defition TV."
Digital technology is expected to allow broadcasters to squeeze as many as six channels through an existing channel, or TV stations could offer a single high-definition signal.
Digital TV also is expected to hasten the convergence of TV and computer technologies. Sports fans would be able to watch a baseball game and split their screen to receive up-to-the-minute scores of other games over the Internet.
