Under pressure from President Bill Clinton to quit pitching hard liquor on the airwaves, the nation's distillers urged the president on Friday to gather the beer, wine and spirits industries together to develop a common advertising code.
But the White House showed little enthusiasm and the wine and beer industries rejected the move, scoffing at the suggestion that their products were similar to hard liquor.
"Common usage tells us all drinks are not the same," the Wine Institute said in a statement.
The Distilled Spirits Council of the United States (DISCUS), in a letter to Clinton, urged the president to use his "bully pulpit" and bring the industries -- along with broadcasters -- "to the table" to develop and adopt within 90 days a common code for alcohol ads.
The initiative came after Clinton asked the Federal Communications Commission on Tuesday to study ways to prevent the hard liquor industry from selling its products over television and radio.
The hard-liquor industry last year abandoned a decades-old voluntary ban on such promotions, and Clinton called on the industry's executives to renew their moratorium.
"This code would set the same responsible standard for all beverage alcohol advertising and would provide uniform guidelines for the broadcasters," DISCUS President Fred Meister told a news conference, without going into specifics.
"This common code would send a strong message that alcohol is alcohol is alcohol," he said. DISCUS contended it was unfair to draw a distinction between advertising for hard liquor and for beer and wine, whose ads were not covered by the voluntary ban and have run on television and radio for decades.
The industry's voluntary ban has been in effect for TV ads since 1948 and radio ads since 1936.
Responding to the liquor industry's proposal, a White House spokesman said: "What the president is trying to do is prevent backsliding" on the part of liquor companies.
Meister declined to discuss details of what his industry would seek in a common code, saying he did not want to "preempt the process." But beer and wine industry officials signalled they would have no part of such a process.
"There are obvious, significant differences between beer and hard liquor. For these reasons an advertising code covering both types of products is neither practical nor workable," the Beer Institute said in a statement.
A spokeswoman for the National Association of Broadcasters said: "We haven't seen any details on what they're asking for. "Until we have a chance to see what exactly they're asking for and what's involved, we can't really respond."
