Regulators want more time to overhaul the vast web of subsidies that keeps phone service affordable, creating a new obstacle in their efforts to spawn new competition and lower prices in the telephone business.
Federal Communications Commission and industry officials said Tuesday the FCC is running into difficulties calculating the multi-billion dollar cost of paying for "universal" phone service to rural and other high-cost communities.
"We've been working hard for a year to try and reconcile this," said FCC Chief Economist Joseph Farrell. "It would be a mistake to hurry it and do it wrong."
Last year's communications law set a May 8 deadline for the FCC to tally the costs and to lay out a plan for a new fund to bankroll the subsidies. Phone carriers are supposed to pay for the fund.
FCC Chairman Reed Hundt told the Wall Street Journal he wants to implement key provisions next year and use an interim plan in the meantime.
The FCC will work with state regulators to determine the costs of the subsidies.
Industry analysts and officials say the new uncertainty is likely to deter phone companies from rushing to compete in new areas of business or upgrade their existing lines of business.
"We need to know what the rules of the game are before we're willing to commit a lot of money to new projects," said Robert Blau, BellSouth Corp. vice president.
Schwab Washington Research Group analyst Scott Cleland put it this way, "When the playing field remains clouded, prudent competitors don't rush into the fog."
The phone business already has a huge cloud overhanging it after a U.S. appeals court last fall suspended a key FCC order designed to break open the $100 billion local phone market to long-distance carriers and other new competitors.
The FCC is trying to calculate the size of the universal service subsidies and make them explicit, as stipulated by the telecommunications law. Estimates range anywhere from $5 billion to $20 billion.
The existing subsidies are buried in the $23 billion in charges that long-distance companies such as AT&amp;T Corp. now pay to access the local phone network.
The FCC's desire to take more time on universal service has raised concern and questions among lawmakers anxious to ensure competition takes root after passage of the telecommunications law.
"If one of the implications (of the added time) is that it does delay competition, it's a problem for us," said Representative W.J. Billy Tauzin, a Louisiana Republican.
"We're beginning to see some concerns about rising phone rates and cable rates. And we're beginning to be asked at town meetings when we're going to see the benefits of this highly touted deregulatory act."
Meanwhile, the FCC's Hundt does want to proceed with one prized piece of universal service -- a $2.3 billion plan to link schools and libraries to the Internet at discounted rates.
But Tauzin worries that Hundt, in his desire to keep basic phone rates from rising, will expand obligations under universal service "that somebody is going to have to pay for."
