Media mogul Rupert Murdoch treks to Capitol Hill Thursday to make a public pitch for his $1 billion Sky satellite-broadcast venture as a powerful new competitor to cable television.
"He's going to sound like the saviour. He's going to present himself like the saviour. Members of Congress will watch and applaud. But we'd better watch our wallets," said Stephen Effros, president of the Cable Telecommunications Association, a trade group representing cable operators.
Murdoch has been lobbying Congress to pass legislation that would benefit his new venture, to be formed through a 50 percent stake in Colorado-based EchoStar Communications Corp.
On Thursday he is expected to appeal to a Senate Commerce Committee hearing for help to make Sky a potent force to cable operators, whose subscription rates have leaped at more than double the rate of inflation over the past year.
Cable companies are worried -- insiders have dubbed Sky "Deathstar" -- and the industry is rallying to battle the Murdoch venture on the legislative and regulatory fronts.
Effros complained that Murdoch is trying to "violate every public policy in this country to protect against the power he's accumulating."
A spokesman for Murdoch's News Corp. was not available to comment.
Sky is set to be running in early 1998. It is expected to offer more than 500 channels of high-quality digital TV, Internet services, and retransmission of local TV broadcasts representing more than 75 percent of U.S. TV households.
Direct broadcast satellite operators -- whose customers receive the service over a pizza-sized dish -- have nearly 5 million subscribers, up from practically zero three years ago.
Murdoch and other satellite broadcast companies want a big chunk of the cable industry's 65 million subscribers. Industry analysts believe Murdoch is in a position to do so.
"He comes in with a lot of motivation, a lot of capital, a lot of experience, and a lot of chutzpah," said analyst Jimmy Schaeffler of The Carmel Group in Carmel, Calif.
Murdoch also is using his political weight to convince lawmakers to pass legislation to clarify the copyright laws so Sky can retransmit local TV station signals to its customers. Other satellite broadcast companies do not provide the broadcasts.
To outflank opponents, Murdoch wants to attach the measure to a must-pass $4 billion spending package that appropriates money for U.S. peacekeeping troops in Bosnia and disaster relief, according to congressional and industry sources.
The effort has run into opposition from lawmakers such as Representative Thomas Bliley, R-Va. The commerce committee chairman wants the measure to go through the normal -- and longer -- legislative channels involving committee hearings and votes.
"Bliley has dug in his heels. And it doesn't sound like its negotiable," said a congressional aide.
In any event, Murdoch's testimony Thursday could get a sympathetic reception from lawmakers anxious to jump-start competition after last year's big communications bill.
Competition in the cable business suffered after big phone companies scaled back plans to offer cable TV. Meanwhile, cable rates jumped 8.2 percent in the 12 months ended in February -- vs. a 3 percent rise in consumer prices.
"There's no competing service that has functioned at a level to cause cable rates to decrease," said Mark Buse, an aide to Sen. John McCain, an Arizona Republican.
Buse said McCain, who chairs the commerce committee, has met with Murdoch and "believes there is an an awful lot of validity to what Mr. Murdoch is trying to achieve."
In a preview of Thursday's hearing, cable industry officials insist they face competition from the likes of satellite broadcasters, regional Baby Bell Ameritech Corp. and now Murdoch's Sky. "Cable is facing some very real competition already," said Torie Clarke of the National Cable Television Association.
