Regulators Tuesday began auctioning a slice of spectrum that will let users gain access to the Internet over the airwaves or create wireless local phone networks that compete with traditional wired networks.
Twenty-four companies -- including units of BellSouth Corp., Pacific Telesis Group, Comcast Corp. and a Bell Atlantic Corp./Nynex Corp. joint venture -- are bidding for the rights to offer "wireless communications service," or WCS.
The first day of bidding in the multi-day sale totalled $5.3 million. Analysts said recent financial problems among wireless carriers will put downward pressure on prices. It is the Federal Communication Commission's 14th airwave sale.
"I expect prices to go very low for this type of spectrum," said Elliott Hamilton, analyst at Strategis Group, a Washington-based consulting firm.
The FCC is auctioning 128 licenses. Of that total, 104 are 10 megahertz licenses that roughly cover state-wide areas. The remaining 24 permits are for 5 MHz of spectrum and cover larger regional areas.
The FCC is not dictating what services companies can offer over this portion of the spectrum.
Potential applications include broadband wireless access to the Internet, wireless local phone networks, and location services for pinpointing trucks and other vehicles.
The value of wireless spectrum has fallen after last year's $10.2 billion auction of licenses for a new generation of cellular phones known as "personal communications services," or PCS.
Edward Warner, Washington bureau chief of Wireless Week magazine, said FCC officials "should be ecstatic" if the agency can net $2 billion from the lastest auction.
Several top bidders at the PCS sale are under financial strain after bidding high prices. Wall Street has been reluctant to invest in the ventures.
Also, FCC officials doubt wireless service providers can offer anytime soon the kind of mobile phone service available through PCS.
FCC officials cite restrictions on the use of the wireless service airwaves that are meant to prevent interference among users of an upcoming digital radio service that will be broadcast coast-to-coast via satellite. The wireless service and digital radio airwaves are adjacent to one another.
The FCC has raised some $23 billion through its airwave sales. But the financial problems among last year's PCS winners has raised doubts over whether the government will ever collect all the money it is owed.
