The government's latest airwaves auction looks likely to generate far less money for Uncle Sam than the $1.8 billion Congress was counting on to help balance the budget, regulators said over the weekend.
By late Friday, the auction -- for a slice of spectrum that will allow users to gain access to the Internet over the airwaves or create wireless local phone networks -- had raised just $12.1 million.
"It's definitely not going to meet budget expectations," Federal Communications Commission Chairman Reed Hundt said in an interview Friday.
The sale began Tuesday. FCC officials said bidding among the 23 companies -- including units of BellSouth Corp., Comcast Corp. and a Bell Atlantic Corp./Nynex Corp. joint venture -- appears to be winding down.
Analysts argued that the low total underscores the point that spectrum sales will probably not be the "golden goose" that lawmakers and the Clinton administration have looked to for eliminating the budget deficit.
"It's nice to think of it as government property that would earn the country some money," said analyst David Roddy of Deloitte &amp; Touche Consulting Group. "But the sale of the spectrum was too much and too fast."
Said Elliott Hamilton, an analyst at Strategis Group, a Washington-based consulting firm: "It's not an endless supply of gold out there at the end of the rainbow."
"Congress, the White House and the FCC have to sit down and start rationalising their approach to spectrum."
The "wireless communications services" or WCS auction is the FCC's 14th airwaves sale. Potential applications for the spectrum include broadband wireless access to the Internet, wireless local phone networks, and location services for pinpointing trucks and other vehicles.
The auctions have netted the government about $23 billion, far more than expected. But prices have begun to slide as more spectrum is sold, contributing to financial problems among wireless carriers and raising doubts over whether Uncle Sam ever will collect all the money it is owed.
Looking ahead, the Clinton administration proposed in its 1998 budget to raise $36.1 billion by selling licenses to firms wanting to sell new ways to link to the Internet or send video images through the air, among other possible services.
"They're not going to make that," predicted Roddy of Deloitte &amp; Touche.
Indeed, the WCS sale offered a new twist. In its zeal to balance the budget, Congress last year required the FCC to hold the auction by April 15 and to collect the proceeds by Sept. 30, the last day of the 1997 fiscal year.
FCC officials said the timetable has contributed to the meagre returns. Potential bidders, communications-equipment manufacturers and wireless investors were not given enough time to fully analyse the auction, they said.
"This is exactly why we told Congress we should always have at least a year's advance notice," said Hundt, adding that his agency was given less than five months.
Some on Capitol Hill are eyeing the problem.
Sen. John McCain, an Arizona Republican who heads the commerce committee, plans to offer a bill soon to try and maximize the money the government raises in auctions.
To prevent spectrum from being dumped on the market, the bill would allow for a "reasonable time lag" between the allocation of the spectrum and its sale by the FCC.
The nation's broadcasters, in the transition to digital television, are using recent auction woes as evidence that they should not have to hand back their analogue TV licenses by the year 2006. The permits would be auctioned for other uses.
"Such proposals will undermine our ability to meet the challenges of moving our nation into the digital future, and will simply not be achievable on the revenue side," the National Association of Broadcasters told lawmakers.
Hundt disagrees. "Everyone who has spectrum wants to make sure that no one else ever gets any."
