The government's latest auction of the airwaves concluded Friday after raising a disappointing $13.6 million for Uncle Sam, with licenses for some wireless communications markets fetching just $1 apiece.
The total was way short of the $1.8 billion that Congress was banking on to help eliminate the deficit. The results also buttressed the view that spectrum sales cannot be counted on as big money raisers -- as they have been in the past.
"The spectrum is being managed in a willy-nilly, haphazard fashion," complained Ken Johnson, a spokesman for Representative Billy Tauzin, R-La., the telecommunications subcommittee chairman.
"The budget crunchers are playing with monopoly money and we're playing with real dollars."
The Federal Communications Commission sold the rights for a piece of spectrum that will allow users to hook up to the Internet over the airwaves, set up wireless local telephone networks and operate location services to pinpoint vehicles.
Top bidders were units of BellSouth Corp., which bid $6.2 million for 22 licenses in Atlanta, Miami, New Orleans and elsewhere; a Bell Atlantic Corp.-Nynex Corp. joint venture, which bid $1.6 million for eight licenses in Boston, New York, Washington and other cities; and Comcast Corp., which plunked down $1.5 million for 17 licenses around the nation.
Analysts and FCC officials blamed the poor results on the speedy timetable Congress required for the sale, the difficult times wireless companies now face raising money, and a flood of new companies into the wireless business.
Seven licenses -- in Milwaukee, St. Louis, Minneapolis-St. Paul, Des Moines, Iowa, and Omaha, Neb. -- sold for just $1. Licenses for Guam and American Samoa drew zero bidders.
"The climate surrounding the auction was awful," said Mark Lowenstein of Yankee Group Inc., a Boston consulting firm. "It's not going to make much of a dent in the national debt."
The FCC put 128 licenses on the block in a sale that began April 15. It was the 14th airwaves sale.
The auctions have netted the government about $23 billion over the past three years, far more than expected. But prices have begun to slide as more spectrum is sold, contributing to financial woes among wireless carriers and raising doubts over whether the government will collect all the money it is owed.
"This sends the strongest signal possible to the FCC, Congress and the White House to reassess their spectrum plans for future auctions," said Elliott Hamilton, an analyst at Strategis Group, a Washington-based consulting firm.
To help balance the budget, Congress last year forced the FCC to hold the auction by April 15 and to collect the proceeds by Sept. 30, the last day of the 1997 fiscal year.
FCC officials said the timetable did not give potential bidders time to develop rational business plans and drum up financing.
The nation's broadcasters -- who are in the transition to digital television and must return their existing analogue licenses to the FCC for auction -- point to the poor results as a reason for scuttling future auctions.
But FCC chairman Reed Hundt disagreed.
"Anybody who says this auction was a failure is basing it on budget predictions that we never bought into. Anybody from the lobbying community who says it's a failure is probably somebody who wants no more licenses because they want no more competition," he said in an interview.
