Regional Baby Bell phone companies appear to have triumphed over their long-distance rivals in a crucial regulatory battle that would leave some customers paying less and others more for their monthly bill.
The Federal Communications Commission has decided against ordering a precipitous cut in the $23 billion long-distance carriers such as AT&amp;T Corp. pay the Bells each year for access to the local phone network, said FCC and industry officials.
Bell executives at one point feared such cuts could cost their companies as much as $10 billion in revenues. Consumer groups and long-distance companies advocate immediate cuts in the range of $2 billion to $3 billion, saying that would mean a similar cut in long-distance rates.
"The Bells have dodged a bullet," said analyst Scott Cleland of Schwab Washington Research Group. "They may get grazed. But they dodged a bullet that was aimed at them during the last six months."
Instead of a big FCC-imposed cut, the agency plans to rely on competition to lower access charges over time, said FCC and industry officials. That could mean an FCC-imposed loss of Bell revenues of no more than $1 billion the first year.
Less clear was the impact on phone customers.
Those who make lots of long-distance calls would see a sizeable drop in their bills, said FCC officials.
But wireless phone subscribers could pay anywhere from 1 percent to 2 percent more a month through new fees. Customers with more than one phone line for a computer or the kids and who make few long-distance calls would see a monthly rate rise of around $1 or more.
"We're cutting away the frills," FCC Chairman Reed Hundt said in an interview.
"We're talking about a $1 subsidy per month that we're eliminating for somebody who's connecting a $2,500 computer to that line and purchasing $20 a month of unlimited access," said Hunt, a big advocate of the rules under consideration.
They are set to be voted on next week. Details may change.
FCC officials, meanwhile, say the plan would yield a cut in long-distance charges of more than $1 billion in the first year.
FCC officials oppose a steep cut for several reasons.
Citing rate hikes by AT&amp;T and MCI Communications Corp. late last year, they fear long-distance carriers may not fully pass on a major reduction to consumers and pocket some of the money. Long-distance executives vow to pass on the reductions.
FCC officials also fear a sharp cut would unleash a rise in local phone rates by carriers trying to recoup lost money.
"We're keeping basic residential dial tone at today's price," said Hundt.
Critics charge the plan would mean higher rates. AT&amp;T says long-distance customers will see a $1.5 billion jump at the outset in July. "Regulators appear unlikely to squeeze the fat out of the Bells' prices, leaving consumers paying for inflated rates," said Gene Kimmelman of Consumers Union.
But Hundt says that over the next five years at least $10 billion "will be transferred to consumers" via access cuts.
The plan also would pay for $3 billion to connect schools, libraries and rural hospitals to the Internet and provide cheap phone service for the poor.
Access charges were created after the 1984 breakup of Ma Bell. Experts agree the $23 billion is more than the cost of providing local access. But they cannot agree on the amount.
FCC officials said 85 percent of the nation's 80 million residential phone customers would see a lower monthly bill.
Those who make lots of long-distance calls would benefit the most, because the agency plans to replace some of the existing per-minute access charges with a monthly flat rate.
The 15 percent of residents who do not make long-distance calls would see their bills stay the same.
But customers with more than one line and who make few long-distance calls are likely to see a rate rise.
That's because the ceiling, or cap, on the existing "subscriber line charge" is expected to rise to $5 a month from $3.50 for each additional residential line, and to roughly $7 a line for multi-line business customers from $6.
One possible way around the charge may be for customers to list their additional lines in a different name or use another local carrier, said industry officials.
