Regional Baby Bell phone companies appear to have triumphed over their long-distance rivals in a crucial regulatory battle that would leave some customers paying more and others less for their monthly bill.
The Federal Communications Commission has decided against ordering a precipitous cut in the $23 billion long-distance carriers such as AT&amp;T Corp pay the Bells each year for access to their local phone networks, said FCC and industry officials.  
Bell executives at one point feared such cuts could cost their companies as much as $10 billion in revenues. Consumer groups and long-distance companies more recently advocate immediate cuts in the range of $2 billion to $3 billion, saying that would mean a similar cut in long-distance rates.
"The Bells have dodged a bullet," said analyst Scott Cleland of Schwab Washington Research Group. "They may get grazed. But they dodged a bullet that was aimed at them during the last six months." The rules are set to be voted on next week.
Less clear is the impact on phone customers.
Those who make lots of long-distance calls would see a sizeable drop in their bill, said FCC and industry officials.
But wireless phone subscribers could pay anywhere from one percent to two percent more a month through new fees. Customers with more than one phone line for a computer or the kids and who make few long-distance calls would see a monthly rate rise of around $1 or more.  
"We're cutting away the frills," FCC Chairman Reed Hundt said in an interview. He is a big advocate of the rules under consideration that are expected to be voted on next week.
"We're talking about a $1 subsidy per month that we're eliminating for somebody who's connecting a $2,500 computer to that line and purchasing $20 a month of unlimited access," Hunt said.
Instead of a government-imposed cut, the FCC plans to rely on market powers to lower access charges over time, said FCC and industry officials. That could mean an FCC-imposed loss of Bell revenues of no more than $1 billion the first year.
FCC officials, meanwhile, say the plan would yield a cut in long-distance charges of more than $1 billion in year one.  
FCC officials are against a steep cut for several reasons.
Citing rate hikes by AT&amp;T and MCI Communications Corp late last year, they fear long-distance carriers may not fully pass on the cut to consumers and pocket some of the money. Long-distance executives vow to pass on the cuts.
FCC officials also fear a sharp cut would unleash a rise in local phone rates by carriers trying to recoup lost money.
"We're keeping basic residential dial tone at today's price," said Hundt.
Critics charge the plan -- which could still change before next week -- would mean higher rates. AT&amp;T says long-distance customers will see a $1.5 billion jump at the outset in July.
"Regulators appear unlikely to squeeze the fat out of the Bells' prices, leaving consumers paying for inflated rates," said Gene Kimmelman of Consumers Union.
But Hundt says that over the next five years at least $10 billion "will be transferred to consumers" via access cuts.
The plan also would pay for $3 billion to connect schools, libraries and rural hospitals to the Internet and provide cheap phone service for the poor.  
Access charges were created after the 1984 breakup of Ma Bell. Experts agree the $23 billion is more than the cost of providing access to the local phone network. But they cannot agree on the amount.
FCC officials said 85 percent of the nation's 80 million residential phone customers would see a lower monthly bill.
Those who make lots of long-distance calls would benefit the most, because the agency plans to replace some of the existing per-minute access charges with a monthly flat rate.
The 15 percent of residents who do not make long-distance calls would see their bills stay the same. The monthly flat rate "subscriber line charge" customers pay to the local phone company is likely to remain $3.50.
But customers with more than one line and who make few long-distance calls are likely to see a rate rise.
That's because the ceiling, or cap, on the subscriber line charge is expected to rise to $5 a month from $3.50 for each additional residential line, and to roughly $7 a line for multi-line business customers from $6 a month.
One possible way around the charge may be for customers to list their additional lines in a different name or use another local carrier, said industry officials.  
Meanwhile, large businesses or consumers who make a lot of long-distance calls could well see a drop in their phone bill because the FCC plans to lower the permanent access charge to about two cents a minute from about 5.4 cents.
To make up the lost revenues, the FCC plans to require long-distance carriers to pay local carriers a new monthly "pre-subscribed line charge" for each long-distance customer.
The charge -- which will range from 75 cents a month for single-line residents to $4.50 a month a line for multi-line businesses -- are intended to better reflect the actual costs of using the local phone network.
