The Justice Department is investigating possible bid-rigging during airwaves auctions held by the federal government for wireless phone licenses.
Justice Department documents obtained by Reuters Wednesday showed the department's antitrust division also was looking into whether bidders schemed illegally to divvy up the licenses being sold.
The Federal Communications Commission has raised more than $20 billion since 1995 by selling licenses to companies offering a new generation of cellular phone service known as "personal communications services," or PCS.
A Justice Department spokeswoman confirmed the investigation. She said the antitrust division was "looking into the possibility of anti-competitive conduct by bidders in connection with the FCC's auctioning of spectrum for PCS."
She declined to specify which auctions were being investigated or provide additional details.
The department documents focus on the PCS auction that ended in mid-January and raised $2.5 billion.
At that auction, the FCC sold 1,479 PCS licenses nationwide in three different blocks, making it the most licenses sold at once. A third of the licenses were reserved for small companies.
Top bidders were units of Sprint Corp., AT&amp;T Corp. and BellSouth Corp.
A spokesman for BellSouth said the company had not been informed by the government of any investigation. It was not immediately known whether the other two companies were targets or had been contacted regarding the probe.
An attorney familiar with the investigation said the department has sent out "numerous" letters requesting information and documents from auction participants.
The "civil investigative demand" seeks information about companies' bids, their bidding strategies and communications about the auction with other telecommunications firms.
In a sign that the investigation was looking into the possibility of bid "signaling" among participants, the department requested documents showing the last three digits of company bids.
One attorney familiar with the investigation said it was evident during the bidding that companies used the last three digits of their dollar bidding figure to signal their intentions to other auction participants.
"It's clear a certain amount of this was taking place," said the attorney, who spoke on condition of not being identified.
