Congress is gearing up to try and make changes to the way the government auctions the airwaves, following a recent sale that fell flat and a new Justice Department investigation into possible bid-rigging.
Lawmakers said Thursday they are eyeing bills or offering legislation to maximize the money the federal government raises through spectrum sales. That comes after some wireless communications licenses auctioned last week feteched just $1 apiece, and the antitrust probe put a further tarnish on the sales.
Bills being offered would set minimum bidding levels or slow the flow of airwave slices into the market by holding federal auctions only at selected intervals. The Clinton administration is studying the measures.
Congress has relied heavily on the Federal Communications Commission auctions as a one-time way to help cut the deficit. "We had a great success with the early auctions that raised over $23 billion. But it became like candy. And the budgeteers just couldn't put it down," Representative Mike Oxley, an Ohio Republican who first introduced auction legislation in 1993, said in an interview.
"At the very least, we ought to have some hearings and try to educate members (of Congress), the public, and particularly the budgeteers, that they're really playing with fire here." Sen. John McCain, an Arizona Republican who chairs the commerce committee, wants the FCC to pay "more attention to the market forces" when it auctions spectrum for uses ranging from a new generation of cellular phones to satellite television.
"The last thing we want to do is have a distortion of the marketplace which would then cost people involved in the free enterprise system and the taxpayers," he said in an interview. McCain is preparing to offer a bill to keep spectrum from being dumped on the market.
But some analysts are wary of tinkering with the process. "The idea that Congress can figure whether there's too much or too little spectrum -- or the right price -- I find arrogant and presumptuous," said Bill Bane, director at Mercer Management Consulting Inc.
The importance of airwave sales to the budget process was driven home by last week's disappointing auction. The sale -- for a piece of spectrum that will let users gain access to the Internet or create wireless local telephone networks -- raised just $13.6 million. That was a far cry from the $1.8 billion Congress was counting on to cut the deficit. FCC officials blamed the results on lawmakers' requirement to hold the auction by mid-April and to end it in time to help reduce red ink in the current 1997 fiscal year. They said companies did not have enough time to develop business plans.
"This was a good example of one that was ordered prematurely," Representative W. J. Billy Tauzin, chairman of the telecommunications subcommittee, said in an interview.
    "It's a problem that has to do with our budgeteers ordering auctions that may be inappropriate, not with the auction process itself," added the Louisiana Republican.     Sen. Robert Kerrey, a Nebraska Democrat, offered a bill this week to set a minimum price for each airwave parcel sold. "With a reserve pricing system, taxpayers will be guaranteed that national assets are not sold for a song," he said.
    Meanwhile, lawmakers are in no hurry to offer bills in response to the Justice Department probe of possible bid-rigging at auctions for advanced cellular-phone licenses. But the news put a further spotlight on the auctions.     "This whole topic of spectrum auctions has become -- crazily enough -- kind of sexy," quipped House Commerce Committee aide Dennis Fitzgibbons.
