Regulators Wednesday approved a sweeping overhaul of domestic telephone charges that they said will lower costs for residential and business customers who make a lot of long-distance calls.
Federal Communications Commimssion officials said basic local phone rates will stay the same. But consumers and businesses will pay more for extra phone lines and may see their bills rise if they make few long-distance calls.
The FCC also voted to set aside about $2.3 billion a year to wire the nation's schools and libraries to the Internet at discounted rates. Another $400 million a year will be used to connect rural hospitals to the global computer network.
The new rates mean residential customers with one phone line will see their long-distance bill drop to $20.65 a month from $22.50 by 1998, on average, according to FCC calculations.
"This is the single best day that business and residential customers have had since the (1984) breakup of AT&amp;T," said FCC Chairman Reed Hundt.
The overhaul also will:
-- Keep the monthly "subscriber line charge" customers pay to the local phone company at $3.50.
-- Boost the line charge for residential customers with more than one line to $5 a month from $3.50, and to more than $7.50 from $6 for multi-line businesses. Those increases will take effect next year and be followed by additional rises that ultimately will be capped at $9.
-- Impose a new monthly charge on long-distance carriers that is expected to be passed on to customers. The charge will be $1.50 a line for multi-line residential customers and $2.75 a line for businesses with more than one line.
-- Reduce by $1.7 billion the $23 billion in annual charges long-distance carriers pay local companies to access their networks, effective July 1.
-- Reduce access charges by a total of $18.5 billion over the next five years.
AT&amp;T Corp. has promised to pass on the savings in access charges to customers through long-distance price cuts of 5 percent to 15 percent. Other long-distance carriers have signalled they will follow suit.
Phone companies gave the rate overhaul mixed ratings.
AT&amp;T generally praised the plan, but No. 2 long-distance carrier MCI Communications Corp. said the access charge reductions did not go far enough.
Regional phone compannies Bell Atlantic Corp. and Nynex Corp., which are merging, questioned the access-charge rate cut.
Industry analysts, meanwhile, also offered mixed views.
"There was a lot of huffing and puffing, but this is incremental change and not revolutionary change," said Scott Cleland of Schwab Research Group.
