A year after the ValuJet Inc. crash, the top airline regulator suggested Thursday it would be impractical to force air carriers to install fire-safety equipment in passenger cargo holds in less than three years.
Under fire for not moving more quickly to promote airline safety, the Federal Aviation Administration plans next month to propose the installation of smoke detectors and fire supressers in all passenger cargo holds over three years.
House lawmakers, however, accused the agency of dragging its feet on the installation issue, despite years of warnings from safety regulators on the need to do so. Lawmakers raised the possibility of a speedier timetable.
"It could be done in a very short period of time if we want to ground the fleet," Barry Valentine, acting head of the Federal Aviation Administration, told a House panel.
"That's the decision. How much disruption do we citizens want to have in our air transportation," he said.
But Representative John Fox, a Pennsylvania Republican, responded, "I think we want to have as safe as flights as possible. And if they have to be a little slower, the public probably would like them to be a little slower."
Airline executives on Wednesday announced plans to place both smoke detectors and fire-suppression systems in their aircraft, after initially balking at the dual requirement.
FAA officials came under attack at the hearing -- from both lawmakers and the chairman of the National Transportation Safety Board -- for not moving more aggressively to implement new safety rules in the wake of the ValuJet crash.
"This is pathetic. The FAA is pathetic. The industry is pathetic," said Representative Peter DeFazio, an Oregon Democrat. "Any more needless deaths and we're going to crucify you."
The FAA announced six months ago plans to issue the fire-safety equipment rules, which will affect about 3,000 aircraft. But it has yet to unveil a formal proposal.
"Six months from now are we going to come back and be in the same situation that we're in today? Or is there really going to be improvement this time?" asked Representative John Duncan, a Tennessee Republican who heads the transporation subcommittee.
Valentine responded that in six months the rules would be in the "final assembly."
ValuJet flight 592 crashed into the Florida Everglades last May, killing 110 people, because of a fire in the cargo hold. Oxygen generators were blamed for the fire. Regulators have since banned their transport on commercial airliners.
The head of the NTSB disclosed this week, however, that Continental Airlines last month unknowingly carried a shipment of generators similar to those in the ValuJet accident.
NTSB Chairman Jim Hall also complained at the hearing that the FAA had been slow to inform his agency of the Continental incident. Hall said it was reported to the FAA on April 24.
"It did not come to the attention of our agency until this week. You would think that in light of the ValuJet accident that if someone knew that something like this had taken place, that that information would be extremely important to the flying public of the United States," Hall said.
An FAA spokesman later said the FAA is under no requirement to forward such information to the NTSB.
