The Clinton administration Thursday threw its support behind legislation to prevent state and local governments from slapping new taxes on the Internet, giving a boost to a bill opposed by state and local officials.
The bill would impose an indefinite moritorium during which state and local governments could not tax the Internet, companies that provide access to the global computer netowrk, as well as electronic commerce conducted in cyberspace.
The legislation -- introduced in the House and the Senate -- would not affect existing taxes on goods and services ordered through the Internet, as long as the taxes are the same as those on mail-order transactions.
The moratorium is intended to give the Clinton administration time to develop a broad plan to address the issue of taxes on electronic commerce.
"Treasury wholeheartedly supports the goals and underlying objectives of the Internet Tax Freedom Act," Deputy Treasury Secretary Lawrence Summers told the Senate Commerce Subcommittee on Communications.
"Unreasonable taxation of the Internet, or even the fear of unreasonable taxation, could be a significant impediment to the growth of the Internet and electronic commerce."
But state and local officials said the bill would intrude on their powers and create budget problems.
"We believe that an indefinite moratorium on state and local taxes on Internet or on-line services would be a significant infringement on state and local sovereignty, create considerable budgetary problems for local governments and lead to unfair competition in the marketplace," said Timothy Kaine, a council member from Richmond, Va., who spoke on behalf of a variety of state and local organizations.
The National Governors Association also opposes the bill.
Key lawmakers in both houses of Congress have signaled a willingness to move quickly on the legislation.
The bill comes as state and local tax collectors have been eyeing the rapidly growing Internet computer network as a source of revenue to bolster their coffers.
Some states already are imposing taxes on companies that link consumers or businesses to the Internet, or that offer computer bulletin boards and electronic mail.
In Microsoft Corp.'s home state of Washington last year, the city of Tacoma decided to impose a six percent tax on companies that link residents to the Internet. But the city council later voted to repeal the plan.
"The present pattern of taxes on electronic commerce can best be described as a crazy quilt. The Internet may be the new frontier, but the way it's taxed looks like Dodge City before the marshals showed up," said Sen. Ron Wyden, an Oregon Democrat who is sponsoring the bill.
Added the bill's sponsor in the House, Rep. Christopher Cox, a California Republican: "That taxes might drive the Internet to an early grave is not hyperbole, but a very real possibility."
