The nation's top communications regulator said Tuesday he will resign as head of the Federal Communications Commission.
Saying he wanted to spend more time with his family and complete two books, FCC Chairman Reed Hundt said he asked President Bill Clinton to begin looking for a replacement. Hundt's term does not expire until June 30, 1998.
The new FCC chief must be cleared by the Senate. Hundt, who said he does not yet have future professional plans, will remain a voting member of the five-member FCC in the meantime.
He said he will remain as FCC chairman until a successor is installed.
"I expect that I'll be here for some time yet," Hundt, 49, told a news conference. "I don't have any plans with anybody whatsoever."
Hundt, a close ally of Vice President Al Gore, became chairman in November 1993. During his controversial 3-1/2-year tenure to date, he has presided over implementing last year's big communications law and requiring television broadcasters to air 3 hours a week of educational TV for children.
Among those considered possible successors are Susan Ness, a current FCC commissioner, and the agency's general counsel, William Kennard. Clinton nominated Kennard last Friday to fill one of two commissioner slots already vacant.
Other possible replacements include: Kathy Wallman, now a senior White House economic aide and formerly the head of the FCC's common carrier bureau; and Ralph Everett, a Washington attorney and former Senate staff member.
"Chairman Hundt has been a strong and visionary leader of the FCC during this historic period in telecommunications policy," Clinton said in a statement.
Clinton praised Hundt's "steadfast commitment to the public interest and to bringing the benefits of competition to consumers."
Hundt's departure -- and the arrival of new commissioners in coming months -- are expected to generate new uncertainties about federal communications policy.
"It could potentially be a huge change," said analyst Scott Cleland of Legg Mason Precursor, a unit of the brokerage firm Legg Mason Inc. "If it's anything like previous transitions, (FCC) chairmen can reinvent the wheel."
Hundt has moved aggressively to implement last year's communications law and pry open local phone monopolies to competition -- although a key part of that effort is embroiled in a court fight against regional Baby Bell phone companies.
Hundt also has overseen the granting of free licenses to TV stations for the introduction of high-definition digital TV and moved to open foreign markets to competition.
"He is in no small part responsible for the pro-competitive revolution in telecommunications that is sweeping the globe," said attorney Scott Harris of Gibson, Dunn &amp; Crutcher.
But Hundt often clashed with key members of Congress and the Baby Bells, who complained that his FCC policies amounted to micro-managing of the communications industry.
"His departure is fitting and timely," said Representative W.J. "Billy" Tauzin, R-La., adding that Hundt "remains a good friend and a person I deeply respect" despite policy differences between the two.
Tauzin, the head of the powerful House Telecommunications Subcommittee, told Reuters that under the next chairman the FCC has "got to be an agency that tries to downsize itself and its influence on the industry."
Broadcasters also have criticised Hundt's policies.
But consumer advocates generally have praised Hundt's stands on issues ranging from children's TV to opening the $100 billion local phone market to competition.
