Regulators are considering ways to make it easier for cash-strapped winners at last year's $10.2 billion wireless phone auction to pay Uncle Sam for their licenses, government and industry officials said.
Congress is counting on the proceeds to trim the deficit.
But many of the companies that won licenses to offer a new generation of cellular phone service are now in financial hot water, raising doubts over whether the government will collect all the money owed.  
Any steps the Federal Communications Commission takes will send a message to future bidders and affect future airwave sales. The FCC "is going to be setting a new precedent," a government official said.
Government and industry officials said the FCC is considering restructuring the payments that last year's auction winners must make to the government. The agency is expected to seek public comment soon on various proposals.
The bids have become loans from the government, with the winners paying interest on the money that's due for licenses to offer "personal communications services" (PCS).  
The companies paid what were considered high prices. Many have since found it tough to raise financing.
The options under study at the FCC include:
-- Handling each company in a case-by-case manner. That way, payments could be restructured on an individual basis.
-- Deferring payments for a number of years -- say five, for example -- after which companies would make their interest payments and then pay off the remaining principal amount due. The breathing space would give companies time to build their PCS networks and make some money.  
-- Letting winners pay, up front, a discounted lump sum based on interest payments otherwise due in the future.
The FCC also has been negotiating with the Treasury Department for help and advice. The FCC is "not particularly expert in this area and never expected to be in it," the government official said.
In addition, several winners -- including top bidder NextWave Telecom Inc. -- have asked the FCC for permission to make interest payments yearly, instead of quarterly.  
Last month, the FCC suspended the quarterly payments while it mulled the request -- a move that, according to one estimate, is costing the government $1.5 million daily.
Government and industry officials said the FCC is in a tough spot, especially because Congress is depending on the auction revenues to help balance the government's books.
If companies were to default on their payments and the FCC were to reauction the licenses, the new prices probably would be far less than the original amounts bid, analysts agreed.  
Many of the auction winners "will soon face financial crises if the FCC does not act swiftly and decisively to change the license payment terms," MCI Communications Corp. told the FCC earlier this month.
The No. 2 long-distance company -- which has signed a deal to lease NextWave's PCS network to provide wireless services to MCI customers -- wants the FCC to handle the companies' problems on a case-by-case basis.
But others urge the FCC to reject that approach. They want the agency to develop a general rule -- through its usual rulemaking process -- that would apply to all companies.  
"We are concerned that whatever the FCC does, it does it fairly and equally across the board," attorney Mark Tauber of Piper &amp; Marbury said. "It's bad 'PR' for the commission if they give the idea that special deals are available."
AirGate Wireless, which won four PCS licenses at an auction that ended early this year, wants the FCC to take more aggressive action: reinstate the quarterly interest payments; declare companies in default if they fail to make payments; and reauction the licenses of those in default.
"Anything less sends a message to existing licensees and future auction bidders that the FCC will provide a financial safety net for bidders that bid beyond their financial capabilities," the Washington-based firm told the FCC.
Meanwhile, the companies are expected to get some help from a recent global trade agreement that will make it easier for foreign communications companies to invest in U.S. carriers. The FCC is developing a proposal to implement the agreement, which could pave the way for foreign sources of money.
