The judge who oversaw the dismantling of the old Ma Bell is worried that a corporate marriage involving the new AT&amp;T Corp could create the kind of "monolith" the historic break-up was supposed to do away with.
Here's the advice U.S. Judge Harold Greene would give regulators who must approve any merger of AT&amp;T and SBC Communications Inc : "Be very cautious."
Judge Greene brings a lot of history to the matter.  
In 1982, he ordered that the Bell system monopoly be split up. For more than a decade, he then presided over the consent agreement that created the seven regional Baby Bell phone companies and the new AT&amp;T, the nation's No. 1 long-distance carrier.
AT&amp;T now is in talks to merge with San Antonio, Texas-based SBC -- currently the largest provider of local phone service -- in what would be an estimated $50 billion-plus transaction. It would far and away be the biggest such deal in history.  
"The basic assumption of the break-up was that you couldn't have competition, fair competition, as long as there was this massive company that encompassed all areas of the country and all types of service," Judge Greene told Reuters.
"And the same theory that led to the break-up," he added, "could lead one to be suspicious at least of the reemergence of the same monolith."  
Judge Greene -- now more of an observer of the telecom business rather than an overseer -- frets that market conditions have not changed that much since the break-up of the Bell monopoly and the consent decree that took effect in 1984. The decree set limits on how the phone industry operated.
He believes competition has yet to take full root, despite last year's telecommunications act that tore down decades-old barriers and let the local and long-distance phone companies and cable-television operators enter each other's business.  
"There are lots of things that need to be done yet -- both to get the long-distance companies into local service, and local companies into long-distance service. Nothing is perfected yet," Judge Greene said.
"It seems kind of surprising that they would now reconstitute the AT&amp;T empire, at least in one part," he added.
"I would hope that regulators -- the Federal Communications Commission and the antitrust division of the Department of Justice -- will be very cautious in approving something like that."  
Judge Greene's policing duties in the telecom business ended with the new communications act. Since the law's passage, there has been an explosion in merger activity.
SBC recently acquired former Baby Bell Pacific Telesis Group. Bell Atlantic Corp is in the process of acquiring NYNEX Corp. And British Telecommunications Plc is in the midst of buying No. 2 long-distance carrier MCI Communications Corp.
It's reported that a merger of AT&amp;T and SBC would have combined revenues of some $80 billion and a workforce of 240,000.
SBC's regional phone system includes California and Texas, following the carrier's purchase of PacTel.
"I'm surprised that somebody wants to put Humpty Dumpty back together," said Judge Green, adding that any new corporate monolith would run counter to the intent of the new telecom law.
"Certainly I think it was the spirit of the act that there not be a return to monopoly conditions," he said.
