Australian life office National Mutual Holdings Ltd is tipped to make a strong, historic debut on the Australian and New Zealand bourses on Tuesday after its institutional offer closed six times oversubscribed last week.
The final price of A$1.60 per share was higher than the indicative bidding range initially set for institutions, and gives Australia's second biggest life office a market capitalisation of A$2.7 billion (US$2 billion) on listing.
"It was very significantly over-subscribed and at A$1.60 there's no doubt that we could have sold it a number of times over," National Mutual managing director Geoff Tomlinson told Reuters in an interview on Monday.
National Mutual is Australia's first listed life office and, at A$1.60 per share, will rank among the market's top 30 firms.
The shares could climb steeply on both the Australian and New Zealand exchanges on Tuesday, as institutional bidders which failed to secure enough shares in the offer step into the market to lift their stakes, share analysts told Reuters on Monday.
Institutions received on average only about 15 percent of the allotments sought, a market source told Reuters.
"There's certainly keen demand...," Morgan Stockbroking's director of equities, Bill Chatterton, said. The shares could reach a high of A$1.80, he added.
National Mutual's listing completes its 21-month transition from a mutual company owned by its policy-holders to a listed group free to pursue its strategic focus on Asia, unshackled by a mutual requirement to act solely in policy-holders' interests.
National Mutual will be owned 51 percent on listing by its French parent, the insurance and financial services giant Axa SA, which is prevented under the terms of the float from selling down its stake for six months after the listing.
Axa, which effectively bought into National Mutual last year at around A$1.25 per share, is sitting on an enormous paper profit. It cannot increase its stake in National Mutual unless given the Australian government's go-ahead.
Under the float, National Mutual's 1.2 million policy holders were offered either shares or a cash alternative. Shares not taken up were offered to retail investors and institutions.
Retail investors were offered the shares at A$1.50 each last month, before the final price was set at the close of institutional bidding last Friday, giving mums and dads a strong temptation to take a quick profit on Tuesday, analysts said.
"There's going to be a fair amount of underlying demand from institutions to get the stock, but there may be a little bit of stag profit-taking as well," a Melbourne-based analyst said.
National Mutual's Tomlinson said the listing, demutualisation and last year's capital injection of A$1.1 billion by Axa marked the end of a tough four years, especially for life subsidiary National Mutual Life.
"Tomorrow will mark the end of a four-year diffcult period and put us into a new area where we can...finalise the turnaround of National Mutual Life in Australia and New Zealand and try to take further advantage of our opportunities in Asia," he said.
A$1 = US$0.79
