Optus Communications Ltd said on Tuesday its Optus Vision pay-television venture was considering whether to continue to support the Australian Rugby League (ARL) after its court defeat against News Corp last week.
"The decision we have to make is how long we continue to support that, and I think right now our people and Channel Nine people would be talking about those issues," Optus Communications chairman Russell Fynmore told Reuters.
Fynmore did not elaborate but said the ultimate fate of the ARL or its News-backed rival Superleague would be decided by the financial backing for the leagues.
"This is really for the ARL and Superleague to determine and in the end it will determined on how much financial support there is for both leagues," Fynmore said.
Optus Vision, five percent-owned by Australian magnate Kerry Packer's Publishing and Broadcasting Ltd (PBL), owns the pay-television broadcast rights to the ARL. PBL's Channel Nine has the free-to-air broadcast rights to ARL.
The ARL suffered a major reversal of fortunes last Friday before the full bench of the Federal Court, which unanimously upheld News' appeal against previous rulings banning Superleague till the turn of the century.
Superleague is preparing to kick off its competition next season, creating the prospect of two rival leagues fighting for TV audience share in 1997 unless a compromise is reached.
Earlier on Tuesday, News Ltd executive chairman Ken Cowley said the company's door was open to talks with the ARL.
"You have always got to keep your door open...," Cowley told reporters in Melbourne.
"We want to maximise the number of fans watching Superleague and so we will be doing the best we can for the fans and the clubs and the players," he added.
He dismissed suggestions, published on Tuesday in News Ltd's The Australian newspaper, that ARL chairman Ken Arthurson could step aside to facilitate a merger of the two leagues.
"The statement by Ken suggesting he might fall on his sword is rather a curious reaction," Cowley said.
"He has no authority in the ARL -- he hasn't had for a couple of years. He cannot make any decisions of any consequences regarding to the game, and particularly to Superleague, without the approval of Kerry Packer."
-- Melbourne bureau 613-9286-1421
