Australia's Foster's Brewing Group Ltd. said Monday it was thirsty for expansion and eyeing possible joint ventures in India and Vietnam to add to its brewery holdings around the world.
Foster's executives said at the group's annual meeting in Melbourne that despite hiccups at its Canadian and Chinese operations, the company was well positioned to seize on growth opportunities both overseas and at home.
"The first priority after satisfying the cash needs of the current businesses is to seek out new direct investment opportunities with the right return profile," Chief Executive Officer Ted Kunkel told shareholders.
"Should that not fully utilize the available financial resources, then we would look at additional options," he said.
Foster's Chairman John Ralph said the group was considering joint venture breweries in Vietnam and India but said it was looking at a wide range of possible investments, including acquisitions. Asia was a major focus, he added.
He declined to give details but said the Vietnamese opportunity involved an existing plant.
"There's nothing immediate but we are looking across all the areas of our business in fact," Ralph told reporters.
"We are involved in looking at a couple of opportunities, but it's early days. Provided we can see it makes sense for us, and we can do it on a basis that's going to earn a satisfactory return, then we are likely to move," he said.
Foster's, which has breweries in Shanghai, Tianjin and Guangdong in China, said the Chinese operations would break even or turn a profit in the fiscal year ending in 1999. Foster's China posted a loss of A$17 million (US$13 million) before interest and tax in the latest year.
The group's 40-percent owned Canadian brewer, Molson Breweries, also performed poorly in its fiscal year that ended on April 1, but has undergone a major restructuring and is focusing on building market share at home, Foster's said.
Kunkel said Molson still delivered a high return on invested capital and forecast higher operating profits from the group's powerhouse Australian brewing unit, Carlton and United Breweries, over the medium term.
Foster's is also counting on higher returns from its British pub chain, the Inntrepreneur Pub Company Ltd., putting the group in a stong position to pursue growth, Kunkel said.
Kunkel identified Asia as the most attractive region for investment, noting beer volumes there surged 60 percent in the first half of the 1990s and were forecast to rise another 40 percent before the turn of the century.
"Access can be achieved at a sufficiently low cost and the return profile is sufficiently better therefore than in other growing markets such as South America," he said.
Foster's has allocated A$200 million ($153 million) for direct investments in Asian markets, deeming this "prudent exposure."
The group has spent four years shedding unwanted assets, lightening the burden of debt accumulated in the 1980s when it was part of the sprawling conglomerate known as Elders-IXL Ltd.
