Australia's Foster's Brewing Group Ltd signalled on Monday that it was thirsty for expansion and said it was eyeing possible joint ventures in India and Vietnam to add to its international stable of breweries.
Foster's executives told shareholders at the group's annual meeting in Melbourne that despite hiccups at its Canadian and Chinese operations, the company was well positioned to seize on any growth opportunities both offshore and at home.  
"The first priority after satisfying the cash needs of the current businesses is to seek out new direct investment opportunities with the right return profile," Foster's chief executive Ted Kunkel told the meeting.
"Should that not fully utilise the available financial resources, then we would look at additional options," he said.
Later, Foster's chairman John Ralph confirmed the group was considering joint venture breweries in Vietnam and India but said it was looking at a wide range of possible investments, including acquisitions. Asia is a major focus, he added.  
He declined to give details but said the Vietnamese opportunity involved an existing plant.
"There's nothing immediate but we are looking across all the areas of our business in fact," Ralph told reporters.
"We are involved in looking at a couple of opportunities, but it's early days. Provided we can see it makes sense for us, and we can do it on a basis that's going to earn a satisfactory return, then we are likely to move," he said.  
Foster's, which has breweries in Shanghai, Tianjin and Guangdong in China, said the Chinese operations would break even or turn a profit in 1998/99. Foster's China posted a 1995/96 loss of A$17 million before interest and tax.
The group's 40-percent owned Canadian brewer, Molson Breweries  MOL.TO, also performed weakly in its business year ending April 1, but has undergone a major restructure and is focusing on building market share at home, Foster's said.  
Foster's chief executive Kunkel said Molson still delivered a high return on invested capital and forecast higher operating profits from the group's powerhouse Australian brewing unit, Carlton and United Breweries, over the medium term.
Foster's also plans to free up about A$400 million in non-performing assets and is counting on higher returns from its British pub chain, the Inntrepreneur Pub Company Ltd, putting the group in a stong position to pursue growth, Kunkel said.
