The computer software and instruction kit for the death machine used in the world's first legal mercy killing will soon be available on the Internet, the Australian doctor who developed it said on Tuesday.
Dr Philip Nitschke, who last month connected cancer sufferer Bob Dent to the machine in Australia's outback Northern Territory, said Internet users would be able to copy the software and instructions from a home page now being developed.
"We see no reason in restricting it in any way," Nitschke told Reuters in Melbourne, where he is due to demonstrate the machine at an euthanasia conference this week.
The death machine used in the Northern Territory, which has the world's only voluntary euthanasia law, enables people to give themslves lethal injections with the tap of computer keys.
On September 22, Nitschke hooked Dent up to the machine with an intravenous tube. Dent, a 66-year-old former carpenter and one-time Christian missionary, started the flow of lethal drugs by entering three simple computer commands.
"Once the intravenous line is put into the patient...then it's simple a matter of the patient pressing the response to the questions on the screen," Nitschke said. The computer programme asks three times if the patient wishes to go ahead.
Dubbed Australia's "Dr Death" by opponents of assisted suicide, Nitschke said the idea of an euthanasia home page was a response to strong interest in Dent's death and the new law, atlhough he said he was having some logistical problems getting the page up and running.
An estimated 50 million people use the worldwide Internet computer network.
"It's to let people know and give them some idea of the way this is being done in a responsible fashion in the Northern Territory," he said, adding he had already sent how-to-do-it kits overseas and around Australia using electronic mail.
A doctor cannot lawfully hook a patient up to the machine anywhere outside the Northern Territory, whether overseas or in Australia's six states and other territory, Nitschke said.
But he dismissed suggestions he could face criminal charges if a machine built from material supplied on the Internet was used in mercy killings outside the remote outback jurisdiction.
"I feel very safe as far as giving the details of the equipment and as far as providing the software and the like," he said. The software is a "trivial" part of the device, he added.
The software and equipment needed to build the machine are very simple and can be bought for around A$200 (US$160), though the lethal drugs are extremely difficult to obtain, he said.
He said he was now developing another death machine which used carbon monoxide and an oxygen mask, enabling people to end their lives without needing someone to insert intravenous tubes.
"When people get too old and frail it can be very difficult to get access to veins and gas is a much easier way to go, and carbon monoxide is a painless and acceptable way...," he said.
Nitschke described his machine as a "slicker" version of the suicide device designed by U.S. euthanasia advocate Dr Jack Kevorkian, who has publicly acknowledged attending more than 40 deaths since he began his assisted-suicide crusade in 1990.
(A$1 = $0.80)
