Australia's most profitable casino operator, Crown Ltd, said on Wednesday its long-term ambition lay in Asia where it planned to continue its winning streak with the region's high-rollers.
Crown chairman Lloyd Williams told shareholders in Melbourne, where the company's new casino and hotel complex is nearing completion, that the new A$1.6 billion premises would be a show-case development for Asia.  
"If we are successful in Melbourne, Australia, I think we can be successful in Asia," Williams told Crown's annual meeting at the casino's temporary home beside the city's Yarra River, near the new Crown complex due to open in early March.
"I think what we are doing with this project is that we are probably show-casing it to Asia and that's basically what our ambition is as far as that is concerned," Williams said.
Crown plans to open another three Asian marketing offices in China, Taiwan and Malaysia. It already has offices in Bangkok, Singapore, Jakarta and Hong Kong, enticing big gamblers there to take their chances at the Melbourne casino.  
Crown derived about 30 percent of its gaming revenue of A$490 million in the year to June 30, which underpinned a 76 percent rise in net profit after abnormals to A$58 million.
Williams told reporters later he hoped to build this up to 40 percent or higher.
"I find it remarkable the wealth creation in Asia. Their principal leisure activity is gaming," he said.
"In Asia, comparatively speaking, they (high rollers) treat A$100,000 like A$10," he added.  
Crown wants to bed down its new casino and hotel complex before launching a foray into Asia, Williams said, adding he was not interested in small casino licences such as one recently awarded in the Cambodian capital, Phnom Penh.
"There are all sorts of licences available in Asia at the moment....I'm not interested in those licences, not those little licences," he said.
"I was talking about a major licence where a government decided to legalise gaming in a genuine way and the only place (in Asia where) that's done that...at the moment is Malaysia."  
Malaysia's Resorts World Bhd, a subsidiary of Genting Bhd owns and operates that country's only casino in the mountain resort of Genting Highlands.
Williams said that if Thailand, one of Crown's biggest source of high rollers, ever followed suit and awarded an exclusive casino licence, Crown would be a bidder.
"There are gaming jurisdictions that are opening up in Asia, but I don't think they will open up in the short term; I think it's more like the medium term."  
Crown has been operating for only two years but, partly due to relatively low state-government tax on revenue from international gamblers, it has emerged as the most popular of Australia's listed casino operators.
Williams told shareholders the company's first quarter performance for the three months to September 30 was stronger than the same quarter a year ago, adding that the second quarter was normally stronger again.
But he warned that dividends might not be paid until after the new complex's first year of operation.  
"I would think it would be probably prudent to have 12 months of operation at Southbank (site) before we considered that," he told the meeting.
Crown shares were two cents lower at A$2.86 at 2.55 p.m. (0455 GMT).
-- Melbourne bureau 61-3 9286-1421
