The Broken Hill Proprietary Co Ltd's steel division expects to increase its earnings in the current 1996/97 year due to lower costs and improved operations, BHP Steel chief executive Ron McNeilly told Reuters on Thursday.
But BHP Steel sees no major improvement in its home Australian market until possibly the second quarter of calendar 1997, and expects the world steel market to pick up towards the end of the first half of next year, McNeilly said.  
Asked if BHP Steels profit for the the current year ending May 31 would be higher than the division's 1995/96 profit, he said: "Oh yeah, yeah, but as I said we don't make any forecasts."
McNeilly declined to give a forecast for 1996/97 profits but said improvements would be driven by lower costs.
"If there's going to be an improvement in our results -- and I am confident there will be -- it will be an improvement that's driven I think in the near term by better operations and lower costs rather than a market-driven improvement in the short term," he added.  
BHP Steel reported a 44 percent slump in profit to A$375 million before abnormals in 1995/96. Its bottom line sunk 76 percent to A$153 million after a A$222 million write-down of the value of its Newcastle raw steel-making plant in Australia.
McNeilly said he expected steel markets in Australia and abroad to pick around mid 1997, as the domestic economy improved and world steel demand, especially in Asia, fed through into a recovery in depressed world steel prices.
"I don't really see any significant improvement in the Australian scene until sort of maybe the second quarter of next year -- so quite flat," he said.  
McNeilly described domestic demand as very patchy.
"There are some signs of improved demand in the resource and infrastructure areas but no sign of any improvement whatsoever in domestic housing, in most of the rural sector and in general demand, so it really is quite flat," he said.
BHP's export despatches of steel have been increasing, but an intensely competitive steel market has weighed on prices.
McNeilly quoted International Iron and Steel Institute (IISI) forecasts for strong world steel consumption over the next four years and said prices should strengthen between the first half of 1997 and the second quarter of 1998.  
"I think we will see towards the end of the first half of next calendar year, towards the end of the second quarter of 1998, an improvement in demand and prices in Asia and likewise Australia," he said.
"But I do think that from now until then, what we see now will be generally the situation."
The IISI forecasts world steel consumption to grow at close to two percent annually to 714 million tonnes in year 2000, with most of this growth coming from Asia.  
"We are not seeing any improvement that's market derived and I don't think there'll be any improvement that's market derived over the next six months," he said.
BHP Steel's major new projects around the world are still being built and will not boost the division's profit until after 1996/97, he said.
"We won't see any major inflow of profitability from new projects, really until the second half of (calendar 1997), which is the first half of next financial year," McNeilly said.  
He declined to comment on speculation BHP is considering closing its old, integrated raw steel-making plant at Newcastle, rather than investing in a new electric-arc furnace there.
McNeilly said BHP's Glenbrook steel mill in New Zealand, also now under the spotlight, must slash A$50 million from its cost base. "It absolutely has to happen," he said.
He said was encouraged by the resolve "of all those involved" at the 700,000-tonnes-per-year plant to cut costs.
"But if we have sites that don't and won't and can't, and tired assets that can't be rejuvenated, we have to bite the bullet and do the obvious."  -- Melbourne bureau 613-9286-1421
