Institutional investor National Mutual Holdings Ltd has arranged to meet St George Bank Ltd to discuss its merger with Advance Bank Australia Ltd in a sign of growing disquiet over the deal.
National Mutual's funds management arm, a top-20 shareholder in St George, wants to discuss the bank's decision not to put the merger proposal to a shareholders' vote.  
"We are coming close to having a position on that and we are meeting shortly with St George and we will make some decision at the end of the meeting," said National Mutual Funds Management Ltd's domestic equity investments manager, Paul Jennings.
He declined to comment further but market sources said on Monday that National Mutual and at least one other institution were lobbying St George to reverse it decision not to seek shareholder approval for the A$2.65 billion merger.
"Three institutions ... are a little bit up in arms about it and would like to see a meeting," a broker said.  
National Australia Bank Ltd, itself seen as a predator in Australia's rapidly consolidating banking sector, has already said it is disappointed at St George's decision, which has been approved by the Australian Stock Exchange.
"We are disappointed there would not be a shareholders' meeting and we were concerned about the level of information out there about a merger proposal," NAB spokesman David Upton said.
"Given there hasn't been any details of the merger released as yet, we thought it would be important to have a meeting to give shareholders an opportunity to discuss it and find out more," Upton said.  
He declined to comment when asked about a newspaper comment that NAB might have few legal options to oppose the bid.
"We simply wanted to make known that we were disappointed that there wouldn't be a meeting," he said.
St George's scrip and cash offer valued each Advance Bank share at A$7.30 -- or nearly three times net asset backing.
The Australian Shareholders' Association, representing small shareholders, said it had met St George last Friday over the question of a shareholders' meeting.
"We are not at all happy," association executive officer Tony McLean told Reuters.  
"The principle is that it's a very significant deal for the bank and we believe that shareholders should be involved in approving it," he added.
He declined to comment on his talks with St George but said: "There will be an exchange of information between ourselves and the bank." McLean declined to elaborate.
Asked if an extraordinary general meeting could be called to pressure St George into reversing its decision, he said: "I guess that's a possibility."
-- Melbourne Bureau 61-3 9286-1421
