Resources and steel group The Broken Hill Pty Co Ltd is expected to report a fall in half year net profit on Friday, but share analysts say Australia's biggest company is likely to be spared another stock market mauling.
BHP, still licking its wounds with sellers having wiped around A$5 billion off its market value since May, is tipped to post a first-half net profit of around A$760 million, down from A$811 million a year ago, according to analysts' forecasts.  
The result, for the six months to November 30, is expected to include roughly A$100 million in net proceeds from asset sales, but slight improvements in the battered copper and steel divisions are also likely to emerge, the analysts said.
BHP's share price, which hit a year high of A$20.05 in early May, has been on a mostly downward roller-coaster ride for the past six months as copper and steel prices turned sour, and analysts revised down their near-term profit forecasts.  
But the copper price has firmed in recent months, steel markets are thought to have bottomed, and brokerages are again reworking their outlooks. BHP shares have also rebounded, closing on Monday at A$17.31 after hitting A$15.58 in September.
"It's one of the few companies where analysts are revising the results upwards," said a fund manager's share analyst.
The five analysts contacted by Reuters on Monday gave widely varying forecasts for interim profit, ranging from A$715 million to a high of A$804 million. The analyst tipping A$715 million said he believed others had forecast even lower numbers.  
But the analysts agreed the interim result would show signs of improved performance in copper and steel, though they would fine tune their estimates after seeing the group's November production data, expected to be released on Tuesday.
"They have definitely had a good two quarters in petroleum and I guess they're struggling in minerals and copper and steel," a Melbourne-based analyst said.
"They are doing a good job given the environment."
Most analysts said they expected a modest profit recovery for full year 1996/97. BHP reported a 20 percent drop in pre-abnormal net profit of A$1.29 billion in 1995/96.  
BHP Petroleum, which in the first half of 1995/96 ranked behind the minerals and steel divisions in terms of profit, will be BHP's biggest earner in the interim result to be released on Friday, said JB Were and Son analyst Neil Goodwill.
"The asset sales are in there though," he said.
The analysts expect BHP to book between A$80 million and A$117 million in asset sales as operating profit, due in effect to gains on the sale of BHP's stake in the Mungo/Monan oil and gas fields in the North Sea and of its interest in the Sierra Chata gas field and Chihuidos block in Argentina.  
BHP also made a A$45 million profit from the sale of its 20 percent stake in an undeveloped gold prospect, Sun Prospecting and Mining Co Ltd, in South Africa. But this was offset by the A$45 million loss booked on the sale of its Mali gold assets.
BHP will not book any of these asset sales as abnormal items, deeming them too small to be taken below the line, one analyst said. But another analyst confessed he initially felt they were being taken above the line to mask the core result.  
"I thought that was the case and then the oil price shot up and copper is a bit better, so without that number (for asset sales) they would have had a reasonably good profit number anyway," he said.
BHP's Magma Copper operation should creep back into profit in the second quarter after posting a loss on a full-cost basis in the first quarter results, he said.
BHP bought Magma last January for US$2.4 billion, making it the world's second biggest copper producer. But the price tag has come under heavy criticism.  
BHP is expected to book a net abnormal gain of around A$100 million from the settlement of its dispute with the Victoria state government over a federal tax on Bass Strait gas revenues.
-- Melbourne Bureau 61-3 9286-1435
