Australian resources and steel group The Broken Hill Pty Co. (BHP) posted a 9.8-percent fall in first-half profits Friday, disappointing the share market but avoiding another mauling by investors.
BHP, whose shares have been hammered since its key markets in steel and copper turned sour six months ago, posted a A$790 million ($628 million) net profit for the six months to Nov. 30, down from A$867 ($689.3 million) for the year-ago period.
But Australia's largest-quoted company had its bottom line boosted by an abnormal gain of A$107 million ($85 million) and investors were initially not impressed.
"It's pretty lousy," said one fund manager's stock analyst. Another analyst disappointed with the result said the resources giant was still on track for a modest profit recovery for the full year to May 31, 1997.
Though BHP's battered copper division showed improvement, with the North American copper operations swinging back into profit, analysts had expected a first-half group operating profits of around A$760 million ($604.2 million).
Instead, BHP's operating profits fell 15.8 percent from the year-ago period to A$683 million ($543.0 million).
But managing director John Prescott said the second-quarter figures showed faster improvement in performance and that, despite weak copper and steel prices, the group was still investing in future growth.
Citing a sharp jump in exploration expenditure in the half year, he told reporters: "That's an important part of sustaining our growth."
Including abnormals, BHP's minerals, copper and steel divisions all contributed higher earnings in the latest three months against the August quarter. The steel division's earnings were flat.
Petroleum was the biggest earner with A$253 million ($201.1 million), but this included an abnormal gain of A$107 million ($85 million) from the settlement of a dispute over a gas resource tax.
BHP Petroleum's operating profits also included a A$82 million ($65.2 million) windfall from asset sales and a larger than expected exploration expense.
BHP's minerals division, a major world producer of iron ore and coal, doubled its contribution to profit in the second quarter to A$154 million ($122.4 million), due largely to higher world prices.
BHP Copper benefitted from a recent firming in the copper price and a cut of 7 U.S. cents per pound in its North American operating costs to post a second-quarter profit of A$132 million ($104.9 million), up from A$85 million ($67.6 million) in the first quarter.
The U.S. copper operations, acquired last January with the US$2.4 billion ($1.9 billion) purchase of Magma Copper, made a loss on a full-cost basis in the first quarter. Prescott said Friday Magma had swung back into profit in the second quarter.
BHP Steel's second-quarter profit was flat at A$90 million ($71.6 million).
