Global paper and packaging group Amcor Ltd announced on Monday a rare slide in annual profit, blaming weak world paper prices and flat economic growth at home, but its shares held firm on the promise of recovery.
The result, which was Amcor's first fall in pre-abnormal profit in over a decade, failed to rock the blue-chip's battered share price, which had already fallen heavily in the past six months in anticipation of a weak outcome.  
"Potentially, the worst is over and you are looking forward to increased earnings here on in," a Sydney-based broker told Reuters after Amcor reported a six percent drop in net profit to A$338.8 million in the year to June 30.
Amcor's paper division was hit by a roughly 20 percent fall in world paper prices since late calendar 1995, and weak economic activity in Australia and Germany impacted heavily on its packaging operations, the company said.
But Amcor suggested that paper prices had bottomed out and said it hoped to see signs of an upturn in 1997.  
"Paper prices ... appear to have bottomed, all Amcor businesses have restructuring and cost-reduction programmes underway and there are new business opportunities in all regions," Amcor managing director Don Macfarlane told reporters.
The stock market, which shaved over A$2.00 off Amcor's year-high share price this year, initially pushed the shares higher on Monday before late selling pulled them to a close of A$7.62, down 12 cents on Friday's close, in a falling market.
"I don't think sentiment towards the stock is going to change in the near term," said one Melbourne-based analyst.  
"Profit will be flat towards the end of the (current 1996/97) year and then start to pick up into the new year," she added, predicting that a recovery in Australian economic growth will begin to spur Amcor's earnings in 1997/98.
Amcor, one of the world's top-10 paper and packaging companies and for many years a favourite of the local bourse, signalled a major cost-cutting drive and a reduction in capital expenditure to restore margins, especially in packaging.  
The packaging business, which makes products ranging from plastic beverage bottles and breakfast-cereal boxes to carboard boxes, suffered squeezed profit margins in Australia and New Zealand, and poor results in Germany.
Its Holfeder box-making business in Germany posted another undisclosed loss in 1996/97. "The level of confidence in the German economy is abysmal," Amcor's Macfarlane said.
The group's U.S. operations also "dragged its feet" but its British packaging business posted excellent results, he said.  
Amcor's Asian packaging operations posted higher profit, despite paper prices in the region "sinking like a stone" this year and dragging carboard-box prices with them, he said.
"It's been a rollar-coaster ride on paper prices in Asia," he added.
Amcor has long had a target of achieving 15 percent growth in earnings per share, but Macfarlane announced this annual goal had been scrapped, given the difficult trading environment and Australia's new low-inflation environment.
"I think we simply have to for a period pull them (rapid-growth ambitions) down a peg or two...," he said.  
"Clearly we have to make sure that the businesses we have already got are earning reasonable returns."
-- Melbourne Bureau 61-3 9286-1421
