Australia's biggest company, The Broken Hill Pty Co Ltd (BHP), has agreed to pay its local steel workers a 10-percent pay rise over two years in a wage deal which could set the tone for other labour negotiations.
The deal, which covers over 13,000 workers at BHP steel plants around the country, falls short of pay rises being sought in some other areas of Australian manufacturing and provoked sharp words among rival trade unions.
The Australian Workers Union (AWU), which claims to represent about 80 percent of BHP steel workers, confirmed the deal on Friday, saying it was struck before Christmas and was well below its initial demand of 15 percent over two years.
But AWU organiser Mick Eagles told Reuters that historically low inflation in Australia was putting intense pressure on unions to modify their wage expectations.
"I think in this environment, with the way the CPI (inflation) is, I think the trend in the next 12 months and two years is going to put enormous pressure on wages to be kept low," he said.
"So a 10-percent outcome over two years is going to be seen as quite an achievement."
The Australian Manufacturing Workers Union (AMWU), which wants to make an annual wage rise of over five percent as the benchmark in the metal trades industry, said the BHP deal would weaken unions' position in other wage negotiations underway.
"Obviously when that happens, it always weakens other unions' positions, but that's typical of the AWU," Vince Theuma, Victoria state organiser for the AMWU, told Reuters.
"They run in there and reach deals that we're not trying to chase."
BHP, which has been working to slash costs to compensate for weak international steel prices and sluggish demand at home, described the wages agreement as satisfactory.
"Part of the agreement involves union agreement to introduce new types of employment arrangements which eliminate traditional demarcation lines and have novel concepts in terms of employment which provide us with a business benefit," a BHP spokesman said.
"We think this is a satisfactory resolution, bearing in mind the benefits of those innovative agreements," he told Reuters.
BHP initially offered eight percent over two years.
The agreement comes as wages growth continues to be cited by Australia's central bank as a major concern for inflation, now sitting well within the Reserve Bank's target range of between two and three percent.
