Australia's biggest company, resources and steel group The Broken Hill Pty Co Ltd (BHP), said on Friday it has agreed to pay its domestic steel workers a 10 percent pay rise over two years.
The Australian Workers Union (AWU), which claims to represent about 80 percent of BHP Steel's 15,000 unionised steel workers, also confirmed the deal, saying it was struck and endorsed by the workforce just before Christmas.  
BHP and the AWU said the annual wage rises, effective from New Year's Day, were for five percent in calendar 1997 and five percent in 1998, paid as three percent instalments in January and two percent in July.
The wage rises include site-specific productivity offsets at steel mills around the country, but also included an adjustment for inflation and took into account other steel industry wage agreements, AWU spokesmen told Reuters.  
"These increases are to take place in the context of the agreement on the specific initiatives for improved performance through the introduction of incentive workplace agreements," BHP said in a short statement.
AWU negotiator Mick Eagles said the wage deal did not affect existing performance-related payments, under which workers can earn quarterly bonuses of up to about five percent of salary.
Eagles described the deal as a good outcome given the prospects for continued low inflation and predicted the wages of all Australian blue-collar workers would come under pressure.  
"I think in this environment, with the way the CPI is, I think the trend in the next 12 months and two years is going to put enormous pressure on wages to be kept low," he said.
"So a 10 percent outcome over two years is going to be seen as quite an achievement."  
A BHP spokesman told Reuters the deal was satisfactory.
"Part of the agreement involves union agreement to introduce new types of employment arrangements which eliminate traditional demarcation lines and have novel concepts in terms of employment which provide us with a business benefit," the spokesman said.
"We think this is a satisfactory resolution, bearing in mind the benefits of those innovative agreements," he added.
The deal was in line with a recommendation made to the company and union last month by Australia's labour tribunal, the Industrial Relations Commission.  
BHP initially offered eight percent over two years, while the AWU entered negotiations seeking 15 percent over two years.
The agreement comes as wages growth continues to be cited by Australia's central bank as a major concern for inflation, now at historically low levels and well within the Reserve Bank's target range of between two and three percent.
The deal averted the threat of strikes at BHP's steel plants around the country, but the group's minerals division continues to feel the effects of industrial strife.  
About 700 workers downed tools on Thursday over wage and benefits disputes, halting construction of a A$1.5 billion iron ore processing plant being built for BHP at Port Hedland in Western Australia.
The striking workers are engaged to independent contractors hired by BHP.
In November, BHP coal miners in New South Wales state called a strike over cuts in accident compensation payouts.
-- Melbourne newsroom 613-9286-1421
