Australia's century-old steel maker, The Broken Hill Pty Co Ltd (BHP), has been warned it risks falling behind global rivals unless it restructures its big, ageing plants and maps out a clear offshore strategy.
BHP Steel's long-term strategy came under the spotlight on Monday after credit rating agency Standard and Poor's wrote in a steel industry review that BHP faced its toughest test yet as it positioned itself to tackle rapidly developing Asian markets.
S&amp;P's comments, made in the latest edition of its journal CreditFocus, comes as Taiwan's An Feng Steel Co Ltd plans to build a A$1.4 billion steel mill in Australia in what has been termed a "wake-up call" for BHP.
"A wake-up call is not a bad way of looking at it," a corporate analyst told Reuters, describing the competition to supply steel into Asian economies as intense.
"It's not that they (BHP) have been flat-footed; it's just that there are (bigger) global players out there with billions of dollars to set these things up," he added.
An Feng and its little known minority Australian partner, Kingstream Resources NL, launched last Friday a plan to build a new-technology steel mill expected to produce annually 2.4 million tonnes of steel slab for mainly Asian consumption.
The move has been seen as a direct challenge to BHP, which dominates the Australian market with steel products made from old-technology plants on the country's east and south coasts. The youngest of its three big steel mills opened 56 years ago. These old mills also supply raw steel for BHP's more modern offshore operations, which have so far focused on downstream steel mills in Asia making higher-value products tailored for such industries as car-making and construction.
BHP produces 636 tonnes of steel per worker per year using predominantly coal-fired blast furnaces, but by the year 2000 new-technology mills using electric arc furnaces will enable steel operators to reach 1,000 tonnes per worker, S&amp;P said.
"In many respects, BHP Steel's future earnings quality will depend on the successful implementation of this international growth strategy and the critical selection of steel-making technology for future domestic expansion," S&amp;P analyst Brad Scott wrote in the January edition of CreditFocus.
BHP is expected by May to announce the results of a year-long review of the steel division's long-term strategy, begun last year after the group reported a dive in steel profits and a big writedown of its Newcastle mill near Sydney.
BHP has since indicated it is prepared to close the 81-year-old Newcastle mill if need be.
Speculation about the closure of Newcastle, and with it the loss of thousands of jobs, has prompted a parliamentary inquiry into the future of Australia's steel industry -- virtually a synonym for BHP, which supplies 75 percent of the local market.
BHP's local dominance and its production costs, still low in global terms, will give it some comfort over the next few years, but the so-called "Big Australian" must rationalise its assets at home to realise its long-term goals in Asia, analysts said.
"BHP will need to define its domestic investment vision over that period or risk falling behind the competitiveness of its global competitors," S&amp;P's Scott said.
A stock analyst suggested BHP may even resolve to abandon raw-steel making capacity and begin buying it instead from cheaper producers, but a BHP Steel spokesman doubted this.
"I would not see that," spokesman John Devers told Reuters. "We have got the benefits of relatively low-cost raw materials on our doorstep and good transport arrangements and energy."
-- Melbourne bureau 61-3 9286-1421
