Australian furniture, whitegoods and computer retailer Harvey Norman said on Wednesday it was trailing behind its target for 15 percent annual sales growth and that cool summer weather had impacted on December sales.
Managing director Michael Harvey told Reuters that December sales again grew by "double digit figures" on the same month a year ago, but was not matching the robust growth the expanding company traditionally enjoyed.
Excluding sales from new stores, turnover in December, a peak month, rose only about five percent, Harvey said.  
"We are looking for a 15 percent increase (in 1996/97), which will take us from A$1.043 billion, which we posted last financial year, up to A$1.2 billion and at the moment we are falling short of that target," Harvey said in an interview.
He described the retail trading environment as the worst in the company's 15-year history, but stuck to his earlier hope that the second half of the current year ending June 30 would compensate for a slow first half.  
Harvey declined to give a profit forecast but said the company was "definitely not" heading down the same path as retailers David Jones Ltd, Country Road Ltd and Just Jeans Ltd, all of which have announced steep interim profit downgrades.
"If we have a flat result or if we were indeed between flat and 10 percent down, we are going to be disappointed," he said.
"But I can assure you it's our belief that it won't be less than a 10 percent decrease on last year and it's certainly our hope that it will be an increase on last yeaer's profit result.
"But, again, because of the nature of our business, it's just too early to tell," he said.  
Harvey Norman reported a dip in net profit after abnormals of A$30.41 million in 1995/96, but told shareholders at its annual meeting in November it looked forward to strong summer months from November to February.
But managing director Harvey said summer had so far been unseasonally cool in its east-coast markets, dampening sales of goods like air conditioners, refrigerators, fans, outdoor furniture and barbecues.
"That's really let us down more than anything else," he said. December and January are usually the firm's peak months.  
Harvey Norman is still hoping for a heatwave, but hot weather has its biggest impact on sales before Christmas when a lot of discretionary household expenditure is spent, he added.
The company is also pinning its hopes on a turnaround in consumer spending in the first half of calendar 1997 to enable Harvey Norman to reach its 15 percent sales target, but Harvey said there appeared to be little joy on the immediate horizon.
"Through last year we were basically saying it's got to turn in the second quarter of '97 calendar year, but at moment there's nothing to indicate that's going to happen...," he said.  
"My view is that next financial year starting July it will be a better year than this year and last year, but in terms of when it will actually start to turn, we are hoping...it will be the second quarter," Harvey said.
"I don't think we are going to see much joy in January, February, but it's our hope that things will turn come March, April, May, June," he said.
-- Melbourne Bureau 613-9286-1421
