Australian retailers are heading for a grim round of sharply lower profit results as one by one the major chains announce they have fallen casualty to a sluggish economy and tight-fisted consumers.
Homeware retailer Harvey Norman Ltd added its voice on Wednesday to the chorus of woe, revealing it was trailing its goal of 15 percent annual sales growth amid the worst retail environment in the company's 15-year history.  
The comments, made to Reuters in an interview, follow formal warnings to the stock exchange that big upmarket department store chain David Jones Ltd, and two large clothing retailers, expect steep profit slides.
David Jones and fashion houses Country Road Ltd and Just Jeans Ltd have all warned of 50 percent drops in interim profit for the half-year ending January, confirming that Christmas failed to boost retailers' bottom lines.  
"We are used to posting massive increases (in sales turnover) year after year after year. This is the first year we've ever been caught up in a general market malaise," said Harvey Norman managing director Michael Harvey.
"It's basically an indication to us that the market is having its worst year since Harvey Norman began (in 1982)."
Harvey Norman, which is aiming for turnover of A$1.2 billion in the year ending June 30, has enjoyed annual sales growth of up to 58 percent over the past four years.  
It, along with other retailers, had been hoping for a strong December but found Australian wallets were not as easy to prise open as they once were, especially for clothes.
Australia's biggest retailer, Coles Myer Ltd, which accounts for almost 18 cents in every retail dollar spent, declined on Wednesday to give figures for December sales.
But corporate affairs director Peter Morgan said he was "comfortable" with Coles' performance. Coles has recently been among the most poorly performed listed retailers and is embarking on a major refocusing of its sprawling businesses.  
Official data released on Tuesday showed that all areas of retailing except for food weakened in the three months to November and that overall retail sales continued to trend down despite two interest rate cuts since July.
The Reserve Bank eased rates again last month, but it was too late to rescue a second dismal Christmas for retailers.
"A shocker" was how one stock analyst summed up the festive season for the clothing retailers, but she said supermarket chain Woolworths Ltd and other food retailers should have come through the Christmas period relatively unscathed.  
Asked about the outlook for full-year profits in 1996/97, the analyst said: "Pretty grim." But she and another analyst said they saw a pick-up in earnings in coming months.
"I think the outlook is reasonable, but not spectacular," the second analyst said.
-- Melbourne Bureau 61-3 9286-1421
