Diversified manufacturer Pacific BBA Ltd said on Tuesday trading conditions in the second half of calendar 1996 had been softer than expected and it now expected 1996 profits to be around the same level as 1995.
"I've only seen July's results and verbal figures for August, but it will depend on how the rest of the year unfolds," Pacific BBA managing director Barry Jackson told Reuters.
"It's looking a bit softer than we would like. We were really budgetting for an economy that was stretching a touch but it doesn't look like it's going to do it," Jackson said.  
Jackson said in an interview the 1996 profit would be similar to calendar 1995's net profit of A$15.9 million.
"I think it's going to be much the same figure," he said.
Jackson cited the flat Australian economy, relatively weak automotive sales world-wide and the cost of developing new projects as the major constraints on short-term profit growth.
But he said the domestic economy should pick up in 1997 and put the group on track to achieving its goal of 15 to 20 percent annual growth in sales and earnings before interest and tax.  
But Jackson, speaking after the announcement of a A$200 million, five-year contract to supply brake parts to a North American vehicle manufacturer, seemed to be more concerned about coping with rapid growth than with a sluggish local economy.
Pacific BBA, which makes car parts, plastic packaging and construction products, has budgeted to spend around A$60 million in 1996 in capital expenditure, Jackson said.
"I think it (capital expenditure) will be two to three times depreciation (charges) for the next year or so," he said, adding that this was around twice the average for manufacturers.  
The group is examining a range of expansion opportunities in Asia and North America, requiring annual capital investments of between as little as A$5 million and A$200 million.
"We have people looking full time at these opportunities," he said. But the group must expand cautiously, he added.
"We've just got to be careful we don't over-stretch ourselves," he said. "Growth holds back your short-term earnings," he added.
Jackson rued the failure of Pacific BBA's recent bid for fellow Australian manufacturer Azon Ltd, which was acquired instead by U.S.-based Illinois Tool Works Inc.  
Pacific BBA needs to become bigger or find a big partner to seize major new opportunities, especially in the automotive industry where the group wants to become a global niche player, he said.
Asked if its small size in world terms could become a brake on Pacific BBA's growth, Jackson said: "It's not been yet, but it could become one and we were trying to say to the market when we were trying to buy Azon that this could give us the ability to do anything we want to."
-- Melbourne bureau 613-9286-1421
