Australian life office National Mutual Holdings Ltd will finally put an indicative value on its own shares on Wednesday, removing much of the guesswork that has surrounded the pricing of the group's A$2 billion-plus float.
The group's net tangible asset backing of A$2.36 billion or A$1.39 per share is expected to serve as the pricing yardstick for the offer, with retail investors receiving a discount on the final price paid by institutions, insurance analysts said.  
"I would have thought somewhere around A$1.30 and A$1.35 (per share for retail investors)," a stock analyst said on Tuesday, noting the demand for shares from National Mutual policy-holders would largely determine the retail price.
Policy-holders own 49 percent of National Mutual Holdings, and French parent Axa the rest.
"Obviously if the demand from policy-holders has been as strong as they say, there's going to be less shares available to institutional investors, so that will push the price up a little."  
National Mutual, which gave its 1.2 million policy-holders until August 23 to choose between taking shares or cashing out, has so far declined to comment on policy-holder demand for scrip, except to say the phones rang hot with inquiries.
It has also declined to specify the retail and institutional portions of the offer, leaving its "embedded value" or net asset backing (NTA) of A$1.39 per share as the only guide to a price.
National Mutual chief executive Geoff Tomlinson has said the group's NTA is an indicator of the final offer price, suggesting the group's earnings are too volatile to use the conventional appraisal valuation method, which accounts for future earnings.  
Under the offer process, Tomlinson will also announce the indicative price range for institutional investors on Wednesday as well as the total number of shares for sale by public offer.
The lack of any hard information on the policy-holders' response has led to some widely varying views on price.
One Sydney-based analyst said the retail price could exceed the group's NTA, suggesting policy-holders who elected to take cash would not want to see the price of the shares they forfeited leap in the secondary market.  
"At the end of the day, the people who took the cash alternative don't want to see the price at 40 or 50 percent above where they took the cash," he told Reuters.
At an issue price of A$1.39, National Mutual would list on the Australian Stock Exchange at a price-earnings ratio of 11.8 times, against the average across industrial stocks of 13.4.
"That's at the upper end of where we would expect these guys to trade, but there's some earnings growth to come through in (years ending September 30) 1997 and 1998," the stock analyst told Reuters.  
He said the A$1.39 NTA quoted by National Mutual undervalued its real NTA by five to six cents per share, and this implied a maximum offer price of A$1.45 for institutional investors.
"I don't think they (the institutions) are really going to want to pay much of a premium over embedded value," he said.
Another Sydney-based analyst said the institutional offer price could reach as high at A$1.60, based on a retail offer price of around the A$1.39 NTA.  
"I think there's going to be a lot of interest, particularly in overseas institutions," he said. "I think there's a lot of value there...," he added, citing an improving Australian life insurance market and good growth potential in Asia.
The group's 69 percent-owned National Mututal Asia Ltd, based in Hong Kong, and National Mututal Life in Australia account for the bulk of the group's earnings.
-- Melbourne bureau 613-9286-1421
