Australia has been warned it risks losing face in Asia if it takes its overseas radio and television services off air, as mooted in an official report.
The report's recommendation that the government close its state-owned short-wave service, Radio Australia, and sell off its fledgling satellite broadcaster, Australia Television, have been condemned as near sighted and harmful to Australia's image.
"The recommendation that was made was one of the most stupid I have ever come across in my life," Mark Dodgson, an expert on Australian business ties with the region, said on Friday.
"They are absolutely critical for Australian foreign policy and for business and to cut them off for the sake of such a small amount of money is ridiculously short sighted."
Dodgson, of the Australian National University, is not alone in warning Australia risks losing face with its near neighbours.
Already, Papua New Guinea has offered to take a cut in Australian aid if this money could be used to ensure Radio Australia's future. The service is often the only source of regional news in the mountainous and isolated Pacific country.
A former chairman of Australia's national broadcaster and the opposition have also attacked the recommendations, designed to help the government slash its budget deficit.
The report, prepared after a government-ordered review of the Australian Broadcasting Corporation (ABC), called on Canberra to drop its requirement that the ABC provide overseas broadcasts in favour of better funded local services.
Australia Television, set up four years ago by then Labor prime minister Paul Keating as part of his government's Asian embrace, has so far accumulated losses of about A$7.0 million, an industry source told Reuters.
Radio Australia, set up decades ago under the control of the foreign ministry, airs mainly around the Asia-Pacific in seven Asian languages and English. It costs taxpayers about A$25 million per year, the source said.
Both are operated by the ABC and place heavy emphasis on news and current affairs. They aim to present an "Australian face" to the region and to raise Australia's profile in Asia.
No decision has been made on Radio Australia's future until the ABC and the government discuss the recommendations, but Canberra has begun the process of selling Australia Television.
A merchant bank, Turnbull and Partners Ltd, said it had received 50 expressions on interest in taking over Australia Television's assets. These include the remaining four years of a five-year lease on the Indonesian owned Palapa C2 satellite.
Australia Television, which is received in 33 countries across the region, has an option for another five-year lease.
If the station cannot be sold, the government has been urged to shut it down. But Communications Minister Richard Alston has said he personally believes this is unlikely.
In the event of a sale, it is unclear whether Australia Television will remain a window on the nation, offering such obscure programming as Australian Rules Football coverage. One media analyst says it is a commercial dud in its current form.
"Australians will all suffer if the ABC deserts international broadcasting," former ABC chairman Mark Armstrong wrote in a newspaper column this week.
"We will be less known and less respected by our neighbours...Our country will lose face in Asia."
Former industry minister Peter Cook, an opposition senator, said the demise of Radio Australia or Australia Television would be another setback for Australia in the region, especially so soon after a flare-up of anti-Asian sentiment here.
"Our public face has suffered terribly and a cut or a change of this sort will be misunderstood in that context," Cook said.
-- Sydney Newsroom 612-9373-1800
