Australia's Foster's Brewing Group Ltd toasted local beer drinkers on Monday for a strong rise in pre-tax earnings, but losses in Canada and China took some fizz out of the half-year result.
Foster's announced a 13 percent rise in pre-tax earnings to A$185 million (US$140.6 million) for the six months to December 31, due largely to what it called a sparkling performance by its home brews.
Carlton and United Breweries (CUB), the group's domestic brewer and earnings powerhouse, recorded an 11.5 percent surge in profit before interest and tax.
"CUB's performance was, again, an absolutely outstanding feature of the result -- a sparkling performance, if you will excuse the pun," Foster's chief executive Ted Kunkel said.
CUB, which brews Australia's best-selling beer, Victoria Bitter, now commands 55 percent of the local beer market, up from 53 percent a year ago, Kunkel told reporters.
But CUB's performance was partly overshadowed by Foster's 40-percent-owned Molson Breweries, which was responsible for lowering the group's bottom line to A$169.4 million, just 2.4 percent up on the first half of 1995/96.  
"The result was mixed," Kunkel said of the Canadian brewer's performance.
Foster's booked a A$20 million abnormal loss for restructuring costs at Molson, which Kunkel said was beginning to arrest a slide in its share of the Canadian beer market.
The loss, partly offset by smaller profit windfalls in the period, may not be the last from Molson. Foster's is braced for more abnormal losses after Molson late last year lost an arbitrated dispute with Coors Brewing Co.
A Canadian arbitration panel ruled that Molson had breached an agreement to brew and sell the U.S. brewer's brands.
The financial fallout is uncertain, but Kunkel said on Monday it was unlikely to be severe.
"The arbitration panel did not set what the likely level of damages will be, so it's just impossible to tell what they may be," he said. A new licensing deal is being negotiated.
Also, Foster's Chinese operation continued to trade in the red, racking up A$10.2 million in losses in the first half from its joint-venture breweries in Guangdong, Shanghai and Tianjin.
But it said Chinese revenue and sales volumes rose in the first half and that the operations in China were on track to break even in around 1999/2000.  
Foster's plans to further expand in Asia and will enter other markets in the region in 1997.
"In Asia, we are close to establishing production in one or two markets, and we will be aiming to do so as quickly as possible as part of or broader Asian strategy," Kunkel said.
Kunkel gave no details, but he has said in the past that Foster's is eyeing India and Vietnam.
Foster's first-half result was roughly in line with stock market expectations, but the China losses raised some eyebrows.
"China is eating their profits elsewhere. The other (units) have to make a pretty good performance to offset that all the time," said Macquarie Equities analyst Raewyn Ellis-Doff.
Foster's share price ended 11 cents lower at A$2.54 on Monday, falling with the market as it tumbled in late trade.
(A$1 = US$0.76)
