Australian insurance group National Mutual Holdings Ltd targeted China and Thailand as key markets on Tuesday as it fleshed out its role as the Asian arm of one of the industry's global heavyweights.
National Mutual, owned 51 percent by the recently expanded French insurance giant Axa SA, unveiled plans to double its representation this year in mainland China by opening three more local offices.
National Mutual is sweating over its application for an operating licence in China, along with other insurers eager for exposure to the most populous nation's emerging middle class.
"It is a key objective for the group and every effort is being made to obtain this licence," chairman Athol Lapthorne told National Mutual's annual meeting in Melbourne.
The group has applied to open offices in Wuhan, Dalian and Chengdu, initially to conduct market research. It already has offices in Shanghai, Guangdong and Beijing.  
National Mutual has been try to enter China for more than three years, during which it has signed a cooperation pact with Chinese insurer China Everbright-IHD Pacific Ltd and has donated HK$10 million (US$1.3 million) to set up a China education fund.
National Mutual and Axa, which recently merged with rival Union des Assurances de Paris (UAP), launched a US$500 million China investment fund in September.
National Mutual has also applied to operate in Thailand, and is eyeing market entry in India, Vietnam and the Philippines.
Thailand and India are both reopening their insurance markets to foreign competition for the first time in many years, National Mutual managing director Geoff Tomlinson said.
The company is considering taking a stake in an existing insurer in the Philippines, and is taking a long-term view on Vietnam, which now has "no real market to speak of", he said. He gave no details on any likely investment in the Philippines.
"We are focusing our attention clearly today on China and Thailand," Tomlinson told reporters after the meeting.
"The work we're doing in relation to India, the Philippines and Vietnam is getting acquainted with people and seeing how business is done (there)...," he said. National Mutual has aligned itself in Thailand with a local joint venture partner, the General Finance group, but its application for an operating licence has yet to be decided.
National Mutual said it was not fazed by the new Thai government's decision to review the criteria for awarding insurance licences, and expected a decision within six months.
"It's a fertile market," Tomlinson said.
National Mutual, which is still powered mainly by its Australia and New Zealand life office National Mutual Life, suggested it could become an overnight force in Asian funds management if it inherits the regional assets of Axa and UAP.
National Mutual's funds management arm has A$2.0 billion (US$1.5 billion) in assets under management in Asia and stands to boost this to A$7.0 billion (corrects from A$7.0 million) if the parent decides to make National Mutual its Asian funds management operation, the company said.
"We will wait till they finalise their merger over there and talks will begin progressively," said Sam Kavourakis, National Mutual Funds Management managing director.
(A$1=US$0.75, HK$1=US$7.74)
