Australian industrial conglomerate Pacific Dunlop Ltd is set to announce a steep drop in first half earnings on Friday, due to plant problems and tough trading conditions, share analysts said on Wednesday.
The analysts are forecasting the group to report a net profit before abnormals of around A$85 million for the six months to December 31, a 28 percent fall on a year ago.
The full range of forecasts are thought to be between A$80 million and A$95 million before abnormals, two of the analysts contacted by Reuters said.  
Pacific Dunlop reported pre-abnormal net earnings of A$118 million for the first half of 1995/96 (July/June), and went on to post a 35 percent fall in pre-abnormal profit for the year.
Brokerages have been steadily winding back their 1996/97 profit forecasts for Pacific Dunlop since the company first warned of a weak start to the current year, the analysts said.
Pacific Dunlop warned last September it expected first half profit to be down on a year ago, but predicted an improved annual result despite extreme competition in key markets.  
The company -- which has businesses spanning tyres, car parts, batteries, clothing, industrial cables and latex goods -- reported pre-abnormal net earnings of A$162 million for 1995/96.
"The market concern at the moment is that the (first half) result might come out worse than what people were expecting or hoping," a Melbourne-based analyst told Reuters.
"There's not an expectation of surprise on the upside."
Pacific Dunlop's batteries division is the biggest concern, due largely to commissioning problems at its U.S. lead smelter in Georgia, the analysts said.  
Pacific Dunlop said in November the smelter was operating at well below capacity. It was shut down earlier for redesign and modification work.
"The smelter is going to affect them substantially," another Melbourne-based analyst said. The batteries division is expected to earn about half what it did in the first half of 1995/96.
Tough trading conditions are likely to weigh on most of the other divisions, especially the tyres business.
"Obviously the consumer economy is difficult. The building environment is difficult -- that will affect cables -- so it will be pretty tough across the board," the analyst said.  
"They may get there. They may be a little bit short, but it will be tough," a Sydney-based analyst said.
Only Pacific Dunlop's rubber-glove maker, Ansell International, is confidently expected to report an improved performance, but the local dollar could steal some of its glory.
Ansell earns much of its revenue in Europe and the United States, one analyst said. "The currency has gone against that division a little bit," he said.
"The Australian dollar for the half was a little bit higher. That's going to make it tough to report an increase in $A terms."
Analysts were not confident Pacific Dunlop could fulfill its forecast for a higher full-year profit in 1996/97.  
-- Melbourne bureau 613-9286-1421
