A former chief executive of Australian retail giant Coles Myer Ltd spent millions of dollars of the company's money to renovate his home in a case of 1980s greed and excess, a court heard on Monday.
Brian Quinn, 60, who rose from a junior store assistant to run the country's biggest retailer, went on trial on Monday in the Victoria Supreme Court on a charge of conspiracy to defraud.
Quinn has pleaded not guilty and suggests he was set up.
The prosecution said on Monday that Quinn conspired to spend around A$4.0 million (US$3.0 million) of the group's money on renovations to his Melbourne home from 1982 to 1988, expanding and renovating it and building a tennis court, spa and pergola.
Prosecutor Paul Coghlan accused Quinn of excess, saying one room was painted 10 times, the house was extended by 70 square metres (80 square yards) and the land was levelled using a rock crusher and surrounded by a double-brick fence.
"This is a case...about excess in money wasting, excess as to how much work was down, excess as to the materials used, excess as to the hours spent," Coghlan told the jury.
"But most of all it's a case about greed. It's a case about having your employer paying for your excesses," he added.
The prosecution said Quinn and another former Coles manager, Graham Lanyon, conspired to ensure Coles paid the bills by pretending the work was being done on stores owned by Coles.
"The expenses were largely concealed from his employer, who was meeting the cost," Coghlan said.
Lanyon, as chief of the company's maintenance department, falsified invoices to conceal the fraud but "he did so in collusion with, or on the orders of, the accused man", he added.
But defence lawyer Philip Dunn said Quinn was the victim of a corrupt maintenance department headed by Lanyon and corrupt works contractors. Both concealed costs from Quinn who agreed in 1988 to partly reimburse the company, he told the jury.
"He is as much a victim as the company is," Dunn said.
Quinn's home belonged to Coles until 1985, when he bought it for what prosecutors estimate was about half market value. Prosecutors said that even while Coles owned the house, the work was done without board approval.
"Brian Quinn is charged with stealing from his employer whilst he was living in a company house, which indicates how much of a nonsense and a load of rubbish we believe this case is," Dunn told the jury.
The trial is expected to last eight weeks.
