Major Australian banks have blown the dust off their Asian strategies and are moving quickly into the region as life gets tough at home.
Three of Australia's biggest banks have publicly renewed their Asian ambitions in the past few months as competition hots up for the local market and earnings begin to suffer. "It's now you are starting to see them push a bit harder into Asia," said Melbourne-based banking analyst Ken McLay, of credit rating agency Standard and Poor's Group.
All of Australia's four big banks are now pursuing opportunities for interest and fee income in the rapidly growing markets of Asia, quietly urged on by the nation's central bank.
Their uniform embrace of Asia comes as two of Australia's biggest life insurers, National Mutual Holdings Ltd and Colonial Mutual, also boost their Asian profiles. Last week, Colonial bought out its Asian joint venture for US$163 million.
But Asia has not always commanded such uniform priority among Australia's financial institutions.
CENTRAL BANK UNHAPPY
Only six months ago, the Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA) expressed disappointment that local banks were not seizing more opportunities to expand into Asia. At that time, the Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd (ANZ) was the only exception.
ANZ has long been Australia's most Asia-focused bank, with a retail network throughout India and operations in 40 other countries, most of them within the region.
In contrast, the most profitable bank, National Australia Bank Ltd (NAB), has focused in recent years on the United States and Europe. Westpac Banking Group virtually withdrew from Asia three and a half years ago to focus on home markets.
For years after the free-wheeling 1980s hit a wall of bad debts in Australia, banks had put expansion plans on hold and Asian strategies gathered dust as they repaired balance sheets.
But since late last year, talk of Asia is again on bankers' lips as interest margins contract in a tight local market where banks and non-bank institutions encroach on each other's turf. ALL EYES ON ASIA
Westpac bounced back into Asia last November, announcing an alliance with British-based Standard Chartered Bank Plc to provide select Asian banking services to Westpac clients.
The venture will focus primarily on Singapore, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Thailand and Malaysia, before expanding into Vietnam and China, said Westpac.
NAB, which owns regional banks in the United States, Britain and Ireland, is also now looking for a partner in Asia.
"We've looked at a few (alliances) with banks and other institutions...It takes time to pull these things off," NAB managing director Don Argus told reporters last month.
Australia's fourth big bank, the Commonwealth Bank of Australia Ltd (CBA), also chimed in last week. It said it too would expand its Asian activities and was looking for joint-venture partners in Indo-China.
"Certainly the competition in the domestic market is extremely tough," S&amp;P's McLay told Reuters, adding he expected Australian banks' local asset quality and earnings to deteriorate.
"One of the ways to offset this is diversifaction...One way they are trying to diversify is to go offshore and I think that's a prudent strategy, but it has its risks," he added.
SMALL FISH, BIG POND
Australian banks, minnows compared with the regional might of banks like Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corp Ltd, are likely to use geography and trade links to make their mark in Asia.
"They are small in size but the Australian banks do bring a lot of expertise. They are headquartered in the region, so they benefit from that and Australia is a major trading partner with a lot of these countries," McLay said.
"Australian banks are pretty well placed to piggy-back on the back of that. I think they will do quite well."
Australia's central bank cleary hopes so, declaring that "momentum for involvement in Asia has now clearly re-emerged".
"The banks' focus has tended to be on the provision of trade finance and treasury services to corporates, although their retail activities in Asia are increasing," the RBA said in a written response to a parliamentary committee recently.
Australian banks' largest operations are in Hong Kong, Singapore and Japan, but they are fanning out, it said.
They are now eyeing opportunities in China, Indonesia, Vietnam, Thailand, Burma and Cambodia as these nations open up their banking sectors to foreign entrants, the RBA said.
