Australian casino company Crown Ltd said on Tuesday its earnings were likely to suffer due to lost time at its new casino complex in Melbourne.
Crown, which has seen its share price fall as doubts emerge over its profit outlook, confirmed that a recent heatwave forced workers at the site to down tools for a number of days.
"I don't think we have made a calculation yet on what effect it will have on the bottom line, but it's something you don't need in this part of the project," Crown spokesman Gary O'Neill said. "I think it will (impact profit)," he added.  
Crown had planned to open its new A$1.6 billion casino, hotel and shopping complex in Melbourne in March. It is now aiming for late April and maybe even May, O'Neill told Reuters.
"We are still hoping to open towards the end of April...but things like this don't help obviously and it could have a small effect on the bottom line. It could put the open date back to May," he said.
O'Neill was commenting on a newspaper report which said members of the Electrical Trades Union (ETU) stopped work 10 times this month as the temperature topped 35 degrees Celcius.  
"There were 10 days when the temperature was over 35 degrees, but I don't think we lost all of that time," O'Neill said. "I think we lost a number of working days."
Crown also rejected a bearish earnings forecast made by accountants Ernst and Young.
The forecast was cited in an  independent report sent to Crown shareholders recently.
It quotes Ernst and Young as forecasting basic earnings per share of 3.76 cents in 1997/98 (July-June), compared with brokers' average forecast of 14.8 cents for the same year.  
The brokers' forecast was based on a mean pre-abnormal net profit of A$87.5 million for 1997/98, according to Barceps forecasting service. Crown reported net profit after abnormals of A$58.38 million in 1995/96.
"We obviously don't agree with it (the Ernst and Young forecast)," O'Neill said.
"Right at the moment, it's a very highly speculative period of time. It's just prior to our opening and people are tending to jump at shadows a little bit," he added.  
Crown's share price has fallen steeply over the past month. It stood at A$2.45 at 0300 GMT (2.00 p.m.) on Tuesday, down from its closing high so far this year of A$2.76 on January 22 and its 12 month high at A$3.06.
Crown is owned 30.9 percent by Hudson Conway Ltd, the operator of Crown casino at its existing premises. Hudson Conway also has options to buy 74.5 million new shares in Crown.
Crown is currently negotiating to buy back the casino management rights from Hudson Conway.
-- Melbourne bureau 613-9286-1421
