GTE Corp, the one big local telephone company already able to offer long distance across much of the United States is being courted for alliances and mergers, but seems relatively self sufficient.
Analysts who attended a meeting with the company on Friday came away impressed by the list of suitors.
"They said they have been in merger and alliance talks with everyone from AT&amp;T (Corp) to WorldCom (Inc), but they didn't give the impression that talks had gone very far," said Barry Sine of brokers SBC Warburg. 
Analysts were even more impressed by how well GTE expects it can do on its own and by the freedom from management distractions that such self-sufficiency offers.
GTE forecast that earnings per share in 1997 and beyond would rise 10 percent a year or more, including a 1997 infusion of a third to half a billion dollars of long distance revenues. Telephone revenues in the U.S., where growth in customer lines has often been the best in the industry, were expected to grow 5-6 percent in 1997.
GTE shares took a cue from the presentation, rising $0.50 on Friday and a further $3/8 to $44-5/8 by midday on Monday.  
"GTE made a very strong case that they don't need to merge with anyone," Sine said.
GTE's local calling operations are like a shotgun blast on a map of the United States, peppering 28 states, but on average only accounting for 10 percent of lines in those states.
Regional Bells by contrast blanket regions, which led to them being ruled dominant carriers under the terms of the 1996 Telecommunications Act, while GTE was not.  
So while regional Bells and long distance companies wrangle over the terms of competitive access to local customers, which must be agreed before regional Bells can enter the long distance market, GTE has already been operating long distance services since the spring.
"I think GTE is in a very good strategic position," said Richard Klugman of brokers PaineWebber.
By the end of the third quarter GTE had won over 500,000 customers from other carriers. By the end of 1996 it forecasts that it will have 750,000 and by end-1997 1.5 million.  
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission on Friday, GTE said it would increase long distance revenues seven-fold in 1997 from 1996. It gave no exact figure.
GTE's fixed and wireless networks cover areas in which a third of the U.S. population live, but with an extension of 100 miles in each direction, would reach two thirds.
Not only does this give network advantages, with few places far from a call switching center, but it means the GTE brand name is recognised very widely across the country.  
Analysts say brand name recognition is vital for companies that intend to bundle Internet and wireless with local and long distance calling.
GTE has plenty to offer a partner. Its mainly rural and suburban customers are the hardest to reach by other means, putting a premium on its network.
GTE's international operations, including investments in Venzuela, Argentina and the Dominican Republic, and a planned push into Brazil. Latin America is one of the hottest areas for telecom market growth in the world.
GTE had its most serious merger talks with MCI Communications Corp analysts say. MCI was making the moves, but was disappointed that GTE was not prepared to offer more than $30 per share, according to news reports.
Neither company has ever confirmed the talks nor the price. MCI eventually turned its merger attention to British Telecommunications Plc, which already had a 20 percent stake in MCI.
-- New York Newsroom 212 859 1610
