Like any marriage, the $20 billion merger of MCI Communications Corp and British Telecommunications Plc may be smoothed by the experiences of a two-year courtship that preceded it.
"I may be an incurable romantic, but I think this is going to be a lot easier than people think," said one BT insider.
Concert, the name of the planned merged entity, was also the original name for a global communications offspring conceived by the two companies in July 1994 to provide one-stop shopping for multinational corporations.
While the executives atop the planned merged company have a clear vision of where they are going, insiders and industry sources say the acid test will be how the engine rooms of networks, billing, support and customer service are melded.
The initial partnership, now called Concert Communication Services, was a wayward child in its early days. Its progress was slowed by turf wars and bickering about which standard or system to use.
"Some of those turf wars were really destructive," said Daniel Briere, a consultant at TeleChoice Inc, who has worked with Concert Communications and its parents.
A computer and software to support pre-paid Concert calling cards in Britain were delayed for many months while BT and MCI managers fought to have their own design used.
Similarly. a videophone product developed by BT for MCI failed on both sides of the Atlantic, at a cost of millions of dollars. BT has built a voicemail system called Callminder, but it cannot be upgraded to serve larger systems.
"This huge hands across-the-water friendship never worked in practice that I saw," Briere said.
Still, sources inside both companies believe the tough decisions have already been made, and a unified management can more easily resolve the remaining issues precisely because of the experience they already have in working together in Concert.
"Those debates by and large are behind us," said MCI Chief Engineering Officer Fred Briggs. "A unified management always shortens the decision-making process some," he added.
"It may sound weird, but you take out the need for cooperation. You can choose the best and discard the rest," TeleChoice's Briere said.
Concert Communications is already producing evidence of such a shift. The venture has $1.5 billion of revenue under contract and networks active in 800 cities in 50 countries. It has a head start over rival alliances Global One and Unisource, backed by Sprint Corp and AT&amp;T Corp, respectively.
To be sure, some analysts see a danger of wrangles being duplicated across the entire company as senior management attempts to fuse two corporations with such different roots.
BT began as a state-owned monopoly, while MCI cut its teeth fighting against a former monopoly, AT&amp;T. BT controls 90 percent of the British market, while MCI has struggled to breach 20 percent of the U.S. long-distance market.
The size of the combined company has raised some concern that MCI's nimbleness and aggression will be lost. The new Concert will rank among the three largest telephone companies in the world, with revenues of $42 billion and 183,000 employees. It will have a pro forma market capitalization of $54 billion.
"Customers will expect a lot more from MCI now that it is on an equal footing with AT&amp;T. It will be harder for MCI to retain that scrappy upstart image," said consultant Jeffrey Kagan of Kagan Telecom.
One potential flashpoint is the likely need to use BT billing and support systems to help pry open the U.S. local calling markets, worth $90 billion a year. Though MCI has advanced billing systems, it has never had to cope with an attack of that scale.
A second potential difficulty involves international calling, where BT and MCI plan a replication of calling plans such as MCI's Friends and Family -- used to great effect within the United States -- to cement customer ties on both sides of the Atlantic.
"There are plans in the works for that sort of thing," said the BT insider, declining to be identified.
But BT has never had to administer calling plans of the complexity of MCI's Friends and Family, which generates a high level of customer-service queries.
The two companies also plan to use Britain as a conduit to grab international business calling from continental Europe and route it through London to the United States.
Another major issue is what type of technology to use to bring Internet and multimedia applications to U.S. homes. BT is expected to be closely involved as a pioneer in so-called broadband technologies.
"That is going to be a major decision," MCI's Briggs said.     -- New York Newsroom 212 859 1610
