Like any marriage, the $20 billion merger of MCI Communications Corp. and British Telecommunications Plc may be smoothed by the experiences of the two-year courtship that preceded it.
"I may be an incurable romantic, but I think this is going to be a lot easier than people think," one BT insider said.
Concert, the name of the planned merged company, was the original name for a global communications offspring conceived by the two companies in July 1994 to provide a one-stop shop for multinational corporations.
While the executives atop the new merged company have a clear vision of where they are going, insiders and industry sources say the acid test will be how the engine rooms of networks, billing, support and customer service are melded.
Concert, now called Concert Communication Services, was a wayward child in the early days, and progress was slowed by turf wars and bickering about which standard or system to use.
"Some of those turf wars were really destructive," said Daniel Briere, a consultant at TeleChoice Inc., who has worked with Concert Communications and its parents.
A computer and software system to support prepaid Concert calling cards in Britain was delayed many months while BT and MCI managers each fought to have their own design used.
Similarly, a videophone product developed by BT for MCI failed on both sides of the Atlantic at a cost of millions of dollars.
"This huge 'hands across the water' friendship never worked in practice that I saw," Briere said.
However, sources inside both companies believe the tough decisions have already been made and that a unified management can more easily fix the remainder precisely because of the experience they already have in working together.
"Those debates by and large are behind us," said MCI chief engineering officer Fred Briggs. "A unified management always shortens the decision-making process some."
"It may sound weird, but you take out the need for cooperation (in a merger)," TeleChoice's Briere said. "You can choose the best and discard the rest."
Concert Communications is already producing evidence of this. The venture has $1.5 billion of revenue under contract and has networks active in 800 cities in 50 countries.
It has a head start over rival alliances Global One and Unisource, backed by Sprint Corp. and AT&amp;T Corp., respectively.
Some analysts see a danger of wrangles being duplicated across the entire company as senior management attempt to fuse two corporations with such widely different roots.
BT began as a government-owned monopoly while MCI cut its teeth fighting a onetime monopoly, AT&amp;T. BT controls 90 percent of the British market while MCI has struggled for 20 percent of the U.S. long-distance market.
The size of the combined company makes some worry that MCI's nimbleness and aggressiveness will be lost.
The new Concert will be one of the three largest telephone companies in the world, with revenues of $42 billion, 183,000 employees and a pro-forma market capitalisation of $54 billion.
"Customers will expect a lot more from MCI now it is on an equal footing with AT&amp;T. It will be harder for MCI to retain that scrappy, upstart image," said consultant Jeffrey Kagan of Kagan Telecom.
Potential flashpoints could be the need to use BT billing and support systems to help pry open the $90 billion a year U.S. local calling markets. Though MCI has advanced billing systems, it has never had to cope with this scale of attack.
A second may be international calling. BT and MCI plan to replicate calling plans like MCI's Friends and Family, which was used to great effect within the United States, to cement customer ties on both sides of the Atlantic.
"There are plans in the works for that sort of thing," said the BT insider, who declined to be identified.
But BT has never had to administer calling plans of the complexity that MCI has used, which generate a very high level of customer service queries.
The two companies also plan to use Britain as a conduit for grabbing international business calling from continental Europe and route it through London to the United States.
Another major issue is what type of technology to use to bring Internet and multimedia applications to U.S. homes. BT is expected to be closely involved as a pioneer in so-called broadband technologies.
"That is going to be a major decision," MCI's Briggs said.
Even though the top executives work very well together, they do not always have perfect judgment.
Briere said MCI's two biggest previous alliances, a $2 billion media alliance with News Corp. and the $1 billion takeover of Canada's SHL Systemhouse, both in 1995, have not produced the benefits expected.
"Both News Corp. and SHL have failed to meet investment expectations," said Briere.
