Not content with disturbing your meals with sales calls, AT&amp;T Corp. will soon have salespeople arriving on your doorstep to explain why you should switch long-distance service to them.
However, they will have been invited.
The nation's dominant long-distance company on Thursday announced an alliance with Shaklee Corp. that will have Shaklee's 500,000 sales agents selling AT&amp;T phone service face-to-face across the nation from January 1997.
The Shaklee sales representatives will sell to friends, colleagues and neighbours, never to strangers.
"Without question, this is a groundbreaking move for AT&amp;T," said Joseph Nacchio, executive vice president of AT&amp;T's consumer and small business division.
Shaklee, part of Yamanouchi Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd. of Japan, currently sells nutritional supplements, personal care products, household cleaners, and water treatment products.
It is particularly strong among ethnic minorities, non-English speakers and in inner cities. These markets can be tough to crack by other routes, but quite lucrative.
"Shaklee will help us expand our personal presence in communities exponentially and create a whole new network of representatives with roots in neighbourhoods across the country," Nacchio said.
To start with, Shaklee will sell only AT&amp;T's long-distance calling plans, but AT&amp;T wants to sell new services too once the sales force is trained on their complexities.
"AT&amp;T would like to give Shaklee that opportunity," said Shaklee spokeswoman Karin Topping.
The move shows AT&amp;T is neither too big nor too proud to take a leaf out of the marketing books of its competitors.
Small aggressive competitors like Excel Communications Inc. have powered their growth through exactly this kind of "multi-level" marketing. The approach is so named because each salesperson recruits others, and continues to benefit from their recruits' sales efforts as they rise up the hierarchy.
MCI Communications Corp. has a similar relationship with direct sales organisation Amway Corp.
"Imitation is the sincerest form of flattery. And it certainly validates this sales strategy," said Eric Strumingher, industry analyst at brokers Chicago Corp. "I think this could be very significant for AT&amp;T," he said.
For AT&amp;T the alliance is aimed at reaching new customers cheaply, and keeping them.
AT&amp;T's market share in the $70 billion long-distance market has sunk to about 55 percent from 90 percent over the last decade. They have been hit not only by traditional rivals MCI and Sprint Corp., but a host of tiny new competitors.
Recent attempts to regain customers by offering $100 checks have been expensive but without increasing loyalty, so Thursday's initiative marks a new departure.
"We do believe the nature of this sales channel will be much more likely to increase loyalty and retention among customers," Jack McMaster, AT&amp;T's vice president for domestic consumer long distance, said in an interview.
Shacklee salespeople sell to their friends and neighbours. Customers are expected to be more reluctant to switch away from a service recommended by a friend.
"It's potentially much more lucrative than selling lipstick or vitamin supplements for the salesperson," said David Goodtree, an analyst at consultancy Forrester Research.
Shaklee said an average salesperson earns $14,000 a year part time, with earnings ranging from $1,000 a month at the entry level to six figures for the long-established.
Shaklee said that cars and vacations would typically be incentives for upper echelon sales representatives.
For AT&amp;T a crucial question will be the value of the customers won in terms of their long-distance spending, and the chances of selling new services like satellite television, pagers or mobile phones to them too.
AT&amp;T wants all of Shacklee's half million salespeople to be involved with the programme, which means they must be AT&amp;T customers themselves.
"It is our ambition that all of them will participate in this programme," McMaster said.
This will mean a boost of several hundred thousand good customers who will not be able to switch, even before the sales effort gets underway.
"Thats one of the reasons we are so excited about this," McMaster said.
AT&amp;T's stock edged down 12.5 cents to $37.125 on the New York Stock Exchange.
