Cable &amp; Wireless Plc (C&amp;W) and the merging NYNEX Corp and Bell Atlantic Corp have one alliance already, a second is on the way, and by late 1997 they could go as far as a full merger.
"Given the U.K. cable alliance I think there is all the more reason that they will be eventual merger partners," said one investment banker, who declined to be identified.
C&amp;W this month said it would merge its U.K. Mercury unit with three cable TV and telephone operators, including NYNEX CableComms Group, of which NYNEX owns 67 percent.  
Sources close to the companies and investment bankers say this is a slow-moving and tentative embrace, with hurdles that could stop it before full merger.
NYNEX's merger into Bell Atlantic will not be completed until the first quarter of 1997, and worries over C&amp;W's assets in Hong Kong will mean waiting to see how the handover to China goes in 1997. No firm decisions are likely before.
However investment bankers say a desire to merge is there, noting the experience of MCI Communications Corp and British Telecommunications Plc (BT) which pulled together an alliance into a full merger.  
"C&amp;W and NYNEX share some common visions and some common friendships," said one industry source close to the firms.
"And all the things that frustrate people about loose alliances are true. But C&amp;W is a large and far-flung empire, and there are plenty of (problem) issues," he said.
None of the three companies involved would comment.
-- C&amp;W SEES NYNEX BEST BELL PARTNER --
However, C&amp;W Chief Executive Richard Brown was last week quoted by the Financial Times in London as saying that talks with NYNEX had already gone beyond the U.K. cable deal.  
"With traffic flow and multinational accounts, NYNEX makes far more sense as a partner than any other Baby Bell," he was quoted as saying. C&amp;W declined to elaborate on the comments.
Investment bankers say C&amp;W is not big enough to crack open the U.S. business market alone, but has long distance circuits that the two Bells could use. Bell Atlantic would be a stronger U.S. brand than C&amp;W, and could funnel far more traffic onto C&amp;W's international network.
C&amp;W is strong in Asia, where NYNEX's 13.5 percent TelecomAsia investment and Bell Atlantic's 24.8 percent stake in Telecom Corp of New Zealand could gain new outlets.  
Bell Atlantic Chief Executive Raymond Smith, eyeing the fat margins on international calling, has left analysts in no doubt of his aim of turning the regional Bell from a powerhouse in the northeast of the U.S. into a global company.
NYNEX Chief Executive Ivan Seidenberg, who takes over as Bell Atlantic CEO a year after the merger is completed in the first quarter of 1997, can help him do that.
-- NYNEX AND C&amp;W SEEN CLOSE TO UNDERSEA CABLE ALLIANCE --
Seidenberg is a close friend of C&amp;W's Brown and bankers say the two are near to a deal on a joint submarine cable firm combining NYNEX's Asian cable FLAG with a transatlantic cable owned by C&amp;W and MFS Communications Co Inc.  
MFS is itself being taken over by WorldCom Inc, the fourth largest U.S. long distance company.
Bankers say the new Bell Atlantic would be most attractive to C&amp;W, but C&amp;W's international reach may attract interest from BellSouth Corp or GTE Corp too.
-- C&amp;W ONLY INTERNATIONAL CANDIDATE LEFT FOR BELLS --
Bankers say C&amp;W is almost the only candidate for any U.S. local phone company hoping to create a company equal in global scale and reach to a merged MCI and BT.
Long distance carriers have moved faster. AT&amp;T Corp has its Unisource alliance with Dutch, Swedish, Spanish and Swiss carriers, while Sprint Corp has its Global One alliance with Deutsche Telekom AG and France Telecom.  
Japan's NTT Corp, so far unallied, is being heavily wooed by BT/MCI according to sources in those firms.
C&amp;W is still available for a good reason. It has a bewilderingly complex structure that makes it both hard to value and expensive to buy. BT discovered this to its cost, abandoning talks on buying C&amp;W in May this year.
C&amp;W's activities include the Mercury phone network and Mercury One 2 One mobile phone operator in Britain, and Mannesmann Mobilfunk and Vebakom in Germany. Many of these are joint ventures, which would complicate a change of ownership.
-- HONGKONG TELECOM IS THE BIG PRIZE, BUT BIGGEST PROBLEM --  
The biggest problem concerns C&amp;W's crown jewel, its 57.5 percent stake in Hong Kong Telecommunications Ltd. Any bidder for C&amp;W must make an offer for the Hong Kong Telecom minority. The total cost of a bid including this could easily top $30 billion, analysts say. Bell Atlantic and NYNEX have a pro forma market capitalization of $47 billion.
"The real wild card is how to value C&amp;W going into 1997 given the Hong Kong Telecom stake," an investment banker said.
China's resumes sovereignty in Hong Kong from Britain next June, and worries persist on how Communist Beijing will handle this and other companies in the territory. One rumored deal is that China's ministry of Post and Telecoms would take a stake in Hongkong Telecom ahead of the transition.
There are some options to bypass the complexities.
A loose alliance between C&amp;W and the two Bells would be easy to construct, but would suffer the same disadvantages of lack of focus and turf battles described by BT and MCI when they decided to go for a full merger.
"They could do an operating alliance with options to turn it into an equity alliance at a later stage," the banker said.
Another option he saw would be to create an operating company containing the simpler parts of C&amp;W in which the new Bell Atlantic would take a stake.
 -- New York Newsroom 212 859 1610
