AT&amp;T Corp. on Wednesday said basic U.S. rates for state-to-state calls made from a home would rise by 5.9 percent effective Dec 1., adding an average 60 cents a month to the typical residential bill.
The company said it was raising rates to pay for investments made to broaden its service line, build technical infrastructure and improve customer service.
Small business call rates will rise 4.8 percent for international, toll free and some other services.
The Basking Ridge, N.J.-based company is raising the cost of calls made with a calling card by 5 percent and those made with the assistance of an AT&amp;T operator by 2.6 percent.
It also said it would increase monthly fees on its Reach Out America, SelectSaver and AnyHour Saver calling plans. AT&amp;T said it stopped marketing those plans in 1993 when it introduced its "True" family of calling plans.
However, rates on the True savings plans will also rise, an AT&amp;T spokesman confirmed, because they are based on a percentage discount from the basic rate. The new One Rate plan introduced this fall will not be affected as it is flat rate.
AT&amp;T stock rose 62.5 cents to $39 on the New York Stock Exchange.
AT&amp;T last raised rates in February, with a 4.3 percent increase. The previous increase was in December 1994.
"This is a real turkey for consumers," said Samuel Simon, founder and now outside counsel to Telecommunmications Research &amp; Action Centre, a consumer group that has monitored long-distance rates since the breakup of AT&amp;T in 1984.
"It is hard to believe market conditions justify yet another rate increase for long-distance customers. Residential rates have been steadily rising for nearly five years, and now AT&amp;T announces a major rate increase the day before Thanksgiving, to take effect four days later."
Asked earlier why announcement of the latest rate hike was made Wednesday, when most peoples' attention was on Thursday's Thanskgiving holiday, an AT&amp;T spokesman said, "It is a coincidence."
Analysts said the increases continue the policy adopted by most big long-distance companies of increasing basic long-distance rates while promoting more generous calling plans to satisfy those customers who are price-sensitive.
"In the last three or four years long-distance prices have actually been going up," said industry analyst Jeffrey Kagan, who runs his own consulting firm.
He said that AT&amp;T and others were trying to build up some fat ahead of the battle in 1997, when regional Bells are expected to drive into long-distance markets in force and push rates lower.
In the meantime, he said, it pays for customers to take a hard look once a year at the call rates they are paying, and to choose the calling plan best for them.
"Only a third of long-distance customers are actually on calling plans at all, and it is the rest who are paying the freight," Kagan said.
AT&amp;T also launched a cut-rate, international call-back service in Tokyo on Wednesday. In a call-back service, users first call a switching centre in the United States and calls are then connected at cost-effective U.S. rates.
The Tokyo call-back service marks the first time AT&amp;T has started such a service, AT&amp;T Asia/Pacific President John Legere said.
"We are the first major telecommunications carrier in Japan to introduce a low-cost, flat-rate international calling option," he said.
AT&amp;T's Japanese unit said it would charge 240 yen ($2) for a three-minute call to Canada or the United States from Tokyo, compared with the 450 yen ($3) Japanese customers now pay.
The service, which will at first be offered only to business customers in Tokyo, could be used for sending data and faxes, Legere said.
