Rural U.S. wireless firms expect to be able to keep on growing rapidly without facing the blitz from new Personal Communications Services (PCS) rivals that has affected their cellular cousins in big cities.
"We believe strongly that PCS is an urban-based phenomenon," John Stanton, chief executive of Western Wireless Corp told an investor conference.
CommNet Cellular Inc, 360 Communications Co, Palmer Wireless Inc and Vanguard Cellular Systems Inc all expect to benefit to some degree.  
"I would think that PCS players will not enter the less densely populated rural markets for some time," said Steven Yanis, an analyst at Salomon Bros, which hosted the conference.
Wireless stocks have been depressed all year, missing out on the big Wall Street boom, despite big increases in subscriber numbers, revenues and improving cash flows.
The reason is simply fears of the effects of competition from aggressive PCS companies, who are driven by monstrous debt burdens to grab market share aggressively.  
In most big city markets, there will be five wireless competitors by 1999 instead of two. The fear is that aggressive price cutting or expensive advertising will trip up the carefully balanced discounted cash flow business models which share and bondholders are relying on.
"If you add up the market share projections by the PCS and wireless companies (in most cities) they exceed 100 percent," said David Roddy, chief telecommunications economist at Deloitte and Touche Consulting.  
But for rural cellular providers, PCS will be slow to arrive, with little built before 2000, and there will be less of a threat to revenue and subscriber growth.
"Population density is critical to understanding competitive threats," said Arnold Pohs, chief executive of CommNet Cellular.
PCS, operating at a higher frequency than cellular, would need more transmitters to cover rural areas and it would be a marginal proposition. However for densely peopled urban areas it offered a perfect solution.  
"PCS is a capacity-based business while cellular is a coverage-based business," said Western Wireless's Stanton.
Comnet, whose home territories include North and South Dakota, finds they are not financial badlands. It had almost 60 percent growth in earnings before interest taxes depreciation and amortization in the year to end-June and customer turnover, or "churn," of only 2.2 percent.
There will even be revenue opportunities for rural cellular companies as PCS customers travel through their areas, or "roam," and need a connection.
"We will gain a lot on roaming agreements as dual mode handsets come into play," Pohs said.
Dual mode handsets will handle both cellular and PCS frequencies to allow customers to stay in touch nationally even if their provider does not own a network in every area.
