Eastman Kodak Co. sees continued innovation as the key to protecting profit margins in a business that becomes more competitive every year, its new president and chief operating officer said Thursday.
"Brand image is fleeting. If you don't innovate ... then that (advantage) goes away," said Daniel Carp, who was appointed Thursday to the positions previously held by Kodak Chief Executive Officer George Fisher.
"There is pricing pressure in all products. What happens is that you have to innovate and bring out products at new price points," Carp said in an interview.
The Rochester, N.Y.-based photographic giant is counting on new products not only to increase its sales, but also to lift it out of markets where price-cutting is the weapon of choice and into areas where consumers pay a premium for what is new and exciting.
Carp, who was previously assistant chief operating officer and an executive vice president, said Kodak launched 30 new products at this year's Photokina, a key industry show in Cologne, Germany.
Advanced photo systems (APS) and digital cameras are two types of innovation for which Kodak has high hopes.
The APS cameras work with special film containing encoded digital information that allows users to specify different print sizes on the same film and change film rolls half-way through in case light conditions change.
Kodak and long-time rival Fuji Photo Film Co. Ltd put aside their long-running dispute over the Japanese market to work jointly with several Japanese camera makers to set standards and develop the APS cameras.
Innovation, Carp said, is increasingly combined with more flexible manufacturing processes so that launches take place with minimal inventory but with a quick follow-up to ensure that strong-selling products do not run out. "The old way was to build inventory, then launch," he said.
Restructuring in such an environment will be a continuous process, he said, with some areas, which he declined to specify, requiring imminent reappraisal on product lines, sales channels or manufacturing processes.
"There are areas of the company that will probably need to have some downsizing going forward," Carp said.
He said Kodak would not rule out acquisitions as one way to fill a gap in product lines, but declined to say where he saw Kodak's deficiencies. "It would give you more strategy than I would want to," he said.
