Eastman Kodak Co, fighting to keep its brand name strong in the minds of its customers, sees continued innovation as the key to protecting profit margins in a business that becomes more competitive every year.
"Brand image is fleeting. If you don't innovate...then that (advantage) goes away," Daniel Carp, newly-appointed president and chief operating officer, told Reuters on Thursday. "There is pricing pressure in all products. What happens is that you have to innovate and bring out products at new price points."  
Carp, who was previously assistant chief operating officer and an executive vice president, said that Kodak brought out 30 new products at this year's key industry show in Germany.
Innovation, risky anyway, is increasingly combined with more flexible manufacturing processes, so that launches took place with minimal inventory, but with a quick follow up to ensure products selling well did not run out, he said.
"The old way was to build inventory then launch," he said.
Advanced photo systems (APS) are a case in point where inventory judgement has become a more critical issue.  
Kodak and Fuji Photo Film Co Ltd each announced cameras early this year with special film containing encoded digital information allowing users to specify different print sizes on the same film and allowing mid-roll film changes.
Kodak has eight Advantix models, priced between $100 and $500. Carp said a shortage of supplies earlier in the year had now been corrected, but there may be some changes needed to the product mix across the range.
"There may also be some wrong product mix," he said, noting that the whole industry was finding demand higher in the mid-range products than expected.  
Restructuring in such an environment would be a continuous process, with some areas -- which he declined to specify -- in need of imminent reappraisal on product lines, sales channel or manufacturing processes. He did not say if jobs would go.
"There are areas of the company that will probably need to have some downsizing going forward," Carp said.
In Kodak's main consumer film business, retailers are also increasingly running lean on supplies, or leave inventory management to vendors like Kodak. This makes the crucial Christmas selling season a nervous time.
"Between Thanksgiving and Christmas is a hold-your-breath time. We've had reasonable sell-in (to inventory). It's way to early to get a read on the sell-through (sales from those stores' inventory)," he said.
Carp said that Kodak would not rule out acquisitions as one way to fill a gap in product lines, but declined to say where he saw Kodak's deficiencies.
"It would give you more strategy than I would want to," he said.
((-- New York Newsroom 212 859 1610))
