Aerospace company Hughes Electronics Corp heads the list of bidders to buy satellite services provider PanAmSat Corp with a strong offer, a source close to the talks said on Friday.
"I think they are just looking at the best offers on the table now," the source told Reuters, adding that Hughes' offer was currently about the best on the table.
Both PanAmSat and Hughes declined to comment on what they called speculative reports. Hughes is part of General Motors Corp.  
However, Hughes chief executive Mike Armstrong told Reuters on Wednesday that the company was considering a multi-billion dollar acquisition in aerospace and defense.
"We are always looking at ventures that will make our business grow" said Hughes spokeswoman Marcy Garber.
Analysts say PanAmSat could be worth $3.5 billion or more, a substantial premium over the $2.75 billion market capitalization of the company. The stock was trading at 27-3/8, up 3/8 late on Friday morning.  
The source, who spoke on condition of not being identified, said that talks are continuing, but no deal is imminent. He would not say how much Hughes was offering.
PanAmSat's majority owners are Grupo Televisa SA of Mexico and the family of founder Rene Anselmo, which each own 40.5 percent of the company's 100 million shares. The rest are publicly traded.
"Rene Anselmo did a great job and took a lot of risks, and now his benefactors are going to reap the rewards," said analyst Jimmy Schaeffler of the Carmel Group.  
In April Televisa and the Anselmo family asked investment bankers Morgan Stanley to find a takeover or joint venture partner for the company, or to plan a secondary stock issue.
The source said that Televisa preferred a sale option, though the Anselmo family had no preference.
Other rumored bidders include Lockheed Martin Corp, General Electric Co Loral Space &amp; Communications Ltd, and Deutsche Telekom of Germany according to press reports.
PanAmSat has a unique franchise as the only global competitor to Intelsat, which is owned by numerous governments and was set up under a treaty.
PanAmSat's customers include a vast array of international broadcasters from Time Warner Inc to News Corp, the British Broadcasting Corp and China Central TV.
Schaeffler said its expansion plans put it in a powerful position for new services and covering new areas like Africa and the central Asian republics which so far have no western satellite coverage. -- New York Newsroom 212 859 1712
