At the end of this month, AT&amp;T Corp. will finally untether Lucent Technologies Inc. as a separate company, a year after the telecommunications behemoth first said it would split into three businesses.
For some of AT&amp;T's 3.3 million shareholders -- it has more than any other U.S. corporation -- it may be a confusing time.
Telecom equipment maker Lucent already had an initial public offering of stock in April, but on Sept. 17 AT&amp;T stock will be shorn of the rights to the remaining 82.4 percent of Lucent shares.
AT&amp;T will then made up only of the telecommunications services and computing businesses. The last part of the three way split-up will be around the end of 1996, when shareholders receive stock in computing company NCR.
Existing shareholders on Sept. 30 will receive one new Lucent share for about every three AT&amp;T shares they hold, and if they intend to hold both stocks, they need do nothing.
But the confusion arises because of the necessity to create two new classes of stock -- one for the rump portion of AT&amp;T and one for Lucent -- in the weeks leading up to the  Sept. 30 split.
The New York Stock Exchange said that these classes of temporary "when issued" stock -- which are rights to the respective new shares -- will effectively form a market in the new companies before formal trading begins.
"AT&amp;T has done a pretty good job of keeping people informed. But inevitably there will be some confusion," said Michael Macleod, a vice president and partner at Shareholders Communications Corp., which specializes in shareholder issues and odd-lot stock programs.
For example, someone selling 100 AT&amp;T shares between Sept. 17 and 30 will in effect be selling rights to 100 new AT&amp;T shares, and rights to just over 30 Lucent shares, although the total proceeds will be the same.
Buyers in that period will be able roughly to reconstruct the old AT&amp;T by buying rights in the same 100 to 30 proportion, or they can buy AT&amp;T or Lucent rights as they see fit. Sellers also can dispose of rights to just one stock and keep the other during that period.
No date has yet been set for the creation of the "when issued" stock. AT&amp;T "when issued" will be allocated the trading symbol T wd.N, a NYSE spokesman said.
It will not entitle you to any Lucent shares, nor to AT&amp;T's regular 33-cent quarterly dividend, even if it is possible to buy it before the AT&amp;T dividend record date of Sept. 12. On Sept. 30, the AT&amp;T stock symbol will revert to T.N.
The "when issued" stock in Lucent (LU wi.N) will carry no rights to Lucent's dividend of 7-1/2 cents a share even if it starts trading before the record date of Sept. 12. At Sept. 30 it will revert to the stock symbol LU.N.
The worst confusion will come for those people who still own stock from the pre-1984 split-up of the Bell system.
"A majority of shareholders -- though representing a small minority of the overall stock held -- still have the original pre-1984 AT&amp;T stock which includes rights to regional Bells," said AT&amp;T spokeswoman Eileen Connolly.
If these shareholders want to sell, working out the stock rights and especially the costs for capital gains taxes, could be very complex.
AT&amp;T's 24-hour shareholder information line is 1-800-756-8500.
