Gail McGovern, AT&amp;T Corp.'s new executive vice president for the consumer and small business division, is new to the big challenge facing her: boosting AT&amp;T's share in the consumer long-distance market.
Like her boss, Chief Operating Officer John Walter, McGovern has made a reputation in a different area but will bring a fresh approach, analysts said Monday.
"Gail is very experienced, but her experience is on the business side, and AT&amp;T is facing the bigger challenges on the consumer side," said Richard Klugman of brokerage PaineWebber.
McGovern, 44, was named to succeed Joseph Nacchio, who is leaving AT&amp;T to join Qwest Communications Corp., a small telecommunications company in Denver, as chief executive.
She said in an interview Monday that her top priority would be to improve revenue growth and to retain customers.
"I can tell you that focusing on reducing churn will be a top priority in 1997," she said in an interview.
As the most senior woman AT&amp;T has ever employed, McGovern will be responsible for more than half the company's revenues.
She expects to apply the same packaging of services to suit consumer customers that she has done in the business market. A single bill for a variety of services will help show the simplicity of offerings, she said.
"Billing is an essential ingredient," McGovern said.
AT&amp;T, based in Basking Ridge, N.J., has seen its market share in the $80-billion-a-year long-distance market dwindle from a near-monopoly when a federal judge ordered its divestiture in 1984 to around 55 percent today, according to analysts' estimates.
Apart from MCI Communications Corp. and Sprint Corp., AT&amp;T has recently faced competition from a host of small yet aggressive long-distance companies like LCI International Inc. and Excel Communications Inc..
AT&amp;T has been able to attract consumer customers, at a cost, but has had trouble retaining them.
Analysts who have met her had little doubt McGovern would be up to the task, after winning back major corporate contracts, including IBM Corp., McGraw-Hill Cos. Inc. and Textron Inc..
"She's very bright and very quick," said Richard Toole of brokers Merrill Lynch and Co. She has fewer rough edges than Nacchio. Joe was unique, and streetwise, but could be a little brutal," he said.
Walter, who was appointed as chief operating officer in October, takes over from Robert Allen as chief executive in May at AT&amp;T's shareholders meeting. McGovern's appointment was his first visible mark on AT&amp;T.
"I see his hands on this promotion, though she was a star to begin with," Toole said.
In the interview, McGovern said tying in satellite TV services and other forms of marketing was a great way of reaching new markets.
AT&amp;T has a stake in Hughes Electronic Corp.'s DirecTV direct broadcast satellite venture, and in November set a deal with Shaklee Corp. under which their 500 sales representatives will talk to potential customers about AT&amp;T services.
"We have to explore as many indirect sales channels as possible," McGovern said.
