Two major Wall Street brokerages lowered their earnings estimates for AT&amp;T Corp. Monday amid growing competition in the industry, sparking a heavy sell-off of the stock.
The stock slid $2 to $39.50 on the New York Stock Exchange, where it was the second most-active issue. MCI Communications Corp. lost 75 cents to $33.125 on Nasdaq and Sprint Corp. also lost 75 cents to $39.25 on the NYSE in sympathy.
"It is in AT&amp;T's court," said analyst Barry Sine of SBC Warburg. "The more they spend on marketing their new services for the long term, the lower 1997's results will be."
The market was spooked by Salomon Brothers analyst Jack Grubman, who cited higher spending and greater competition in the telecommunications market. He cut his estimate of AT&amp;T's 1997 earnings to $3.00 per share from $3.60 and his 1998 estimate to $3.25 per share from $3.80.
Fourth-quarter 1996 earnings per share will be closer to 70 cents than the previously forecast of 78 cents, he added.
Grubman said his new estimates may "still be too high," but he continued to recommend holding AT&amp;T stock.
AT&amp;T reported third-quarter profits of $1.4 billion, or 89 cents a share, on revenues of $13.2 billion.
First Boston Corp. also lowered its AT&amp;T earnings estimates, but agreed with most analysts that Salomon's view was too bearish.
"Salomon's number is for a dire outcome," said Frank Governali of First Boston, who expects AT&amp;T to earn $3.25 to $3.45 a share for 1997.
"I would be shocked if AT&amp;T diluted its 1997 earnings down to $3.00 per share," said Richard Klugman of PaineWebber.
AT&amp;T said it does not comment on stock activity or analysts' reports.
"We have not yet determined what 1997 will bring, but it is safe to say we do not agree with the more pessimistic comments," said a source at AT&amp;T who declined to be identified.
The source acknowledged the company was facing stiff competition from traditional rivals like MCI, as well as small aggressive competitors and soon, the regional Bells.
Governali said AT&amp;T had a choice to make: "Either to run the business for 1997, in which case they could make $3.60 per share, or to position itself for the long-term, in which case there is no way they can" earn that amount.
Analysts say the whole industry faces the same dilemma.
The Telecommunications Act of 1996 will release the regional Bells into the long distance market place this year, on top of a horde of tiny rivals that have been nibbling away at the customers of the big three.
Though AT&amp;T, MCI and Sprint can enter the local phone market, they will have to spend hundreds of millions of dollars to advertise their services, push their brand names and build network facilities to key business customers.
Grubman's research note said he believed AT&amp;T was losing hundreds of millions of dollars on its popular Worldnet Internet access service too, because of high costs.
Analysts said MCI and Sprint have already bitten the bullet by warning analysts of increased spending, but AT&amp;T had not done so.
"Sprint and MCI have already done it. MCI's merger with British Telecommunications Plc is a tacit admission of that fact (that you need very deep pockets to succeed)," Governali said.
SBC Warburg's Sine said MCI told analysts it would spend an extra $200 million to $300 million this year on marketing, but the stock was not hit because it is supported by the value of the planned British Telecom merger, announced in November.
Separately, AT&amp;T said it won a $341 million contract from Delta Air Lines Inc. for worldwide voice and data services.
The seven-year contract extends an existing agreement between the two under which AT&amp;T provides a virtual network for the airline. The new contract will provide Delta with intelligent call-processing to reduce reservation backlogs.
In another announcement, a partner in an African consortium that is bidding to take over Ivory Coast's Ci-Telcom telephone company said AT&amp;T agreed to buy a 35 percent stake in the consortium, Africa Bell.
Ci-Telcom, with an estimated value of between $200 million to $350 million, is the most important company on Ivory Coast's privatisation programme.
AT&amp;T's involvement, if the Africa Bell bid succeeds, would represent a major breakthrough for an American company in a traditionally French domain. Ivory Coast is the most important economy in France's former colonies in West and Central Africa.
