Sprint Corp said core local and long distance operations are performing with unprecedented strength, but its results in 1997 will be diluted by investments required to sustain future strength.
"We have our core operations producing as they have never produced before," chief operating officer Ronald LeMay told Reuters in an interview on Wednesday.
"We are investing in the future. That will show in our results in 1997, no question about that.  That will show as dilution in EPS (earnings per share)," he said.
The company said it already told analysts its expectations that 1997 would see increased spending.  The company reports 1996 results on February 4.
First Call's consensus of analysts's earnings estimates was $2.93 per share in 1996, up from $2.89 reported in 1995 and $2.47 in 1994.
Analysts said they heard the same on spending from MCI Communications Corp, but not from AT&amp;T Corp. However, AT&amp;T has been hit by a wave of lowered analyst estimates, on the assumption it will also spend more. 
In Sprint's case, LeMay said that participation in the U.S. government auctions for D and E bands of radio spectrum would be a major part of the outlay, as the company filled in a few remaining gaps in its national wireless network.
The D and E band bidding process is continuing.  A spokesman said Sprint has so far bid $550 million, and would also incur costs to build networks in those license areas.
The D &amp; E band auctions are the latest for wireless licenses for personal communications services (PCS), which allow clear connections, tiny phones and in-built pagers and voicemail. 
Investments in telephone operations and in the Global One business venture with French and German partners would also affect 1997, he said.  Deutsche Telekom AG and France Telecom share a 20 percent stake in Sprint.
"What we are asking investors to do is look at our core capabilities," LeMay said, adding, "We had the best year since 1989 in long distance last year."
He said Sprint was not being damaged by small, aggressive resellers in the long distance market.
"We can see their efforts in the marketplace, but we have not suffered the impact nearly that AT&amp;T has had," LeMay said.  
The company, which gets two-thirds of its long distance revenues from business customers, has not seen any change in customer turnover, or churn, during 1996.
"Churn comes and goes, but it is not materially different from a year ago," LeMay said.
((-- New York newsroom 212-859-1610.))
