Teleport Communications Group Inc is looking to buy Internet and long distance telephone service companies that add extra value to its networks or help sustain its 50 percent annual revenue growth target.
"We're constantly analyzing the correct time to do that (make acquisitions)," chief executive Robert Annunziata said in an interview on Wednesday.
Acquisitions would push a higher-value mix of services through its networks, reach new urban residential customers, and perhaps add to its burgeoning long distance networks.  
"Our goal and our strategy are three things.  To grow our existing markets, to grow our new markets, and to grow new products and services," Annunziata told Reuters.
Teleport provides local communications to businesses in major cities, competing with regional Bells.  It is launching new networks in eight cities in 1997 for a total of 57.
Teleport is majority-owned by a group of cable TV companies.  Tele-Communications Inc has 31.1 percent, Cox Communications Inc has 24.4, Comcast Corp has 16.0, and U S West Media Group's Continental Cablevision Inc has 11.0 percent.  
Continental Cablevision has to divest its stake by mid-1998, beginning with a one percent stake by June.
The remaining shares have publicly traded since an initial offering last June. The company expects to raise more cash by 1998.
He declined to say whether an acquisition was imminent, but if the company made one, or accelerated its investment plans, it may seek stock or debt financing earlier, he said.  
Annunziata expects Teleport to break even on net earnings in about seven years, but said heavy build-out costs mean the firm is best valued on operating cash flow -- earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (EBITDA).
Teleport already has had three EBITDA-positive quarters, and expects to remain that way as growth continues.
"Nobody else competing with the RBOCs (regional Bells) is EBITDA positive...we expect to stay EBITDA positive as we grow our company," he said.  
The Staten Island, N.Y.-based firm expects to exceed a 40 percent operating cash flow profit margin in each of its city networks, which generally cost $5-$10 million to build. Total capital costs are expected to continue at $450 million a year.
Annunziata said that he expected the 50 percent annual revenue growth target to remain achievable.
"For the next few years that is our target and our plan. It gets to be a bigger challenge every year as the numbers get bigger," he said, noting that acquisitions could contribute to the target.  
Some analysts see the company itself as a takeover target, in the wake of WorldCom Inc's $14 billion acquisition in August of MFS Communications, the other big competitive local exchange carrier.
Investor attention has been drawn to the value of owning local networks, rather than having to resell regional Bell connections, which not only makes for a fast market entry but, in Annunziata's view, eases the sale of extra services too.
"The only way you can capitalize on and control your client base is by owning the facility that connects to the customer," he said.
Much would depend on the attitude of the cash-strapped cable TV shareholders, some of which have distanced themselves from the telecommunications market in recent months.
"There is always the issue that they may want to monetize that asset...(but) they have a very good investment here," Annunziata said.
Teleport shares have roughly doubled since its IPO. On Wednesday afternoon they stood 1/2 higher at 32-1/4 on Nasdaq.
((-- New York newsroom 212-859-1610.))
