Sprint Corp is keeping its options open on how to extend its local phone services across the U.S. in the post-deregulation telephone environment, but for now its cable TV allies are not participating at all.
Interviews with key Sprint executives this week show the long distance firm will begin by reselling the local circuits of regional Bells but longer term it is keeping an open mind.
"The relationship we have with the cable companies at this point is for wireless only (not local telephone)," said Sprint chief operating officer Ronald LeMay.
The wireless partnership, Sprint PCS, is shared by Sprint, Tele-Communications Inc, Comcast Corp and Cox Communications Inc. It is building a pure digital network across the U.S for Personal Communications Services.
The extension of local phone service has been the most troublesome part of Sprint's 1994 grand strategy to package wireless and wired phone service with cable TV.
Sprint and its partners have grown away from their original plans to use cable networks to carry telephone services to consumers.
Sprint already has seven million local phone customers, mainly in rural and suburban areas, but is aiming for the center of big cities for its service expansion.
"We're shooting for somewhere between 10 and 20 cities served by end-1997," Wayne Peterson, president of Sprint's local communications division told Reuters.
"We are on the verge of several resale agreements (with regional Bells)," Peterson said, adding that they expect some to be finalised within 30 days.
The 1996 Telecommunications Act which breaks open the regional Bells local calling monopoly sets a process for new competitors to negotiate access to local customers over the Bells' network. Talks have moved very slowly.
No resale deals between Bells and the big three long distance operators have yet passed all approval processes, and to speed the deals, Peterson said Sprint was willing to accept the same terms as MCI Communications Corp and AT&amp;T Corp where they had already struck provisional deals.
However Peterson was looking forward to the day when Sprint would own its own switches -- the modern successors to telephone exchanges -- in all the areas where it provides local services, which would boost the investment returns.
LeMay said the 1994 deal with the cable firms assumed it would be impractical to resell Bell networks nationally.
"Frankly at the same time the Telecom Act began to develop and it became clear that the ability to become a reseller or a rebrander...on a nationwide basis was much more feasible than we assumed when we entered the cable relationship," he said.
In addition cash shortages at some cable partners and technical hurdles to upgrading cable networks for telephone services caused some cable companies to hesitate.
There were also disgreements, with some cable companies wanting to keep the benefits of Internet and other broadband services over the cable TV system out of the alliance.
"One of the things we disagreed on was the extent to which we should share the benefits of high speed data," LeMay said.
He said no talks with the cable partners were taking place, but added the door was open if any of the companies decided to make a "real commitment" to local telephony.
LeMay said Sprint had no interest in buying or taking a stake in Teleport Communications Group Inc, even though it owns networks in precisely the urban areas where Sprint needs local customers.
Teleport is majority owned by Sprint's cable partners and by U S West Media Group's Continental Cablevision.
"Basically it is in our view a commodity function, and we don't have an interest in investing in a commodity function," LeMay said, adding that he would be interested only in buying networks like Teleport's if it was cheaper than building or renting them. -- New York Newsroom 212 859 1610
