OneLink Communications Inc believes it has found one of the richest veins in the new practise of data mining by wringing every scrap of information out of telephone calls.
Data mining or data warehousing are the terms for building up profiles of customers or potential customers by aggregating millions of pieces of transaction data.
OneLink gathers customer information for healthcare, telephone, real estate and other companies and then compiles maps which lay out demographic information in an easy format.  
The maps can be used and manipulated on a personal computer.
"We view every telephone call and every Internet message as an information transaction," Nicholas Bluhm, chief executive of the Minneapolis-based company, said on Friday.
OneLink combines information like the name and number of the caller -- which is gleaned from caller-ID -- with the time spent on line and choices made in call management systems to build up a profile of caller habits and interests.
To get household and financial information it pulls in data stored on databases to build up a complete picture.  
Bluhm said that calls from public phones, mobile phones, and from the workplace left gaps in the data. Trying to fill in those gaps from other sources was often unsuccesful.
The company had its IPO at $3.50 in April 1995 and closed on Friday at $2.25.  The company has four million shares outstanding.
OneLink, which changed its name from MarketLink last week, lost $1.28 million in the first nine months of 1996, more than its revenues of $743,000 in the period. However, the name change coincides with a gradual change to a service-based from a hardware-based company.  
"I believe that by the end of 1997, if not third quarter then fourth quarter, we will be profitable," Bluhm said.
He is particularly attracted by markets like healthcare, where resource allocation is important.  OneLink's system can track when calls went unanswered or lines were busy or other indications that customers' needs were not met.
"We are looking at those markets where we can provide enhanced services at enhanced prices," he said.
OneLink is also working with regional Bells to help prepare them for the fight with more experienced competitors like the long distance telephone companies, as calling markets are opened to full competition.
"There are so many companies that are throwing away that information you have on your phone bill," Bluhm said.
OneLink gets a monthly license fee for its service and a fee per message, per minute of calls monitored and per map printed for its customers.
"We are doing very well and the company is going to be very succesful," he said.
-- New York Newsroom 212 859 1610
