GTE Corp on Wednesday said it had 800,000 long distance customers at the end of 1996, six percent above the target of 750,000 it set itself after it entering the $80 billion long distance market last March.
GTE gave the new figures in a press release announcing a new flat rate long distance calling plan. It said by the end of this quarter it may up customer targets for 1997, and pull forward the unit's expected break-even target.
"We are evaluating that on a daily basis," Rob McCoy, president of GTE long distance, told Reuters in an interview.  
McCoy did not give the current target for end-1997 customers. The unit is currently expected to break-even by the last quarter of 1998 with a full year profit contribution to the parent company for 1999.
GTE is targeting customers who would spend an average $25 a month on long distance. McCoy said bills were at present above $17 reaching towards $20, adding they would rise further as more users emerged from the first few weeks of promotional service.
"We have had some terrific success in our first 10 months," McCoy said.  
GTE is approaching the ferociously competitive market cautiously, picking at customers in niches who may switch to the company and stay. Switching and not staying -- called churn in industry jargon -- has been the bane of the industry.
The new "GTE's Easy One Rate" plan is aimed at users who want simplicity, and those who make a lot of daytime long distance calls. Several providers offer cheaper off-peak rates than GTE's $0.14 per minute.
"We don't have a mass market strategy," McCoy said. GTE is only initially offering the calling plan in 27 states where it already offers local or wireless services.  
The idea is to build a customer base which uses a bundle of services and -- according to business models and market research -- will be less likely to switch carrier than those who only take one service.
GTE has set up a rate plan customer line, 1-800-GTE-3737, and will monitor which areas among the other 23 states where it offers long distance have high demand. This will help it determine where to expand the rate plan, McCoy said.  
GTE's next market niches to attack will include markets for ethnic minorities. This may bundle international calling to the country of origin with multilingual customer service and other services needed in that community marketplace.
"It will be coupled with marketing best able to reach those marketplaces," he said.
McCoy said that GTE's long distance unit would shortly be announcing a business data network resale deal with one of the big three long distance carriers, AT&amp;T Corp, MCI Communications Corp or Sprint Corp.
He declined to say which.
GTE resells the network of WorldCom Inc for its basic long distance, so its increased customer tally will also benefit that carrier as the number of network minutes bought rises.
((-- New York Newsroom 212 859 1610))
