GTE Corp. Wednesday threw down the gauntlet to AT&amp;T Corp. by offering a nationwide long distance calling plan that is one cent cheaper than the industry giant's own flat-rate plan.
The flat rate plan is called "GTE's One Easy Rate," charging 14 cents a minute day or night. It has no monthly or enrollment fee and is immediately available to consumers in 27 states where GTE already offers either local calling or wireless services as well as long distance.
The Stamford, CT.-based company may later expand the plan to the other 23 states where it offers only long distance services.
Though several companies have cheaper off-peak calling rates, GTE said its rate compares favourably with flat rate plans offered by the big three.
AT&amp;T charges 15 cents per minute for its One Rate, MCI Communications Corp. 14.5 cents for its True Rate, and Sprint Corp. 15 cents for its Sense Day plan.
GTE last month unveiled a flat-rate calling plan for businesses that included domestic and international calling.
GTE's existing long distance rates are 27 cents a minute during peak hours and 14 cents off peak, with a 10 percent discount for customers who spend more than $10 per month and 25 percent off for those who spend $25 or more.
GTE entered the long distance business in March 1996 and signed up 800,000 customers by the end of the year, 50,000 more than it predicted in November.
Analysts say it and other smaller new entrants have hit AT&amp;T hard in its core residential customer base. MCI and Sprint are less reliant on residential customers.
GTE is predominantly a local telephone company, and is often compared with the Baby Bells. But unlike them, it is not restricted by the 1996 Telecommunications Act.
The law forces the Baby Bells to open their local calling regions to competition before offering long distance calling to their local customers.
Analysts say this ruling has been a boon for GTE, giving it a headstart of more than a year over the Bells in the $80 billion long distance market.
GTE said it also plans to focus on markets for ethnic minorities. It may bundle international calling to the country of origin with multilingual customer service and other services needed in that community marketplace.
