The $25 billion cable TV industry, once considered a major threat to the regional Bells' $95 billion local phone market, is now watering down its ambitions with many projects abandoned or on hold.
Analysts say high-speed Internet services offer a more exciting market than local telephone, while the threat of satellite TV has other cable TV firms defending home turf.
"I think the cable companies are realizing their core business is in urgent need of strengthening," said Peter Kreisky, a consultant at Mercer Management Consulting.  
Most cable TV firms are weighed with debt, and have put local phone initiatives on a backburner while regulatory and technological uncertainties resolve themselves.
-- CAUTIOUS CABLE FIRMS LOOK BEFORE THEY LEAP --
"I'ts basically a look before we leap," said Joann Dobbs, a spokeswoman for Tele-Communications Inc (TCI), the largest U.S. cable TV company, which has 15 million customers.
TCI, Comcast Corp and Cox Communications Inc were partners with Sprint Corp in a grand alliance begun in 1994 to package local and long distance telephone with wireless and cable TV.  
Now the cable firms' involvement is basically on hold, partly because of technical and regulatory difficulties, but also because Sprint was irritated the cable firms wanted to keep their high speed Internet access plans out of the deal.
-- INTERNET OVER CABLE SEEN MORE EXCITING THAN TELEPHONE --
Internet over cable offers much higher speeds than are generally available over the phone system, removing the big frustration of using the web -- delays in page retrieval.
"Phone over cable is a me-too product, but high-speed data over cable...has a clear competitive advantage," said analyst Rick Westerman of UBS Securities.  
Telephone regulatory snags still unsolved a year after legal reform include the cost of resale of regional Bell circuits, how universal service will be funded and the size of access charges Bells levy to connect calls to their customers.
This has has left in doubt how profitable the local phone market will be for new entrants. While long distance firm have to get into the market if they are to offer packaged services it is not essential for for cable TV.
"They were up against very tough competitors in the phone business whose lifeblood was threatened and have a very low cost base," said Kreisky.
-- ONE LESS RIVAL FOR REGIONAL BELLS --
A cable TV pullback is good news for the regional Bells because cable firms were the only rivals for their local market, which already had access to a significant number of their residential subscribers.
Time Warner Inc, the second largest cable TV firm with 12.1 million subscribers, this month changed its local phone strategy to concentrate on serving businesses in 18 cities where it already has networks built.
Time Warner only needs to provide switches to make itself a competitive local access provider in these areas.  
Time Warner Cable typically invests $1 billion a year, mostly on cable upgrades, and two years ago had been spending in the order of $100 million a year to prepare for entering the Bells local phone markets using its cable TV network.
"We are going to maximize the return from our existing (telephone) investment, any additional investment will not be material," spokesman Michael Luftman said.
However, Time Warner is pushing ahead with its Road Runner high speed Internet access service, which is operational in parts of Ohio on an upgraded system that cost $120 million.
-- SOME CABLE FIRMS STILL AGGRESSIVE ON PHONE PLANS --
Many cable companies retain the long-term ambition of entering the phone market, and some are pushing ahead.
"Cox and U S West Media Group are still going to be aggressive operators in telephone," Westerman said.
Cox is supporting its Personal Communications Services (PCS) wireless service in California by switching signals captured by receivers through its cable TV network.
"We are still intending to offer wired telephone service (too)," said Ellen East, Cox Communications' spokeswoman.
-- THREAT FROM DIRECT BROADCAST SATELLITE --  
The worry for some companies is the success of direct broadcast satellite in picking up customers with offers of hundreds of channels and clear digital signals. The threat is most potent in rural areas, where the cable TV companies will be slow to upgrade, analysts say.
Long distance firms like AT&amp;T Corp which has a small stake in Hughes Electronic Corp's DirecTV, and MCI Communications Corp which is linked to News Corp's ASkyB see satellite as useful.
Market studies suggest that customers are less likely to switch phone provider if they have a satellite TV service as part of the service package.
Cable companies like Time Warner and TCI already have stakes in direct broadcast satellite (DBS) companies which should cushion them from most competitive worries.
Nevertheless, analysts say cable companies are clearly more cautious now than two years ago about what can be accomplished outside their core areas.
"They are saying lets stick to what we know how to do," Kreisky said.
((-- New York Newsroom 212 859 1610))
