Four regional Bell telephone companies reported strong fourth-quarter results Tuesday, riding a wave of demand for extra phone lines, wireless phones and "smartphone" services like caller ID.
Two sets of merger partners -- Bell Atlantic Corp. and Nynex Corp. and SBC Communications Inc. and Pacific Telesis Group -- all produced results fairly close to analysts increasingly ambitious expectations.
"These companies have clearly raised the bar on expectations for demand growth. It should be sustainable for 1997," said analyst Richard Klugman of brokers PaineWebber.
The Bells have been powered by the mushrooming demand for phone lines to link home computers to the Internet, falling costs of mobile phone service, which has lured more users; and by technology to get more from a phone call -- call waiting, caller ID and call management systems.
Even the companies are surprised by the market's power.
"I'm amazed by how much momentum we have. Frankly, its in advance of our business plans, and its due to both the healthy economy and an overall exploding telecom marketplace," SBC Chief Financial Officer Don Kiernan said in an interview.
However, the Bells' stocks continue to be subdued, as investors worry about who will win when regional Bells and long-distance companies follow the lead of telecommunications deregulation and enter each others' markets later this year.
Nynex Corp. said its net income rose 10 percent to $416.5 million, or 95 cents a share, in the fourth quarter from $378.7 million, or 88 cents a share, in the 1995 period.
Revenue edged up 0.9 percent to $3.33 billion from $3.30 billion, the New York-based company said. It was reduced by a change in accounting for directory revenues, the assessment of prior-period service rebates and Nynex's decision not to stimulate certain markets while it was in the process of improving services.
Philadelphia-based Bell Atlantic Corp. said its profits, depressed by one-time items, fell to $346 million, or 79 cents a share, in the fourth quarter, from $392 million, or 89 cents a share, a year earlier. Sales grew to $3.4 billion from $3.2 billion.
Excluding onetime gains and losses, however, Bell Atlantic's operating income rose 7.3 percent to $424 million from $395 million.
"We posted strong gains in our key communications markets in 1996 as we prepare to complete our merger with Nynex in 1997," said Bell Atlantic Chairman Raymond Smith.
The two companies agreed to merge in April 1996, hoping to create a company with over $50 billion in market value. The deal is expected to be completed by the end of March.
For the year, Bell Atlantic earned $1.88 billion, or $4.28 a share, on revenue of $13.1 billion. In 1995, it earned $1.86 billion, or $4.24 a share, on sales of $13.4 billion.
"Both Bell Atlantic and Nynex reported better-than-expected results compared to analysts' consensus," said Bill Vogel, analyst at brokers Dillon Reed.
"Bell Atlantic had a very strong and robust quarter. There were quite a few charges in the quarter, but fundamental volumes of the business are at or above expectations," he said. "For NYNEX it was the first back-to-back years with double-digit earnings growth."
SBC Communications Inc., parent of Southwestern Bell Telephone Co., said its net income rose 4.8 percent to $542.9 million, or 90 cents a share, in the fourth quarter from $517.8 million, or 85 cents a share, in the year-ago period.
"Our outstanding financial performance was driven by excellent results by our wire line and wireless businesses, as strong demand and effective marketing led to the addition of a total of 1.5 million customer lines during the year," said Edward Whitacre Jr., chairman of the San Antonio, Texas-based company.
Pacific Telesis reported profits of $191 million, or 45 cents a share, before one-time adjustments, down from $233 million, or 54 cents a share, last year. Excluding adjustments, net income rose to $282 million, or 66 cents a share.
The parent of San Francisco-based Pacific Bell said its earnings before adjustments were driven by expanding business in data delivery and new custom calling services, as well as increases in access line and minutes-of-use volume.
Nynex closed unchanged at $50.375, Bell Atlantic fell 25 cents to to $67, SBC fell 25 cents to $52.50, and Pacific Telesis rose 12.5 cents to $37.75, all on the New York Stock Exchange.
