SBC Communications Inc said on Tuesday that soaring demand for wireless services is beating its expectations and shows no signs of slowing down in 1997.
"I'm amazed by how much momentum we have. Frankly its in advance of our business plans, and its due to both the healthy economy and an overall exploding telecom marketplace," SBC Chief Financial Officer Don Kiernan told Reuters.
SBC's U.S. wireless user base jumped by 20.2 percent to 4.4 million during 1996, with 739,000 customers added compared with an internal forecast of 600,000-650,000.
The company was a cent below First Call's analyst consensus with earnings per share of $0.90 for the fourth quarter compared with $0.83 a year earlier, though Kiernan said the miss was less once rounding errors were discounted.
SBC shares, which lost as much as 1/2 immediately after the results, were unchanged at $52-3/4 at 1500 EST/2000 GMT.
Wireless is providing SBC with new outlets for services like caller ID and voice dialling, which gives and extra kick to revenues in a fast growing marketplace, Kiernan said.
During 1996 1.9 million SBC wireless customers took cellular long distance, 42.5 percent of the total, which generated $60 million extra in revenues.
"As wireless customers realise its not that much more expensive to use a cellular phone to make a long distance call we could get a real windfall...," Kiernan said.
On top of this services such as Caller ID are a big boost to revenues and profits, first because they cost almost nothing to provide to each marginal user and because they help retain customers who might switch between providers.
"Revenue per customer in wireless is down only 1.5 percent from the prior year," Kiernan said. Wireless companies have come to expect bigger falls in average revenue per user as falling prices enable casual users to take a mobile phone.
Traditionally, wireless providers cope by switching to cheaper methods of acquiring new customers through retailers or resellers to offset marginal revenue declines.
But Kiernan said value-added services help support the wireless revenue curve, even as costs decline.
Already SBC reaped over $1 billion in revenues in 1996 from value-added services, mostly on the wired network.
In wired networks a new generation of software-based features would be available in mid-1997 using advanced intelligent networks (AIN), Kiernan said.
AIN means a phone or data network carries plenty of its own computing power and more information about a call than existing networks.
Desktop video conferencing is available already, but others will include call management based on information extracted from caller-ID records. Eventually many of the new features will migrate to the wireless network too.
Kiernan said that SBC had just last week started selling a package of local and long distance calling, plus local and long distance wireless under the Cellular One brand in New York state.
"We will be rolling that out in our other out-of-region markets in Chicago, Washington/Baltimore, Boston during 1997, so that will further buoy up average revenue per customer," he said. ((-- New York Newsrom 212 859 1610))
