Fourth quarter results so far from the regional Bells show a breathless increase in demand across the U.S. for additional lines, wireless phones and services like caller ID. There are no signs of it slowing.
Analysts said results on Tuesday from Bell Atlantic Corp, NYNEX Corp and SBC Communications Inc generally met aggressive market expectations.
"These companies have clearly raised the bar on expectations for demand growth. It should be sustainable for 1997," said Richard Klugman of brokers PaineWebber.
However, the share prices of the group continue to reflect investors worries about looming competition in the Bell's core local markets and how well they will do in long distance.
"The big issue is competition and when does that have an impact," Klugman said. In the meantime, booming demand continues to show up at the Bells' bottom line.
"Both Bell Atlantic and NYNEX reported better expected than results compared to analysts' consensus," said Bill Vogel, an analyst at brokers Dillon Reed.
SBC was a cent below the First Call consensus of $0.91 for the fourth quarter, but SBC chief financial officer Don Kiernan said that this was less when rounding errors were removed. The 1996 consensus of $3.46 was hit dead on.
"Its really much closer (to fourth quarter consensus) than it looks," Kiernan told Reuters.
Analysts were sanguine about SBC's performance.
"Generally SBC met aggressive expectations for revenue. Expenses were higher than we expected, but offset by a lower tax rate and a $22 million revenue boost from a regulatory change," said Bill Deatherage of brokers Bear Stearns.
Deatherage said the higher expenses seem to have come from Internet and data transport initiatives, investment for long distance services and Americast.
Americast is a venture with Walt Disney Co, GTE Corp, BellSouth Corp, Ameritech Corp, and Southern New England Telecommunications Corp to produce media content for interactive and multimedia networks.
Klugman said that NYNEX was pulled back a little by the relative weakness of the north eastern economy, and had reined in its marketing spending as a result of service penalties.
"I don't think they have had the opportunity to harvest the full benefits of the change in regulatory regime (to price cap from rate of return)," he said.
However, Vogel noted that NYNEX had made a first.
"For NYNEX it was the first back-to-back years with double-digit earnings growth," he said. ((-- New York Newsrom 212 859 1610))
