Nextwave Telecommunications Inc., an ambitious newcomer among the giants of the wireless world, is to re-file for its delayed initial public offering in the next two weeks, a source close to the company said Monday.
An unknown in the industry until it began bidding in 1996's C-band Personal Communications Services (PCS) auctions, Nextwave has spent a staggering $4.7 billion on wireless licenses for the third largest network in the United States.
The company planned to go public last summer, but after a series of delays finally came to a parting with lead manager Merrill Lynch in the fall. It must now amend a required document it sent to the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Revised documents are not yet finalised, but Smith Barney and Lehman Brothers are set to be co-lead managers of the $200 million equity offering and CIBC Wood Gundy is leading the $300 million debt offering, the source said.
Nextwave, based in San Diego, declined to comment ahead of the re-filing, and the source declined to be identified.
Nextwave's total outlay may top $8 billion, when the $3 billion to $3.5 billion cost to build the network is included.
Some analysts have been spooked by the huge debt Nextwave is taking on and see the wireless market as being dangerously overcrowded already. Nextwave, however, is sanguine.
"The company has pre-sold 35 billion network minutes of use. To put it in perspective, that is equal to the entire U.S. cellular industry's 1994 traffic," the source said.
While Nextwave has huge debts, it will not incur the massive advertising, marketing and customer acquisition costs incurred by its clients and their rivals as they duel in the market place for fickle customers.
The company has 21 customers, headed by MCI Communications Corp.
Nextwave is essentially offering off-the-shelf digital wireless service to any reseller that could want it.
These already include long distance and local telephone firms who need wireless to bundle with their wired offerings, other wireless firms which have holes in their own license coverage and electric utilities that see a future in telecom.
