AT&amp;T Corp's core businesses performed better in the last quarter of 1996 after struggling during much of the year, but a new problem of rising bad debts from business customers is causing analysts some concern.
"The growth in traffic volumes (3.2 percent) was better than the 2.5 percent we were expecting," said Richard Klugman of brokers PaineWebber. "But they are still losing market share to the tune of three percentage points a year," he said.
An extra $200 million provision for uncollectible revenue dragged earnings below consensus for the fourth quarter.
AT&amp;T's operating net was $0.76 against $0.68 in the year-earlier period and adrift of the $0.79 First Call consensus of analysts. Increased provisions will now cost $100 million each quarter.
"It knocks out close to four cents a share (in earnings) going forward," said Klugman.
"No one was expecting that," said Bette Massick, an analyst at Bear Stearns. The problem is partly poorer credit profiles at businesses, plus increased bankruptcies and bad debt.
But breaches of contract and bankruptcies among the mushrooming number of long distance service resellers who use AT&amp;T's network is clearly a major problem too, analysts say.
"When a reseller goes out of business the network provider takes the hit," said Klugman.
AT&amp;T and other network providers are required by Federal Communication Commission rules to do business with resellers, who then compete with them for customers.
AT&amp;T said it had lowered customer turnover -- or churn -- and had maintained its market share in business services.
"Volumes in long distance was better and revenue growth better than we expected," said Massick.
However she said she was lowering her earnings estimate for the company for 1997 to $3.20 from $3.65 per share.
"You have to cut your number for that (the uncollectibles) alone)," she said.
AT&amp;T seems to have overcome the worst of its problems in the credit card business where operating losses fell to $4 million in the fourth quarter from $35 million in the third quarter of 1994.
"At least it is not losing significant amounts of money any more," Klugman said. He added that the business was still very competitive and AT&amp;T, once a pioneer with no-fee cards, had lost its competitive edge.
AT&amp;T shares took the results in their stride, falling 7/8 to 38-1/2 by mid-afternoon, against the backdrop of a sharp fall in the broad market.
Chief Financial Officer Richard Miller said earlier that first quarter results would be comparable or slightly higher than those of the fourth quarter.
The company said it must decide how much to spend on the entry into local telephone markets and how much to spend defending its long distance markets against the regional Bells as deregulation becomes a reality later in the year. ((-- New York Newsrom 212 859 1610))
