AT&amp;T Corp, after recording a $200 million rise in bad debt and uncollectibles in the fourth quarter, sees a need for an industrywide drive to crack down on customers who fail to pay their telephone bills.
"It used to be if you don't pay your phone bill, you didn't get phone service. Now with multiple suppliers, we can shut off their service, but they can go someplace else to get service," Chief Financial Officer Richard Miller said Wednesday.  
The extra $200 million was the main reason AT&amp;T fell short of consensus estimates for the fourth quarter, analysts said.
AT&amp;T's operating net was $0.76 against $0.68 in the year-earlier period and adrift of the $0.79 First Call consensus.
"We think there are some behaviors that are beginning to emerge that we need to work on as an industry," Miller told Reuters in an interview.
"The majority of the problems we had in 1996 were in the business market, but we are also seeing increased uncollectibles in the consumer area," he said.  
There were increases in business fraud, delinquency and bankruptcies during the period, AT&amp;T said.
"We studied this in the fourth quarter and concluded we need to step up our ongoing provisioning. As we take on receivables, we allocate a certain proportion to bad debts or uncollectibles," he said.
"Half the $200 million was catch-up for (underprovisioning in) the past and the other represented what we were incurring in the fourth quarter," Miller said.  
In 1996, AT&amp;T had $9 billion of account receivables plus $7.1 billion of financial receivables. Of these it put a total $1.3 billion into allowances including uncollectibles.
Miller said the $100 million extra in the fourth quarter should be seen in the context of this overall figure.
Worldnet, AT&amp;T's Internet access service launched in 1996, ended the year with 568,000 subscribers, but added fewer in the fourth quarter than the third quarter.
"Were close to being on our plan on online services...in a brand new industry that is very dynamic that is quite remarkable," he said.  
He would make no predictions for when it might break even.
Miller said the company planned to market Worldnet aggressively, and the results of that effort would be seen in the first quarter.
((-- New York newsrom, 212 859-1610))
