BellSouth Corp on Thursday produced another set of strong earnings, with fourth quarter figures one cent above consensus, and extremely strong access line growth and cellular customer expansion.
Analysts note BellSouth has done this on a lean cost base, aided by a conservative approach to expensive projects like Personal Communications Services (PCS), and futuristic broadband networks.
"They did report a penny better than expectations," said Lind Meltzer, an analyst at UBS Securities.
The company boosted earnings per share before one-off items by 12.3 percent to $0.64, from $0.57 a year ago. The First Call consensus was $0.63.
"I think their double digit earnings growth is sustainable," said Barry Sine, an analyst at SBC Warburg, though he was less confident that growth would continue at 12-13 percent as had been seen.
Total operating revenues rose six percent to $5.05 billion from $4.76 billion in the fourth quarter and operating expenses rose 5.7 percent, excluding year ago charges.
Preparing for entry into long distance and to defend the local calling market from new rivals is a challenge to costs, but BellSouth is so far doing well.
"Just holding the line on margins is an achievement, and they managed to expand a little," said Sine.
BellSouth only bid for PCS licenses to fill in gaps of its regional cellular coverage while some other Bells banded together to build a national network.
Analysts also applaud its 'wait and see' approach to the information superhighway, which has been more broadly adopted by phone companies after technological and marketing setbacks.
"They have been proved right," Sine said.
Access line growth over BellSouth's huge and economically buoyant region was 4.7 percent in the fourth quarter from a year earlier. This was below the third quarter's 4.9 percent and the 5.0 of the second quarter.
"We're not sure how much of this decline is secular, and how much is related to the (second quarter strength) from the Atlanta Olympics," Sine said.
"Volume growth at BellSouth did look a little weak considering they are normally at the high end of the regional Bells," Meltzer said.
SBC Communications Inc and Ameritech Corp each recently reported some moderation in line growth.
In Ameritech's case this is a deliberate cut back in marketing because second lines have a long payback period, particularly when used for linking computers to the Internet which does not generate access revenues, analysts have said.
BellSouth telephone operations cash expenses rose 0.7 percent in the fourth quarter from a year ago.
"They have got some room to go on costs as they came to cost-cutting a little later than some," Sine said.
BellSouth its employees per 10,000 access lines had fallen to 28.2 from 32.5 a year ago, a measure of productivity improvements.
The stock closed 1-1/2 lower at 42-3/8 as the broad market fell. ((-- New York Newsrom 212 859 1610))
