Ameritech Corp is confident that it has a three-part strategy to keep its earnings growth intact even when new competitors enter its midwest region in force later this year in search of new customers.
The Chicago-based regional Bell has strengthened its core local calling business, moved to enter new businesses like cable TV and security which add value to the network, and sought out profitable niches abroad.
"The beauty is we started these strategies three years ago and they work," said Chief Executive Richard Notebaert.
Over lunch in a Manhattan restaurant, Notebaert told Reuters that the costs of fighting new competitors would be significant, but would not seriously hinder growth.
"Will it affect us? Yes. Will it takes us below double digit earnings growth? I don't think so," he said.
While some Bells have sought safety and market strength in mergers, Notebaert said Ameritech had not so far found any business combinations that met the acid test.
"We haven't seen anything that would add value for shareholders," he said, declining to give details.
Ameritech has taken an individual path in its core business by pushing software calling features like call-waiting and caller ID -- which are very profitable -- instead of extra lines which may not be so profitable.
"We just stopped stimulating it (demand)" he said, adding that growth in lines had fallen to 3.5 percent a year from 4.5 percent when new lines were actively marketed.
New lines have a very long payback when cable reinforcement is needed in the street, Notebaert said. The additional revenue may be small, especially if the line is used solely for a facsimile machine or Internet usage.
Ameritech also struck out alone in its foray into the security business, which concentrates on remote monitoring of premises. The company bought SecurityLink in 1994 and National Guardian in 1995 and now has 367,000 users, mostly businesses of which 78 percent are outside its home region.
"We are number two in the U.S. and we need to be number one," Notebaert said.
Ameritech, which is licensed to offer long distance services in 42 states, has considered using its security  customer base as a launching pad to sell other telecom services outside its region, Notebaert said.
Ameritech has quietly become a force in cable TV, offering service in 20 of 32 franchises it owns in its local region.
The programming is supplied by Americast, which Ameritech owns with BellSouth Corp, SBC Communications, Walt Disney Co, GTE Corp and Southern New England Telecommunications Corp.
Ameritech is shy about revealing cable TV customer numbers. It would only say they number tens of thousands. Of customers approached, 25 percent have taken the service.
The offering is typical of Ameritech's down to earth approach. Notebaert has shied away from futuristic services when it is not clear what the market will support.
"Everyone who went into interactive and multimedia lost their shirts," Notebaert said.
Ameritech powered 30 percent of its earnings growth in the fourth quarter of 1996 came from overseas investments, which includes stakes in companies in New Zealand, Hungary, Belgium, Norway and Germany.
"We could have done much more, but we didn't want to take our eye off the ball at home," Notebaert said. ((-- New York Newsrom 212 859 1610))1
