MCI Communications Corp's increased focus on high value customers has produced real results in the last quarter of 1996, positioning the company well for the impending market fight with regional Bells.
"Normally I take strategic position shifts with a pinch of salt, but you can really see it in this quarter's MCI numbers," said Richard Klugman of PaineWebber
MCI, which reported results earlier on Tuesday, expanded long distance revenues by 10 percent in the fourth quarter from a year earlier, ahead of volume growth of eight percent.  
This reverses the normal position for long distance companies, which have tended to get less revenue for each average minute used on their system year by year.
"You are seeing a favorable gap (revenue growth minus volume growth)," Klugman said. "Part is the price increases around Thanksgiving, but part is the data services," he said.
Data services are high value services, and are not billed on a minute basis.
MCI said that it had increased average revenue per customer, cut the proportion of customers leaving for other carriers and built a more effective base for the future.  
"We are far more selective about customers going forward," MCI Chief Financial Offier Doug maine told Reuters.
To push this process along MCI is aligning the pay of its sales people with the overall value rather than number of customers. The start of MCI One, a package of services on one bill, has helped that process, he said.
"They did what they said they would do and increased the focus in the long distance business on higher value customers," said Barry Sine, an analyst at SBC Warburg.
Analysts are expecting a substantial increase in MCI's spending this year for marketing the expansion into local calling. MCI is sticking with its guidance to analysts to expect flat earnings per share for the year, they said.
MCI is in the process of merging with British Telecommunications Plc. MCI stock was 1/4 firmer at 34-5/8 by midsession. ((-- New York Newsrom 212 859 1610))
