Global One, a telecommunications venture owned by Sprint Corp., Deutsche Telekom AG and France Telecom, lost more money than expected in 1996 and is poised to cut jobs, two sources close to the company said Wednesday.
The venture set up in January last year was expected to lose $250 million for 1996 but has in fact lost almost $370 million, one source close to the venture told Reuters.
"The partners are furious about the losses. Word has come down that they are looking to cut jobs," said the source, who asked not to be identified.
Neither Global One nor Kansas City, Mo.-based Sprint, which owns a 33 percent stake in the group, would comment.
It was not immediately possible to contact Deutsche Telekom or France Telecom which share the remaining 67 percent. However, a second source, close to one of the partners later confirmed the accuracy of the story.
Current analyst expectations are of losses of up to $250 million, of which around $85 million would be attributable to Sprint and $51 million of that has already been recorded in the first nine months.
Sprint is planning to report fourth quarter results on Feb. 4 and First Call's analyst consensus of fourth quarter earnings has already slipped in recent days to 69 cents per share from 70 cents, compared to a year ago 79 cents, when Sprint posted a net profit of $278 million, excluding one-time charges.
Analysts say much depends on the proportion of the loss attributable to Sprint, the tax effects, and how the partners account for it, but it will clearly hit earnings per share.
"If this is true, Global One's effect on Sprint will jump up from per share losses of 2-4 cents per quarter in the first nine months to in excess of 10 cents in the fourth quarter," said Bill Deatherage of Bear Stearns.
Global One currently has 2,900 employees and has been spending heavily to build a network powerful enough for it to carry traffic for other telecom firms as well as to cater to the global needs of large businesses.
The partners have revealed no financial details about Global One's performance in 1996 except to say it is expected to end the year with more than $800 million of orders.
