Citizens Utilities Co. said on Thursday it is aiming to be among the largest eight or 10 U.S. telephone companies by the year 2000 by buying up companies in small but important local telephone markets across the country.
"We are looking at acquisitions of this type every day," Ronald Spears, vice president for Citizens' telecom business, told Reuters.
Citizens, currently the 15th-largest U.S. phone company, is looking for new properties on both the western and eastern seaboards, particularly in the South and Southwest, where people are already concentrated or are expected to move.
The Stamford, Conn.-based company is a big stakeholder in wireless telephone firm Centennial Cellular Corp. and owns Electric Lightwave Inc., which provides telecommunications services in five western cities.
To facilitate the growth it needs, Citizens is seeking regulatory changes in the markets where it is the incumbent local phone company, hoping to encourage competitors to come in.
"We want to bring the benefits of a competitive market to customers in the second and third tier markets ..." he said.
Citizens was to file with New York state regulators Thursday to request price cap regulation for the 250,000 customers it has in upstate New York instead of a cap on its rate of return.
Citizens acquired the business in this area from GTE Corp. in 1993.
If approved, Citizens will also change its New York rate structure, merging local calling areas and making wholesale rates on its network more attractive for new market entrants in a plan it has dubbed "Customer Wins".
At the moment it is regulated with a cap on its rate of return, which discourages efficiencies because savings have to be shared with customers.
Price caps instead allow companies to keep their cost savings so long as they meet price targets.
While most regional Bells are being accused of dragging their feet over competition, why would Citizens want to encourage rivals to snare its customers?
The difference, Spears says, is in the type of markets. "The introduction of competition should stimulate demand in these markets, which is historically what happens," he said.
Spears said Citizens would get 85 percent of the revenues as a wholesaler, compared with 100 percent as a retailer -- but the market would be larger and grow more quickly.
Already about 20 companies, mainly cellular telephone providers, are lining up to talk to Citizens about interconnection and resale agreements.
The process is being played out in other parts of the country. Citizens has already moved to price cap regulation in California, Tennessee and West Virginia, and plans to do so in the remaining eight states where it operates as soon as possible.
Citizens Utilities' revenues in the first half of 1996 were up 25 percent at $647 million, with telecommunications the main engine of growth.
This year telecom will account for 65 percent of revenue, and in 1997 near 70 percent, with electricity, natural gas and waste water services taking the rest. Telecom operating margins are a healthy 30-33 percent of revenues.
"We're taking a very aggressive posture for what has been recognised historically as a small independent telephone company," Spears said.
