Global One says its shareholders are pleased the venture was able to establish itself in a tough market in year one and are not judging it by its losses in 1996.
Global One was set up in January 1995 by Sprint Corp, Deutsche Telekom AG and France Telecom to provide global telecom services to multinational firms and carry other telecom firms.  
"They are very pleased they could establish Global One as a strong global carrier in year one," said Klaus Czerwinski, vice president of corporate communications at Global One.
Sources close to Global One told Reuters last week the venture had lost almost $370 million in 1996, when only $250 million had been expected.
Czerwinski declined to say how much Global One had lost in total during 1996, saying no figure would be finalised until the venture closes its books, probably in the next two weeks, and even then would not be made public.  
"All I can say is that we did have losses in 1996," he told Reuters.
Sprint took $62 million in charges for Global One losses in 1996, $22.1 million of it in the fourth quarter when some earlier spending decisions had to be "trued-up," or reconciled with actual outlays.
The long distance carrier owns a third of the European part of Global One and half the non-European part. The European carriers each own a third of the European operation and a quarter of the non-European operation.  
Sources close to Global One last week said that unexpectedly higher losses had led to threats of job cuts, but Czerwinski was not aware of any being planned.
"The clear truth is that there are no decisions yet," he said.
Asked about the shareholders reactions to overall cost levels he said: "There are things they are more happy with and things they are less happy with....But they do not judge us in year one."
Sources close to Sprint said on Tuesday the complexities of contributing operations from three different corporations from different accounting and linguistic backgrounds would make it hard to control first year costs.
"There are certain things you can only find out at the end of the year," the source said, declining to be identified.
However, these are no expected to be persistent problems the source said.
((-- New York Newsrom 212 859 1610))
