Fourth quarter results from Sprint Corp showed extremely strong growth in the core long distance and local phone businesses, but earnings trailed consensus estimates because of dilution from new ventures.
"I was pretty pleased. It continues to show strong core growth offset by increased dilution from new ventures," said Simon Flannery, an analyst at J.P. Morgan.
Sprint's volume of business in long distance jumped 20 percent in the fourth quarter from a year ago, and operating margins improved.  
Local calling was less outstanding, analysts said, but included a 5.6 percent increase in lines to customers and a 40 percent increase in revenues for smart phone features like Caller ID and voice dialling.
"The core business was an absolute blow-out," said Michael Elling of Prudential Securities.
The stock rose 1/2 to 40-3/4 by midsession.
"Investors continue to focus on the strong core growth and the prospects of the emerging businesses," said Flannery.  
Sprint is now gearing up to add thousands of PCS and Internet subscribers in 1997, when its vision of a package of services on one bill should reach fruition.
Sprint produced $0.57 earnings per share in the fourth quarter of 1996, compared with a loss of $0.98 a year ago. Analysts added  back an $0.08 charge for comparison with their projections, reaching $0.65 in the quarter.
That was four cents below their consensus of $0.69 carried on First Call, which already assumed considerable dilution from new ventures like Personal Communications Services (PCS) wireless and Global One.  
"That four cents could be placed at the feet of one product, the Internet roll-out," said Elling.
Global One, an international venture jointly owned with Deutsche Telekom AG and France Telecom, cost Sprint $0.05 a share in 1996's fourth quarter up from $0.02 a year ago, but costs should decline from now on, analysts said.
"The true-up at Global One seemed to be worth about two cents per share," Flannery said, referring to a fourth quarter catch up to costs incurred earlier.  
Sources close to Global One last week told Reuters that the venture had racked up almost $370 million of losses in 1996 instead of $250 million budgeted. Neither Sprint nor Global One would confirm these figures.
The venture serves multinational firms telecom needs and carries traffic for other telecom firms.
The cost of all the new ventures was around 20 cents to Sprint in the fourth quarter, according to Richard Klugman, an analyst at PaineWebber.  
"You will not see the return on these (investments) until 1999 at the earliest," said Klugman. However, like other analysts polled he backed the company's strategy. ((-- New York Newsrom 212 859 1610))
