BellSouth Corp, seeing regional Bells merging around it, feels no pressure to seek a merger itself and sees little value in other deals so far.
"We haven't seen a compelling value proposition in any of the mergers so far," chief financial officer Ron Dykes told Reuters.
Dykes said there were few efficiencies in neighboring Bells merging and buying long distance assets was even less attractive.  Competing with Internet service providers was easier and better than paying a premium to buy one.  
As for vertical takeovers, like home security, financial services, software or other firms which are big customers for communications facilities, Dykes was even more blunt.
"It is hard to merge a cat with a dog," he said.
By this he meant BellSouth would be much less sure of its footing in a business where it does not have expertise, and management cultures would be very different.
Dykes believes that filling out service provision in BellSouth's huge nine-state region and building franchises for individual businesses is the best way to succeed in the competitive landscape sketched by the 1996 Telecom Act.  
Others have different ideas.
Neighbors Bell Atlantic Corp and NYNEX Corp decided to merge, as did SBC Communications Inc and Pacific Telesis Group, while Ameritech Corp has expanded into home security.
Some analysts believe there are attractive bid targets for regional Bells in the long distance industry, but Dykes said BellSouth doesn't want to own assets of declining value.
"With long distance you are looking at an industry where prices are at their peak.  The same would be true of buying a second tier long distance company," he said.  
Dykes believes that long distance rates will fall sharply as companies like BellSouth enter the industry, especially as so much wholesale capacity is for sale.
BellSouth has a deal to use AT&amp;T Corp's network to provide long distance service and expects to be serving customers in at least two states in its region by year-end.
Firms like WorldCom Inc have acquired Internet service providers (ISP's), but Dykes says it is unnecessary.
"In our view it is cheaper to steal the customer than pay for them (by buying an ISP)," he said.  He said that BellSouth already had tens of thousands of Internet customers.  
"By the end of 1997 we believe we will be the largest Internet service provider in the South," he predicted.
BellSouth has worked hard to fill out its wireless coverage, adding new licenses in Federal Personal Communications Services (PCS) auctions earlier this year to its existing PCS and cellular licenses.
It has also bought licenses in other areas in order to swap them for licenses held by other firms in its home region.
On Wednesday it finalised such a deal with a unit of Telephone and Data Systems Inc, trading its interests in 12 licenses in Wisconsin and Illinois for 23 owned by TDS in the South, plus receiving an undisclosed cash sum.
In addition the company has bought licenses for wireless cable which allow it to beam microwave TV signals by line of sight to the homes of viewers. ((-- New York Newsrom 212 859 1610))
