Russia's top aluminium smelters said on Monday attempts to fix contracts with Ukraine's main raw materials supplier had met with no success and Ukraine was instead courting a rival smelter in Tajikistan.
Russia, chronically short of supplies of alumina, has been seeking supply contracts from Ukraine's Mykolayivsky Hlynozemny plant, with an eye to securing nearby raw materials at attractive prices.
But Russian metals officials said Mykolayivskiy had been reluctant so far, leaving Russia's giant Bratsk and Krasnoyarsk smelters with no alumina supplies this year from Ukraine.
"We have reached no agreement with Mikolayivskiy over supplies," said Yuri Shlaifshtein, a board member at Bratsk, the world's largest smelter.
"They're asking prices above world levels -- they can't go on like this much longer."
Mikolayivskiy's deputy commercial director, Hennady Bushtruk, earlier told Reuters in the southern Ukrainian town where the plant is based that it planned to sell 90 percent of its 1997 output to Russia but no contracts had yet been signed.
He declined to name prices.
But Shlaifshtein said the plant was asking around $270 per tonne, above world levels, and wanted to sell the bulk of its supplies to Tajikistan's Tursunzade smelter.
Mykolayivskiy is one of the largest plants of its kind in the region, with a production capacity of one million tonnes a year.
It takes about two tonnes of alumina to produce one tonne of primary aluminium, making Mykolayivskiy capable of supplying enough alumina to account for nearly 20 percent of Russia's 1996 output of 2.87 million tonnes.
Russia has only two functioning alumina plants which can meet only 30 percent of smelters' demand.
The lack of raw materials and tight finances have given tolling a key role in the Russian aluminium industry.
Under tolling, smelters import raw materials, usually through international commodities houses, process them and then export them, paying back the houses with some of the proceeds.
Shlaifshtein said even Mikolayivskiy wanted to toll alumina at places like Bratsk and Krasnoyarsk rather than sell outright to Russian plants.
Mikolayivskiy, which supplied 800,000 tonnes to Russia in 1994, according to Russian news agencies, was now selling most of its supplies to Tursunzade, officials said.
Krasnoyarsk board chairman Gennady Druzhinin and Shlaifshtein said recent talks with Mikolayivskiy had come to naught, but Bratsk and Kranosyarsk had already covered most of their alumina supplies for production this year.
"Their prices are too high," said Druzhinin.
Russian plants usually complete talks for alumina supply contracts in December of the preceeding year.
"We've basically covered our supplies for the year," Druzhinin said. "Bratsk has Pavlodar (the big Kazakh alumina plant), so it's easier for them."
He said Krasnoyarsk was working with London-based Trans-World Group to invest in the financially troubled Achinsk plant to boost alumina output to 700,000 tonnes this year and to have a more secure source of supplies.
--Moscow Newsroom, +7095 941 8520
