Russia's new oil majors want to wrest crude oil exports market away from traders in a battle for control over one of the country's most lucrative businesses.
Domestic oil producers, who export about one third of their total output of 5.86 million barrels per day, are fighting for control over a chunk of these exports known as the federal programmes market.
"Producers are trying to oust the trading companies from the business of implementing these programmes," said a senior source at Alfa-Eko, one of Russia's biggest oil exporters with no oil production facilities. "It would mean that we have no job."
Under so-called federal programmes, the government signs decrees every year authorising companies to export certain amounts of crude oil to finance state investment programmes.
The amounts are getting bigger, making federal programmes a huge business for companies which see dancing dollar signs in strong world oil prices.
About 20 decrees call for federal programme oil exports to soar to 60-70 million tonnes in 1997 -- representing 60-70 percent of Russia's total oil exports.
The programmes are used by the Kremlin to finance everything from space shuttle lift-offs from the Baikonur cosmodrome to building baby-food factories.
Federal programme exporters -- most of them trading firms rather than producers -- keep some of the proceeds, getting rich on the difference between domestic and world oil prices.
Traders say that if they are squeezed out of this lucrative niche, they could be put out of business.
Fuel and Energy Minister Pyotr Rodionov told Russian oil executives in Siberia last week that the government was preparing to limit the number of companies exporting oil.
The president of Russia's largest oil company LUKoil, Vagit Alekperov, was quoted by Interfax news agency as saying producers, not traders, should deliver oil abroad.
"I guess they just don't like all of the MESs and Alfa-Ekos of the world making such huge margins," said the head of a small European trader, referring to two of Russia's most prominent independent oil exporters who thrive on federal programmes.
Russian crude oil prices were 70 percent of world prices before international markets began their rally.
Benchmark Brent blend crude oil has been near six-year highs for weeks and, at an average $20.30 a barrel during 1996, was up 20 percent last year from 1995.
With that in mind, Russia's new vertically-integrated oil majors wrote to Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin last month pleading that they, not traders, be allowed to carry out the federal programmes and asking for more commercial exports.
Federal programme exports in 1996 -- originally targeted by the government at 71 million tonnes, were eventually scaled back to 27.5 million tonnes. Domestic oil producers did less than 20 percent of that volume, or around 5.3 million tonnes.
Even powerhouse Alfa-Eko had to fight for export pipeline space for its 1996 allotment of four million tonnes.
"We couldn't fulfil our allocation because there was no pipeline space -- we couldn't get it," said the Alfa-Eko source, adding that the firm eventually shipped only 1.1 million tonnes.
Russia's 13 crude oil producers -- most of them vertically integrated firms with their own trading arms -- already have a head start on traders in that the biggest of them "coordinate" oil exports and have the power to allot precious pipeline space.
This year's programmes will probably be trimmed, but they will still be a big cash earner for whoever gets the business.
"There's probably a desire in the Fuel and Energy Ministry to squeeze out the traders," said a Nafta-Moskva source. "After all, we're not part of their organisation anymore."
--Moscow Newsroom, +7095 941 8520
