Russian oil-for-sugar barter deals with Cuba, a staple of trade between the two countries since Soviet times, have soured as market economy principles intrude upon leftover communist-era practices.
Once a swap unencumbered by inconveniences like volatile commodities prices and competitive supplies from other countries, the practice has come up against cold realities that have stalled old deals and raised questions about how new ones will be implemented.
Players on the Russian side said on Wednesday that the last barter arrangement for 1996 had yet to be completed, and that one of the Russian commodities houses implementing the old deal had lost money on it and would likely not do future deals.
"We are not talking now about new deals. No way," said a source at Alfa-Eko, which with Menatep-Impex, another Russian powerhouse commodities trader, is implementing the 1996 deal.
The Alfa-Eko source said the only talks taking place were on how to resolve sticky issues left over from the 1996 deal, which has carried into 1997 due to disputes stemming from high world oil prices and low prices for refined sugar in Russia.
He said Alfa-Eko still owed Havana about 200,000 tonnes of oil and was owed about half as much cane sugar.
"The talks are about whether we should go ahead and deliver or just settle the matter amicably," he said.
The barter practice goes back to the 1960s, when Soviet Moscow sold cheap oil to Havana, bought a major portion of the Cuban sugar cane crop at wildly-inflated prices, and even picked up Cuba's bad credits when poor harvests sent Havana scrambling onto world markets in search of supplies.
Today, the game is no longer about helping the communist holdout in the Carribean, but about making money.
Havana resells the crude oil on world markets, while Russian sugar refineries get a steady feedstock.
The deals are carried out according to ratios linked to world commodities prices, and private Alfa-Eko and Menatep have replaced the Russian government in carrying out the schemes.
"It's all about the ratios, which are linked to world prices for oil and sugar," said a senior Menatep-Impex source, adding that the ratio formulas were a commercial secret.
Menatep said it would complete its portion of the 1996 deal, under which it owes several hundred thousand tonnes of oil and will get about half as much sugar, in the first quarter of 1997.
But it has not been easy.
Cheap Ukrainian refined sugar has flooded into Russia, creating a glut that has pressured prices and forced Alfa-Eko and Menatep to rethink how they can make money on the schemes.
"Honestly, we still have sugar in storage, and the fees are killing us," said the Alfa-Eko source. "We're not doing anything right now -- the market is not favourable."
The Menatep source said Menatep would do all of the 1997 deals and that Alfa-Eko was quitting the business.
The two sides already have a three-year arrangement covering 1996-1998 that Moscow and Havana signed in 1995. That is in addition to the separate 1996 deal still being carried out.
According to Interfax news agency last year, the three-year deal envisaged Russia selling Cuba 2.1 million tonnes of oil in 1996, 3.9 million in 1997 and 4.5 million in 1998. In return, Russia would get 750,000 tonnes of Cuban raw sugar for 1996, 1.5 million in 1997 and 1.75 million in 1998.
With oil prices at highs and Russian refined sugar prices at lows, the ratios will likely change, leaving somebody in tears.
But even with volatile prices, some things have not changed.
"The deals are still relevant," the Menatep source said. "Russia needs this sugar, which is tough to get in these volumes on the free market, where certain traders have dug in.
"Cubans as trading partners are a very particular type. We're used to them. We've got all sorts of Soviet-era specialists working for us. Alfa-Eko has more of a Western mentality -- and that is why they have lost."
