Russia, taking a bold step in its troubled relationship with De Beers, said on Tuesday that Moscow was mulling export quotas on gems and some analysts said such curbs could put more order into world gem markets.
The Almazy Rossii-Sakha (ARS) monopoly diamond producer, which drew up a draft export agreement with De Beers last year, said the Industry Ministry was considering quotas on the volumes of rough diamonds available for export.
"We could see Russian gem sales down 25 percent," said Charles Kernot, mining analyst at Paribas Capital Markets.
"It would be good news as far as the international diamond market is concerned," he said, adding that large leakages of Russian gems outside previous trade agreements with De Beers had upset markets in the past.
Kernot also said the terms of the stalled draft deal between Russia and the South African company -- the world's two diamond powerhouses -- would probably be amended.
"I think they will have to be," he said.
Roger Chaplin, mining analyst at T. Hoare &amp; Co in London, said quotas would essentially correspond to the terms of the draft deal, which envisioned setting aside rough gems for Russia's nascent cutting and polishing industry.
"The general impression is that Russia is backpedaling," Chaplin said. "To actually get financing (to mine gems), they need to have in place a solid marketing agreement. It's getting to look more like you're going to have a trade agreement signed."
But he counseled caution.
"There's always been a problem in Russia as to actually who controls the diamond industry," he said. "Anything you read has got to be in the context of that particular struggle."
A frustrated De Beers stopped buying Russian diamonds at the end of last year, cancelling an interim arrangement after Moscow failed to give word on a new trade deal.
Finance Minister Alexander Livshits told a news conference on Tuesday that Russia still wanted to sign a gem export deal with De Beers -- but he declined to answer questions on whether the draft agreement would be amended.
ARS said it would cooperate closely with the Industry Ministry to enliven Russia's diamond industry by helping to win financing to boost output and license sales.
It said cooperation would help "strengthen the position of Russian producers of rough and polished diamonds on world markets." But the firm's vision of the Russian gem industry made no mention of De Beers.
Analysts said they thought Russia was slowly coming around to accepting the need for a trade deal with the South African giant, but they declined to predict when it might be signed.
Russia accounted for 26 percent of De Beers' total worldwide sales under the previous contract, a deal worth about $1.2 billion a year to Russia.
But gems leaked abroad outside that contract, and Chaplin put total Russian gems sales at around $2 billion a year.
One analyst said leakages at the end of 1996 were as high as $80-$100 million a month, and analysts said up to 70 percent of gems set aside for home use ended up being exported as roughs.
De Beers has always said that its draft agreement with ARS makes provision for an adequate supply of stones for Russia's new cutting and polishing industry but that it wants to put a lid on unauthorised exports.
Kernot said quotas, coupled with Russia's dwindling diamond stockpile, could do just that.
A source in Russia's Audit Chamber said last Friday that Russia's diamond stockkpile could run out between March 1998 and September 1998 unless it were replenished.
"It's a complicated situation as far as all the different players in Russia are concerned," said Kernot.
