Russia's troubled Norilsk Nickel plant has vowed to keep output steady while it seeks a solution to its financial woes, company officials said on Thursday.
But the struggle to make the enterprise leaner and more competitive has forced the flagship producer to modify long-term plans to boost profitability.
Valery Alfimenko, director of the Norilsk combine's information section in Norilsk, said January output was slightly higher than planned levels but that the enterprise was not working at 100 percent of capacity.
"The main task is not to produce less than we did last year," he said. "It will all depend on the market. If prices go up, we'll produce more; if not, less."
He said the plant's financial crisis had not affected mining operations but that supplies of materials secondary to production, like salt, could run low.
The Norilsk complex, Russia's biggest producer of nickel, copper and cobalt and a major world producer of platinum and palladium, is the flagship plant of the RAO Norilsky Nikel metals group.
Plant workers have given management until February 20 to pay off three months of salary arrears and Alfimenko said a Norilsk delegation would arrive in Moscow on Sunday for more talks aimed at resolving the crisis.
Leonid Binder, in charge of restructuring Norilsk, said output was steady but declined to give concrete figures.
"There are various ways of resolving the matter (financial crisis)," he said, adding, "Maybe we don't need to increase output, but to change the structure of our production." He declined to be more specific.
Plant workers passed a vote of no-confidence in management earlier this week to protest against wage arrears of around one trillion roubles and to demand higher salaries that one official said would cost Norilsk an extra 70 billion roubles a month.
The crisis has meant that Norilsk, which revamped its export strategy last year in a bid to cut out intermediaries, has been unable to fully cut ties to Russian and international commodities trading houses.
"We try to go to the end users, but if traders offer more acceptable terms, then we go to them," said Marina Nefyodova, first deputy director in charge of finance at Interrosimpex, the exclusive distributor of Norilsk output. "When financing problems exist, we choose conditions that are better for us."
She said an analysis of the effect of restructuring on exports had not yet been carried out and declined to comment on how sales volumes abroad might be affected by restructuring.
The task of restructuring Norilsk has fallen on commercial bank Uneximbank, which owns a 38 percent share in the group, acquired through a 1995 government shares-for-loans auction.
Workers have said they will ask the government to strip Uneximbank of its shares if their demands are not met. But a bank official saw no grounds to force shares to change hands.
"I don't see any real mechanism for them to realise this," said Uneximbank spokesman Modest Kolerov. "They are upset because they want to live -- but there is no legal mechanism for them to force us to give up these shares -- we have the full right to do as we wish with these shares on the open market."
The Norilsk group is the world's second largest producer of refined nickel, and the flagship combine produced 100,000 tonnes of nickel in 1996, a company official said earlier.
Binder said the firm faced pressing financial burdens to carry out mining, smelting and social support operations north of the Arctic Circle, where Norilsk supports entire towns.
"Not one metals enterprise could have carried this burden alone - the exploration, mining, production, transport of food and goods to the North," Binder said. "It is a colossal burden."
--Moscow Newsroom, +7095 941 8520
