Pinning down the size of Russia's grain harvest is proving a problem for analysts and traders due to widely differing estimates from official and trade groups.
Various government and private-sector predictions put Russia's net grain output at anywhere from 70 to 80 million tonnes -- a range which could leave Moscow with one of its worst harvests ever or give it a more comfortable margin.
"The situation is still tense and serious," said independent agriculture specialist Andrei Sizov of SovEcon Ltd consultancy on Friday, citing miniscule stocks from last year's harvest.  
But Arkady Zlochevsky, president of the OGO grain and food trading company, one of Russia's largest, saw net grain output at 80 million tonnes. "We are not optimists, we are realists -- we know how much peasants and regional administrations water down the real figures," he said.
The various numbers see output recovering anywhere from 11 to 21 percent from last year's drought-hit 63.4 million tonnes.
Agriculture Minister Viktor Khlystun said in June, his last public forecast, that he saw output at 70 million tonnes, while Deputy Prime Minister Alexander Zaveryukha, who is in charge of the harvest, put the figure this week at 75-77 million tonnes.  
In a separate estimate, the state statistics committee sees output at 71-72 million tonnes.
Sizov said he saw net output at 70 million tonnes.
A Russian source at a Western industry organisation put it at 74-75 million tonnes, based on recent talks with other trade sources in Moscow and abroad. "These are the figures we've got right now," the source said. "I think they're realistic."
The state meteorological service, which bases its forecasts on weather conditions only, and not on factors like tractor availability, sees output in the 71-75 million tonne range.  
The International Grains Council sees the crucial Russian wheat harvest alone rising to 34 million tonnes, while Zlochevksy sees 37 million tonnes.
The lower-range net output numbers still mean the 1996 harvest could be one of the worst three since 1965.
The Russian government will not issue a final figure until at least the first two weeks of October, when the harvest officially ends -- leaving trade sources now to watch the all-important Siberian harvest, key to regional supplies.  
"The harvest in the European part of Russia is nearly over and pretty much a known entity -- the focus right now is Western and Eastern Siberia," Sizov said.
In Siberia, farmers are battling weeks of rains that have moved the harvest closer to the date of the first snow, which can come as early as the end of the month.
"I think they could lose three or four million tonnes there," due to the weather, one trade source said. --Moscow Newsroom, +7095 941 8520
