Russian oil producers have seen limited benefit from a rise in world crude prices over the past 12 months, as their costly transformation into capitalist companies sucks up extra cash, energy analysts said on Friday.
"To a certain extent, you can say they have benefited," said Peter Houlder, head of the CentreInvest group consultancy and an energy specialist. "But the tax system has been pretty efficient in catching up with a lot of this increased revenue."
Oil prices currently stand about $5 a barrel above levels seen this time last year, defying analysts' predictions of weaker oil on what was expected to have been an easing of the United Nations' Gulf War ban on Iraqi oil sales this year.
Analysts said that Russia, the world's third largest oil producer, would in theory have earned an extra $2 billion or so from its exports of about 96 million tonnes of crude to cash-paying, mostly Western countries over the past 12 months.
But the unexpectedly bullish market has not directly translated into fistfulls of cash as it did for the Soviet Union in the 1970s and 1980s, when output peaked at 570 million tonnes after world oil prices rose to nearly $50 a barrel.
"Russian exports are not just a question of profits, but of liquidity," said Catherine MacDougall, Russia analyst at Kleinwort Benson in London, referring to producers' need for cash to keep operations going. "If you take excise and other taxes, there has been limited benefit to Russian producers."
Russian oil companies are seeing higher world oil prices for the first time since being spun off from the state into privatised, vertically-integrated companies -- and are using export cash as working capital to keep output flowing.
Crude exports now carry big pipeline and transit fees. Companies pay an output duty as well as an export duty, currently about 51,000 to 83,000 roubles ($9.50 to $15.46) a tonne.
Corporate taxes are revenue, not profit, based, with the average company in a 70 percent bracket but paying only 30 percent to keep cash on hand.
Gennady Vasilyev, an independent energy consultant for the World Bank, said Russian producers had earned more from exports this year -- but that they also had bigger debts.
"Of course they have earned more, but they are also restructuring and consolidating and trying to clear out their debts," he said.
In the 1970s, when Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) members sent the price of oil soaring, the Soviet Union cashed in with windfall petrodollar profits that built up its mighty military machine.
The exports gave the Soviet economy tens of billions of extra dollars, and production associations, the precursors of Russia's privatised oil majors. They paid small taxes and adhered to communist accounting practices which did not account for costs.
MC Securities, in a report on LUKoil, Russia's top oil producer, said the company boosted upstream revenues and net profits 30 percent in the first half of this year, with exports benefiting from higher world prices.
Pyotr Neyev, LUKoil spokesman, said the company's average exports of one million tonnes a month had helped, but not as much as might be expected, partly due to the failure of some customers to pay their bills.
Total Russian crude exports to solvent customers rose nearly 7.5 percent last year, while shipments to former Soviet countries slipped nearly 20 percent, according to fuel and energy ministry figures.
"With our debt situation, the word 'profit' must always be put in quotation marks," LUKoil's Neyev said. ($1=5367 Rouble)
