Russia's LUKoil said on Monday a new reserves audit made it the world's single largest oil firm, but energy analysts said LUKoil was not the grand dame of the seven sisters' club of international oil producers.
NK LUKoil said in a statement, based on an audit by U.S. engineers Miller &amp; Lents, that its total proven oil reserves in Russia, including unspecified amounts of gas, were 10.7 billion barrels.
This was above the 10.5 billion it said it had in 1996 after a similar audit.
"It puts them basically at the top of the list for publicly-traded oil companies," said energy analyst James Bunch at Renaissance Capital brokerage in Moscow.
"It puts it in the company of the big sisters, but by no means is it larger than the big sisters."
Energy analysts said LUKoil, already Russia's largest vertically-integrated oil company in terms of reserves, had jumped the gun in saying that, in terms of reserves, it was the queen of the seven sisters -- the world's biggest oil companies.
The Seven Sisters, a term coined in the 1950s and popularised two decades later, refers to Royal Dutch/Shell, British Petroleum, Exxon, Texaco, Chevron, Mobil and Gulf Oil Corp, now owned by Chevron.
The world's single largest oil company is private Saudi Aramco, the state oil company of Saudi Arabia, the world's single biggest oil producing and exporting country.
But even LUKoil's listed international competitors have reserves and oil reserves equivalents that make them outshine Russia's star oil firm.
"There's a slight bit of being, how shall we say it, economical with the truth," said Stephen O'Sullivan, director of oil and gas at MC Securities in London, adding that Exxon had larger reserves than LUKoil when its natural gas was converted to oil equivalent in barrels.
Shell had about eight billion barrels of oil reserves, but also an equal amount of natural gas equivalent to barrels -- putting it head and shoulders above LUKoil.
"Certainly if you're LUKoil, 99 percent of your value is in oil, whereas if you're BP or Exxon, you have an awful lot of value in your gas, which is a very valuable commodity," O'Sullivan said.
Russia's Gazprom natural gas monopoly controls all the transport of Russian gas to world markets, leaving a question mark over the production and transport of any gas in LUKoil's reserves portfolio.
LUKoil said it had arrived at the new reserves total after an audit of its reserves in what Russia calls its European part, where some LUKoil production units are based.
The statement gave no information on the degrees to which the total reserves were commercially recoverable -- a key for any shareholder wondering how big oil in the ground translates into equity benefits.
LUKoil's reserves, at the company's 1996 production rate of about 58 million tonnes, would mean it had 26 years' worth of output -- a period of time that, coupled with the cost of extracting oil in Siberia, could be a burden, not a blessing.
"After 10 years, the net added value of those reserves, discounted at 15 percent, is nothing," said Peter Houlder, managing director of CentreInvest consultancy in Moscow and an energy specialist.
"They're the largest development driller and exploratory driller in Russia -- and you have to ask, why?" said Houlder, citing the vast costs of tapping remote oil in Siberia, where the majority of LUKoil's oil is located.
One Western analyst joked that the cost of producing Siberian oil was so great compared to North Sea or Alaskan oil that Russian oil firms with remote reserves were the six "babushkas", or grandmothers, to the world's top six producers.
