Chechnya's main oil refinery once sent popes the finest paraffin wax they needed for the Vatican's holy candles. Now the shell-scarred plant barely flickers with activity, wasting away after two years of war.
Russian bombs no longer fall on the mainly Moslem region's capital Grozny. But the aftermath of the independence struggle with Moscow has left the century-old refinery to battle an army of Chechens who steal its oil to make illicit petrol.
It is a wild, bootleg industry unmatched anywhere else in the world. Legions of local people eke out a living by scooping up crude oil from idled wells across the republic and making what must be the world's worst gasoline.
It is a windfall for some of Chechnya's million-strong population, left destitute by the fighting which ended last year. But it deprives the refinery of badly-needed supplies and is holding back the reconstruction of an oil industry that was the mainstay of the economy in Soviet times.
The illicit trade is not the oil-riches dream that rebel leader Dzhokhar Dudayev promised Chechens, who sit on only small oil reserves but control a key pipeline route in the North Caucasus.
"Dudayev said that after we built a new pipeline, we'd all live in houses with gold-plated taps flowing with camel's milk," said a young Chechen who would give only his nickname, 'Cyclone'. "He promised people gold roofs, too."
There is little gold yet in Chechnya, where there is virtually no infrastructure or real economy. Roads resemble the surface of the moon. Every man seems to have a loaded sub-machinegun and a jar of home-made petrol to sell but no obvious job.
ILLEGAL REFINING ONE OF FEW SOURCES OF INCOME
Black-market refining, begun as a wartime necessity, is now one of Chechnya's few sources of income. The simple chemistry requires little more than stolen crude oil, bath-like containers, siphoned natural gas, water, and, for a dash of colour, powdered drink mix.
Wartime leader Aslan Maskhadov was elected president a month ago after the Russian army finally quit the region, and promised to consolidate Chechnya's de facto independence by rebuilding the economy. He has vowed to end the bootlegging.
But everybody's doing it. There is little work in Chechnya. According to official figures, nearly 90 percent have no job. As many as one in four Chechens may be involved in the illegal petrol trade, officials say.
LOW OCTANE BUT FULL OF "EVIL"
The bootleggers tend to work stealthily at night, raiding idle oil wells under the cover of darkness.
In Tsotsin-Yurt, a tiny village 35 km (20 miles) southeast of Grozny, 23-year-old Lyomi, a tomato grower before the war, stood knee-deep in mud, refining petrol.
Thick black smoke billowed in the barren distance on the foothills of the snow-capped Caucasus mountains, marking the well from which Lyomi steals his suuplies.
Driving the oil across a landscape of mud and snow, he dumps it into a boiler heated with natural gas siphoned from a nearby pipeline. It is then piped to a pit under which lies a cistern -- also purloined -- that is cooled with water.
Then it trickles over to another cistern. That's it. First he gets acetone, then gasoline, then diesel and then paraffin.
The product is put into three-litre (one gallon) glass jars and sprinkled with a packet of Turkish-made soft drink mix for a pale lemon-green tint, mimicking the real thing.
The low-octane petrol, sold on streets and country roads across Chechnya, wrecks engines, does few kilometres to the litre (miles to the gallon) and has spawned an active, if ultimately futile, car repair business.
"There's no other work," Lyomi said, wiping his smudged face. "It's not worth shutting down. There are no other jobs."
BATTLE AGAINST BOOTLEGGERS
Back in Grozny, Khozhakhmed Yarikhanov, president of the Southern Oil Company, or YUNKO, and Chechnya's highest oil official, told Reuters that operations like Lyomi's must be closed so that the real refinery can have enough oil to process.
"Today, oil is the only source of income for the republic," he said at his spartan office. "It was my idea to close down the home refineries and we will do it." He knows it will be tough.
Bootleggers greatly upset refinery director Baudin Khamidov, who fears his chances to renew supplies to the Pope and make top-flight lubricants for military jets are slipping away.
"If we took the 4,000 tonnes a day that the bootleggers are stealing from the wells, we could solve our economic problems," he said at the main refinery, the Grozny Oil-Refining Combine.
"This is the very greatest evil in the republic."
The plant was built by the British during the first Caucasus oil boom of the 1890s. In Soviet times it processed oil brought in from Siberia. With foreigners rushing to open up vast reserves in the landlocked Caspian, Grozny hopes to cash in on a new flow of oil across its territory to Black Sea ports.
But for now, the refinery shows only faint signs of life. A mangy but well-fed dog slept in the sun next to hissing pipes, and wisps of steam curled lazily in the crisp winter air.
"Our paraffin was considered the best in the world," sighed Viktor Petrov, deputy director and former papal supplier.
"We were pretty badly hit during the war," Khamidov said.
Out of action most of last year, the plant has begun processing tiny amounts of oil. But against battalions of bootleggers it is losing the battle for local crude supplies.
"We have no feedstock (supplies)," Khamidov said, complaining that Moscow had ceased sending Siberian oil.
"You don't see this anywhere else in the world."
