Russia removed a layer of secrecy from its huge Sukhoi Log gold field and invited investors on Thursday to tap the Siberian El Dorado, which could significantly boost Russian gold output for years to come.
But there was little chance that developing the vast field would flood markets with Russian gold, even if the long-stalled, long-delayed billion-dollar project gets off the ground soon.
"Sukhoi Log may be the biggest hard-rock reserve, but Busang in Indonesia, which is open-pit, has 75 million ounces and rising," said Andy Smith of UBS in London, discounting Russian talk that Sukhoi Log was the world's largest untapped gold field.
An aide at the Natural Resources Ministry said domestic miner Lenzoloto would tender next month a 49 percent stake in one of its units which holds the right to develop Sukhoi Log.
Small Australian miner Star Mining Corporation NL, with nominally 31 percent of Lenzoloto, was the preferred bidder, Lenzoloto board secretary Alexei Mikhailov said.
Sukhoi Log -- which means Dry Ravine in Russian -- is in southeastern Siberia's remote Irkutsk region and has gold reserves of about 35 million troy ounces, Mikhailov said.
Lenzoloto produced about five tonnes of gold last year, a drop in the bucket of Russia's 1996 total of 124 tonnes.
Mikhailov said Sukhoi Log's peak output could reach 60 tonnes a year (nearly two million ounces) in the next millenium -- a figure which did not make analysts jump.
"Sixty tonnes of output can be bought in five minutes by a fund," Smith said, adding that mine supply variations had not really affected gold prices in the past year and the chances of Russia flooding the market with Sukhoi Log gold were "nil".
Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin ordered last year that Russia stop hiding how much gold Sukhoi Log might have, saying decades-long Soviet secrecy on the giant field would do nothing to attract the vast amount of capital needed to tap it.
Mikhailov said platinum reserves there could be as high as gold reserves but said it was unclear if they could be commercially developed.
A feasibility study of Sukhoi Log has been completed but Mikhailov said Lenzoloto had not yet seen the document. The study details gold-recovery grades ascertained by Russian geologists and guarded as a secret by the Soviet Communists.
"We have 51 percent of the shares (in Lenzoloto unit Sukhoi Log that will tap the field) and fully control the situation," Boris Yatskevich, First Deputy Natural Resources Minister and Lenzoloto board chairman, told the Sevodnya daily.
"They will pay money, and we will control things."
That could be wishful thinking, given Russia's track record in attracting foreign investment to its flagging gold sector.
"The lack of investment in the area is quite incredible at the moment," said bullion analyst Andrea Hotter of Metal Bulletin Research in London.
One reason is that Russia has made it tough to export gold.
"The issue of exporting gold has not yet been resolved by the government, but they are working to liberalise the market," Mikhailov said, adding that the government buys gold from domestic mines at international prices but pays in roubles.
Sukhoi Log could be worth $12.4 billion at current world gold prices -- but small Star Mining will have to cough up plenty to turn it into a silk purse.
Lenzoloto wants the tender winner to pay a $60 million signing bonus, $200 million for the equity stake and provide $500 million in bank-guaranteed financing. Mikhailov estimated the project's total cost at $1.5 billion.
Star Mining signed a memorandum last year with South African mining group JCI Ltd for JCI to acquire an option for shares in Star unit Star Technology Systems Ltd that would give JCI an economic interest of up to 30 percent in Sukhoi Log.
"Sukhoi Log was the jewel," Smith said. "But tenders have been known to be postponed. It seems to be a very slow project in getting started up."
