The struggle by Russia's Norilsk Nickel to climb out of debt may leave workers unwilling to bite the only hand that feeds them by staging a serious strike, Russia-based analysts said on Wednesday.
But efforts by Norilsk's main shareholder to restructure the key metals producer will not bring quick results, which could mean labour unrest and possible output disruptions in the future.
Some analysts have focused on the chances of Norilsk winning state aid as the key to quelling labour unrest that has led union leaders to call for strikes over wage and holiday arrears on March 27 and April 2 at Norilsk's flagship plant.
"Tax holidays have been handed out in the past," said a Western economist who is familiar with Norilsk and its pleas for a state bailout.
"But if you give Norilsk a break, you've got dozens in the queue right behind it. Then you get YUKOS (Russia's second largest oil producer) saying, 'What about us?'"
Sergei Pavlenko of the Moscow-based Centre for Economic Reform said Norilsk's ability to find 900 billion roubles for overdue salaries depended less on its main shareholder Uneximbank's cash in hand and more on regional budget politics.
"Restructuring Norilsk is not so much a question of cash as of budget politics," he said, adding Norilsk was trying to force its administrative district, the vast Krasnoyarsk region, to shoulder the cost of supporting social infrastructure and other non-metals industries.
A Western fund manager in Moscow who follows Norilsk said he thought a government decree restructuring Norilsk tax and budget arrears was likely, given the strategic importance of Norilsk's nickel and precious metals exports to the economy .
Key to Norilsk's efforts to boost revenues and pay off arrears is a plan to transfer the huge cost of social infrastructure in its Arctic towns to the regions.
Norilsk supports 60 percent of the regional budget of Krasnoyarsk, which runs from the Arctic down to the southern Siberian steppes. It says it cannot support the region's farmers and other workers.
But many analysts do not expect fast government aid for Norilsk, which in addition to two to three months in back salaries owes 1.2 trillion roubles to various budgets -- a burden it says has cut into wage payments.
Norilsk says it spent nearly 42 percent of its 1996 revenues on social costs.
While Norilsk's main shareholder commercial bank Uneximbank is well connected -- First Deputy Prime Minister Vladimir Potanin is the bank's former head -- it is only one of many powerful Russian firms in need of state handouts.
"To pay for transferring social costs, the regions will have to raise taxes -- and that is going to be paid for by the company," said the Western economist.
Western traders are sceptical of serious supply disruptions at Norilsk, but they are not discounting the possibility that a protracted financial crisis and arrears could affect output at one of the world's biggest nickel and precious metals producers.
But Pavlenko said no Russian industrial strike in recent history had ever cut into output significantly.
"Russian workers know how to do one thing -- work," he said, adding, "The Norilsk trade union is multifaceted and complex."
Other analysts said they doubted a serious strike would materialise while debt restructuring was being carried out.
"I think people are seeing the seeds of a solution there," said Grant Sinitsyn, metals equity analyst at United City Bank in Moscow.
"It's been a lot of posturing on the part of the union. We've seen plenty of strike action at Norilsk in the past, and the net effect on their total yearly output is basically nil."
--Moscow Newsroom +7095 941 8520 ($1 = 5,689 roubles)
