The titans of Russia's aluminium sector said there were few chances of output disruptions to the world's largest exporter as a result of a row over Western participation in the industry
Asked if Moscow could renationalise the sector, a senior official close to the Bratsk smelter -- Russia's and the world's largest -- said, "I can't say that it's impossible."
But he added, "All the smelters have a unified position of solidarity. The enterprises will win this argument and output will not be affected."
Oleg Presman, deputy chief executive of the Krasnoyarsk smelter, Russia's second largest, said in a telephone interview that Russia's top aluminium executives were drafting a letter to Interior Minister Anatoly Kulikov to address his concerns about foreign presence in the sector.
Kulikov stepped up a war of words with London-based Trans-World Group -- a commodities giant working closely with Russian smelters -- saying on Tuesday that a probe into what he called crimes in Russia's aluminium sector was justified.
Kulikov, in a letter to Trans-World executive chairman David Reuben, a copy of which the ministry faxed to Reuters, said domestic producers needed protection from foreign metals companies to compete and survive.
Among other stakes, Trans-World has about 30 percent in Bratsk, 11 percent of voting shares in Krasnoyarsk and a non-controlling stake in the smaller Novokuznetsk smelter.
But domestic aluminium executives defended the presence of foreign companies like Trans-World on the Russian market, saying that they had saved Russian plants with tolling arrangements.
"If Kulikov puts an end to tolling, he'll put an end to the Russian aluminium sector," the senior official said.
"Where is he going to get $2 billion?" he said, referring to the cash smelters would have to raise if they severed links with suppliers like Trans-World and bought their own raw materials to produce primary aluminium.
Russian primary aluminium exports last year were the world's largest at 2.44 million tonnes out of total domestic output of 2.87 million tonnes.
Kulikov said there was no question of confiscating property -- which Trans-World said was reassuring.
But Kulikov said tolling -- in which commodities companies import alumina, give it to smelters to make primary aluminium and then take the product back for export -- had deprived smelters of earning more money from exports.
But smelters said they also make money on the arrangement.
"If tolling were not advantageous for us, we wouldn't do it," Presman said.
Igor Prokopov, chief executive of the Kontsern Alyuminiy producers' group, said that a group letter being drafted would deny that Russian aluminium was a dirty business.
"We are not in any way involved in criminal deals," he said.
The Prosecutor-General said last Friday that it was activating an investigation originally started by the Interior Ministry into what it called crimes in the aluminium sector.
"It's unpleasant when a factory is under pressure," Presman said, referring to the probe. But when asked if the quarrel could hit output or exports, he said, "I don't think so."
The stepping up of the probe came days after Reuben, in commentaries and advertisements in international newspapers, said Moscow was smearing him for his business in Russia.
"There are some normal questions and some incorrect ones," said Presman, referring to materials Kulikov had on the sector.
"Maybe the materials Kulikov was given (to examine) were true, but some of the conclusions about those materials are incorrect," he said, adding that Kulikov's call for tariffs on alumina imports were damaging.
When asked if tolling in Russia would continue, he said, "I think yes -- as long we still need it economically."
--Moscow Newsroom, +7095 941 8520
