Western mines and financiers have not taken a shine to Russia's big gold reserves, saying it will be some time before the world's third-largest gold producer attracts significant foreign investment.
"A lot of companies have come, looked and are here to look again, but it's going to be slow, very slow," said Ted Reeve, gold equity analyst at Toronto-based Scotia Capital Markets.
"There's competition for exploration and investment dollars, and Russia is certainly not getting her share of them," he said, speaking on Tuesday at a Russian-Canadian industry seminar.
Russia ranks third in the world in terms of gold reserves, but only fifth in output and far lower in outside investment.
Industry sources said not one of the dozen or so top joint ventures in Russia had produced even one tonne of gold since launching operations in recent years.
"It's too early," said Pas Gido, a board member of Baleyzoloto, a Canadian-Russian project near Chita in Siberia, adding that the lead time for gold projects here was five years.
Viktor Gritsayev, a deputy head of the state committee for precious metals and stones (Komdragmet), whose functions are being transferred to other state entities, said Russia had targeted $6 billion in investment for its gold sector by 2000, with 43 percent of the total to come from foreign investors.
But if last year is any sign of things to come, the short-term outlook is not good.
Industry sources said a mere $45 million was invested in Russian gold projects last year -- a tiny fraction of the total $3.6 billion spent last year by global investors, half of them Canadian or U.S., on gold projects around the world.
Sergei Kyshtymov, head of the central bank's precious metals department, said 108 domestic banks had licenses to finance gold output. But industry sources said only eight banks can take gold out of the country as collateral to finance projects and that domestic financing had yet to increase output.
"Unfortunately, there really have not been any significant structural changes in financing," said Mikhail Katsman, executive director of Russia's Union of Gold Producers, a non-government organisation.
About 85 percent of all gold mined in Russia last year was from above-ground alluvial, or placer, deposits, as opposed to below-ground ore deposits. But since 80 percent of Russia's known gold reserves are in the ground, big investment dollars will be needed soon if output is to increase significantly.
Output last year fell to about 122 tonnes, largely because alluvial reserves are being depleted, taxes hit producers at 60 percent of revenues and state funding has declined.
State forecasts say 1996 output is likely to slip further.
Nearly two thirds of the country's gold is mined in Russia's Far East, a quarter comes out of Eastern Siberia and 12 percent out of the Urals, with small cooperatives, known as artels, accounting for about 60 percent of output.
In one of Russia's best-known projects and the one analysts say is the furthest along, Cyprus Magadan Gold, a unit of Amax Gold Inc, owns a 50 percent stake in the Omolon Gold Mining Company project to develop the Kubaka reserve in the Far Eastern Magadan region.
Output, expected to begin in 1997, is targeted at an annual average rate of 310,000 ounces of gold and 235,000 ounces of silver over seven years.
But other projects have stumbled or worse.
Britain's RTZ Corp Plc pulled out of its only Russia project in May over royalty and tax squabbles with Moscow.
"If I were a foreign company, I would see a tonne of problems to foreign investment in Russian gold," Katsman said.
-- Moscow Newsroom, +7095 941 8520
