Russia, the world's top aluminium exporter, is also its least competitive and alleged corruption may scare off badly-needed foreign investors, top industry sources said on Friday.
But the key to success was not in government intervention in the running of the industry. It should, instead, help by reducing heavy energy and transport costs, leaving it to shareholders to improve quality and expand production, they added.
Aluminium luminaries, speaking at a metallurgy conference, stepped delicately around a controversy over alleged crime in the sector. But they warned that the scandal could keep Russia's industry from becoming more competitive by discouraging investors from pumping cash into the world's largest smelters.
Igor Prokopov, executive chairman of the Kontsern Alyuminiy producers' group, said the crime allegations were not helping matters, adding, "it reflects negatively on our situation on world markets and puts off investors.
"I'll give you an example: Alcoa is buying companies in Italy and Spain but hasn't invested a copeck in Russia."
Comments by Interior Minister Anatoly Kulikov earlier this month that Russian aluminium was plagued with corruption and that a formal probe was gathering pace come just as smelters confront the problem of how to boost profits.
Smelter profit margins were 16 percent over 1992-1994 but had fallen to one percent in 1996 and were as low as minus 14 percent in the final quarter of last year, Prokopov said.
Limp world prices, stagnant domestic consumption of barely three kgs per capita and soaring energy and rail tariffs -- a major component of production costs -- were to blame.
"Russia's aluminium sector is on the verge of crisis -- we need measures to remain competitive," Prokopov said.
"We're barely competitive on world markets. Our production costs are higher than virtually anywhere else in the world."
But he said shareholders would solve the crisis, not the government.
Vsevolod Generalov, chairman of the Metal Exporters Union and board chairman of the Norilsk Nickel metals group, said that raising output and exports was the way out of financial crisis at aluminium and other metals enterprises.
Russia was the world's biggest primary aluminium exporter last year, with deliveries of 2.44 million tonnes. It has kept output rising steadily and forecasts growth of up to three percent this year.
But all is not well, with transport costs, for example, accounting for 53 percent of output costs, compared with 24 percent in the West.
Prokopov blamed five-digit increases in energy and transport tariffs since 1991, problems in recouping a 20 percent value-added tax and high taxes, which he said consumed money needed for investment and modernisation.
The Bratsk smelter in Siberia, the world's largest, paid 526 billion roubles ($92.2 million) to the budget last year on gross profits of 300 billion roubles, according to a Bratsk release. Profits were down sharply from 1995's 1.19 trillion roubles.
Russian smelters also need foreign money to secure longterm electricity and transport contracts, and to integrate vertically with power generators and raw materials plants.
Tolling, in which foreign commodities houses import raw materials, send them to smelters for processing and take the metal back for export, had attracted $1.5 billion in short-term investments, the International Metallurgists Union said.
While much more is needed to improve the quality of Russia's output, industry sources said the goverment was scaring off investors who were active in tolling but who might be interested in more direct investments.
"Some federal structures continually create artificial barriers to the adoption of this practice (tolling) which may not only undermine export possibilities but also significantly worsen the situation of the Russian raw materials base," a Metallurgists Union letter to President Boris Yeltsin said.
"Western companies who do tolling have a highly organised system of marketing and transport," Prokopov said, adding that tolling had saved smelters from complete collapse in recent years when they had no cash of their own to buy raw materials.
While aluminium officials spoke of the need for investment, they were hesitant to slam Kulikov's comments.
"Kulikov's address has both positive and negative moments, and we're very attentively watching it and will send a letter (to him) soon," Prokopov said.
Yuri Shlaifshtein, a Bratsk board member, said there was no crime whatsoever at the Siberian giant and added, "it's very hard to say things about the whole thing because Kulikov is a deputy prime minister and the state has strategic interests." ($ = 5706 Russian Roubles)
