Russia's reformist cabinet may give a new thrust to economic changes, but Western oil investors said on Wednesday the new government was not a knight in shining armour ready to go into battle for stalled oil deals.
The appointment of reformers may cheer economists worried about Moscow's stalled market economy transition. But foreign oil majors, with energy deals already mired for years by political bickering, said they were unlikely to see direct benefits soon.
"Reforms to other sectors will be tardy in hitting the fuel and energy sector," said a senior Western energy executive. "It's probably due to the value and strategic significance of the sector. They may want to leave well enough alone."
Western and Asian oil companies plan around $60 billion in direct long-term investments in greenfield projects in Russia, the world's third largest crude oil producer.
But the deals hinge upon the unruly parliament, or Duma, which has blocked essential legislation, not on the cabinet.
"The cabinet would not appear to be the block at the moment," said Martin Cocker, a partner in consultancy Ernst &amp; Young's World Energy Group. "Until the enabling legislation is through the Duma, it seems unlikely that the majors will want to invest in a major way."
Russia has had a production-sharing law -- the legal linchpin for outside energy investment in risky countries -- for more than 15 months, but most major deals are not yet off the ground.
That is because the law, trimmed to appease conservatives before it was finally approved, still lacks elements required to make it function. Russia has also not decided which reserves it will open to production-sharing deals.
Both gaps have left foreign oil investors in the lurch.
"The government still can't really influence parliament, and that's where all the oil legislation is," said Eugene Khartukov of Moscow's International Centre for Petroleum Business Studies.
Oil executives are gloomy despite the appointments of reformers who will dominate government economic departments.
Anatoly Chubais, who masterminded Russia's privatisation programme and is now First Deputy Prime Minister in charge of the economy, also takes on the post of Finance Minister.
Boris Nemtsov, head of the reform showcase Nizhny Novgorod region, will work alongside Chubais and hold the same rank. Nemtsov's brief includes reform of natural monopolies such as gas and electricity.
Still, the dramatic Kremlin reshuffle has not completely left foreign oil companies out in the cold.
Chubais was the brain behind the Federal Energy Commission, a reform-minded regulatory body that has yet to get off the ground but seeks to inject market-economy principles into the energy sector, like fair access to oil export pipelines.
"Probably the FEC will come more to life," the first Western executive said. "That's the sort of institution that gives some comfort to investors. Existing operations are very concerned about the pipeline access issue -- they never know how much they'll be exporting from month to month."
The Fuel and Energy Ministry, at loggerheads with the Commission, survived the Kremlin reshuffle, possibly because Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin, the former gas minister, made its preservation a condition of staying in the government, an oil industry source said.
But Chernomyrdin, who helped foreign oil companies through the Kremlin power corridors in recent years, may have less of an ear for Western oil companies.
There may not be help either from Fuel and Energy Minister Pyotr Rodionov, whose earlier job was in the gas sector.
"My drift is that he's not particularly interested in oil," the second source said.
