Russia admitted on Tuesday it had missed its chance to be the top dog in Caspian oil projects, but said it had ambitions in the Mideast Gulf after signing giant deals with Iraq.
Fuel and Energy Minister Pyotr Rodionov said Iraq, with which Russia signed two oil deals last week, was a natural choice since Moscow had missed the investment chances in its own backyard.
"We of course missed our chances in the Caspian, a lot of chances," he told a news conference. He was referring to a host of multi-billion dollar oil deals in Azerbaijan and Kazakhstan, where Russian companies play a minor role to the leading parts of the world's oil majors.
"We're ready to look at any projects in Iraq that are commercially viable and open," he said.
Russia and Iraq signed last Friday a 23-year deal to develop seven to eight billion barrels of oil reserves in southern Iraq's Qurana oilfield once sanctions imposed by the United Nations after Iraq's 1990 invasion of Kuwait are lifted.
Iraqi officials said earlier that the deal would give Baghdad $70 billion in revenue -- more than enough for Baghdad to repay Moscow $7 billion in Soviet-era debt.
Officials stressed that none of the deals would violate the U.N. sanctions, which place a blanket ban on investments, and that only preliminary feasibility and financing work would begin now.
But they said Russia was keen to get down to business in the Gulf once the curbs were removed.
"I would like to underscore that we firmly support international laws," Rodionov said. "But at this stage, we will only do serious preparatory work. We estimate that it will take a bit of time. None of this is against the U.N. sanctions, which we are observing and will observe."
Russia's largest oil company LUKoil has a majority 52.5 percent stake in Qurana, in which Iraq has 25 percent, and two other Russian oil firms, Zarubezhneft and Mashinoimport, have the rest.
Rodionov said Russian state oil holding firm Rosneft and Zarubezhneft had signed a separate deal to set up an oil drilling enterprise to carry out work in Iraq.
Oleg Popov, executive chairman of Zarubezhneft, said a deal to hasten the drilling of 100 wells in Iraq would be speeded up but would not violate the U.N. curbs.
LUKoil Executive Chairman Vagit Alekperov said the deals were good news for Russia, which is the world's third largest oil producer but is smarting at its loss of control over reserves in the former Soviet republics.
"Russian work will not violate the sanctions," Alekperov said. "The Russian profits from this project are quite large and we've taken the right step."
Officials said Qurana envisaged first stage capital expenditure of $4 billion and output of 660,000 barrels per day.
"When the sanctions end, we'll be in the starting blocks and ready to go," Popov said, adding that Russia would like to work with other international oil majors in the Gulf.
Moscow is still a close ally of Baghdad and Foreign Minister Yevgeny Primakov, a Middle East specialist, has called Iraqi Deputy Prime Minister Tareq Aziz his "old comrade".
Russian oil companies already buy about one quarter of Iraq's limited oil exports under the U.N.'s $2 billion oil-for-food programme, which permits Baghdad to pump oil to raise money for humanitarian needs.
While Russia supported the U.N.'s stringent sanctions, it is now eager to see them lifted.
Rodionov said he was eyeing more Iraqi oil deals and advised Russian oil independent Tatneft to pool its brains and finances with other firms to get in on the Gulf act.
"We must do this because of our longterm national security interests," Rodionov said, adding that other companies, known to be French and Chinese, were also eyeing post-sanction deals.
"Maybe after all of Iraq's oil reserves are explored and proven, it will become the world's largest oil country," he said, adding that Russian firms would already be there.
--Moscow Newsroom, +7095 941 8520
