The newest challenge for Russia, now that it has lumbered over the hurdles of privatisation and market liberalisation, is reforming its giant natural monopolies to underpin long-term economic growth, analysts said on Tuesday.
But reforming prices and boosting competition in the gas, electricity and railway monoliths -- as well as tackling the most resilient leftovers of the Soviet planned economy -- could be the toughest economic task yet in this vast country.
The monopolies are the government's newest makeover target, castigated for functioning largely as they did in Soviet days, when production costs were irrelevant, competition non-existent and prices bore no relationship to reality.
Prices for industrial consumers have risen astronomically as Russia's markets take hold, but the new pricing -- domestic customers pay a fraction of real costs -- does not reflect market principles.
Analysts said price distortions were hurting the economy, with far-reaching effects ranging from consumers not paying for supplies to shortfalls in budget revenue and commodities houses unable to import grain because of high domestic rail tariffs.
"The theoretical principle is very simple," said Jochen Wermuth, an economist and adviser at the Finance Ministry. "If you abolish cross-subsidies and introduce territorially differentiated price structures, you'll see more competition."
But Russia's monopolies can see only fine-tuning, rather than the major overhaul the International Monetary Fund wants as a condition of its $10 billion, three-year loan to Moscow.
Each monopoly faces similar problems, but all drag their feet and need prodding from the Kremlin to change old ways.
Gazprom  GAZP.RTS, the natural gas monopoly and the world's largest gas company, needs to release its stranglehold on production and distribution.
"To a certain extent Gazprom is pretending to talk about restructuring," said Renaissance Capital oil and gas analyst Alexei Kokin. "It may help it work more efficiently but it won't introduce competition (in gas distribution)."
National electricity firm UES  EESR.RTS, both a producer and a transmitter, must create a wholesale electricity market and allow regional producers to sell directly to end-users.
But the tightly-integrated system was set up so that regional generators could send excess supplies to areas needing more, and some analysts said giving the regional "energos" a free rein could wreak havoc in the short-term.
"If consumers could chose their own providers, they would go for the cheapest supplies, which would lead to no demand at other producers and shortages in certain areas," said Marina Oganesian, energy analyst at Troika-Dialog in Moscow.
Analysts said the railways monopoly, still a ministry, must stop subsidising passengers with prices many times lower than commercial rates that have influenced the economics of everything from oil exports to grain imports.
Russia's newest economic whiz kid, First Deputy Prime Minister Boris Nemtsov, wants UES to lower prices and allow competition among producers, but he and Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin have ruled out breaking up either UES or Gazprom.
The three monopolies, coupled with the oil pipeline export network, account for 40 percent of budget revenues but are a main source of a nonpayments crisis crippling Russian industry.
Just 10 percent of electricity consumers pay their bills in cash, while UES, Gazprom's biggest domestic client, owes the gas giant billions. UES collects only half of what it is owed.
"Clearly, if you keep having a distorted price structure, it's not good for long-term growth," Wermuth said, adding he expected major changes this year but that they would be painful.
The biggest beneficiaries of monopoly restructuring would be industrial enterprises, whose output contracted an average six percent in 1996, and the monopolies themselves, which would find it easier to collect for supplies delivered.
The scale of monopolies whose gas pipelines, powerlines and railroads cover tens of thousands of km (miles) makes restructuring both urgent and difficult. "It's a big advantage for Russia to be so big -- the hugeness is in fact the argument for efficiency of the energy system," Wermuth said.
