Russian oil producers are striving to seize control of a chunk of the country's crude oil exports, leaving traders wondering if their glory days in the world's third largest oil producer could be turning sour.
Russia's newest oil majors, racing to integrate vertically and to exert more control over deliveries abroad, say they need the profits that traders earn on state-sponsored exports to invest in production and expansion at home.
Russian and Western traders say they are more experienced on logistical matters like contacts with Western buyers and better able to deal with constant revisions in the export schedule set by oil pipeline monopoly Transneft.
"You can't just call Russian oil companies producers any more -- they're all trying to get control of exports as part of their integration processes," a Russian trader said.
The battle is for state-sponsored exports called federal programmes which aim to help raise cash for state projects. Worth $2-$3 billion a year, the programmes let companies buy oil at home, send it abroad and pay less in taxes and tariffs.
Traders dominate exports for state needs, which comprised 23 percent of Russia's two million barrels per day (bpd) oil exports outside the Commonwealth of Independent States last year. Russian output totalled 6.03 million bpd.
But producers, backed by the Fuel and Energy Ministry, want this to change -- and they may be seeing first signs of victory.
"Oil companies, against the backdrop of more solvent domestic consumers, have succeeded in restricting sales of their resources to trading companies which export for state needs," wrote the Fuel and Energy Ministry's InfoTEK agency in its latest monthly bulletin.
"As a result, the majority of traders have not been able to export the oil they planned to for state needs. But the results for oil companies which export for state needs are quite different," it said, citing smooth deliveries by producers over the first two months of this year.
A second Russian trader said producers were offering crude oil to traders at increasingly high prices, which was cutting into profits and making state exports less attractive.
InfoTEK said oil trading company Nafta-Moskva could not get any of the oil it was to export under federal programmes in January or February, but a Nafta-Moskva source said the firm had managed to secure 230,000 tonnes for state exports in March.
A Western oil trader said the fight could soon get even hotter, citing market rumours that Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin could sign an order cutting federal programmes.
Traders are lesser but still significant players in commercial exports, which account for about three-quarters of Russia's $13 billion a year oil exports. But producers are also seeking an even bigger role in these deliveries.
LUKoil, Russia's largest oil producer, said it was building a fleet of 10 river vessels with a total deadweight capacity of 66,100 tonnes to move its oil and products better. It also said it was planning a fleet of sea going tankers.
"This is part of our strategy to make oil exports more optimal," said LUKoil spokesman Pyotr Neyev.
Mini-major Sibneft, which accounted for nearly five percent of Russia's total crude exports last year, said earlier this week it would handle its own oil exports from April.
The struggle to control the flow of oil is also affecting Russia's refining industry, with traders saying producers are increasingly unwilling to sell oil to outsiders for processing.
"We tried to get oil to supply refineries, but it's very difficult to make a lot of money doing that," said a second Russian trader, adding that low utilisation rates boosted costs.
Producers on average supply refineries with two thirds of the oil they process each year and the rest is from traders.
Integrated oil companies own only 19 of Russia's 28 major refineries. They have a total capacity of 4.6 million bpd, or 75 percent of Russia's total capacity, but processed 2.5 million bpd last year, working at an average 56 percent of capacity.
--Moscow Newsroom, +7095 941 8520
