Russia's Norilsk Nickel, one of the world's largest nickel producers, kept metals traders on guard on Thursday after a short strike by unpaid workers raised long-term questions over future output and exports.
Interfax news agency said workers at some Norilsk Nickel metals group plants struck for two hours on Thursday over wage arrears, temporarily halting output.
The strike, the second at the company this year, unnerved industry players, who said Norilsk could either increase exports to generate cash to pay overdue salaries or cut back output and exports because of labour unrest.
"It's a minefield," said a nickel trader at a major Western commodities house.
"If you deal with these people very carefully, things will be okay -- but only if," the source said, adding that instability in Russia's coal industry could spread to Russia's non-ferrous metals sector.
Interfax said Norilsk workers would refuse to load metals for export from September 16 unless an agreement was reached with management over 800 billion roubles ($148.7 million) in wage arrears.
"The problem is serious and possibly long-term," said Ilya Korotkov, product manager at Russian metals exporter European Materials Agency, which exports small amounts of Norilsk output.
"They will try to export more to pay off salaries," he said, adding that exports could rise 10-15 percent in the second quarter of 1996. "They don't have many other choices."
Russia is the world's largest miner of nickel ore and concentrate, and Norilsk, whose exports are key to balance in the market, is the world's second largest producer of refined nickel, a key ingredient in stainless steel.
The company also produces huge quantities of copper, cobalt, platinum and platinum group metals.
"They really have some severe problems with cash flows," said Olga Vinogradova, a metals analyst at United City Bank in Moscow, adding she had heard of some export delays, which traders had reported earlier this week. "This strike is not going to have a positive impact on clients."
Sources said Norilsk was moving from pre-financing to Western export credits to boost profitability.
Benchmark nickel contracts on the London Metals Exchange are at around $7,530 a tonne, down from September highs of $7,850.
Sources said Norilsk, which reported a net profit for 1995 of 138 billion roubles and debts of 6.8 trillion roubles, all under Russian accounting standards, was facing one of its first major financial tests since privatisation.
Norilsk director Alexander Khloponin has said he wants to turn the company around and Interfax quoted him as saying he saw several ways to raise cash to pay salaries, including asset sales, more effective exports and more efficient production.
Norilsk produced 180,100 tonnes of nickel in 1995, up nearly 11 percent from 1994, and it expects 1996 production to rise by three percent.
But Russian nickel output, most of it at Norilsk, fell seven percent in August on July levels, according to state figures.
Trade sources said Norilsk, built in 1935 on a swamp 200 km (130 miles) north of the Arctic Circle, was strugging with its status as a cash-sucking firm that must fly in food and soap for workers.
"Workers don't have much there, and the least they expect is their salary," said a Russian metals source. "But turning that place around is easier said than done."
($1=5379 Rouble)
