A battle is shaping up for control of Russia's Fuel and Energy Ministry after the minister resigned, and the losers are likely to be Western firms eyeing deals in the lucrative Russian oil sector, industry sources said on Monday.
The Kremlin has not yet named a replacement for Pyotr Rodionov, who tendered his surprise resignation on Friday, leaving almost no record of substantial achievements after eight months in the job.
But the sources said Moscow, abuzz with talk of possible replacements, was likely to install a person whose priority was domestic oil producers, not Western joint ventures or output-sharing deals dominated by energy multinationals.
"Rodionov didn't have any real feel for the oil sector," said one Western source. "He wasn't a plus or a negative -- he was a nonentity."
Russian news agencies tipped Alexander Samusev, vice-president of Rosprom-YUKOS, Russia's second largest oil producer, and a former deputy minister in the Fuel and Energy and Finance Ministries, as the likely replacement.
YUKOS and its shareholder, Bank Menatep, declined to comment. Rosprom is an industrial holding firm attached to Menatep.
Sources said First Deputy Prime Minister Boris Nemtsov, a new cabinet reformist in charge of natural monopolies and energy issues, wanted his own unnamed choice in the post.
Either option would install a candidate with market economy sensibilities but also a keen desire to make Russian oil firms the dominant players in the world's third biggest crude producer.
"Having somebody from Menatep run the energy ministry wouldn't be particularly good news for Western companies," said a European industry executive.
"I would expect him, if he gets the job, to take a tough line in terms of favouring Russian commercial banks."
Samusev, seen as a reformer and experienced in the state and private sectors, played a key role in winning oil export tax exemptions for joint ventures in the early years of reform.
But that was years ago when domestic oil firms were just beginning to privatise and integrate with refining and marketing units and were in no shape to finance anything on their own.
Russian companies now want controlling stakes in production sharing deals and are upset that they must pay taxes on some oil produced by ventures for which their partners are exempt.
"There is a concern that the Russian producers want to go it alone," said the Western source, adding that whoever headed the ministry could make terms tougher for Western oil companies.
Samusev is a key link between YUKOS and Menatep in their stalled production-sharing talks with U.S.-based Amoco Corp on the $52 billion Priobsk field. The talks have faltered because the Russian side wants greater leverage and ownership in the deal.
Rodionov, appointed in August 1996, was previously director of Lentransgaz, the St Petersburg-based transport unit of Russian natural gas monopoly Gazprom  GAZP.RTS.
He left the oil sector entirely to his deputies, leaving Western oil firms -- which are ready to invest tens of billions of dollars if Moscow passes the necessary laws -- wondering whether Moscow had fundamentally changed its once more welcoming attitude towards outside participation in the energy sector.
Western firms have long said they can secure the financing to reverse lower output, which has almost halved in the last 10 years and was 6.03 million barrels per day in 1996. But that may change now that Russia has a sovereign debt rating.
"It looks like Russian oil companies and banks are beginning to land financing that they couldn't have a year-ago," said the European source, adding that domestic commercial banks could be seeking to exert more leverage over the sector.
