Russia's oil sector, fresh from its smallest fall in output after a decade of plunging, may find it tough to keep up the momentum in the coming years, officials and analysts said on Thursday.
"Analysts' consensus is that production will not pick up before 1999 or 2000," said Elena Merkoulova, Russian energy analyst at Salomon Brothers in London.
Output fell two percent to 6.03 million barrels per day last year, its lowest level in three decades, although the drop in percentage terms was the smallest since 1987.
But output from the world's third largest oil producer has fallen again in the first two months of this year to an average 5.60 million bpd. This is two percent lower than year-ago levels.
Some producers have said that total output could be halved by the year 2000 under existing tax regimes.
Analysts believe this is highly unlikely and the era of steep declines appears to be over. But they say the upturn will be rocky and that slippage will continue.
"The drop we saw at the beginning of the year won't continue through the rest of the year," said Sintez energy analyst Gennady Vasilyev. He forecast that total 1997 output would edge down one percent from 1996.
But the Fuel and Energy Ministry, citing increasingly scarce cash, high taxes and ageing, less productive wells, fears that stagnation could follow the steep decline.
"In these conditions, the relative stabilisation in energy output achieved in 1996 is only a temporary phenomenon," the ministry said.
"It does not offer hopeful grounds for strengthening the slowdown in the rate of decline needed for the short term development programme to 2000," it said in its latest InfoTEK bulletin.
Around 26 percent of Russia's 139,000 wells are not operating and existing tax regimes make many of them unprofitable to rehabilitate. Exploration drilling fell by a third in 1996.
"Such cuts in the sector's production potential pose a threat to the medium-term stabilisation programme to 2000," the ministry said.
Analysts said producers saw few reasons to invest what little cash they had in production when the government was pushing them to supply more crude to domestic refineries and to deliver oil products to the ailing farm sector.
Investment by oil firms in production shrank 26 percent last year, with YUKOS, Russia's second largest oil producer, cutting investment by half. A third of oil companies finished 1996 in the red.
Russia's draft Tax Code may make special provisions for producers, who pay around 53 percent of the wholesale price of each barrel of oil in taxes and tariffs. Boosting output depends upon lower taxes and tariffs, they say.
"The easy-to-recover reserves have been depleted, and it is going to take a lot of money and technology to get the other reserves," Merkoulova said. "No one wants to produce a lot until the excise tariff on production is resolved."
--Moscow Newsroom, +7095 941 8520
