Russian natural gas giant Gazprom announced restructuring and cost-cutting plans on Tuesday, but the world's biggest gas producer downplayed discord with the government over its fate and said it would stay intact.
Gazprom board chairman Rem Vyakhirev said the company -- one of Russia's most powerful entities but increasingly under government scrutiny -- had mostly resolved a row with ministries and property officials over restructuring.
He told a news conference the firm would shed 100,000 jobs this year -- a massive 26 percent of the workforce.
But Vyakhirev said Gazprom would remain a monopoly and would not be split up.
"All of the internal blocs will remain within the Gazprom organisation," he said, referring to internal restructuring which would create up to half a dozen units within the monopoly for output, marketing, transport, finance and other issues.
Gazprom is one of Russia's most politically influential and well-connected companies, but it has come under attack by the International Monetary Fund and some government officials over its opaque financial books and strict control over access to its pipelines.
But Vyakhirev sought to paint a picture of accord between Gazprom and the government, whose prime minister, Viktor Chernomyrdin, once headed Gazprom but who has been conspicuously absent from recent public debate over the company's fate.
He said that he, First Deputy Prime Ministers Anatoly Chubais and Boris Nemtsov and Chernomrydin were all carrying out state duties in examining Gazprom activities.
"I think all four of us will reach agreement. I have a creed -- Russia and Gazprom are family. There will be no quarrels."
Vyakhirev, displaying none of the fear other executives show at the prospect of shedding jobs, said the leaner workforce would save Gazprom three trillion roubles ($520 million) a year.
Russia accounts for 34 percent of world gas reserves and 27 percent of output; Gazprom produces nearly all of Russia's gas.
Analysts say that the company, which was once an entire ministry, is immensely rich from exports -- heating about one third of Europe -- but that it faces serious problems in collecting debts in the former Soviet Union for unpaid supplies.
Even the profit figures are open to doubt.
"When we worked with our auditors (Price Waterhouse), we saw our profits weren't accurately reflected, that our expenditures didn't always have something to do with output," Vyakhirev said.
"There are many unnecessary expenditures. We're cleaning out all our basic production spheres -- that means getting rid of anything that we don't need."
But he said Gazprom was rich enough to pay seven trillion roubles ($1.2 billion) to state coffers by June 10 to help President Boris Yeltsin meet a promise to pay pension arrears.
Nemtsov has put Gazprom's debts to the federal budget at a whopping 14.8 trillion roubles ($2.6 billion), while Gazprom says it is owed a dizzying 64 trillion roubles ($11.2 billion).
The state has a 40 percent stake in Gazprom, seven eighths of it personally managed in trust by Vyakhirev. Last week, after a row between Vyakhirev and ministers, Privatisation Minister Alfred Kokh said the government would review the arrangement.
Government officials said this week they had lost the document outlining the deal. Vyakhirev said they later found it and that the scheme would stay, but with some changes.
Nemtsov, a reformer entrusted with restructuring Russia's natural monopolies, including Gazprom, has long said the monopoly will not be broken up into separate output and transport companies. "Only a nut would destroy Gazprom," Nemtsov was quoted by Interfax news agency as saying.
The company operates a strict separation between its domestically-traded shares and those covered by its ADSs in London.
Gazprom was trading at $0.665 on the Russian Trading System at 1230 GMT versus $0.620 on Monday. The ADSs, covering 10 underlying shares, were at $16.45 in London versus Monday's close of $16.30.
