Russia's Norilsk Nickel, an arctic industrial metals behemoth built on slave labour but now struggling to slim its workforce and cut costs, said on Thursday it would take up an offer by thousands of workers to quit.
Oleg Budargin, a deputy director of the flagship Norilsk mining and metallurgical complex, said in an interview that 10,000 employees -- around eight percent of the workforce -- who had applied to leave would be let go this year and not replaced.
Norilsk, a major non-ferrous and precious metals producer built in 1935 out of a forced-labour gulag at the beginning of an era of Soviet repression, is struggling in the new marketplace to scrap its planned economy legacy and cut costs.
In part this is being achieved by trimming its workforce and resettling employees.
"The main problem is to change the psychology of the Norilsk worker," Budargin said. "He's used to thinking that the state will wake him up, feed him and tuck him into bed."
The Norilsk Nickel group is the world's second largest supplier of refined nickel, a key ingredient in stainless steel. It is also one of the world's biggest platinum and palladium producers.
Losing the workers would save the RAO Norilsky Nikel group one trillion roubles ($175 million) a year in salaries and benefits.
Budargin said that some of the workers were in the mining, enriching and metals processing sectors -- the heart of this filthy industrial town.
But a senior trade union official said the company should not expect fast or easy savings from the job cuts, adding that the move would cost Norilsk -- which does not want pensioners -- many more trillions of roubles in benefit and resettlement costs.
"These people have said that they want to go of their own free will, but it will cost seven trillion roubles to resettle them and to pay the various benefits to which they are entitled," said Boris Degtyarov, deputy chairman of Norilsk's United Trade Union Committee.
Tens of thousands of political prisoners were forcibly resettled to Norilsk in the 1930s and 1940s and died in this barren, polluted town, which is so ecologically poisoned that the average life expectancy here is a miserable 50 years.
But the town became so well known for its generous pensions and benefits that it now even boasts Chechen refugees and homeless people living in boiler plants and cloakrooms.
Some of those people receive miniscule benefits subsidised by Norilsk. Those costs, and the much heavier burden of supporting an entire industrial town, are expenses the company is eager to shed. But it is finding it tough to raise the cash.
Norilsk averted a strike threat earlier this year when it made peace with workers who, upset over salary arrears, pensions and benefits, agreed not to disrupt output before July 1.
But Degtyarov said that shedding 10,000 employees without paying them adequate pensions and benefits or resettling them to warmer climates could open old wounds.
"It could cause a problem with the protocol if the (benefits) obligations are not met," he said, referring to the deal signed by management and labour in March.
The Norilsk mining and metallurgical complex has 120,000 people on its payroll, including 15,000 miners, 20,000 metallurgists and 15,000 metal enrichers.
The remaining 70,000 are in auxiliary jobs or are retired and Norilsk has said that it cannot support non-core expenses not related to production.
The restructuring is the brainchild of Norilsk's main shareholder, commercial bank Uneximbank, which controls 51 percent of voting shares in the powerful metals producer.
The director of the complex's nickel plant, Mikhail Steklov, who is part of a committee looking at ways to revamp the industrial giant, said that getting rid of what he called non-effective production was the only solution.
"Uneximbank is our master and maybe they can make us more profitable," he said, adding that the town of Norilsk and its suburbs needed to get rid of about one third of its 300,000- strong population.
Budargin complained that Norilsk spent 800 billion roubles last year supporting the city and its non-core enterprises, which range from bakeries to housing construction outfits.
"We will be the first big enterprise in Russia to really restructure," he said. "But I can't yet say that the final plan has been worked out." ($ = 5749 Russian Roubles) --Moscow Newsroom, +7095 941 8520
