Russia, expecting an increased grain harvest but lower carryover stocks this year, is unlikely to go on a shopping spree soon despite government talk of imports, industry sources said on Friday.
"Soy and maize buying is a real possibility for Russia, but I wouldn't start to talk about any volumes," said Arkady Zlochevsky, head of the OGO commodities trading company. But he said he had been buying some Brazilian and Argentine soymeal.
Farm Minister Viktor Khlystun has said Russia may import 4.0-4.5 million tonnes of maize and soymeal plus 500,000 tonnes of food wheat to supplement the 1996 harvest and a very low carryover from last year.
While other grain sources also talk big numbers, they say Russia's grain needs do not always mean imports will take place.
"They do not yet have sufficient information to interpret their grain needs," said a senior Western grains source, referring to Khlystun's figures.
Russian 1996 net grain harvest predictions range from 69 to 75 million tonnes.
Sources say Khlystun has not approached major Western grains exporters in Moscow about any possible buys.
"He hasn't come to us," said one Western grains source.
Others say Khlystun, who gave no specific time-frame for possible buying, may be waiting for international prices to slip on the back of better harvests around the world.
"No, no -- no buying right now," said Andrei Ambartsumyan of grain trader Exportkhleb. "But in January, when domestic maize prices could peak, who knows?"
But Eduard Baranov, deputy head of the Centre for Economic Trends, an institute set up by the government, said Russia could be a buyer as it had used most of the carryover from 1995.
"Khlystun's (import) numbers are probably close to the truth," said Baranov, whose centre sees net grain output at 69 million tonnes, below official forecasts of 75 million tonnes but still above last year's drought-hit 63.4 million.
The Western source said Russia's total grain imports last year, with flour converted to grain equivalent and pasta buying included, were 5.5 million tonnes.
"The cash and the need are there," said a Canadian source, "but the (Russian) government will not fund the whole amount."
The source said many small, private Russian traders had turned to Canadian agriculture officials but that no big requests had come from the state or from former state buying agencies like Roskhleboprodukt.
Andrei Sizov of private agricultural consultancy SovEcon Ltd said he thought Russia's total imports of all types of grain from all sources over the 1996/97 crop year could be six to seven million tonnes, including 3.5-4.0 million tonnes of wheat and wheat flour, 1.5 million tonnes of barley, 200,000-300,000 tonnes of rye and 300,000 tonnes of rice.
But doubts remain. "I've got a lot of interest and requests from the Russian side, but it's hard to say how legitimate it all is," the Canadian source said.
--Moscow Newsroom +7095 941 8520
