Russia's net grain harvest will probably fall below official forecasts of 75-77 million tonnes, leading independent industry sources in Moscow said on Monday.
Andrei Sizov of private agricultural consultancy SovEcon Ltd said he had revised his forecast down to about 68 million tonnes from a previous 70 million.
"Russia lost 2.9 million hectares to drought, and since it will cost more to harvest this grain than it is worth, it is likely this area will not be harvested at all," he said, adding that the government would be unwilling to spend money on tractor fuel for crops that were essentially already lost.
"The Western Siberian harvest is mixed -- you've still got good quality there for the time being, but it's a very slow harvest," Sizov said, adding that he saw output there at 9.3 million tonnes.
He said it was likely the region would not be fully harvested and that some crops would be left to rot.
However, a senior Western grains source said the government would probably declare the net grain harvest at 72 million tonnes, but that it could in reality turn out to be several million tonnes higher.
"They'll declare 72, but remember that they've under-reported the actual total for the last two years," the source said.
A lot would depend on how heavy rains in Siberia affect yields, the source said, adding, "Some of this stuff is not going to be of very good quality."
A source at the State Meteorological Service said government officials were constantly revising their estimates based on recent weather trends but that they were not making the new forecasts public.
An Agriculture Ministry spokeswoman said the ministry was sticking to its forecast of 75-77 million tonnes but said officials would meet Thursday to discuss the pace of the harvest and that the forecast could be revised downwards.
A source at Rosselkhozakademiya, the state agricultural institute, said the harvest would be slightly below the government forecast, but he declined to give a concrete figure.
"It will be a little bit below 75 million tonnes, because it's a very tough harvest in Siberia," said the source, who declined to be named.
Arkady Blyumin, head of Informzerno, a grain market research group, said output could be as a low as 70 million tonnes or as high as 75 million. "Nature may give us something, or it may take it away, and that's where the difference will be," he said.
The Centre for Economic Trends, an influential institute set up by the government, on Friday forecast Russia's 1996 net grain harvest at 69 million tonnes.
One analyst who saw output higher was Boris Chernyakov, head of agriculture at the U.S.-Canada Institute in Moscow. He forecast net grain output at 80 million tonnes, saying producers were hiding how much they had already harvested.
Last year's grain output was officially 63.4 million tonnes, the worst in three decades.
The harvest in parts of Siberia has largely ground to a halt as heavy rains keep crops too wet for reaping, while drought hit sections of the main grain producing areas in the Northern Caucasus and Central Russia earlier in the summer.
--Moscow Newsroom +7095 941 8520
