Russia's Norilsk Nickel, created by Stalin using forced labour, still operates under Soviet-style business practices.
But post-Soviet Norilsk epitomises the new corporate Russia, where battles for control over exports and manoeuvering for influence in Kremlin circles have made this Arctic outpost a centre of Russia's debate over how to restructure its firms.
Built on the blood and bones of prisoners forced to mine perhaps the world's richest ore, Norilsk is battling to restructure costs, resettle legions of workers and pensioners and clean up its image.
Corporate change would be as dramatic as Soviet dictator Josef Stalin's 1935 decision to exile hundreds of thousands of prisoners to establish this powerhouse industrial town 200 miles (320 km) north of the Arctic Circle.
"We built such a beautiful socialist city," sighed Mikhail Steklov, director of Norilsk's flagship nickel smelter. "Now the market is telling us we must change."
FROM SOVIET INDUSTRIAL CONCEPT TO MODERN COMPANY
Norilsk's new managers from its shareholder Uneximbank, a big bank with 51 percent of Norilsk voting stock, see a bright future in RAO Norilsky Nikel, the parent of the head complex.
The Norilsk group is a stunningly powerful producer. It sits on 55 percent of world palladium reserves, 20 percent of platinum and 35 percent of nickel reserves.
Its annual nickel output accounts for 20 percent of world supply, platinum for 23 percent and palladium for 60 percent. It also mines cobalt, copper and some gold.
But functioning as a company -- not a Soviet industrial mega-concept -- is easier said than done in this polluted Siberian company town.
Norilsk, where the Soviet taboo on discussing precious metals still exists, can make Western metals markets tremble with its secrecy, strikes and chaotic export business.
But it has extracted some lessons from the past.
"The disaster of the early 1990s when we dumped metal and prices crashed are over," Steklov said. "We won't do it again." RESTRUCTURING
Now Norilsk wants to regroup into one company focused on maximising output and profits.
Suppliers -- who drag goods up the Yenisei river during the two months of the year when it is free of ice -- would form another.
Mines and construction outfits would make a third.
"The main task is to stabilise output so that we don't have jumps," said Oleg Budargin, a deputy general director at Norilsk's mining and metallurgical complex, which groups the three gigantic smelters, mines and other subsidiaries. "But it's hard to restructure and boost output simultaneously."
SOCIAL COSTS
Norilsk wants to maximise export profits, tainted in recent years when export licences were sold under the table and many deliveries were never paid for. It wants billions of dollars in cash and credits to resettle pensioners and support social costs.
The flagship complex has 120,000 on the payroll but supports a town of nearly 300,000, including 40,000 pensioners costing 12 times what they would if they were not in Arctic Siberia.
Norilsk spends 40 percent of revenue on worker housing, pensions and Soviet-era benefits.
The costs were immaterial to the Soviet management, whose slogan was "Metal at any cost", but they are sucking modern Norilsk dry.
The calls for change have caused tension verging on a standoff between Moscow-based Uneximbank and workers, unions and some managers. Few at Norilsk seem to understand what restructuring is or how it will be paid for.
"We will be the first big Russian enterprise to really restructure," Budargin said. "But I can't yet say that the final plan has been worked out."
STATE OF CONFUSION
"We've blocked the retructuring order," said Boris Degtyaryov, deputy head of the main trade union. "It's a very debatable plan and must have board and shareholder approval."
An internal document, saying the firm was in crisis, said Norilsk had to adapt to market terms and revamp its operations.
The memo called for a hearts and minds campaign so that a strike threat which arose in March would not be repeated.
Sergei, 38, a nickel cleaner, said workers had calmed down but that wages were still delayed by two months.
"Market relations make restructuring indispensible," Steklov said. But he added: "We have such complex output that you can't just cut 100,000 people, which is what we need to do."
Budargin said that resettling pensioners was the responsibility of the local authorities, not the company. "We still work as under socialism. Workers want things for free."
But the memo admitted defeat in efforts to restructure, saying the plan was unclear and poorly understood.
"I don't understand what they mean by restructuring," said Sergei Yershov, director of the nickel smelter's huge electrolysing plant, referring to plans to corporatise units.
NOT JUST AN ENVIRONMENTAL MESS
Norilsk, with output worth billions of dollars a year, is not poor but its accounts and practices are a mess.
Norilsk complex sales of 10.8 trillion roubles in 1996 translated into only 100 billion roubles accruing to the complex, sparking an arrears crisis that fuelled strike fever.
It owes around 1.2 trillion roubles to various budgets because of a lack of adequate cash flows from its exports. Wage arrears as of April were around 900 billion roubles.
A midnight flight from Moscow to Norilsk spoke volumes. Passengers included a Chechen refugee seeking company-subsidised housing and a load of "New Rich" Russians out to snap up company shares and the metal export business.
"There's an element of metals theft here," Budargin said. "All possible elements, including criminal ones, are here."
One source said the tax police regularly detain a third of Norilsk's nickel and cobalt output each month, store it, wait for ships to arrive at Dudinka and then release it for loading.
Stolen metals end up on Western markets but hurt Norilsk's cash flows, leaving less money for wages, taxes and investment.
Degtyaryov cited missing export revenues as a core crisis, offering one 1994 example in which the Foreign Trade Ministry received $200 million worth of metals but never paid for them.
Norilsk, strengthening its state ties while seeking to be more market-nimble, will double the capital of its flagship complex and give the new controlling stake to the government.
Former Uneximbank head Vladimir Potanin, ousted as first deputy prime minister but heading back to the bank, is seeking permission for Norilsk to export all its precious metals to boost profits, instead of selling via the state agency.
Even former Norilsk chief executive Anatoly Filatov, sacked by the Kremlin in 1996 under a cloud after decades in power, still lurks about Norilsk with his own mining firm.
"Restructuring is in principle very correct, but it takes money," Degtyaryov said. "In practice, in Russia, if you destroy one thing, the whole house can come tumbling down.
