Russia's upcoming harvest will barely top last year's poor level, but peasants in this vast agricultural country see that they have no choice but to adopt efficient ways, the agriculture minister said on Tuesday.
Viktor Khlystun repeated earlier government statements that Russia would produce at least 70 million net tonnes of grain and that Moscow would not need to import wheat this year.
"Seventy million tonnes is the prediction, and this is realistic," Khlystun told a news conference. "But I hope it will be bigger."
But as he called for a rejection of Soviet-style cheap state credits and handouts of goods to finance food production, he admitted that 70 percent of Russian farms verged on collapse.
Khlystun, just appointed a deputy prime minister and now the beleaguered farm lobby's top cabinet voice, promised to give his all to implement a government programme aimed at stabilising and modestly reforming the sector.
"It's completely obvious the time has come when we cannot just look calmly at a situation in which many farms are falling apart," he said, adding that 10-15 percent of farms were chronically broke, lazy and without any vision of the future.
But he said some key changes in Russia's agriculture sector, still one of the world's most inefficient, were in motion.
"A root change has taken place -- peasants now see that selling output is more important than producing it," he said, adding that most farms were now joint stock companies and that 30 percent of them were thriving.
Russian grain output has contracted by around 40 percent from earlier peak levels of 115 million tonnes and more, and imports now supply up to half the food market.
But banks are unwilling to lend to farms, which in turn have no money to invest in output as state credits dry up.
Khlystun, saying farmers wanted to sell grain but did not know how, said Moscow would set up a marketing agency to bring suppliers and sellers together to redress a big problem that has fuelled smaller private imports -- regional supply imbalances.
"There can be no return to credits in kind," he added, referring to government handouts of inputs to farmers. "I really hope 1997 will be the year we succeed in setting up a (private) credit system for the agricultural sector."
But he did not say how troubled plans to introduce a land market -- crucial if farms are to receive commercial bank credits requiring property or other assets as backing -- could win the consent of conservative parliamentary deputies.
When asked about Russia's grain import needs this year, Khlystun said, "We will not do centralised (government) imports." Russia would have enough food wheat but private sector purchases of maize would continue.
Russia's net grain harvest last year was 69.3 million tonnes, the second worst on record in three decades and only a notch below Khlystun's output forecast for this year.
Private commodities houses have been importing some grains as the government loosens its grip on the market and Moscow has sought to procure for the army and far-flung regions on a competitive basis.
But some reform efforts, most notably the Federal Food Corporation state buying agency, have flopped in the face of charges of misuse of funds and inefficiency.
