Russian demand for imported sugar has picked up earlier than usual on the eve of the beet harvest, and traders said less price volatility and more consolidation were adding stability to the domestic market.
"Demand is normal, prices are stabilising," said a senior trade source. "There's sugar coming into the ports and demand is good."
He said raws would need to arrive by mid-July to be processed at domestic refineries before the Russian beet crop supplanted them as a feedstock.
"The (Russian) market is strong at the moment," said a second senior trade source. "You are seeing demand for sugar at the moment. There is some pretty intensive importing of raws right now -- the price structures make tolling profitable."
Traders debated market talk of sugar backlogs at the Black Sea port of Novorossiisk and whether Russia could soak up any unplaced cargoes looking for homes.
"If you have raws arriving in the Black Sea in July, you'll be pressed," said the first source, adding that refineries needed 14-21 days for processing and that they would be less keen to contract for raws as the beet harvest approached.
Recent market talk that around 250,000 tonnes of raws, possibly Brazilian, could be expected later this summer in Novorossiisk or the Baltics was still speculative, traders said.
A Novorossiisk port source said that a backlog of Cuban raws at the outlet had edged down only slightly to 80,700 tonnes from around 90,000 tonnes last week because the Russian receiver was not ready to take delivery.
He said the port expected to receive around 200,000 tonnes of raws, probably of Cuban origin, this summer, including 70,000 tonnes of unknown origin before June.
Indian refined white sugar stocks in port warehouses were around 400,000 tonnes, the port source said, but the senior trade sources said it was overblown by a factor of ten or more.
Russia is heading into its traditional jam-making season, a major factor that spurs a rise in refined sugar imports.
"People are preempting a little, because demand doesn't normally pick up until end-June," said the first trade source, adding, "the high-quality sugar market is much stronger -- you're seeing significant demand, especially at the Western (beverage) bottlers (with Russia operations)."
Sources said domestic sugar reserves were being drawn down but that a fundamental, long-term pick-up in consumer demand had yet to materialise. Some traders see Russian demand as fairly price inelastic and relatively steady despite economic decline and tight disposable income.
Russian consumption is about five million tonnes a year.
There is less room for European sugar in Russia, which meets most of its needs by importing whites from Ukraine and refining Cuban raws and its own sugar beets.
But the structure of the Russian market is changing.
"The market is consolidating -- it's a natural market development," said the first source, adding that the days of suppliers having to leap over three or four middlemen to get to buyers were gone.
"You're getting directly at the refiners, and you're cutting out the wild (price) swings," he said.
A big glut in 1995, in which buyers imported too much and demand failed to take off as hoped, forced changes in distribution networks that were now consolidating the market.
"The domestic market will remain strong but it won't go crazy," said the first trader. "But hopefully this will establish a pattern."
--Moscow Newsroom, +7095 941 8520
