Russian refineries, pressured by growing domestic demand for transport fuels and cleaner specifications in export markets, are nonetheless a long way from producing lighter products, analysts said.
"You should not expect any significant changes in the composition of the Russian barrel in the next three to five years," said Pavis Shahidi, a refining expert at  Bechtel International Inc in London.
"All the upgrading projects are still awaiting financing."
Russia's 28 major refineries have plans to install conversion systems and some are in talks with international lending institutions on multi-million dollar financing. But none of the major proposals, whose total cost will ring in at around $12 billion, are truly off the ground.
"It requires a lot of money, and investment is hard to get in this country," said Peter Lukyanov of Universal Oil Product in Moscow. "But it is a priority for Russian producers, because it's a big (financial) loss to do heavy fuel oil instead of lighter products."
Conversion levels at Russian refineries are 50-55 percent, with fuel oil comprising the balance of output, compared to 75-80 percent conversions at leading foreign facilities.
Deeper treatment technologies are in use in only 10 percent of current refining capacity and Russia has not one single hydrocracker, analysts said.
One result is that Russia will continue to produce vast quantities of heavy fuel oil, or mazut, with the sludgy, heavy product now comprising 40 percent or more of oil product output.
Liz Barrett, an energy specialist at CentreInvest Group consultancy in Moscow, said another factor stymieing efforts by refineries to finance conversion technologies was the focus of top managers at the new vertically integrated oil firms on upstream, not downstream, projects.
"Most of the refineries are looking at hydrocrackers (as opposed to less costly but less flexible catalytic crackers) because they want low sulphur diesels," she added.
Russia's Soviet-era refineries were designed three and more decades ago to serve a domestic planned economy, and many, especially those clustered in the Volga-Urals region, may not have good export marketing potential.
"The Russian refineries are positioned to supply local markets, and with export and transport costs expensive, it makes it difficult to arrange financing for upgrades," Shahidi said.
But under-utilisation -- Russian plants operate at an average 55 percent of their 6.8 million barrels per day capacity -- has meant some refineries run reforming units more severely and in greater volumes, creating more material for desulphuring diesel.
"This is actually how the Russians are making more low-sulphur material," Barrett said.
Russia turns out some cracked product but it is not high quality. "The product is not upgraded -- it's not the result of new conversion processes," Lukyanov said, when asked why some Western traders might be seeing more cracked material.
In spite of the lack of changes in refining technologies here, fuel oil output has dropped this year on the back of higher crude oil exports and, some analysts say, scaled-back use at bankrupt domestic military-industrial plants.
Russia produced 21.9 million tonnes of heavy fuel oil in the first four months of the year, down four percent from the same year-ago period, State Statistics Committee figures show.
This represented 38 percent of total refinery throughput of 57.7 million tonnes in the first four months.
-- Moscow Newsroom, +7095 941 8520
