Russia's LUKoil, one of the world's biggest oil companies, will increasingly take its upstream business out of Siberia and into the Caspian and Gulf, in a move reflecting the tough economics of production at home.
LUKoil's strategy underscores the problems of producing oil in Russia, where expensive, hard-to-recover reserves, limp domestic demand and a struggling economy make exports and foreign projects the only ways to earn substantial profits.
"I can tell you we're not really interested in raising our oil output in Russia, and for three reasons -- pipeline capacity limits, small export terminals and low domestic demand," LUKoil spokesman Pyotr Neyev said in a brief telephone interview.
LUKoil heads into its shareholders' meeting on Thursday ready to put what Neyev said were net cash profits according to Russian standards of 3.87 trillion roubles ($673 million) to work on projects in Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan and Iraq.
A second spokesman, Alexander Vasilenko, said LUKoil -- which says it has the most crude oil reserves of any traded oil company in the world -- aimed to produce at least one quarter of its oil outside Russia at the beginning of the next millenium.
"LUKoil does admit they're not investing much in their West Siberia operations," said Renaissance brokerage energy analyst Alexei Kokin. "They have too many undiversified costs there, and they're relocating fronts."
Among LUKoil's major non-Russia projects are a 52.5 percent stake in a $4 billion, 23-year production-sharing project in Iraq's Western Qurnah; a 12.5 percent stake in an $8 billion international Azeri Caspian project that is the largest foreign investment deal in the former Soviet Union; and significant stakes in two other Azeri projects.
It is set to receive a five percent stake in Chevron Corp's and Mobil Corp's Tengiz project in Kazakhstan, and has a $5.2 billion, 18-year joint venture agreement with Atlantic Richfield (ARCO), which owns eight percent of Russia's largest vertically-integrated oil firm.
It is also eyeing Algeria, and has a deal with Italy's Agip Spa to look at North African projects.
"I think the strategy is a correct one -- but it's not an easy one to copy," said a Western energy consultant, adding that LUKoil President Vagit Alekperov, half-Azeri and born in Baku, had connections to Caspian oil that other oil bosses did not.
Russian oil producers make no money on domestic production not exported and by some estimates earn 80-90 percent of their profits from sales abroad and the remainder from regional sales of refined oil products.
Output and transport costs for Western Siberia, where three-quarters of LUKoil's 10.7 billion barrels in proven reserves are located, are about $6 per barrel, Kokin said, compared to estimates of $2 per barrel in the Caspian.
"Generally, the domestic Russian oil business is loss-making," said the Western analyst. "You get some earnings in regional distribution (of refined products like gasoline). But selling crude to Russian refineries or on the Russian spot market is loss-making."
Despite an aggressive expansion programme, LUKoil, which accounted for nearly 20 percent of Russian oil production last year with output of 1.16 million barrels per day, sees home production rising by 2.4 percent this year.
Most Russian oil companies face similar problems, and are struggling to turn the tide against output declines while calculating the value of increased output against export pipelines already filled to the limit.
But LUKoil, a favourite among foreign portfolio investors, in part due to its success in consolidating control over its production units, refiners and distributers, is the exception, not the rule, among Russia's newly-privatised oil companies.
"LUKoil's move abroad is correct," said the Western analyst. "But its Russian competitors will not be able to do the same."
