Russia's hot new reformer, Boris Nemtsov, is sparking changes at the Fuel and Energy Ministry he now heads, revamping the grey body in ways which could reshape output and exports by the world's third largest oil producer.
Industry sources say Nemtsov, who is trimming the ministry's bloated staff and reorganising the Soviet-era institution to deal with new market realities, is moving to make Russian oil exports to Western markets more transparent.
But Nemtsov also wants to keep Russia well supplied with oil products and prevent regional deficits which have arisen over the past year as producers boost exports at the expense of supplying domestic refineries.
The streamlining envisaged by Russia's golden boy of reform includes fairer access to stretched-to-capacity export pipelines -- first-quarter oil exports outside the Commonwealth of Independent States were up 7.2 percent from year-ago levels at 2.0 million barrels per day.
"The big question is 'Who will control access to export pipelines?'" asked a senior Western oil industry source in Moscow. "Moving administration of the pipeline system to a regulatory body is not a bad thing."
But Nemtsov, who is also a first deputy prime minister in charge of restructuring natural monopolies, including the Transneft oil pipeline outfit, is mindful of domestic needs.
His hand-picked protege, Sergei Kiriyenko, a young banker brought on board as first deputy fuel and energy minister, said the ministry had a duty to keep everyone from domestic power plants to farmers adequately supplied with oil products.
"You can influence the producers only by creating specific stimuli, not by government telegrams," Kiriyenko told Wednesday's edition of the Kommersant business daily.
"Of course, there are coercive methods, like access to export pipelines. If we see Russia does not have enough oil products, then the volume of exported oil will be limited."
Kiriyenko said the ministry's priority was to bring balance into the domestic fuel and energy market and create desirable conditions for companies at home.
Nemtsov, 38, was appointed Fuel and Energy Minister in April, taking responsibility for one of Russia's most strategic and highest-earning sectors under sweeping changes which put reformers in charge of the government.
In a big overhaul, he divided the Fuel and Energy Ministry into two sections -- one in charge of operations, headed by Kiriyenko, and one dealing with investment, headed by Viktor Ott, a ministry old-timer liked by Western energy executives.
Ott will deal with development licences and a supervisory body handling domestic fuel supply issues.
Kommersant quoted Kiriyenko as saying the new team would change "the obsolete position of the ministry".
The ministry's old way of functioning includes forcing oil producers to supply regions with oil products essentially for free and deciding how much oil companies can export.
"I can't say we've yet felt the effect of his changes, but it's fairly clear that when the process is over, the ministry will be vastly different than what it was before," said the Western executive.
Kiriyenko said the ministry was in no position to lead Russia's newly privatised oil companies but should play a role in managing state shares in the new majors.
Nemtsov, who met Western oil executives at the influential Moscow International Petroleum Club on Tuesday, was quoted by Kommersant as saying no single Russian oil producer would be allowed to account for more than 25 percent of total oil output.
Western executives at the meeting said Nemtsov would fire half of the ministry's 800 or so bureaucrats, stripping away legions who delayed everything from talks for joint ventures to approval for exploration licences.
"We're going to create more attractive conditions for you," Kommersant quoted Nemtsov as telling the executives.
