Russian oil refiners are eyeing costly upgrades to make the lighter products that export markets favour, but they may find it hard to find the cash.
Hydrocrackers and fluid catalytic crackers -- expensive, sophisticated plants that produce lighter material like gasoline, naphtha, diesel and jet fuel -- are rare in Russia, where heavy fuel oil makes up around 40 percent of output.
Most Russian refiners use less sophisticated processing technologies, and only three percent of capacity comes from cracking processes, well below Western levels.
"There's just a screaming need for secondary capacity," said a senior Western energy consultant in Moscow. "But who's willing to invest in a Russian refinery?"
Boston Consulting Group says that by 2000, new capacities in Russia could include 254,000 barrels per day (bpd) of catalytic cracking and 131,000 bpd of hydrocracking, both used to produce expensive, high-octane fuels.
The increases, and boosts to other processes, could bring Russia's products output to 5.9 million bpd by 2000 from a current 5.2 million -- but the analysts said they would not mean heavy product output falls by the wayside.
"You will clearly increase light products capacity, but you also at least maintain the heavy products," said Boston Consulting Group Vice-President Charbel Ackermann. "It's not a substitution or reduction for heavy capacity."
Oil sources said Russia's 28 major refineries had collectively put in 28 formal requests to international lenders and banks for loans for upgrades -- but money has not flowed in.
"Lots are talking about it, but few are actually doing it," said Bechtel International Inc. Vice-President Robert Parker.
In one of many plans dependent on full financing, Russia's Kirishi refinery has said it hopes Chevron will help install a $750 million hydrocracker.
The Yaroslavl refinery, north of Moscow, is getting a $60 million catalytic cracking unit to boost gasoline output, while the Angarsk refinery in Siberia is working with M. W. Kellogg on a $70 million plan for a fluid catalytic cracking unit.
The Fuel and Energy Ministry said the Omsk refinery, in Siberia, would get a catalytic reforming plant by 2000, and that ABB Lummus Global was working on plans to help the Perm, Samara, Angarsk and other refineries install catalytic crackers.
Rif Usmanov, chief engineer at the Ufa refinery in southern Russia, said the plant's catalytic cracking facility, completed in March, would produce two million tonnes of gasoline and diesel a year (about 40,000 bpd).
An engineer at the Ryazan refinery south of Moscow said revamping of a catalytic cracking unit to raise capacity to 24,000 bpd would continue into 1997.
"A lot of projects are merely adjusting the heights of the columns and tinkering with other things," said energy specialist Peter Houlder at CentreInvest consultancy in Moscow. "But most of these are not $200-$300 million projects."
Some question the timing of the proposed upgrades, saying transport costs to Europe will squeeze margins too much.
"A lot of ambition is geared on the basis of exporting product to Europe, which I don't think is that logical," Parker said. "Continental Europe is surrounded by state-of-the-art, high-tech refineries and sophisticated distribution."
But the economy in Russia's Volga and Urals regions, where heavy industry is in steep decline, is not picking up quickly and may not be able to absorb new products output soon.
"With the domestic market's limited absorption capacity, you'll still see an inclination to export heavy," Ackermann said.
