Russian economic crime officials said on Thursday they were investigating the head of Russia's second largest aluminium smelter.
Company and ministry officials said Yuri Kolpakov, general director of Krasnoyarsk, the second biggest aluminium smelter in the world, was under investigation over the alleged failure to repatriate $20 million from contracts for raw materials supplies.
Olga Semenyaka, a member of an Interior Ministry investigative committee dedicated to the crackdown on crime in industry, told Reuters by telephone from the south Siberian city of Krasnoyarsk that she had personally opened the investigation on Monday.
"I think I have told you enough," Semenyaka said. She declined to give further details.
Interior Minister Anatoly Kulikov is locked in a battle against what he has described as the "crime-ridden" world of Russia's aluminium industry, which last year was the world's biggest exporter of primary metal.
Gennady Druzhinin, Krasnoyarsk's board chairman, confirmed by telephone from Krasnoyarsk that a probe had been launched against Kolpakov, but also gave no details.
Asked if output or exports would be affected, he said, "No."
Krasnoyarsk produced 770,000 tonnes of aluminium last year, 27 percent of Russia's 2.87 million tonne output.
Andrei Grigoryev, head of the smelter's information section, said he did not know of the charges and said Kolpakov was out of town. Reuters could not contact him.
Interior Ministry officials in Moscow could not be reached for immediate comment.
Kulikov has never said what kind of crimes he believes take place in the domestic metal industry, but Russian aluminium officials have in the past been the target of death threats and contract killings.
Industry sources said the investigation of Kolpakov concerned a tolling deal -- under which a trading company supplies a smelter with raw materials for processing and then exports the finished metal -- with an offshore concern identified by the sources as Leo Trust Company.
Krasnoyarsk, also known as KrAZ, does much of its tolling business with Glencore AG of Switzerland, which has a stake in the smelter and a joint venture called Krazpa Metals NV. There is no suggestion Glencore is linked in any way to the investigation.
"If it weren't for Glencore, we wouldn't be working right now," said a Krasnoyarsk source. --Moscow Newsroom, +7095 941 8520
