Russia will be a big buyer of Iraqi oil once again as Baghdad gears up to export more crude to raise much-needed cash for food and medicine, Russian officials said on Thursday.
"We're aiming for as much this time as we had last time," said Yuri Agababov, deputy general director of Zarubezhneft, the Moscow-based firm coordinating Russian contracts for Iraqi oil under the United Nation's oil-for-food deal.
The United Nations renewed a $2 billion, 180-day programme on Wednesday under which Iraq will export oil to raise cash for humanitarian needs and to pay reparations to Gulf War victims after Baghdad's 1990 invasion of Kuwait.
Russian companies bought nearly 28.54 billion barrels of Iraqi oil under the first 180-day programme, or a whopping 23.4 percent of the 121.6 million or so barrels Baghdad was permitted to export under that first deal.
"We're hoping to do this much again," Agababov said in a brief telephone interview. "But it will all depend on how the commercial terms of our talks proceed. Let's not jinx it by talking about it before it happens."
The U.N. resolution renews the programme from June 8, right after the first deal expires, and Agababov said he would head a delegation of Russian companies to Baghdad next week to begin negotiating contracts with Iraqi state oil firm SOMO.
He said talks had not yet taken place and declined to say whether contracts had been pre-negotiated in principle.
"Those firms which participated will do so again, and there may be some new players," Agababov said, adding that Russian companies lifted their last loading of crude on May 22-25.
Russia has an inside track to Iraq, its Soviet-era trading partner and geopolitical ally, and is keen to see Baghdad flush with cash to repay the $7 billion it owes Moscow.
Russia's -- and one of the world's -- largest oil companies, LUKoil, has a 52.5 percent stake in a $4 billion, 23-year production-sharing project in Iraq's Western Qurnah oil field.
Other Russian firms, including Mashinoimport, have supplied Baghdad with oil equipment, and organisations close to the Foreign Trade Ministry sent wheat, sugar, vegetable oils and other foodstuffs.
But Agababov said commerce, not politics, was at work in the oil-for-food deal. "We'll participate on the same level and terms as others," he said. "It all comes down to the terms of the contracts."
He declined to say how the terms had been attractive to the eight Russian oil-producing and trading companies which had contracts under the first deal.
Benchmark Brent Blend's nearby contract, a benchmark for valueing Iraq's exports and thus their quantity, was around $18.74 a barrel in early London futures trade.
That was more than $5.00 below the December 10, 1996 nearby-contract level when Iraq first returned to world oil markets under the first U.N. programme.
But Russian traders, who are finding it tougher to win access to tight domestic export pipelines, are keen to get their hands on any oil they can.
Vladimir Bjedougov, deputy head of major trader Alfa-Eko's international section, which had a big contract under the first programme, said lifters had taken a hit from what he called the failure of the U.N.-Iraqi price formula to reflect the market.
"Prices fluctuated fairly sharply for a while and the formula didn't reflect the difference -- but I wouldn't say this experience would have any effect on our next talks," he said.
"On the contrary, it will make things easier. The first contract went well, even though in any deal, there are always technical problems -- but none of them were critical."
