The former Soviet Union will probably see grain output increase this year after last year's drought-hit disaster, industry officials said on Friday.
But unpredictable weather in Russia, Kazakhstan and Ukraine, the region's biggest grain producers, could still hit volume and quality levels.
"Ukraine was very bad last year, Russia was quite low and Kazakhstan was below average," said Andrei Sizov of SovEcon Ltd, a private agricultural consultancy in Moscow, referring to 1996 output levels that were among the worst in three decades.
"This year, weather conditions have so far been better for all three. But 'better' is in comparison to what was last year's really bad situation."
Kazakhstan and Ukraine export much of their surplus grain to Russia and other former Soviet republics, as well as to Eastern and Central Europe. Kazakhstan accounted for up to three quarters of Russia's wheat and wheat flour imports last year.
Sowing in the three countries is nearly complete, and industry sources said the weather, not low agricultural inputs, was the main factor -- and the main unknown.
"I think we can definitely say output in all three countries will improve on last year, but it's all still unpredictable because the weather is unpredictable," said Vladimir Totsky, deputy director of Russia's Grain Union, a private grouping of traders and producers.
Russia may finally reverse a five-year trend of declining grain area, with around 30 million hectares sown, not including maize, on public-sector farms.
"This is more than enough for Russia to meet its needs," Sizov said, forecasting net wheat output of 35-38 million tonnes compared with last year's 35 million. "Imports will fall and there may be material for export."
Officials have forecast net grain output of at least 70 million tonnes after last year's 69.3 million, which was the second worst crop in three decades.
Average temperatures in the European part of Russia were five to six degrees Celsius lower than normal at the end of May, Viktor Trenin of the State Meteorological Service said, adding the cold had not seriously hurt crops.
But Siberia and the Urals had the most unusual weather in a century, he said, adding that very hot, dry temperatures in recent weeks made crops grow too fast and sucked moisture away.
An expected cold snap with possible frosts could further hurt plantings, he said, adding, "We haven't seen fluctuations like this in 100 years. It's dangerous." He said it was too early to predict weather patterns in the coming months.
An Agriculture Ministry official said Russian winter grains were in good condition, with winterkill losses the lowest in five years at five percent, compared with last year's eight to 11 percent.
In Ukraine, crops were planted two weeks late and experienced a cooler, wet spring. Totsky said yields were below 1996 levels.
Ukrainian officials have declined to forecast summer weather conditions, but Sizov said net grain output in the former breadbasket would rise to 31-33 million tonnes from last year's paltry 25.4 million. The government has forecast 35 million tonnes.
In Kazakhstan, the most secretive of the big former Soviet producers, officials have declined to forecast publicly how output might improve on last year's official, drought-hit 11.6 million tonnes. Almaty's Agro-Industrial Exchange sees output at a net 14 million tonnes.
"They had some problems with their sowing campaign," said Totsky, referring to official figures showing the area sown to grain down to 14.5 million hectares from 1996's 16.1 million.
The giant Central Asian state saw an early spring with heavy rains. Sizov said the weather was a big factor in northern Kazakhstan, where drought often mixes with downpours and snows during the autumn harvest.
"Every year, we have to wait and see what cards the weather deals us," said Totsky. "This year will be better, but there's still an element of unpredictability."
--Moscow Newsroom, +7095 941 8520
