Russia's energy sector will soon have fewer domestic players as newly-privatised oil companies eye domestic mergers and acquisitions to improve production and refining margins, industry sources said on Monday.
Producers -- eager to cash in on higher refined oil products prices abroad and at home and to replenish books with cash for big-ticket production projects -- were beginning to eye downstream and upstream consolidation, analysts said.
While it was early for formal mergers, they said Russian companies were beginning to lay the groundwork for acquisitions and a shakeout of the sector's dozen or so vertically-integrated companies and eight independent firms was inevitable after 1998.
"Undoubtedly we will see a winnowing," said Stephen O'Sullivan, director of oil and gas at MC Securities in London.
"There are too many oil companies and not all can survive."
Moscow has transformed its old Soviet production associations into vertically-integrated companies, but the process left most firms with major imbalances between production and refining.
Russia is awash in refining overcapacity, which, at 6.8 million barrels per day, far outstrips current output of around 5.8 million bpd -- making refineries prime takeover candidates.
"Yes, I see consolidation," said Dan Lubash, managing director of Emerging Markets Europe at Merrill Lynch in London. "Margins in a market in transition tend to move very quickly."
In one example of the slimming awaiting the world's third largest oil producer, Russia's LUKoil -- one of the world's largest oil companies by reserves -- said on Monday it would seek to acquire Norsi-Oil, an independent refiner with marketing units and no production facilities.
"This is not a hostile takeover, but rather two companies working together," said LUKoil spokesman Pyotr Neyev, adding LUKoil would seek a major equity stake in the plant.
Analysts said producers were increasingly annoyed at seeing lower profits from refineries where they conducted tolling operations -- supplying crude oil for processing at plants they do not own and then taking it back for resale.
In a second takeover battle, an industry source said oil major SIDANCO and mini-major Sibneft were tussling for Rosneft, the state oil holding firm which holds the government's stake in production-sharing deals and is slated for privatisation.
Analysts said a third shakeout could see Sibneft making a play for the East Siberian Oil and Gas exploration company.
"Downstream in Russia, something has to happen," said a senior Western consultant. "The money's not coming back to the producers, and something has to be consolidated."
But upstream consolidation is also inevitable, since the future of Russian oil is in hard-to-recover, remote, expensive reserves requiring a pooling of cash and technical expertise.
"If you're aiming at economies of scale in five years, you've got to start the (consolidation) process now, and that's what we're seeing" said the Western consultant.
One such deal tried and failed last year, when former Fuel and Energy Minister Yuri Shafranik tried to create a giant oil corporation by merging four companies -- the Tyumen Oil Company, ONAKO, the Eastern Oil Company and Slavneft.
"The general feeling is that only those strong enough in terms of corporate structures and centralised cash flows will be looking to pick up assets in the upstream business," said a Russian energy analyst at a Western investment bank in Moscow.
But analysts said mergers were already on many companies' agendas.
"There are two driving forces here," said O'Sullivan. "A desire to move into downstream, and a drive by existing companies to consolidate their existing holdings fast."
-- Moscow Newsroom, +7095 941 8520
