Western oil joint ventures in Russia, their hands tied by myriad taxes and the unknown policies of a new energy minister, are finding it tougher than ever to make money, industry sources said on Friday.
"Nothing's really happening on the jv side because they (the Russians) don't have a good investment vehicle," said an independent U.S. energy consultant in Moscow. "And I don't see anything that would suggest a quick turnaround."
Zarko Stefanovski, an oil analyst at T. Hoare &amp; Co brokerage in London, estimated net revenue on each barrel of oil produced and exported from Russia by joint ventures at about $4.40.
That is after current per-barrel costs of about $2.70 for operations, $2.75 for transport, $2.00 in excise duty on output, $0.65 in pipeline tax, mineral royalties of $1.30 and road and housing taxes of $0.35.
Then comes Russia's 35 percent profits tax, which is revenue, not profit, based.
"The biggest nightmare is having to adjust the budgets meeting after meeting after meeting," said a Western oil man, complaining that Russia's taxes changed constantly. "Morale in the company then falls because we don't get the money to do what we need because the economics are skewed."
About 40 Western ventures produce and export Russian oil -- but their output, at about 250,000 barrels per day (bpd), is a drop in the bucket of Russia's total 6.2 million bpd.
"The export tax is gone, but these other taxes have more than made up for it," added a Western energy consultant in Moscow who works with major U.S. oil companies. "You can't say across the board everyone's making a profit."
Joint ventures were thought to be a cheaper, easier and faster way than more complex production-sharing contracts to access Russia, the world's third-largest oil producer, which could hold five percent of the world's proven reserves.
"They have a potential to be a success long-term," said Brian Leonard, first deputy director of KomiArcticOil, which groups British Gas Plc with Russia's Komineft and a local geological outfit.
But Zarko said joint ventures would take off only when their bigger cousins, multi-billion dollar production-sharing contracts undertaken by Western majors, get to the output phase -- at least several years down the line.
In the absence of an acceptable legal framework, many ventures plead for Kremlin favours to secure special deals.
Western oil men bow and scrape before ministries and the cabinet on two fronts, the Petroleum Advisory Forum and the Moscow International Petroleum Club, which includes Russian industry executives.
The policies of new Fuel and Energy Minister Pyotr Rodionov remain unclear to oil men and tax changes from other officials have not been forthcoming.
A new threat comes from Russia's State Customs Committee, which says prominent ventures should pay millions of dollars for "excess" exports -- including White Nights, a 50-50 venture between Phibro Energy Production Inc and Russian Sidanko's Varyoganneftegaz, and KomiArcticOil.
"We think it's absolute nonsense and are hoping for a resolution to the situation," a senior oil executive said.
In the meantime, corporate budgets are constantly revised and oil men are discouraged.
"The environment is certainly very tough and it hasn't gotten any easier," said one of the Western consultants.
"A lot are hanging on, hoping to get a stake in the market to get better terms when things change."
