Russia's powerful Gazprom pushed back a plan on Wednesday to issue more share look-alikes for foreigners, saying it needed time to clear out its massive debts to give its stock time to appreciate.
But the company also issued a challenge to the government to meet it half way as it struggles to make tax and other payments which are crucial to the functioning of Russia's economy.
Eduard Ivanov, director of securities at the world's largest natural gas producer, told a news conference RAO Gazprom planned to issue a second tranche of its American Depositary Shares (ADS) next year, not this year as previously planned.
"We consider it expedient to place this tranche in 1998... However the exact timing has not yet been set," he said.
He said Gazprom still planned to start issuing convertible bonds this year and that the ADSs would be sold on U.S. markets.
But company officials said one reason for the ADS delay was Gazprom's tortuous efforts to find a common language with the government -- once its unquestioning supporter -- on payments by the giant company into the budget and state funds.
Much is at stake. Gazprom accounted for 26 percent of Russia's 1996 tax revenue -- a whopping figure which underscores the wealth of the company and its key role in Moscow's efforts to plug the budget deficit and keep market reforms on track.
Gazprom, with a market capitalisation of $16.5 billion, accounts for over one-third of global gas reserves, 95 percent of Russian gas output and 39 percent of the world's gas trade.
"We are taking the responsibility to pay our debts," Pyotr Rodionov, deputy chairman of Gazprom's board and a former energy minister, said. "But we also demand the government take steps to meet us halfway, especially in planning the 1998 budget."
"It's time for the state to conduct itself correctly with regard to payments from energy companies," he said, referring to what he thought were unrealistic state revenue targets.
Gazprom has been the target of attacks by the cabinet's fresh-faced reformers, who have promised the giant will not be broken up but want it to pay its corporate and other debts.
Gazprom argues that its consumers -- mostly gas-fired power plants and industrial enterprises -- are late payers fuelling a payments crisis whose blame is laid at Gazprom's door.
The company -- once a ministry, once headed by Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin and now quite coveted by foreign investors -- took pains last month to say peace had broken out in talks with the cabinet on its arrears.
Gazprom said it still owed 3.5 trillion roubles ($608 million), down from an estimated 14.8 trillion ($2.6 billion).
But Rodionov said the two sides needed common understanding.
"We must first sort out our relations to the state," he said, describing what needed to happen before Gazprom offered more of its equity to foreign investors. "That is the element which will facilitate growth in our share price."
In a sign the government is still sympathetic to Gazprom's problems, a senior official said on Tuesday one option would be to transfer assets of indebted power companies to Gazprom. Gazprom's first tranche of ADSs, issued in October 1996 and listed in London, set foreign investors drooling. The company plans to make nine percent of its capital available to foreign investors -- who currently own less than two percent.
It accounts for 60 percent of Europe's gas imports but plans to sell even more by raising capital abroad for its $45 billion Yamal project linking Arctic gas fields to Western consumers.
Some of the money will come from the ADSs; other from a bridging loan of $1.2 billion and medium term credits of up to $3 billion dollars, for which Gazprom has mandated banks Credit Lyonnais and Dresdner Kleinwort Benson.
A Gazprom official who declined to be identified said ABN-Amro and Goldman Sachs -- which were awarded but lost the mandates -- would probably still arrange Gazprom's planned Eurobond.
"Every bank wants to work with us," Rodionov said. "Of course it's a competitive battle."
Gazprom has a strictly-divided share structure separating paper available on the Russian market from that on foreign markets, where ADSs effectively cost three times as much as Russian paper. But Rodionov said this could be tough.
"A lock on a door won't stop a cheater," he said.  REUTER
