Russia's Norilsk Nickel mining and smelting company said on Thursday a cash crisis could tarnish its plans to become the world's top nickel producer in 1997.
The company had to cut costs, and to do that successfully it needed the government's cooperation.
Norilsk, previewing of one of the puniest payouts yet seen in Russia's emerging market, also said its board would recommend at an annual shareholders meeting on Friday a 1996 privileged share dividend of just two roubles -- an infinitesimal sum in dollar terms and way below 1995's 438 roubles.
Norilsk is a leading global producer of nickel and metals such as platinum and palladium. It aims to boost nickel output by 20 percent this year to 213,000 tonnes, taking advantage of idled capacity to become the world number one.
But Norilsk spokesman Sergei Vetchinin said the firm could be frustrated by cash problems that are reflected in a dividend structure which recommends no payout on ordinary shares for the second year running.
"Realisation of the 1997 production plan strongly depends on the decisions of the government with regard to our needs to cut costs," he said.
Norilsk's production north of the Arctic Circle is profitable but vast expenses are pushing it into the red.
"We have a plan," Vetchinin said. "We're not just crying...We are working to improve things."
But he added, "If our costs do not come down, and that will take place by the state taking responsibility for our social costs, things may change."
The state holds 51 percent of voting shares in Norilsk, a stake entrusted temporarily to commercial bank Uneximbank, which is trying to revamp everything from Norilsk units' finances and export revenue flows to the cost of supporting pensioners.
Vetchinin said the board would vote on items that could affect the company's charter and Uneximbank would vote according to State Property Fund instructions, but he gave no details.
At the end of 1996, RAO Norilsky Nikel was owed 6.9 trillion roubles ($1.2 billion). It owed, through tax and other arrears, 16.9 trillion roubles, Vetchinin said.
This has helped make its flagship mining and metallurgical complex one of Russia's top debtors and a source of labour unrest that has in the past sent world metals markets gyrating.
But a company statement said workers were satisfied management was making progress in paying off wage and other arrears, which had been halved to six weeks, and that under a deal ending July 1, output would not be disrupted.
"The downhill slide has been halted and the proof is thus -- we have a team of managers, a programme and real resources for production," Vetchinin said, adding the government could sign a decree restructuring the company's debt as soon as next week.
Norilsk, which has said it could be near bankruptcy after 1996 consolidated losses of 3.29 trillion roubles according to Russian accounting standards, likes to describe its problems as social and political, not economic and financial.
But some of its problems stem from market, not state, relations. Vetchinin said Norilsk wanted its natural gas supplier to cut its rates, not supplies, as it has since early June, forcing Norilsk to run partly on heavy fuel oil.
Russia also accounts for about 60 percent of the world's palladium supply and around 20 percent of platinum deliveries, with Norilsk accounting for most of Russian production.
"If you look at our production as separate from our other costs, it's profitable," Vetchinin said. The main complex's profit margins on nickel, used to manufacture stainless steel, were 18 percent, he added.
"But we want to tell our own state that if we don't get rid of our expenses, then our metal will cease to be competitive on world markets after 2000." ($1 = 5,760 roubles)
