No roads link Russia's Arctic city of Norilsk to the rest of the world. A flight across the Siberian tundra or a trip across the frozen Kara Sea are the only ways to reach this gigantic mining and smelting centre.
A lone highway from Norilsk airport to the company town winds across blinding, snow-blanketed tundra, across which locals say lurk an array of nuclear missiles primed to strike.
After an hour's bumpy ride, the Arctic sun struggles behind a pall of filth and Norilsk, one of the world's biggest metals combines and a monument to Soviet industrial might, rises menacingly from a gruesome, gritty blanket of smelter fumes.
The dark air here is so polluted that for the average local resident, life ends at 50.
Apartment hallways can be covered in blue ice when temperatures drop below minus 50 Celsius (-58 Fahrenheit) in winter.
"Norilsk was built for working, not living," said Andrei Samokhin, spokesman for Norilsk Nickel, the company that effectively is the town. "There's nothing to do but work."
DEADLY PAST, POISONED FUTURE, LITTLE GOLD FOR WORKERS
Norilsk pulses with the ghosts of at least 100,000 political prisoners whom Soviet dictator Josef Stalin exiled to this forsaken spot in the 1930s and 40s to work one of the planet's richest, but most desolate, sites for turning mineral deposits of nickel, platinum, gold and other ores into pure metals.
For Mitrofan Rubeko, a rare 85-year-old survivor of Stalin's purges, Norilsk, 200 miles (320 km) north of the Arctic Circle, is an outpost of outrage. "None of the young want to remember the history of Norilsk," he said in his spartan apartment.
Norilsk has no monument to the innocent victims of forced labour, no mention of them in the town museum and no talk of one of the most prominent episodes in the Soviet Union's climb to a communist industrial heaven. Not one book has been published in Russia on the town's real history. Company officials have ignored Rubeko's request to erect a monument.
Norilsk does have a monument to the town's first "engineers". Most were officers in the secret police that later became the KGB. They supervised thinly clad prisoners labouring in the open air and sleeping in wooden barracks with ice floors.
Norilsk now has three nickel and copper smelters, two of them skeletal dinosaurs belching poisonous gases. It has metals processing and enriching plants and some of the world's richest mines of nickel, platinum, palladium, cobalt, copper and gold.
The new generations of Norilsk's 300,000 residents -- some descendents of Stalin's victims, others children of later, hardy souls who headed north decades ago for higher wages -- are miners and metalworkers who look a decade older than they are.
"It's so ecologically dangerous in Norilsk, you aren't even supposed to give birth here," said Sergei Yurshov, director of the main nickel plant's electrolysing unit.
Norilsk says it is in the throes of financial crisis -- but its streets are literally paved with gold.
Tonnes of filthy cancer-inducing black slag, sparkling with precious metals, are collected from the smelters and sifted over streets to keep them from freezing.
"The state sees the bullion, but this is all we see," said Boris Degtyarov, an official at the main trade union.
There is more beautiful poison at the electrolysing plant, where luminous, lime-green liquid nickel, laced with electricity, is processed from matt black slabs glinting with the earth's most prized metals.
The dark cobbled floors and 1940s technology, exposing steel entrails and frames of processing lines, have a mediaeval air.
Concentrations of carcinogenic nickel in the air are 200 times Western norms and 20,000 times the worthy but never attained Soviet standard.
In Norilsk, women retire at 40, men at 45. Degtyarov says 90 percent of newborn babies have serious illnesses or handicaps. An aura of illness pervades everything here. One mine, Keyerkan, means Valley of Death in the language of the local Dolgan people.
Despite the richness of its ore mines, Norilsk has not created wealth for its workers.
Difficulties in keeping tabs on just who exports its multi-billion dollar output, and vast tax arrears have not helped the labour force, whose wages are two months behind.
"Where's the money for the metals going?" asked Rubeko, shaking his silver-haired head. "That I cannot understand."
A FROZEN, UNDERGROUND HELL
Deep in the Taimyr mine, 1.5 km (one mile) below the permafrost, is a darker world, where miners labour round the clock in shifts and cavernous tunnels worm through the earth.
Get lost and you are in severe danger -- engineers daily blast out new galleries with dynamite. The rule for finding the way out -- hold up a wet finger and sense the faint breeze from the ventilation shaft.
The lift, a 15 minute or so ride, rumbles like a distant rocket's afterburners.
"The lift cables are rusted," said duty operator, Sergei. "But we love our jobs," he added, inciting laughter from miners waiting to be ferried down into the bowels of the Arctic.
The Soviet authorities saw Norilsk as the embodiment of the socialist city-factory and as an organising principle for society. Now the remains of that vision are being tested by new market forces. Already hundreds of homeless live in the town's boiler plants.
Company officials speak of uprooting pensioners to warmer climes, where they would cost less to support, and of the need to trim a bloated workforce.
The plans have made Norilsk a barometer of the troubles faced by Russian industries in casting off their Soviet legacy. But they are hotly contested.
"You'd need two Kalashnikovs for every policeman if you had a load of unemployed wandering these streets," Degtyarov said.
Rubeko, dragged to Norilsk in 1938 after a midnight knock at his door in southern Russia, despairs at the thought of a second exile. "You can't resettle an 85-year-old man," he said.
After working at Norilsk for 66 years, Rubeko, now head of the local chapter of the Society for the Defence of the Victims of Stalinist Repressions, cannot even afford new shoes.
When asked what Norilsk was for him, he answered, "a grave".
But he is not a dead soul.
"People related better to each other in the old days -- they were kinder and more spiritual.
"Everyone thought Stalin would die and we would survive this," he said with a smile. "And that is what happened."
