Russia's delays in exporting platinum metals to an increasingly tight and edgy world market stem from a volatile cocktail of internal power struggles and bureaucratic foul-ups, industry sources said on Friday.
Few Western traders and analysts believed Moscow was intentionally withholding supplies in order to boost the market, which earlier this month saw palladium prices at 17-year highs and platinum at a seven-year peak.
Most Russian sources have said the delays in deliveries from the world's biggest supplier of palladium and second largest of platinum are due to problems with red tape in Moscow, and that no larger issues are at play.
But Western industry analysts say in-fighting among state bodies for control over Russia's multi-billion-dollar white metal exports is probably a major factor.
"I believe it started out as a power struggle and has been considerably exacerbated by red tape," said Rhona O'Connell, precious metals analyst at T Hoare &amp; Co in London.
Two other Western analysts said it was unlikely Russia had left the market just to boost prices, as it did in the 1970s.
"They understand what can happen when you meddle in the market," said one London analyst, referring to a time when Russian supply delays backfired because Western electrical companies simply turned to silver instead.
Russia's senior metals officials have taken refuge behind a wall of silence on the delays, now running at five months.
Russia accounts for nearly two thirds of the world's palladium supply and around 20 percent of platinum deliveries. At one point this year prices for palladium, used in catalytic converters, electronics and dentistry, doubled to $240.00 an ounce.
Sister metal platinum rose 20 percent in the first week of June to around $500.00 an ounce but have since slipped back to around $416.
"There was a period, after the reorganisation of (state strategic reserve) Gokhran and the functions of the Economy Ministry in this area, when it took time to sort out quota and licensing procedures," said a source at Almazjuvelirexport, the state agency exporting the metals.
Almaz completed talks in mid-June with buyers in Japan, the world's largest consumer of platinum and palladium. But after quoting Japanese buyers various possible dates for the resumption of exports and leaving markets guessing on when it would start deliveries, Almaz has clammed up.
"Mr Berlin does not wish to give any comments on the situation," said an employee, referring to Vitaly Berlin, the head of Almaz's platinum unit.
One Almaz source again cited red tape, saying, "It would be fair to say technical, bureaucratic procedures are to blame."
The Russian institutions involved in precious metals have undergone major changes in the past 12 or so months. Gokhran, now GosFond, is no longer under the aegis of Roskomdragmet and is administered by the Economy and Finance Ministries.
Roskomdragmet, the former state committee for precious metals and precious stones, was disbanded in mid-1996. A sweeping government reshuffle in March in effect disbanded the Industry Ministry, which had jurisdiction over precious metals output.
But one official disagreed with the red tape theory.
"This is disinformation -- Almaz has no bureaucratic problems," said Yuri Boikin, deputy head of the Foreign Economic Relations Ministry's foreign economic activities department.
"Almaz has a government order to sell -- when it does that is its problem. They can do it whenever they want. On the second day after getting the quota they can get a general licence. Why they haven't prepared documents and contracts is their problem."
Western markets also question how much Russia's stockpiles have dwindled in the past three or four years on strong exports.
"The general sense is that they've got plenty of palladium but that platinum could be running short," one source said, quoting a second trader who thought Russia had only six months of platinum left.
One London trader said Almaz was ready to export in March but that President Boris Yeltsin disbanded the Industry Ministry that month and that the central bank may have heated up the campaign for control over the marketing of Russia's white metals.
