Russia's plans to cut electricity tariffs for good payers could jolt its giant aluminium industry, the world's largest exporter of the non-ferrous metal, into bigger profits, officials and analysts said on Monday.
But not all plants, they said, would benefit equally.
"Well, this is certainly a pretty good development," said Galina Stelmakova, deputy director for development and investments at Kontsern Alyuminiy, the Russian producers' group. "It will streamline the economic situations at smelters.
Fuel and Energy Minister Boris Nemtsov, in charge of revamping natural monopolies in the energy and transport sectors, said earlier that electricity tariffs for domestic industry would drop by up to 30 percent from July.
Nemtsov said only users which paid on time for supplies would be eligible for the lower tariffs -- a condition many, but not all, Russian smelters meet.
Industry officials said that with electricity accounting for about 25 percent of the cost of producing a tonne of primary aluminium in Russia, lower power tariffs could help profits.
Yuri Shlaifshtein, a board member at Bratsk, the world's largest primary aluminium smelter, said leaner tariffs could help the Siberian plant's longterm plans to attract foreign investment for modernisation.
"I can only welcome this decision," he said by telephone, adding Bratsk always paid on time, in cash, for its electricity supplies. "This won't affect our general production levels but it will make them more stable over the longterm."
Russia, home to the world's largest smelters, exported 2.44 million tonnes of primary aluminium last year, the most of any producing country. Its total output was 2.87 million tonnes.
The reduction in power costs are not likely to be felt evenly, since different regions have different rates. The so-called European part of Russia, where only about 15 percent of Russia's aluminium is produced, pays the highest tariffs.
Irkutsk, another large East Siberian smelter, pays about 10 percent of its per-tonne production cost of $1,200 for electricity. In sharp contrast, the European smelters pay up to $600 for electricity for each tonne.
Boris Arlyuk of St Petersburg, Russia-based Alumconsult said the rate cuts would help the Kandalaksha, Nadvoisky and Volgograd smelters in the European part of Russia most of all, since those plants had the highest energy costs.
But they were also the least solvent, paying for electricity with metal or promissory notes, and might not be able to produce cash up front as Nemtsov wanted, he said.
Russian smelters are struggling to secure longterm electricity supply contracts to increase profits and plan for the future.
Nemstov's rate cuts are part of a wider drive by Moscow to spark life into industrial output in general, which has plummeted in the years since the breakup of the Soviet Union.
Ironically, electricity rate cuts could benefit the Siberian smelters the least, since some of them may have already secured longterm supply contracts with regional hydroelectrical plants.
"Now if we can just get the government to agree to a lower tariff for three years," Shlaifshtein added. "And then get it to do the same thing for railway tariffs."
Nemtsov, a young reformer who is also a first deputy prime minister, has also promised to cut rail tariffs -- a move the smelters would welcome.
Industry officials have said the cost of transporting Russian metal to world markets is more than twice the Western industry average of around 24 percent.
Kontsern Alyuminiy said in March that average Russian smelter profit margins had fallen to one percent in 1996 from 16 percent two years before.
--Moscow Newsroom, +7095 941 8520
