Russian oil barons are battling for control of Rosneft, one of the last big energy firms not yet privatised, in a tussle that could alter Western investments in this energy frontier, industry sources said on Monday.
The sources, who asked not to be named, said rival Russian oil company Sibneft, widely known to be controlled by prominent financier and politician Boris Berezovsky, was making a play for Rosneft, the rough diamond of the Russian energy sector.
"Berezovsky plans to merge the two companies," said a highly placed Russian energy official close to the matter. "It's part of a plan to control revenue flows from (Rosneft's) exports."
Sibneft spokesman Filipp Murashkov said Rosneft was one of six energy companies Sibneft was considering acquiring but would not say whether the mini-major would actually make a play.
"The company's (Sibneft's) management is analysing the possibility of acquiring one of these oil companies and is assessing its overall needs," he said by telephone. "What that will result in, I cannot tell you now." He said Sibneft's board would take a decision in coming weeks.
Russia's former oil production associations are now independent companies, most of them privatised and many of them among the world's largest in terms of oil reserves.
Rosneft's key draws are its status as the recipient of state offtake in all production-sharing deals and its significant equity stakes in $40 billion worth of energy projects with foreign oil companies.
But the company has many deadweight liabilities, including dozens of research institutes and defunct equipment producers.
Still, Rosneft is part of three deals off Russia's Far East island of Sakhalin requiring total investments from Japanese and U.S. partners of around $22 billion. In Sakhalin-I, due to begin output right after the turn of the century, one Rosneft unit has a 17 percent interest while a second affiliate has 23 percent.
Rosneft also has a 7.5 percent stake in the $2 billion Caspian Pipeline Consortium, which will build a new oil export pipeline from Kazakhstan to Russia, and a 20 percent stake in the $20 billion international Timan-Pechora Company project.
"This is more than just a corporate battle," said one of the Russian sources. "Rosneft is going to start reeking of money very soon, and Sibneft's owner senses this."
Rosneft's privileged position could introduce a new variable into the tortuous negotiations foreign energy firms go through to try to get oil deals in Russia off the ground.
A senior Western energy executive said Rosneft's status as representative of the government in output-sharing deals was unclear and he was unsure of its effect on stalled projects.
One of the Russian sources said Rosneft had once been in preliminary talks with Exxon Corp, Amoco Corp and Total of France on possible strategic alliances but that talks could not proceed until Rosneft's fate was decided.
"For the (international) majors, Rosneft is not a hypothetical partner now," the source said.
Berezovsky, through Rosneft's new, government-appointed president, Yuri Bespalov, has undertaken a sweeping overhaul of Rosneft managers, replacing half a dozen powerful department heads, including Valentin Zlatov, who oversaw exports. Rosneft vice-presidents and deputy chairmen are no longer empowered to conduct negotiations with foreign partners or to sign contracts.
Sources said Sibneft, whose main production unit is Noyabrskneftegaz, was positioning, possibly through an unknown affiliate, to place a winning bid for Rosneft in a forthcoming auction of the company's shares.
"I keep hearing from many Russians that Berezovsky is definitely going for Rosneft," said the Western oil executive. "There is a sense now that it's much more certain."
Moscow has held sales of prize stakes in privatised oil companies but nearly all of them have been won by what appear to be pre-determined winners allied with the company being sold.
The original privatisation plan for Rosneft, Russia's 10th largest producer with 1996 output of 262,000 barrels per day, calls for 47 percent to be auctioned off. The state would retain 51 percent while workers would get two percent.
Rosneft, which Moscow once envisioned as Russia's national oil company, has wanted to emulate the success of its private competitors, like LUKoil. Senior Rosneft officials once begged to be described as a private oil company, even though it is still 100 percent state-owned.
