Russia's Gazprom, the world's largest gas company and a corporate empire with the power of a state, has not seen big economic troubles at home hurt its ability to raise money abroad.
Energy analysts, speaking on Friday one day before RAO Gazprom holds its annual shareholders' meeting, said Russia's arguably most powerful company would use the event to declare an end to a tussle with the government over the company's role in the economy and to solidify investor confidence.
"Nonpayments problems depress Gazprom's collection rate and undermine its overall profitability," said analyst Yuri Butayev of Renaissance Capital. "But the company is attractive, regardless," he said, citing its huge reserves and exports to Europe. "It's absolutely unique."
Gazprom, struggling to emerge from a severe nonpayments crisis which has left most Russian enterprises crippled, goes into the meeting on the heels of major capital raising plans and a clean slate before tax authorities.
The company faces a major problem in getting domestic customers to pay.
But some analysts said the problem had still not dented the company's fundamentals and cash flows from exports were strong.
"It's raised more capital abroad than any other Russian company," said energy analyst Ivan Mazalov of CentreInvest Group consultancy in Moscow, adding Gazprom's reserves and exports were the company's top positive factors. "Foreign credit institutions are very confident of Gazprom's ability to repay."
The monopoly is a corporate and political force in Russia, where it accounted for a vast 26 percent of the country's 1996 tax revenues and heats a nation of voters.
But Gazprom, once a ministry and once run by Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin, faced attacks earlier this year by cabinet officials, who were once the company's unquestioning supporters but are now desperate for cash to plug the deficit.
Gazprom's biggest problem is that it gets paid for only 60 percent of the gas it sells at home, and then mostly by barter.
The low rate made it fall behind in its tax payments, but it finally paid off its final $608 million in tax arrears this week and can now try to raise more money abroad for costly production and export projects.
But how Gazprom's international auditor Price Waterhouse will value the barter, and thus the company, which had 1996 pre-tax profit of 45 trillion roubles ($7.8 billion), is unknown.
"It's difficult to say what the company will be worth," said Butayev. "There exist big discrepancies with the collection rate and how you convert barter into cash."
Analysts said Gazprom was unlikely to use the annual meeting to announce radical changes to its strategy.
"The one significant piece of information we're waiting for is the international accounts standards, " said Butayev, referring to the question of just how rich the wealthy company is. "But I don't think they'll release them at the meeting.
"Otherwise, there will be no big surprises as far as the fundamentals are concerned."
The fundamentals for Gazprom, which has 34 percent of world gas reserves, 27 percent of annual global output and accounts for 60 percent of Europe's gas imports, are good.
Gazprom plans to issue two $1 billion Eurobonds and a $1 billion convertible bond by early 1998. It plans a second tranche of its wildly-successful American Depositary Shares (ADSs) next year and has mandated Credit Lyonnais and Dresdner Kleinwort Benson to organise a bridging loan of $1.2 billion and medium term credits of $2.5-$3.0 billion.
Gazprom, 40 percent state-owned, plans to offer nine percent of its equity to foreign investors. Gazprom's market capitalisation has doubled this year to $16.5 billion.
Ekho-Moskvy radio said influential financier and politician Boris Berezovsky, a force in Russia's oil sector and member of the Security Council, was lobbying to join Gazprom's board.
Abroad, Gazprom is looking to double its gas exports to Europe by 2010 via its $40 billion Yamal production and pipeline project -- plans requiring financing which in turn requires Gazprom not bicker with the government about taxes.
"Gazprom is a state within a state, and it's in its best interests to cooperate with the government," Butayev said. "The company is a pragmatist."
