The story of Bre-X Minerals Ltd. and its fabulous Indonesian gold discovery deep in the jungles of Borneo has all the elements of a thriller: suspense, international intrigue, politics, legal wrangling and lots of money.
The end of the story is nowhere in sight.
Until this week, Toronto-based Barrick Gold Corp. appeared to have a deal with Bre-X sewn up. But Placer Dome Inc. in Vancouver raised the stakes and added another twist to the plot on Tuesday by announcing that it had made an offer for Bre-X that was now under consideration by the Indonesian government.
On Wednesday, another Vancouver mining concern, Teck Corp., said it hoped to make its own bid for Bre-X and its rich Busang deposit.
"Busang assures any company a leading position, with its low costs and large size," said gold analyst John Ing of brokerage Maison Placements in Toronto.
The Busang deposit in Kalimantan on the island of Borneo contains at least 57 million ounces of gold, worth $21 billion at today's prices. Many analysts believe the deposit could contain more than 100 million ounces of high-grade, low-cost gold.
Until this week, it seemed Barrick was the only company with a realistic chance of grabbing a share of the project. In November, the Indonesian government told Bre-X, which discovered the Busang gold find, to form a joint venture with Barrick and present their deal to the government for approval.
A proposal was assembled last month and awaits the government's blessing.
But the Indonesian government's edict spooked the international mining community and angered many Bre-X shareholders who felt their company had been forced to negotiate with a gun to its head. Some Bre-X shareholders hired high-profile lawyers to ensure their interests were protected in any eventual deal.
Meanwhile, the Barrick-Bre-X arrangement spawned rampant rumors in the mining and investment communities, prompting observers to ask why Busang deposit was not auctioned to the highest bidder, how Barrick acquired such a privileged position and who was calling the shots in hammering out a final deal.
Barrick maintains it was chosen for its experience operating large gold mines, its environmental record and its strong financial position.
Others cite Barrick's alliance with the influential daughter of Indonesia's President Suharto, and Barrick's high-powered advisory board, which includes former Canadian Prime Minister Brian Mulroney and former U.S. President George Bush.
Although Barrick contends it is still the only company in the running for Bre-X, shareholders have pushed up Bre-X's stock on the belief that Placer Dome may have a chance, analysts said.
"If it were a horse race, you'd have to look at Placer," said analyst Ing.
Bre-X shares rose C$1.10 to C$24.45 on Wednesday on the Toronto Stock Exchange after jumping C$1.90 to C$23.35 on Tuesday.
Analysts said Indonesian officials were probably concerned about tarnishing their reputation in the international investment community and were seeking a way to allow other companies to bid on Busang without losing face.
The fact that Placer Dome boldly declared its intentions in a news release, adding that it had discussed the matter with high-ranking Indonesian officials, could be a sign that the bidding process had already opened, said gold analyst Chad Williams at Research Capital in Montreal.
"We may be in the midst of a bidding process as we speak, a bidding process by Indonesian standards," Williams said. "I think the Indonesians appreciate how important it is to attract foreign investment, so they're treading very carefully."
For Bre-X, it is not simply a matter of waiting for word from the Indonesian government and doing what it is told.
One of Bre-X's Indonesian partners, Jusuf Merukh, this week filed a C$2 billion ($1.5 billion) lawsuit against Bre-X, its executives and others involved in Busang. The suit claims up to 40 percent of the Busang deposit. Merukh already controls an undisputed 10 percent of the smallest part of Busang.
"We're serious about this claim," Merukh's lawyer Aleck Trawick told Reuters by telephone from Calgary on Wednesday. He said Bre-X had 15 days to file a defense.
Bre-X described the law suit as "frivolous" and said it planned a vigorous defense.
Meanwhile, Bre-X is still waiting for its contract of work permits from the Indonesian government, which it needs to continue work on Busang.
Most observers agree on one thing: Indonesian  President Suharto and his close officials and advisers hold the key to any conclusion of the Bre-X saga.
"I think Placer and Barrick are waiting for some sort of signal," said Ing. "I think it's a waiting game."
While Placer Dome Chief Executive John Willson estimated this week that the saga would take three to six months to play out, some analysts believe the outcome will be clear long before that.
"I think things will develop very quickly from here on in," said analyst Williams.
