Canada's Barrick Gold Corp. appeared to regain the upper hand on Tuesday in the perplexing fight for control of the massive Busang gold find in Indonesia.
Barrick said on Tuesday that a letter from the Indonesian government supported a proposed joint venture between Barrick and Bre-X Minerals Ltd., the Calgary, Alberta-based company that discovered Busang.
But the letter made plain that the government's blessing was conditional on satisfying the demands of Bre-X's Indonesian partners -- PT Askatindo Karya Mineral and PT Amsya Lyna -- within a month, Barrick said.
"The main thing here is that the government has reaffirmed its support of Barrick's participation," Barrick spokesman Vince Borg told Reuters. "This is a very significant step forward."
The Indonesian government told Barrick and Bre-X last November to agree on a joint venture to develop Busang. The companies submitted a proposal to the government in December, asking for clarification on a few issues.
However, delays in completing the agreement prompted Vancouver-based Placer Dome Inc. to make a $5 billion counter-proposal for Bre-X last week. Under Placer's rival bid, 40 percent of Busang would go to Indonesian interests. The letter from the Indonesian government received this week by Barrick and Bre-X addressed only their joint venture proposal and mentioned nothing about the Placer Dome offer.
Barrick gave little weight to Placer Dome's rival proposal after receiving the letter. "I don't see how the Placer proposal can at all affect the progress we'll be making in reaching a final agreement," Borg said.
Placer was undaunted. "We don't see it like that," Placer spokesman Hugh Leggatt said in Vancouver. "We have a creative and compelling proposal on the table and we expect it will succeed."
Meanwhile, Barrick said the Indonesian government had offered to help Bre-X sort out its relationships with its Indonesian partners and analysts believe Askatindo is the key to forging a successful deal between Barrick and Bre-X.
Askatindo, which has a 10 percent stake in the richest parts of Busang, is controlled by the Syakareni family and Muhammad "Bob" Hasan, a close associate of Indonesian President Suharto. Hasan bought a 50 percent stake in Askatindo earlier this month.
"The Indonesian people are looking for a bigger participation," observed one Toronto-based gold mining analyst.
Others said Bre-X, Barrick and the Indonesian government were being pressured to work out a way to give Askatindo a larger share of Busang.
In its letter, the government stipulated that Barrick and its partners should get 67.5 percent of a new company that would develop Busang. Bre-X and its partners would keep 22.5 percent and the Indonesian government would get 10 percent.
It was unclear whether Askatindo's portion was included in Bre-X's 22.5 percent.
"That's what we have to work out with Bre-X and Askatindo," Borg said.
Bre-X officials did not return telephone calls asking for comment.
