The glory of controlling Busang, one of the world's richest gold deposits, has thrown together an unlikely duo.
In one corner is Peter Munk, the suave but aggressive founder of heavyweight Barrick Gold Corp., backed by buckets of money, power, connections and experience.
In the other is David Walsh, the maverick chief of Bre-X Minerals Ltd., the young Canadian exploration firm that discovered Busang in the jungles of East Kalimantan on the Indonesian island of Borneo.
The Indonesian government has told Barrick and Bre-X to form a joint venture to manage the fabulous gold find. But the government edict would force an unnatural David-and-Goliath alliance on two companies led by two very different men.
To observers, Munk, 69, is the epitome of class. He makes sure everything is top-notch and pays top dollar. Barrick's imposing office towers over downtown Toronto, impressing visitors with its grandiosity.
Those who know him best say Munk plays to win. In sports, he sticks to skiing and tennis, believing that focusing on just two activities will help him excel.
With Barrick, North America's biggest gold company and Munk's baby, he sticks doggedly to gold, refusing to diversify into other metals or minerals.
"He's like a tiger," his long-time friend Bob Smith, the recently retired president of Barrick, told Reuters. "If he grabs hold of something, he won't let go. He has a tremendous ability to focus, whether it's recreation or business."
In the 1950s, Munk, originally from Hungary, started up Clairtone Sound Corp., a stereo company that dazzled Canada until it flopped in 1971.
"Everything I've done afterward has been child's play compared with Clairtone," he told author Peter Newman. "What I learned was never to give away your destiny."
In 1983, Munk started Barrick, producing 3,000 ounces a year, and built it into the world's third largest gold company with estimated production of 3.2 million ounces for 1996.
Bre-X's Walsh has gone from rags to riches in less than four years. He started as a Montreal stockbroker, was transferred to Calgary, Alberta in the 1980s and then broke out on his own. He concentrated on oil and gas exploration and then switched to mining. But by 1993, his exploration efforts had dried up.
"We had these claims which were worthless, and no money," Walsh, 51, told Reuters in a recent interview.
Almost broke, he scraped together C$10,000 ($7,400) to start exploring in Indonesia, pursuading friends to invest C$200,000 ($148,000) for a stake in the area now known as the central Busang.
Walsh hit the jackpot with Busang, which has at least 57 million ounces of gold, currently worth $20 billion.
"It just kept growing," Walsh said. "By July and August (1995) it really appeared it would be a monster discovery."
He ran Bre-X from the basement of his Calgary home until last year. Bre-X's rocketing stock has made him a multi-millionaire and he now lives in the Bahamas with his wife Jeannette.
But he has one regret. "We should have been more visible in Indonesia," he said. "I think where we lacked was in making more relationships than we had in Indonesia."
Bre-X has an alliance with Sigit Harjojudan, the son of Indonesian President Suharto, but observers said Sigit's influence was eclipsed by that of his sister Siti Hardiyanti, with whom Barrick forged an early alliance.
Munk has attracted to his advisory board former U.S. President George Bush, former Canadian Prime Minister Brian Mulroney and former Bundesbank President Karl Otto Poehl.
He has ties with politicians in many countries and analysts said those gave him the upper hand with Busang.
Munk and Walsh have tried to tango before. In 1994, they reached an agreement on developing Busang. But last-minute changes from Barrick prompted Bre-X to back out of the deal.
With Barrick's rival Placer Dome Inc. trying to woo the Indonesian government into allowing it to bid on Bre-X, Walsh has made it clear he would rather do business with Placer than with Barrick.
