Bre-X Minerals Ltd's choice today of J.P. Morgan and Co as a financial adviser completes the first step in its search for a partner to help develop its huge Indonesia gold deposit.
Bre-X also said on Thursday that it hired Republic National Bank of New York as a corporate adviser.
The two advisers will work together to ensure Bre-X gets the best deal possible as it picks a suitable partner, Bre-X said in a statement.  
"It's setting the stage for the auction process, allowing them to be in a position to quickly and fairly assess any offers that may come in," Gordon Capital analyst Barry Allan said on Thursday.
Calgary-based Bre-X sits atop one of the world's biggest gold finds and has said it wants to sell 25 percent of the project to an experienced gold miner that can develop the site and market its product.
"We've been approached by basically every major gold company in the world," a Bre-X spokesman said in a recent interview.  
Bre-X also said today it hired Bryan Coates as vice-president and corporate controller. Coates most recently worked for Cambior Inc and brings 15 years of experience in international gold mining to Bre-X, the company said.
The gold mining community has been holding its breath for months, waiting for Bre-X to open up bidding for its prized Busang deposit.
The choice of J.P. Morgan "reflects that this is going to be a large international process," analyst Allan said.  
The decision on a financial adviser is the first of a slew of announcements expected this month from Bre-X that could drive the stock.
A contract of work from the Indonesian government is expected in the coming weeks. The contract will outline environmental, social, tax and financial obligations for Bre-X and its Indonesian partner.
Although details of the draft contract of work are already public, some observers fear the government may try to grab a bigger share of the profits as it sees the deposit blossom.  
New drilling results are expected to hit the market within a couple of weeks, Bre-X said.
The contract of work and the drilling results will likely send the stock higher, analysts said.
So far, drilling at the Busang deposit has outlined 46.92 million ounces of gold. The next set of results should bump up the deposit to more than 50 million, analysts said.
"I've made the joke that everybody who goes to the property tends to see God," Gordon Capital analyst Allan said just days after returning from an analysts' trip to the site.  
"And I guess I did. There's every probability it will be one of the largest in the world."
The mine should be low cost, especially in the first few years, said Allan, forecasting operation costs at about US$150 an ounce.
He has set a target of 35 for the stock, in the middle of the 30 to 40 range set by most analysts after the most recent tour and a previous tour in July.
"I continue to be really impressed by the deposit," said analyst Chris Bradbrook at Loewen Ondaatje McCutcheon, who has visited the site twice.  
"It keeps getting bigger and bigger. The upside is substantial."
Bradbrook has a C$30 target for the stock for now, since investors want to see who the company's partner will be and how the partner will develop the property before they bid up the stock.
"That is the biggest potential driver."
But Allan said Bre-X's options in developing the site included going it alone.
"They don't want to sell too low and give up some of the upside potential," he said. "I'm sure they'll look at those offers and if they don't find any that are reasonable, I suspect they will go on their own."
The economics of the project are robust enough for Bre-X to finance the mine itself, he said.
Bre-X was up 0.05 to 25.05 in morning trading on the Toronto Stock Exchange and rose 1/4 to 18-3/8 on Nasdaq.
-- Reuters Toronto Bureau 416 941-8100
