The fight for control of Indonesia's rich Busang gold deposit has turned into an intense public relations battle rather than a traditional bidding war.
Barrick Gold Corp.'s founder and Chairman Peter Munk took the offensive on Wednesday, trumpeting Barrick's history, financial structure and mining capabilities.
Rival Placer Dome Inc. President John Willson has also kept a high public profile, lobbying in Indonesia to pursuade the government to give his company a chance to bid on Busang.
While both companies have been wooing Indonesian reporters, explorer Bre-X Minerals Ltd., which discovered Busang, has hired public relations firm Hill and Knowlton to polish its image.
Calgary, Alberta-based Bre-X currently controls the deposit. The Indonesian government has told Bre-X to form a joint venture with Toronto-based Barrick to develop the 57 million ounce gold deposit. But Placer Dome has said it wants a chance to bid on the deposit too by forming a merger with Bre-X.
"I think that Barrick is the company that is going to be involved in Busang's development," Munk said in a Wednesday conference call with mining analysts that seemed instead to be addressed to the Indonesian government.
"Not because somebody writes a letter, not because somebody calls somebody, not because somebody's got a better partner or worse partner, but only because Barrick is the company that has the most outstanding credentials to do the right job for Indonesia," he said.
Barrick has been criticized for using its high-profile board of advisers, which includes former U.S. President George Bush and former Canadian Prime Minister Brian Mulroney, to write letters and make phone calls to powerful Indonesians in a bid to corner Busang. Barrick also has an alliance with the eldest daughter of Indonesian President Suharto.
But Munk downplayed his company's influential ties, citing instead his company's strong finances, mining history, focus on gold and its experienced staff.
"Ultimately the right people will get this job and I think Barrick will qualify," Munk said.
Placer Dome's Willson thinks otherwise.
"We've come to a point now where there's a reasonable chance there will be a standard Western-type of auction," Willson told Reuters in an interview in Vancouver this week.
"I think there's a 50-50 chance that's going to happen. When it comes to competitive bid, I think there will be two people essentially in that race -- ourselves and Barrick.
The Indonesian government has instructed Bre-X and Barrick to work out a deal with their Indonesian partners at Busang by Feb. 17.
