Canadian mining companies are keeping a wary eye on the strengthening Canadian dollar, which threatens to bruise their earnings and cash flow.
"As the Canadian dollar strengthens, it hurts us," said Vic Wells, spokesman for Anvil Range Mining Corp., which cited the stronger currency as a factor that forced the company to suspend zinc and lead mining at its Faro property in Canada's Yukon last December.
Analysts are forecasting a surge in the Canadian currency in 1997, with some predicting the unit to rise to 80 U.S. cents from its current 74 U.S. cent range.
"It'll take the cream off, that's for sure," said George Miller, president of the Mining Association of Canada.
Canada is the world's largest producer of potash, uranium and zinc, the world's second-biggest producer of nickel after Russia and an important source of copper.
Companies that produce metal mainly in Canada are especially hit by the currency strengthening against the U.S. dollar because producers must pay their operating costs in Canadian dollars. But most companies' revenues come in U.S. dollars, the currency in which most metals trade.
"Currency gets full-time attention here," said Alan Thomas, chief financial officer of Noranda Inc..
A change of one U.S. cent in the Canadian dollar translates into C$20 million ($14.8 million) on Noranda's bottom line, Thomas said. The currency rose about three-quarters of a U.S. cent in 1996, costing Noranda about C$15 million ($11.1 million), he said.
"So for '96, there's not a big change. But if the dollar continues to go up, it will have a bigger effect," he said.
"All our costs are in Canadian dollars -- the salaries we pay, the supplies we buy, the rent we pay. All our products are priced in U.S. dollars and they're priced the same regardless of the exchange rate," Thomas said.
Companies such as Alcan Aluminium Ltd., with most production outside Canada, are not as exposed to harm from a stronger currency since they pay most of their operating costs in U.S. dollars, analysts said.
But for companies such as Inco Ltd. and Falconbridge Ltd., which produce most of their nickel in Canada, a stronger dollar will take its toll.
Falconbridge figures a one-cent change in the Canadian dollar would knock C$7 million ($5.2 million) off its bottom line, even with the company's substantial currency hedging programme.
While Falconbridge operations in the Dominican Republic and Norway would not be affected by a stronger Canadian currency, about two-thirds of the company's operating costs originate in Canada, said Chief Financial Officer Lars-Eric Johansson.
Inco estimated that every one-cent change in the Canadian dollar amounted to a $9 million pre-tax hit despite currency hedging. But the company earned $179 million in 1996 on revenues of $3.1 billion, so small movements in the Canadian dollar do not have a huge effect, said Inco Chief Financial Officer Tony Munday.
"It's not going to kill us," he said.
Still, some mining analysts said the effects of a stronger Canadian dollar must be understood in context.
"With a rising dollar, it usually means metal prices are going up as well," said base metal analyst David Davidson with CIBC Wood Gundy in Toronto.
