Canada's Barrick Gold Corp on Monday dropped out of the race to control the vast Busang gold find in Indonesia, losing a long battle for the right to mine the deposit to U.S.-based Freeport-McMoran Copper and Gold Inc.
But analysts warned that the struggle to control Busang, possibly the world's biggest gold deposit, may not have ended. Placer Dome Inc, another big Canadian mining concern, said it has not given up hope of grabbing a piece of Busang.
"This thing is far from over," said Fred Ketchen, vice-president of Toronto brokerage ScotiaMcLeod.
Calgary's Bre-X Minerals Ltd, which discovered the 71-million-ounce Busang gold find, announced on Monday it had reached a deal with Freeport, shortly before an Indonesian government deadline was due to expire.
Under the deal, Freeport will own 15 percent of Busang find, Bre-X will keep 45 percent and Indonesian interests will take 40 percent.
The deal convinced Barrick, which has spent months negotiating for control of Busang, to give up its quest.
"We put forward our proposal last week and said to Bre-X that if you can find a better deal, we wish you success," said spokesman Vince Borg. "For us to go beyond the proposal would not be in the best interest of our shareholders."
He declined to elaborate on Barrick's final offer, citing a confidentiality agreement.
Many details needed to evaluate the Freeport deal remained a mystery on Monday, causing confusion in the stock market.
Bre-X said Freeport, based in Louisiana, will provide US$400 million or 25 percent of the capital costs of the Busang project. Freeport will borrow US$1.2 billion to fund the rest of the costs. But neither Bre-X nor Freeport would say how much would be paid to Bre-X.
"We're not making a comment until the (Indonesian) government announcement tomorrow," said a Freeport spokeswoman in New Orleans.
Since Bre-X did not mention any compensation from Indonesian interests or Freeport, observers have to assume there will be none, analysts said. Most analysts put a C$25 to C$30 target on Bre-X shares. The shares opened at C$25 on the Toronto Stock Exchange on Monday and sank quickly to C$23.50 by midafternoon.
"This has been very expensive for Bre-X. But Freeport has a pretty good deal here," said Rick Cohen, gold analyst at Goepel Shields in Vancouver.
The government of Indonesian President Suharto is expected to respond on Tuesday to the proposed deal. Freeport and Bre-X need government approval before going ahead.
"It's a tremendous loss for Barrick," said Cohen.
Barrick, the world's second biggest gold producer, had manouevred aggressively to grab control of Busang, spending months negotiating with Bre-X and Indonesian officials.
It formed an alliance with Suharto's eldest daughter Siti Hardiyanti Rukmana and used its powerful advisory board -- which includes former U.S. president George Bush and former Canadian prime minister Brian Mulroney -- to cultivate ties with other influential Indonesians.
Meanwhile, Placer Dome's chief executive officer, John Willson, said his company would re-evaluate its US$5 billion offer to merge with Bre-X, but would still be willing to use its financial resources and expertise to help develop Busang.
"Given the size, complexity and importance of Busang to Indonesia, we remain prepared to contribute our financial resources and unique mine development capabilities to this very attractive project," Willson said. "Naturally, we are disappointed by the news that we were not selected as the developer and operator."
If the Indonesian government grants Bre-X and Freeport the right to develop Busang, Bre-X could quickly become a takeover target for a large company that would not mind allowing Freeport operate the mine, analysts said.
But Barrick is unlikely to jump back into the race, said gold analyst Chad Williams with Research Capital in Montreal.
"I think Barrick would be apprehensive of buying out Bre-X because Bre-X is not the operator. It would be more amenable to Placer Dome."
