Inmet Mining Corp chief executive Bill James has one focus for the company he has led for the past six months: Antamina.
The huge copper and zinc discovery in Peru holds a resource of at least 400 million tonnes of ore, but the deposit requires at least US$1.5 billion to develop. Inmet shares the deposit 50-50 with Rio Algom Ltd.
"We're going to focus on Antamina and hopefully that will turn out to be a very profitable mine," James said on Friday in an interview.
"Our trick is going to be to finance it. We have very limited cash flow right now," he said. "It'll be a difficult situation. But we're going to do it."
How?
"Well, at some stage we'll probably do some underwritings and we'll sell off some assets. With the combination of that, we think we can handle our share," James said, springing out of his chair and pacing the room.
"We're going to do it," he bellowed, shaking his clenched fists above his head. "We are definitely going to do it."
But James is not starting from a position of strength. The copper, zinc and gold company posted a 1996 loss of C$364 million -- one million dollars for every day of the year, as James puts it.
"Nobody would call that too healthy."
James, 68, who is still officially chief executive at Denison Mines Ltd, was brought to Inmet last September to turn around the company. Denison would likely name a successor next week, said James, a former chief executive of Falconbridge Ltd.
Since James took the Inmet helm, the company has written down C$355 million in assets, including its solution mining at Copper Range in Michigan and its Bougrine zinc and lead mine in Tunisia.
It also wrote off a big chunk of its investment in the Izok Lake copper and zinc prospect in Canada's Northwest Territories and its investment at the Cayeli copper and zinc project in Turkey.
The company also faces low grades and rising costs at its young Troilus gold mine in northern Quebec.
A recent study on the Petaquilla copper-gold exploration property in Panama showed the project would probably not be economic under current conditions. Inmet has 48 percent of the project, with Teck Corp holding 26 percent and the rest held by Adrian Resources Ltd.
James would not say which assets were for sale. But he said he was sure the company could get at least book value or C$17 million for its stake in Petaquilla, "a little bit" for Bougrine and at least C$25 million for Izok Lake.
"We're not in any rush to sell these things off and we don't want anyone going around these properties kicking tires," he warned.
The company has C$185 million in the bank and would not need to fund Antamina for two or three more years, he said.
Inmet shares were up 0.05 to 8.85 in Toronto, down from a 52-week high of 11.13.
((Reuters Toronto Bureau 416 941-8100))
