A surprisingly weak February jobs report for Canada on Friday is staining the Liberal government's economic record as Canadians gear up for a federal election this year.
Canada's unemployment rate in February was stuck at 9.7 percent for the third month in a row, the government agency, Statistics Canada said. The figure was sharply higher than the U.S. jobless rate of 5.3 percent reported on Friday.
Especially dismal was the loss of 18,700 Canadian jobs last month. Full-time employment dropped by 38,000 from January, while part-time employment grew by 19,300.
Women and young people bore the brunt of the job losses, with women losing 44,000 full-time jobs and youths aged 15 to 24 losing 22,000 jobs.
The jobless news came with a federal election on the horizon, perhaps as soon as June.
The government of Prime Minister Jean Chretien has a commanding lead in public opinion polls and has won international praise for slashing Canada's budget deficit.
But it faces growing criticism over unemployment, the one serious blot on the economic landscape.    "Despite what the
polls suggest, they (the Liberals) may be in trouble," said economics professor Fred Lazar at York University in Toronto. "There's an increasing resentment building in the electorate."
"These figures are a damning indictment of a government with no clue, no plan and no idea how real jobs are created," said Monte Solberg, finance critic for the opposition Reform Party.
Some opposition politicians, labor groups and even left-leaning Liberals want the government to spend more on job creation. The right-wing Reform Party sees broad tax cuts as the best route to job creation.
The Liberals gamely defended their job creation record on Friday, with Finance Minister Paul Martin's parliamentary assistant Barry Campbell saying the Canadian government still expected 300,000 to 350,000 new jobs this year.
"All the other indicators are very positive," added Prime Minister Chretien's spokesman Peter Donolo. "You can't deny the fact that there's been a net creation of 715,000 jobs since we took office (in late 1993), which is higher than Germany, France and Italy combined."
Critics noted, however, that Canada's recent job creation has lagged far behind that of the United States, which has generated almost 600,000 new jobs so far this year.
