Nickel prices have been in the doldrums in the third quarter, disappointing Canada's big nickel producers who had forecast an increase in prices and a boost to profits.
Canada's two nickel giants, Inco Ltd and Falconbridge Ltd, are also experiencing copper woes.
The unexpectedly low metal prices "will likely take a bite out of our third-quarter earnings compared to previous earnings," Falconbridge chief financial officer Lars-Eric Johansson said in an interview.
Copper prices collapsed after Sumitomo Corp said its chief trader helped run up US$1.8 billion in losses through unauthorized trading over a decade. Only recently has copper showed signs of life.
For nickel, Johansson blamed the sluggish prices on faltering European and southeast Asian economies.
"In the very short term, the fundamentals are obviously not there," he said. "The overall global economy is not doing as well as we had hoped for."
But he added: "We expect the demand for nickel to pick up, maybe not this quarter but during the fourth quarter or to be more conservative, early next year."
Inco was also optimistic, with Inco executive vice president of marketing Peter Salathiel saying: "The potential for a nickel spike still exists. The time frame has been shifted from say the first half of '96 to the fourth quarter of '96 or the first quarter of '97."
Salathiel blamed a glut in stainless steel this year for nickel's poor performance. Stainless steel consumes about two-thirds of the world's nickel output.
Nickel demand and supply are currently on a par, Salathiel said.
He said that with nickel demand expected to remain steady for the next few months, nickel prices should rebound once stainless steel production picks up and the European and Asian economies strengthen.
But Richardson Greenshields analyst Ray Goldie said the nickel price should have picked up by now. He has seen growing demand along with a steady supply, laying the groundwork for a rise in prices.
"The fundamentals have worked beautifully," he said.
"Despite gloomy talk about the stainless steel industry, which is the major consuming industry, the most recent figures show nickel consumption is growing. Supply can't keep up and inventories are declining."
So why did nickel fail to spike?
"The fact that nothing has gone wrong may be one reason," said Goldie.
He said that nickel companies produced at capacity with no strikes or disruptions and that it might take such a disruption to knock the nickel price out of joint.
The floundering nickel market could spell trouble for stocks that trade on nickel prices, he added.
The stock market has built in an expectation of a moderate price increase, said Goldie and "if the price of nickel were to go sideways for the next six months, that would be a disappointment and the shares would go down," he said.
"But I don't believe there's an expectation we'll see sustained prices over US$4." Nickel was trading today at US$3.46 a pound.
Bank of Nova Scotia economist Patricia Mohr predicted nickel prices of at least US$4 a pound by early 1997.
She expected stainless steel stocks to be depleted in the fourth quarter, leading to increased demand for nickel in the first quarter of next year.
"There isn't very much new mine supply coming on in the near future," said Mohr. "So you do have the potential for prices to certainly move higher."
Analysts expect third-quarter earnings for Inco to fall to US$0.29 a share from year earlier US$0.33, with Falconbridge earnings declining to C$0.18 a share from C$0.47 in last year's third quarter, according to estimates compiled by I/B/E/S.
-- Reuters Toronto Bureau 416-941-8104
