Fears of a U.S. interest rate hike battered Canadian financial markets this week, but Canada's top central banker gave no hint on Friday whether he might raise Canada's rates in reply to any Fed action.    "There will always be aan
impact on Canada of an international change in interest rates," Bank of Canada Governor Gordon Thiessen told reporters after a speech to economists.
"But the difference I think now is that we have got more room to maneuver than we did before. But you should not interpret that as saying what we are going to do next week or not," he added.
The Canadian dollar and fixed income markets were rattled this week by investor concerns that the Federal Reserve would hike U.S. interest rates next Tuesday while the Bank of Canada is expected to hold rates steady.
Thiessen said nothing on Friday to ease market fears.
"He's saying inflation is under control and there is no reason for rates to rise," said Warren Jestin, chief economist for Bank of Nova Scotia.
However, economists predicted the central bank might eventually yield to pressure to tighten monetary conditions in Canada if the Canadian dollar continues to weaken.
The Bank of Canada dropped short-term interest rates 11 times last year compared with just one U.S. rate cut.
The lower rates and low inflation can be thanked for strengthening Canada's economy, Thiessen said on Friday, predicting strong growth for jobs and production in the year ahead.
"The Canadian economy should have room for strong above-potential rates of growth in output and employment in coming quarters without a resurgence in inflation," he said.
"The margin of unused capacity in our economy will shrink substantially over the next couple of years," he said.
Thiessen agreed with a Royal Bank forecast that 700,000 new jobs would be created over the next two years. And he predicted a return of consumer confidence and surging private sector growth.
Thiessen said he sees a strong Canadian dollar in the long term, citing a report on Friday of low Canadian inflation.
Canada's core consumer price index for February rose 1.5 percent on the year, according to Statistics Canada, which puts inflation well within the central bank's target inflation range of one to three percent.
