Softwood lumber prices may stay at their current high levels or even start to climb once Canadian lumber companies are given a fresh quota to sell to the United States on April 1, some analysts say.
"My opinion is we'll be seeing higher prices," said Gilbert Garant, a commodity broker in Montreal for Whalen, Beliveau and Associates.
Softwood lumber was trading on Friday at about US$370 a thousand board feet (tbf), against about US$320 before the quota system began a year ago.
April 1 marks the start of the second year of the Canada-U.S. agreement to limit Canada's softwood lumber exports -- and brings with it new uncertainties.
The quota system limits fee-free exports from the four top exporting provinces to 14.7 billion board feet of lumber/year. Companies surpassing their quotas must pay a fee ranging from US$50 to US$100 per 1,000 board feet. Statistics from about mid-March showed the country as a whole had already exported about 98 percent of its quota, while many individual companies had surpassed their own quotas and were now paying penalties.
In the previous three quarters, the market has been jittery as firms that had already reached the ceiling on their quota withheld stock toward the end of the quarter, waiting until they received a replenished quota in the next quarter to avoid paying fees, Garant said in a phone interview.
But as the end of the fourth quarter approaches, "I don't believe there's much being held back," said Garant.
Prices have fallen slightly in recent weeks as some lumber producers rushed to fill their quotas for the year, since they will lose unused allocated quota that they had not turned back to the government by the end of 1996, analysts said.
But demand would likely rise to fulfill spring building needs, and Canadian mills did not have a glut of softwood lumber to satisfy rising demand, Garant said.
Buyers "probably think people have more on the ground than there really is," he said.
Inventories are low and demand is on the rise for now, agreed Patricia Mohr, vice-president of economics at Scotiabank in Toronto: "I think actual demand will pick up."
The first year of the quota system has caused much uncertainty and price volatility in the market, a situation which will likely continue into the second year of the five- year agreement, analysts said.
"Things have settled down to a large extent, but it's far from clear what the next year will bring," said trader Gerry Yane at Marleau Lemire Securities in Montreal. "There's not enough clear information coming out of the government."
The system has made statistics a hot commodity and pitted Eastern Canada against the West as politicians give quotas.
"It's been very difficult. This is a very large industry to put under quota," said Ronald MacDonald, parliamentary secretary to Canada's trade minister. "I think the system has worked as well as we expected it to work."
He said there were bound to be bumps in the flow of lumber over the border at the end of every quarter as the quota system entered its second year, but the bumps would not be as dramatic as in the first year of the system.
"It won't be quite as bad, but you will get some problems like this," he said by phone from Dartmouth, Nova Scotia.
He said there would be no major changes to the system in the coming year. He brushed off complaints from the West: "The system is very fair to East and West."
The quota agreement gives Canada a bonus fee-free quota if softwood lumber averages more than US$405 in a quarter. Since the bonus was triggered in every quarter in the past year, the government has some leeway to give more quota this coming year to mills that were unfairly treated last year, MacDonald said.
"There might be some reallocation done mostly in favor of the East," added Garant. "At this point, most major mills out of the eastern provinces are paying a minimum of US$50 (fee per one thousand board feet), and many are paying the US$100." (Corrects to U.S dollars from Canadian dollars).
Some eastern mills have been out of quota room for almost two months, while in the West, some mills have had extra quota to fill at the end of the quarter, he said.
The interim allocation for companies in the first quarter starting April would be 28.75 percent of their full-year quota from last year, a government official said. The full-year allocations would be decided in the middle of May, he said.
((Reuters Ottawa Bureau 613-235-6745))
