The 1998 target date to start mining at the Voisey's Bay metals deposit, one of the world's biggest nickel deposit, will be a "tight" deadline to meet, says the new president of Inco Ltd.'s Voisey's Bay Nickel Co.
"We're still looking at that (time frame) very carefully," Stewart Gendron said in an interview recently. "It's pretty tight."
Inco intends to produce 270 million pounds of nickel annually, as well as 200 million pounds of copper and a significant amount of cobalt at the site in Canada's remote northeastern region of Labrador.
The company has forecasted initial production of 23 million pounds of nickel and 15 million pounds of copper in 1998.
Inco's plans to take over the deposit were delayed for three months this summer after the completion of its C$4.3 billion ($3.1 billion) acquisition of Diamond Fields Resources was put on hold while Diamond Fields executives settled a lawsuit.
The acquisition of Voisey's Bay has cemented Inco's position as the western world's largest nickel producer.
Analysts estimate that it will give Inco control 38 percent of the world's nickel market.
Gendron, 53, has been president for three weeks. He left his position as vice-president of milling, smelting and refining at Inco's Copper Cliff complex near Sudbury, Ontario, when the Voisey's Bay takeover was completed in August.
He and his team are now involved in environmental issues and negotiations with local aboriginals.
Without land claims agreements, the aboriginal groups have the power to delay or even prevent mining in the area, Inco has told its shareholders.
Gendron said the company also planned to finish a feasibility study for the remote Labrador site in the province of Newfoundland before the end of the year.
"Our primary focus right at the moment is environmental permitting," Gendron said.
His negotiators are mired in a tangle of overlapping provincial and federal regulations that they hoped to simplify for their project.
"My view is both the provincial government and the federal government are committed to making this happen," he said. "We clearly want to have production as soon as possible. Their objective would be the same."
But negotiations with two local aboriginal groups could be complicated, since there are four sets of negotiations.
The two groups, the Innu and the Inuit, are set to launch a lengthy round of negotiations with the federal and provincial governments over land claims.
Gendron said he expected an agreement by March.
"One of the things that seems frightening to the aboriginal groups is their perception that this is really a gigantic project and that the time schedule is very tight," Gendron said.
"But as a mine goes, while this is a good size mine, it remains simply just a mine and just a mill. The physical imprint on the land is much larger in people's perceptions than in reality."
Although making a 1998 schedule for open pit production may be challenging, the company's plans for full production by the year 2000 are on track, Gendron said.
"We've talked full refinery operation by the year 2000 and we're still working toward that target."
The company intends to start construction on an underground mine, a mill, a refinery and a smelter at the same time. The project will cost about C$1.1 billion ($802 million), Inco has estimated.
"By the year 2000, we expect to have all four parts in operation," Gendron said.
