A large discrepancy between two recent statistical reports on job creation in Canada has raised questions about the depth of Canada's unemployment problem.
The so-called payroll report, which measures the number of employees on business payrolls in Canada, showed the creation of 301,000 jobs in the fourth quarter of 1996.
But the much-watched labor force survey showed a more depressing picture. The monthly labor force survey is a broader measure of labor markets and includes self-employed and agricultural workers, who are not on business payrolls, as well as the unemployment rate.
For the fourth quarter of 1996, the labor force survey showed the creation of about 86,000 jobs -- less than a third of the new jobs in the payroll survey.
While Statistics Canada officials played down the discrepancy, the numbers raised eyebrows in Ottawa, where job creation promises to be a major issue in a federal election campaign expected this spring.
The governing Liberals are ready to campaign on their economic record, but are vulnerable to criticism on jobs since the unemployment rate has remained stubbornly high, hovering just below 10 percent.
But the two reports are apples and oranges, said Mike Sheridan, director-general of labor and household surveys at Statistics Canada.
"There's a big difference there, but why don't you look at it year over year?" he said in a phone interview. "The problem here is, on the short term, these two surveys don't measure the same thing."
For all of 1996, the labor force survey showed an increase of 186,000 jobs or 1.4 percent, while the payroll numbers showed an increase of 195,000 or 1.8 percent.
"Not a big difference," Sheridan said. "Over short-term periods, they rarely move in sync. But over longer-term periods, they move in sync."
The labor force survey had a 20-year history, while the payroll survey was fairly new and still undergoing changes, he said.
"The payroll numbers are being improved. They're playing almost a catch-up to the labor force," he said.
Economists said they tended to place more weight on the labor force survey than the payroll numbers, because the labor force survey gave a bigger, more up-to-date portrait of the job market.
The labor force survey for March is to be released on Friday. Economists predicted the creation of 35,000 jobs, compared to a loss of 18,000 for February. They predicted a dip in the unemployment rate to 9.6 percent from the 9.7 percent at which it had been stuck in the past three months.
Positive signals in the data are widely expected to encourage the Liberals to call a spring election, rather than waiting until autumn.
((Heather Scoffield, Reuters Ottawa Bureau 613 235-6745))
