The 1998 target date to start open pit mining at the rich Voisey's Bay metals deposit will be a "tight" deadline to meet, the new president of Inco Ltd's Voisey's Bay Nickel Co says.
"We're still looking at that (time frame) very carefully," Stewart Gendron said in an interview. "It's pretty tight."
Inco's takeover of the deposit was delayed for three months this summer when the completion of its C$4.3 billion acquisition of Diamond Fields Resources was put on hold while Diamond Fields executives settled a lawsuit.  
Gendron, 53, has been president for three weeks. He left his position as vice-president of milling, smelting and refining at Inco's Copper Cliff complex near Sudbury, Ontario, when the Voisey's Bay takeover was completed in August.
He and his team are now caught up in environmental issues and negotiations with local aboriginals.
Without land claims agreements, the aboriginal groups have the power to delay or even prevent mining in the area, Inco said in its circular to shareholders last May.  
Gendron said the company planned to finish a feasibility study for the remote Labrador site in eastern Canada before the end of the year.
"Our primary focus right at the moment is environmental permitting," Gendron said.
His negotiators are mired in a tangle of overlapping provincial and federal regulations that they hope to simplify for their project.  
"My view is both the provincial (Newfoundland) government and the federal government are committed to making this happen," he said. "We clearly want to have production as soon as possible. Their objective would be the same."
But negotiations with two local aboriginal groups could be complicated, since there are four sets of negotiations.
The two groups, the Innu and the Inuit, are about to launch a lengthy round of negotiations with the federal and provincial governments over land claims.
Gendron said he expected an agreement by March.  
The aboriginal groups are also trying to forge settlements with Inco on employment, training and scholarships as well as the economic, social and environmental impact of mine development.
"One of the things that seems frightening to the aboriginal groups is their perception that this is really a gigantic project and that the time schedule is very tight," Gendron said.  
"But as a mine goes, while this is a good size mine, it remains simply just a mine and just a mill. The physical imprint on the land is much larger in people's perceptions than in reality."
Although making a 1998 schedule for open pit production might be challenging, the company's plans for full production by the year 2000 were on track, Gendron said.
"We've talked full refinery operation by the year 2000 and we're still working toward that target."  
The company intends to start construction on an underground mine, a mill, a refinery and a smelter at the same time. The project will cost about C$1.1 billion, Inco has estimated.
"By the year 2000, we expect to have all four parts in operation," Gendron said.
Inco intends to produce 270 million pounds of nickel annually, as well as 200 million pounds of copper and a significant amount of cobalt at the site. The company has forecast initial production of 23 million pounds of nickel and 15 million pounds of copper in 1998.
-- Reuters Toronto Bureau 416 941-8100
