Nickel giant Inco Ltd., after besting suitors and facing down legal challenges, said said on Wednesday that it has finally closed its C$4.3 billion ($3.2 billion) takeover of Diamond Fields Resources Inc.
The closing gives Inco, already one of the world's biggest nickel miners, a leading role in the nickel market for years to come with the acquisition of the massive copper-cobalt-nickel deposit in remote Voisey's Bay, Labrador, in northeastern Canada.
Diamond Fields shareholders had the choice to take common shares in Inco, cash up to a maximum of C$350 million ($256 million), preferred shares in Inco or a new class of VBN shares to participate directly in the Voisey's Bay deposit.
Inco said Wednesday the full C$350 million was paid out. The company also distributed a total of 50.3 million common shares, 25.9 million Inco class VBN shares and 9.4 million preferred shares as part of the acquisition.
The deal ends a long takeover battle and legal saga. Inco's bid beat out rival Toronto-based Falconbridge Ltd. last spring.
But Inco refused to sign the dotted line when, days before the scheduled closing of the deal, a group of Texans launched a lawsuit against Diamond Fields executives and Inco.
The lawsuit was settled Aug. 5, clearing the way for the deal to go through.
For Inco, the deal was worth fighting for. The Voisey's Bay deposit is thought to be one of the largest metals discoveries in the world.
The site contains an estimated reserve of about 150 million metric tons of ore and will give Inco a solid chunk of the nickel market when production starts up in 1998 or 1999.
The low-cost, high-quality Voisey's Bay project is expected to produce one-third of all new nickel mine output in the next 10 years and force some high-cost nickel projects out of business, analysts have said.
Inco may still face some roadblocks before it gets to that stage, however.
The nickel giant must negotiate with local native groups and win environmental approvals before it can go ahead with production.
