Statistics Canada has admitted to making a significant error in one of the ways it calculates the depth of Canada's persistent unemployment problem.
The monthly payroll report, which shows how many new jobs were registered on Canadian payrolls, was scheduled to be released on Thursday.
But Statistics Canada said on Wednesday it will delay the report until May 6 so that it can correct its methods and fix inflated figures from December and January.
"In the course of our review of the February numbers, we discovered an error," Peter Lys, director of Statistics Canada's labor division, said in a phone interview.
He would not say how inflated the job creation figures for December and January were.
"It is significant," he said. "We are very sorry for what problems this has caused."
The most recent payroll report showed businesses adding 9,000 new employees to their payrolls in January and 134,000 new employees in December.
The error was made as Statistics Canada was fine-tuning its methodology for the survey, but the agency made changes too suddenly, Lys explained.
"The new data service is a definite improvement of the survey, but you can't just introduce it in a month or it will distort the numbers," Lys said. "It was an unfortunate human error."
The payroll report sparked debate earlier this month when it became obvious there was a large discrepancy between the payroll numbers and the less optimistic job creation numbers reported in the much-watched labor force survey.
During the fourth quarter of 1996, the payroll survey showed the creation of 301,000 jobs. But the labor force survey, which is more encompassing, showed the creation of about 86,000 jobs -- less than a third of the new jobs in the payroll survey.
The discrepancy raised eyebrows in Ottawa, where job creation promises to be a major issue in a federal election campaign widely expected to be called within the week.
Canada's unemployment rate has remained stubbornly high, hovering just below 10 percent. The rate showed its first improvement in months, when it dropped to 9.3 percent in March from 9.7 percent in February.
The unemployment rate also comes from the labor force survey, but the integrity of that survey has not been questioned, economists said.
The most recent labor force survey said employment grew by 60,900 jobs to 13.80 million in March. The payroll survey has not yet been released for February or March.
((Reuters Ottawa Bureau 613 235-6745))
