Although a Canadian federal election is not expected to be called until this weekend, the mudslinging has already begun.
Reform Party leader Preston Manning, defensive after charges of racism in his right-wing opposition party, sought to turn the tables on the rival Conservatives on Thursday.
The two parties face a battle for the right-wing vote. Reform won the third most seats in its inaugural national election campaign in 1993, while the Conservatives plummeted to two seats after nine years of rule.
But Reform has been haunted by accusations of racism through its 3-1/2 year term in Parliament.
Questioned by reporters on Thursday about Reform's record on tolerance, Manning accused the Conservatives of choosing a candidate based on race.
Manning produced a clipping from a Vancouver newspaper, which quoted a Conservative official as saying he deliberately sought election candidates who were not Sikh so the candidate could distinguish himself from the other parties' Sikh candidates.
"If we'd said that, we'd be crucified," Manning told the National Press Club in Ottawa. He urged the media to challenge the Tories on the comment, but denied he was mudslinging.
"I don't like any of that stuff," he said.
A Conservative spokesman brushed off Manning's remarks as "electioneering."
The ruling Liberals are widely expected to call an election this weekend for June 2. While recent polls predicted the Liberals would retain power, pre-election campaigning has taken on a bitter flavor, with name-calling and accusations of racism and sexism becoming more frequent.
Liberal Defense Minister Doug Young was criticized recently for sexist remarks. On Tuesday, Reform member of parliament Ian McClelland called Liberal Deputy Prime Minister Sheila Copps a "bitch" in the House of Commons and was forced to withdraw his remark.
Also this week, British Columbia Reform official George Rigaux resigned after saying that Sikh leaders were corrupting nominations in his riding. Conservative leader Jean Charest said on Wednesday that voters should be alarmed about charges of racism and sexism surrounding the Reform party.
The Conservative and Reform parties are trying to carve out distinct images as they compete for the conservative vote. In trying to portray itself as a grassroots party, Reform has had to fend off a reputation for extremism.
Last May, Reform members of parliament opposed a Liberal bill to expand rights for homosexuals. One Reform member of parliament said that if he owned a business he would move black or gay employees "to the back of the shop" or even fire them if their presence annoyed bigoted customers.
His comments were backed by another Reform member of parliament. Both were disciplined by the Reform caucus.
During the 1993 campaign, Reform had to dump a candidate after he acknowledged making anti-immigrant remarks.
