With the ruling Liberals far ahead in the polls, the biggest question in the campaign for Canada's June 2 federal election is not who will win but which opposition party will place second.
"It's an election that's quite unlike what you see in other Western countries because there really is no realistic option (aside from the Liberals)," Reg Whitaker, a political scientist at York University in Toronto, said recently.
"The opposition parties are fighting for small markets. It's wide open for the Liberals."
Despite opposition criticism of the Liberals' record on national unity, unemployment and taxes, polls show the Liberal party with a consistently strong lead.
The official opposition since the last election in 1993 has been the Bloc Quebecois, whose sole aim is promoting Quebec independence, not forming a federal government. "They want to put themselves out of business," Whitaker said. "So right off you have a bizarre situation."
Prime Minister Jean Chretien called the June 2 election on Sunday. In the last election in 1993, the Liberals won 177 out of 295 seats, the Bloc Quebecois 54 seats, the Reform Party 52, the New Democrats nine and the Conservatives two. One independent was elected.
Unless one of two right-wing parties -- the Conservatives and Reform -- can consolidate nationwide support, analysts said, the Bloc was poised to be the official opposition again, keeping the Quebec sovereignty issue on the front burner.
Reform, with strong roots in western Canada but feeble support elsewhere, has painted itself as the only party that can hold the Liberals accountable. But it stops short of seeking the role of government for now.
"Our ultimate objective is to get a Reform government," party leader Preston Manning said recently. But when asked about his immediate goal, he said he wanted to win enough seats to form the official opposition.
"They're mainly concerned about holding on to what they've got," Whitaker said. Reform had 50 seats when the House of Commons was dissolved on Sunday.
The Conservatives, led by Quebecker Jean Charest, stubbornly maintain they can form the next government, but the right-leaning party has a long way to go. In 1993 the party, one of the oldest in Canada and the ruling party from 1984 to 1993, lost all but two of its seats in the House of Commons.
"They have some severe limitations," Whitaker said. "You see the Conservative Party and the Reform Party fighting over the same right-wing margins."
Reform and the Conservatives are both campaigning on smaller government and tax cuts as ways to fix Canada's persistent unemployment problem. The Conservatives, however, stand to gain in Quebec, while Reform has no base in the French-speaking province.
A poll in Quebec released on Monday showed support for the Liberals at 37 percent, the Bloc at 35 percent and the Conservatives at 25 percent.
Alone on Canada's left wing is the New Democratic Party, which makes no claims to forming a government.
"Federally, we've never made a government, but we've always been there to make a difference," NDP leader Alexa McDonough said as she launched her campaign last weekend.
But the Liberals have co-opted the NDP too, appealing to moderate left-wing Canadians with talk of preserving health care, social programmes and the national pension system, and promoting Liberal legislation on gun control.
