As Canada's budget deficit shrinks, politicians campaigning ahead of June elections are debating whether to cut taxes or raise government spending.
While many Canadians say they are desperate for tax relief, others are begging politicians to shun tax cuts and spend the extra money on social services.
"They have to stop talking about cutting taxes," one Toronto social worker said as Reform party leader and tax cut advocate Preston Manning spoke nearby at the kickoff of his campaign for the June 2 election.
"People want to hear about jobs and job creation. If you have a job you worry about keeping it, you worry about losing it," she told the Canadian Press news agency. Canada's unemployment rate is a stubbornly high 9.3 percent.
The governing Liberals on Sunday called for the June vote, just 3-1/2 years into their five-year term.
The two right-wing parties, Reform and the Conservatives, are touting their plans to cut taxes.
Canada has the highest personal income taxes among the seven leading industrial nations and the fourth highest among the member nations of the Organisation of Economic Cooperation and Development, according to an OECD study.
"(Conservative leader) Jean Charest believes that high taxes kill jobs -- that the economy needs tax cuts now to create jobs," the Conservatives' campaign literature says.
Reform lashed out at Liberal tax increases, accusing the centrist party of pushing through 31 tax hikes while in office. Reform has promised to cut payroll taxes and contributions to unemployment insurance, as well as simplify the income tax system.
In 1996, the average Canadian family's tax bill was about 48 percent of its income, a study released on Tuesday showed.
But the left-leaning New Democratic Party (NDP) opposes tax cuts, saying right-wing platforms are irresponsible. The NDP actually wants to raise corporate and capital gains taxes.
The separatist Bloc Quebecois wants Ottawa to close tax loopholes for big business, while giving tax breaks to smaller firms to stimulate growth.
The Liberals are sandwiched between the right's call for tax cuts and the left's call for spending, and face different opinions in their own ranks on the issue.
They have taken a typical middle-of-the-road approach, advocating tax cuts once the deficit is licked and when health care and education are securely funded.
"The choice the other political parties are offering is to declare the job done before it truly is, to introduce a tax cut before the country can afford it," Finance Minister Paul Martin told a Montreal news conference on Tuesday.
"They would short-change our hopes for a stronger economy and for greater job creation."
Martin said his party would lower taxes but only when the deficit was eliminated. Instead, his party announced on Monday they would not cut C$6 billion (US$4.3 billion) in health care funding, as had been planned.
Martin has predicted the deficit for the year ended March 31, 1997, would be less than C$16 billion ($11.4 billion), well below the original target of C$24.3 billion ($17.4 billion) for the year.
But the Conservatives argue that 87 percent of the deficit decline was due to higher taxes. They say real after-tax income has fallen from the early 1990s.
