TVX Gold Inc is taking steps to join the ranks of major mining companies, bringing aboard three senior executives who pledge to turn the company into a million-ounce-a-year gold producer.
"We're here to help TVX grow," said Cliff Davis, the new senior vice-president of North American operations, among three officers who joined TVX in the past month.
"We understand the need for organization. We understand realistic plans. I think that's something we can help TVX with," Davis told Reuters in an interview.  
Davis's next plan is to speed production at the New Britannia mine in Manitoba and develop more reserves at Casa Berardi in Quebec.
Joining Davis at TVX are David Murray, the recently appointed president and chief operating officer, and Ken Sangster as senior vice-president of European operations.
The three have worked together before. They did stints at mining giant RTZ-CRA Corp Plc and have years of experience with huge projects.  
"For us it was a perfect fit," said TVX spokesman Ed Baer. "One of the things that was a common concern to the market was our lack of management."
Toronto-based TVX split off from Inco Ltd in 1993 and has concentrated on expanding its assets.
With its interests now growing in Canada, Greece, Brazil, Ecuador, Chile, the Czech Republic and Russia, the company is ready to switch its focus to production, he said.
TVX has promised its shareholders it will be producing 1.1 million ounces of gold a year by the year 2000 from 423,000 ounces in 1995.  
To help keep its promise, the company has placed its bets on the Kassandra Mines in Greece. "If everything works for us, the story really lies in Greece," said Baer.
The property so far is expected to produce 300,000 ounces of gold a year at a cash cost of US$150 an ounce. TVX was still drilling and would not have a clear idea until next spring what the deposit offered, said Baer.
Uncertainty over Kassandra has unsettled TVX stock. Its shares peaked at 14.85 in Toronto during a road show and high gold bullion prices last winter. But the stock has since slid.  
With its stock now trading around 10 on the Toronto Stock Exchange and around 7.50 on the New York Stock Exchange, TVX has been rumored as a takeover target for some major gold producers.
But as a growing company, TVX is always looking for joint ventures and is on the prowl for small mining companies with proven reserves, Baer said.
Davis's first move at TVX was to shut the company's gold mine in Montana earlier this month.
The Mineral Hill mine drained money from the company for years. TVX hoped to revive it with additional ore found at nearby Crevice Mountain, but ore grades at Mineral Hill grew worse and the company could not keep its mill supplied.
Although the company continues to explore at Crevice, Davis did not hold out much hope for a resurrection of mining on the property.
"If it's what it appears to be, we won't reopen," he said.
