The European Union's trade commissioner chided Canada on Thursday for its lack of action against the U.S. Helms-Burton law, which penalizes foreign firms for doing business in Cuba.
"We put our head above the block and Canada has declined to do so," Leon Brittan told reporters as he headed into quadrilateral trade talks with his counterparts in Canada, Japan and the United States.
"I find it a little curious that we have gone ahead and challenged the Uhited States, taken a very high-profile action and got some progress from the United States as a result of that, very substantial progress," Brittan said. "Canada has held back on (action through) NAFTA."
The European Union had threatened to challenge the United States through the World Trade Organization over the Helms-Burton law.
In April, the European Commission said it struck a deal with Washington, under which the EU agreed to suspend its action in the WTO and the U.S. government would continue to suspend a key clause in the Helms-Burton law.
The two parties would continue to discuss the anti-Cuba law through the multilateral investment agreement under the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development, rather than pursue the debate throught the WTO.
"There'd been a sort of informal understanding of the division of labor, that we would go ahead under the WTO and Canada would go ahead under NAFTA," Brittan said.
But Canada has hesitated to challenge the Helms-Burton legislation under the auspices of the North American Free Trade Agreeement.
"I've still got the NAFTA challenge in my back pocket," Canadian Trade Minister Art Eggleton told reporters. "If things break down and don't proceed, then I can always use that."
He said Canada wanted to participate fully in the negotiations under the OECD.
"As long as progress is being made, it serves no purpose to go ahead (with a NAFTA challenge) at this point in time," Eggleton said.
Eggleton also brushed off U.S. criticism of Canada's new copyright law, which imposes a C$0.50 tax on blank audio cassettes, with the revenue to be distributed to performers. But the royalties are not passed on to U.S. performers since the United States has not signed an international treaty on copyright.
Eggleton confirmed on Thursday that Canada was on a U.S. "watch list" for its copyright legislation, among other issues.
"They put out a watch list at the end of every April and we've been on it every time," he said. "We've been having discussions about copyright. We think it fully meets our trade obligations."
He also repeated that Canada would not concede to U.S. demands to cap Canadian grain exports to the United States.
((Reuters Toronto Bureau 416-941-8100))
