Officials from the world's biggest trading partners agreed Friday to push a deal on opening up financial services markets to the top of the agenda in talks to liberalise global trade.
The leaders also emphasised the importance of bringing China and Russia into the World Trade Organisation as quickly as possible "on commercially viable terms."
The financial services talks are "the most urgent, major priority in terms of negotiations for the world trade community," Leon Brittan, European Union Trade Commissioner, told a news conference after two days of talks between the so-called Quad partners -- Canada, Japan, the United States and the European Union.
"I believe that the Quad meeting has given a shot in the arm" to negotiations on financial services, Brittan said.
The Quad members agreed to put forward requests by mid-June and offers no later than July 14 to work towards a financial services deal. They hope to wrap up negotiations in December.
"That should be an example to the rest of the world and a platform on which to build," Brittan said.
But he and the other leaders pointed out the need for countries in Asia and Latin America to put together improved offers to the World Trade Organisation. Last year the United States pulled out of talks on financial services because of its disappointment in the offers from other countries.
U.S. Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin, in a letter last week to a number of his counterparts, said a successful financial services pact must include provisions that allow firms to operate in other countries in the form of their choice.
It must also allow full majority ownership and assure existing rights of foreign financial services providers, he said.
The four trading chiefs also called for bringing China and Russia into the World Trade Organisation quickly.
The Quad members said they were united in their belief that China, in particular, should be brought into the global trading forum as long as Beijing committed itself to the global trading system and open market access.
"We are not going to push on the accelerator for political reasons, and we are not going to put on the brakes for political reasons," Brittan said.
Officials said the Quad members would like new members, especially China, to sign on to a recent pact to eliminate tariffs on various information technologies by 2000.
The forum provided an opportunity for the four countries to discuss bilateral trade issues with each other.
The European Union expressed concern about the implementation of a 1992 agreement with the United States limiting subsidies to aircraft industries.
"We do not accept that proposition at all, at the same time the United States has some concerns about European practices," U.S. Trade Representative Charlene Barshefsky told reporters after a morning meeting with Brittan.
Barshefsky said U.S. and EU officials would continue discussions on the issue in June, but that the United States would not agree to any emergency consultations.
Barshefsky also had a strong word with Canadian Trade Minister Art Eggleton over Canada's new copyright law which taxes blank cassettes and distributes the royalties to performers. U.S. performers, however, will not receive any money since the United States has not signed an international copyright agreement.
"We think there is a national treatment problem here," Barshefsky said, referring to one country's preferential treatment for its citizens. She said the United States would consider taking trade action against Canada over the law.
But Eggleton said Canada was well within its rights and obligations with the copyright law.
