Canada's Federal Court ruled on Monday that immigration officials should move to deport a Saudi dissident suspected of being involved in a bombing that killed 19 U.S. airmen in Saudi Arabia last June.
Federal Court Judge Donna McGillis decided that a government certificate declaring Hani Abdel-Rahim Hussein al-Sayegh a terrorist and a danger to Canada was "reasonable" -- despite Sayegh's refusal to testify in the case.
"The court has satisfied itself that he was involved in terrorist activities," said Gaetan Blais, a spokesman for the Canadian Security Intelligence Service.
As a result, Sayegh will almost certainly be deported, although Canada's immigration minister must still decide whether he will be sent to the United States or Saudi Arabia. Sayegh cannot appeal the decision.
The Canadian government has accused Sayegh of being a driver involved in the massive truck bomb in Saudi Arabia last June 25 that killed 19 U.S. airmen. The bombing, which also injured 400 people, was at the Khobar Towers, a complex housing U.S. military personnel outside Dhahran in the oil-rich eastern part of Saudi Arabia.
The government also believes Sayegh is involved in the Saudi branch of Hizbollah, a fundamentalist group based in Lebanon, court documents showed. Canada believes Hizbollah is using Canada as a safe haven.
The hearing on Monday was meant to give Sayegh a chance to defend himself against the government charges. But Sayegh surprised the court by turning down a chance to testify.
"His testimony in this matter was crucial," McGillis said as she handed down her ruling.
Sayegh's lawyer, Doug Baum, would not say why his client did not give his side of the story.
"It's a difficult question to answer," Baum told reporters outside the courthouse. "It's a deeply personal decision."
Baum denied that his client had been advised by the U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation.
But he said Sayegh's silence was not an admission of guilt, since the hearing was an immigration case rather than a criminal case.
"There were no admissions or denials," Baum said. "The issue today is not his chance to defend himself on the issue of guilt or innocence or punishment. The issue today was admissibility to Canada."
He said his hands were tied in defending Sayegh since the court shared only the summary of the government's case with him.
"I think the evidence in the summary is not up to scratch," Baum said.
U.S. and Saudi officials have said they want to question Sayegh about his links to the bombing.
Sayegh, 28, was arrested in Ottawa on March 18 on the grounds that he posed a security threat to Canada. He arrived in the country applying for refugee status from Saudi Arabia because of what he said was poor treatment of Shi'ite Moslems by the Sunni Moslem government.
He has told reporters that he was in Syria at the time of the deadly bombing.
Canadian government documents said that of the known conspirators in the bombing, Jaafar Chueikhat was dead, supposedly after committing suicide in a Syrian prison, Ahmed Ibrahim Ahmad al-Mughassil had been identified as the mastermind and Sayegh conducted the surveillance and drove the car directing the truck that exploded, killing the U.S. airmen.
