Canada's stubborn youth unemployment problem is the Achilles heel for the ruling Liberals as they campaign for re-election on June 2.
As Prime Minister Jean Chretien travels the country to boast about his party's economic record, a 16.6 percent youth unemployment rate threatens to be a serious embarrassment for the Liberals. The unemployment rate for the general population is 9.3 percent.
"This is the Liberal betrayal of an entire generation, their hopes, their dreams, and yes, their birth right as Canadians," the leader of the leftist New Democratic Party, Alexa McDonough, said on Tuesday.
"Somewhere along the line the Liberals decided that Canada could afford to lose a generation after all," McDonough told CBC Newsworld in Newfoundland.
The number of Canadian young people with jobs has dropped steeply in recent years, Canada's federal statistics agency said in a recent study.
The employment rate for Canadians aged 15 to 24 in 1996 was 51.1 percent, a drop of more than 11 percentage points since 1989, Statistics Canada said.
The most recent statistics show the employment rate for youth was 50.5 percent in March. The difference between the 50.5 percent employment rate and the 16.6 unemployment rate is made up of young people in school or who have given up finding a job.
"The labor market has become a more precarious place for young people in the 1990s," StatsCan said in its spring 1997 youth unemployment report.
But none of the parties have a concrete plan to deal with youth unemployment, despite their rampant rhetoric, said Brad Lavigne, chairman of the 400,000-member Cahadian Federation of Students.
"There hasn't been an adequate level of discussion yet," he said in a phone interview in Ottawa. "The (age group) is not seen as important. It's very easy to dismiss it."
The Liberals have a youth employment strategy which provides summer jobs and access to job information. They also give reductions in unemployment insurance premiums to small businesses that create new jobs.
"That's a more effective way than simply cutting the premium across the board," said Industry Minister John Manley during a news conference in Ottawa on Tuesday.
The Conservatives, who hope to make a comeback in the election from their current two seats out of 295 in the House of Commons, say they have made youth employment a top priority.
Conservative Leader Jean Charest says his party wants to cut unemployment insurance contributions, establish common educational standards and testing to train young people for high-tech jobs and set up a C$50-million fund for common standards.
"The lack of federal leadership is causing our children to fall behind in the race for success in the new global economy," Charest said recently.
And the right-leaning Reform party, with strong roots in Western Canada, also wants to cut taxes as a way to create jobs for young people.
But none of the plans will make a dent in the unemployment problem, said the student federation's Lavigne.
He said the political parties and many Canadians have given up on the government's ability to do anything to create jobs.
((Reuters Ottawa Bureau 613 235-6745))
