Canada hopes Asia-Pacific trade ministers in Montreal for trade talks will forge a consensus to target environmental products and services as an area for trade liberalisation.
"Environmental goods and services and technologies is one (sector) that I particularly favour," Canadian Trade Minister Art Eggleton said Thursday, the first day of a three-day meeting of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) forum.
Analysts said Eggleton is under pressure to make sure the APEC trade ministers have something concrete to show at the end of their meeting, held to set the agenda for an APEC summit in Vancouver, British Columbia, in November.
Environmental technologies is an area where Canada should find it easy to gather support, said senior Canadian trade officials.
"It tends to get a rather positive echo around the circuit," said one official who asked not to be identified.
Last year, the 18 APEC members kick-started a worldwide agreement on liberalising the information technology market, Eggleton said, and he hopes APEC can play a similar role this year in at least one sector.
"There's a lot of pressure (to announce concrete progress)," Karen Minden, director of the APEC Studies Foundation for Canada, said in a telephone interview. "People in the organisation have said if APEC doesn't catch the leaders' attention, then it won't get anywhere."
Canada is this year's chair for APEC, and wants to show the world in November that the huge forum, which includes some of the world's richest countries as well as many developing countries, can be productive.
Previous summits have been long on trade liberalisation rhetoric but slow to promote free trade measures, critics charge.
"This will be the meeting that gets things started," Eggleton told reporters. "I expect what we're going to announce is that we're moving forward and developing an agenda for the November meeting that will help ensure we'll come out of this Canada Year for APEC with some very solid accomplishments."
He said he also hopes the trade ministers will discuss implementing country-specific trade liberalisation action plans put together by each of the 18 members last year.
"If we come out of this meeting having named one or two sectors, then we will have done well," a senior trade official said.
While U.S. officials said earlier this week they hoped to use the APEC meeting to test the waters for tariff cuts on wood and paper products, Canadian officials were not optimistic progress would be made in that sector.
"There are some sensitivities here," said the official. He said Canada would love to eliminate all tariffs in wood and paper trade, but APEC was divided on the issue.
Officials said they also hoped to make progress on streamlining customs regulations, which often cost small and medium-sized businesses crucial time and money in international trade.
"For these people, (customs red tape is) not merely an inconvenience like it is for big business," an official said. "It's a block."
As the APEC trade ministers prepared for their first dinner together Thursday, Canadian labour leaders called on them to focus on human rights in Indonesia.
The labour leaders said they opposed the imprisonment of Muchtar Pakpahan, an Indonesian trade union leader and dissident. The Canadians cited a letter from U.S. President Clinton conveying his disapproval of Pakpahan's jailing, and they urged Canadian officials to follow suit.
Eggleton said he would discuss human rights with Indonesia if the two countries could arrange a bilateral meeting.
APEC aims to achieve free and open trade and investment in the region among developed countries by 2010 and among all member countries by 2020.
APEC's members are Australia, Brunei, Canada, Chile, China, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, the Philippines, Singapore, South Korea, Taiwan, Thailand and the United States.
