Canadian Trade Minister Art Eggleton faces pressure at a meeting of Asia-Pacific officials that starts on Thursday to ensure concrete steps are taken to achieve free and open trade, analysts said.
Trade ministers from the 18 member Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum are meeting through Saturday here to set the agenda for an APEC summit in Vancouver in November.
"There's a lot of pressure," said Karen Minden, director of the APEC Studies Foundation for Canada. "People in the organisation have said if APEC doesn't catch the leaders' attention, then it won't get anywhere."
Canada wants to show the world in November that the huge forum, which includes some of the world's richest countries and many developing countries, can be productive. Previous summits have been long on talk of reform but slow to promote free trade measures, critics say.
Canada, which as APEC chair this year will play a big role in directing the summit agenda, has a reputation for focusing on administration and structure rather than on trade reform.
But Eggleton probably will pick up on sectors discussed last week in Toronto at a conference of trade ministers from the United States, Japan, the European Union and Canada.
The so-called Quad countries agreed to make liberalisation of financial services a priority, with Canada optimistic about progress on trade in environmental products.
But APEC members should expect resistance from lesser developed Asian countries on financial services, said a Canadian trade specialist who asked not to be identified.
At the top of everyone's minds will likely be China's bid to join the World Trade Organisation, the trade expert said.
"The biggest issue will be in my view the WTO accession of China," the expert said in a phone interview.
At last week's Quad meeting, trade ministers said they wanted to bring China and Russia into the WTO quickly but wanted to assure Beijing was committed to the global trading system and open access to markets.
The APEC meeting will also provide an opportunity to test the waters for a new round of tariff cuts on wood, paper and other products, U.S. officials said.
APEC aims to achieve free and open trade and investment in the region between developed countries by 2010 and between all member countries by 2020.
APEC members are Australia, Brunei, Canada, Chile, China, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, the Philippines, Singapore, South Korea, Taiwan, Thailand and the United States.
