Trade ministers from 18 Asia- Pacific countries were urged to support renewed talks for free and open trade in financial services, official documents showed on Friday.
In the documents, senior officials requested that ministers at the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum in Montreal "note the successful re-launch of the financial services negotiations."  
The officials said that "while recognizing that flexibility may be needed with regard to transition periods for some participants, (we) urge all APEC participants in these negotiations to strive toward achieveing a permanent, most favored nation-based agreement by December 1997."
Trade ministers from Canada, the United States, the European Union and Japan announced in Toronto last week that they would push negotiations in financial services to the top of the agenda for world trade liberalization talks.
Talks broke down last year after the United States pulled out because of its disappointment in the offers from other countries.
At the Toronto meeting last week, the so-called Quad leaders urged Asia and Latin America to improve their offers to the World Trade Organization. APEC's support this week will likely be seen as a big boost for the talks.
APEC leaders were also urged to consider expanding an agreement liberalizing trade in information technologies forged last December.
APEC members should "consider the planned review of the Information Technologies Agreement with a view to the possibility of broadening participation in the agreement to all APEC members," the document said.
The United States and the European Union have said they hoped China, in particular, would join the agreement as a major step toward China's bid to join the World Trade Organization.
In the document, senior officials also asked the trade ministers to complete the implementation of the recent agreement to open telecommunications markets by January 1, 1998.
APEC includes Australia, Brunei, Canada, Chile, China, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, the Philippines, Singapore, South Korea, Taiwan, Thailand and the United States.
