Countries belonging to the World Trade Organization should be flexible and understanding about China's bid to join the WTO, the organization's director-general said on Saturday.
"As we approach the final stage of the Chinese accession process, there is a need for flexibility on all sides and a determination to resolve the crucial outstanding issues in the negotiations," Renato Ruggiero told trade ministers from the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) forum.
"The success of this negotiation is a shared responsibility, and it can be assured only if we keep up the momentum established earlier this year," Ruggiero said.
He said substantial progress is needed on rules issues and market access.
The APEC members said they wanted China and Russia to join the WTO quickly, as long as they join on commercially viable terms, officials said.
The world's major trading partners have suggested that China join last year's international agreement to open up trade in information technology before it acceeds to the 130-member World Trade Organization.
Ruggiero said that talks on financial services have become the WTO's top priority.
"A success in financial services is essential to help ensure each of you -- industrialized and developing countries alike -- the necessary infrastructure growth," Ruggiero told the Asia-Pacific trade ministers.
"My message is: do not see this negotiation in North/South terms," he continued. "On the contrary, developing countries whatever their economic position, have an even stronger need than the industrial countries for competitive financial institutions."
Ruggiero urged APEC to make sure a financial services deal is reached this year, to maintain momentum in international trade talks.
"Not to  do so should be as unthinkable as it would be short-sighted," Ruggiero said.
Last week, the United States, the European Union, Canada and Japan affirmed they would stick to the WTO schedule on financial services by putting forward their offers by mid-July.
On Saturday, the 18 APEC countries affirmed their support too, building strong momentum for a deal by the end of the year in the lucrative sector, officials said.
But U.S. Trade Representative Charlene Barshefsky warned Saturday that some countries in Latin America and Asia need to be more generous with their offers. The United States pulled out of previous attempts to broker free trade in financial services because of its disappointment in offers from other countries.
The meeting between the WTO leader and the APEC trade ministers confirmed APEC's role as a regional catalyst for action within the WTO, trade officials said.
But Hong Kong expressed its concern about the WTO's dumping code, while Korea and Japan said they were worried about an onslaught of agriculture products flooding their markets from lesser developed countries because of WTO regulations, officials said.
