Trade ministers from the Asia-Pacific region were urged on Friday to cut customs red tape and make it easier to finance Asia's huge infrastructure needs, officials at the APEC trade ministers' meeting said.
But an Australian proposal to develop a travelling "smart card" to let business officials from Asia-Pacific countries jump to the front of the line when clearing customs got short shrift from Canada, the conference's host.
"We are looking at a slightly different approach," a senior Canadian trade official said. "Our approach is to try to work on a larger package."
Australia's proposal dealt with business travelers but not their cargo, the official said. The Philippines, Hong Kong and South Korea back Australia's plan for now, he added.
The APEC travelling card was one of several recommendations put forward by international business representatives at the first full session of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum for trade ministers.
"We are the reality test and ... we are very happy about the dialogue that we started today," said Victor Fung, co-chairman of the APEC business advisory council, an international group of trade-oriented business representatives that has considerable influence on the APEC agenda.
Officials said Canada also used the session to drum up support to make it easier to finance Asia's massive infrastructure requirements. The region will require about $1.5 trillion to build transportation and communication links over the next 10 years, officials said.
Canadian Trade Minister Art Eggleton urged his counterparts to make information about private sector investment more readily available and to develop a framework that dealt with foreign financing of infrastructure projects.
"It's a very preliminary interest right now, but (Eggleton) did flag the special interest Canada has," an official said.
Officials said they expected substantial progress on harmonising customs regulations at the three-day meeting in Montreal. Canadian officials said they hoped to be able to post harmonised customs forms on the Internet that would let international traders file electronically around the world.
"They really want to move toward a much firmer, clearer blueprint, which will explain to businesses what it is they have to do," an official said.
Canada, as host of the meeting and of the APEC summit scheduled for Vancouver in November, has focused mainly on helping small and medium-sized companies clear hurdles to expand international trade. Simpler customs procedures and travelling requirements would be a big boost for the smaller companies, officials said.
The business community, especially smaller firms, would benefit greatly from financial guidelines for infrastructure, said Fung of the business advisory council.
He said the council would recommend in Vancouver that APEC set up a network to tie together organisations dealing with small and medium-sized enterprises in each country.
The APEC ministers are scheduled to take up broader trade issues on Saturday, during a meeting with World Trade Organisation officials and WTO Chairman Renato Ruggiero.
In a conference document, senior officials requested that the ministers recognise the "successful re-launch of the financial services negotiations and, while recognising that flexibility may be needed ... urge all APEC participants in these negotiations to strive toward achieving a permanent Most Favoured Nation-based agreement by December 1997."
The document also urged ministers to consider the WTO's planned review of an agreement for open markets in information technology, and consider broadening participation in the agreement to all members.
APEC includes Australia, Brunei, Canada, Chile, China, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, the Philippines, Singapore, South Korea, Taiwan, Thailand and the United States. REUTER
