Trade ministers from the Asia Pacific region agreed on Saturday to work toward free trade in financial services and expanding open markets for information technology.
The Asia Pacific Economic Co-operation forum wrapped up its three-day trade ministers' meeting in Montreal, agreeing to look for ways to expand last year's information technology deal to include more products and more countries.
In the information technology sector, "there are a number of both non-tariff measures and tariff measures that we might take up and we're hopeful that we'll see significant progress later this year," deputy U.S. trade representative Jeff Lang told a news conference. But Lang would not supply details on the kind of progress he hoped to see.
The information technology agreement included 41 countries and 91 percent of world trade now, but Lang said four or five more countries were interested.
The ministers also announced they were committed to forging a final financial services deal by December.
"Clearly what I'm hearing from the 18 members of APEC is that they want it to work this time," Canadian Trade Minister Art Eggleton said after the final news conference. Eggleton chaired the three-day meeting since Canada will host the APEC summit scheduled for Vancouver in November.
Previous talks on an international agreement on financial services fell through last year after the United States pulled out because of its disappointment in offers from some other countries.
And U.S. Trade Representative Charlene Barshefsky warned on Saturday that some countries in Latin America and Asia need to be more generous with their offers.
"The United States will put forward an MFN (most favored nation) consistent offer, but it will be conditional on achieving a critical mass in the Asian countries and Latin America," she told reporters.
Among the 18 APEC members, some of them will have progressive offers in time for the WTO deadline of mid-July, Barshefsky said.
"There are others who have shown reluctance. The same with Latin America," she said. "These offers are going to have to be good, or the United States will seek an MFN exemption."
Such an exemption would likely stall progress on the talks.
Last month, the United States said a financial services pact must include provisions that allow firms to operate in other countries in the form of their choice. It must also allow full majority ownership and assure existing rights of foreign financial service providers, the United States said.
Chile's Trade Minister Jose Miguel Insulza said his country would do its best to make a good financial services offer.
"We are prepared to make our offer and try to improve it, if it's possible," Insulza told a news conference.
The world's major trading powers have agreed to put forward requests on financial services commerce by mid-June and offers by July 14 in the hopes of finalizing a deal by the end of December.
The United States and Canada emphasized the role APEC should take in isolating certain trade sectors, liberalizing them within APEC and then putting them on to the agenda at the World Trade Organization. APEC agreements are voluntary, while WTO deals are binding.
But the lesser developed countries that form a large part of APEC's membership appeared to place sectoral liberalization on a lower pedestal than the developed countries. Instead, they emphasized unilateral and voluntary plans to knock down trade barriers.
"I think we have to emphasize that the system talks about individual action plans as well as sectoral liberalization," said Cesar Bautista, the trade minister for the Phillipines.
Malaysia and Indonesia both stressed the need to help small and medium sized businesses develop trading strategies. They said they appreciated APEC's progress on cutting customs red tape and promoting international investment in infrastructure.
