The United States wants Asia-Pacific countries to expand free trade in information technology, telecommunications and financial services so that the region can influence the World Trade Organization agenda, U.S. Trade Representative Charlene Barshefsky said on Saturday.
"APEC has decided that it should play the catalytic role in sector opening," Barshefsky told reporters on the final day of a three-day meeting of trade ministers from the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) forum.
"This is terribly significant," she said. "APEC ought to be leading the way."
Barshefsky said APEC will take the lead in expanding last year's agreement to liberalize information technologies markets and a recent deal to open up trade in telecommunications. If they succeed, APEC countries should give the impetus for a worldwide agreement to liberalize financial services markets.
"APEC countries will give a very strong push," she said.
If enough APEC members voluntarily agree to liberalize trade in these sectors, the organization can push the World Trade Organization to make the APEC deal binding on the larger trade body, Barshefsky said. Agreement is easier to reach within APEC than the WTO since the group is smaller and the agreements are not binding, she added.
But progress on financial services depends largely on Latin American and Asian countries significantly beefing up their offers, Barshefsky said.
"The United States will put forward an MFN (most favored nation)-consistent offer, but it will be conditional on achieving a critical mass in the Asian countries and Latin America," she said.
Among the 18 APEC members, some of them will have progressive offers in time for the WTO deadline of mid-July, Barshefsky said.
"There are others who have shown reluctance. The same with Latin America," she said.
"These offers are going to have to be good, or the United States will seek an MFN exemption," she challenged.
Such an exemption would likely stall progress on the talks. Last month, the United States said a financial services pact must include provisions that allow firms to operate in other countries in the form of their choice. It must also allow full majority ownership and assure existing rights of foreign financial service providers, the United States said.
The world's major trading powers have agreed to put forward requests on financial services commerce by mid-June and offers by July 14 in the hopes of finalizing a deal by the end of December.
Barshefsky said APEC, which concentrates on developing voluntary initiatives on free trade, should focus on forming sectoral free-trade pacts for areas that are important enough to force the rest of the world to join in.
She said she wants to have more than one sector to announce by the APEC summit in Vancouver in November.
Other APEC countries have suggested singling out trade in environmental services, medical products, oil seeds, wood, paper, chemicals and autos.
APEC includes Australia, Brunei, Canada, Chile, China, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, the Philippines, Singapore, South Korea, Taiwan, Thailand and the United States.
