Canada's election campaign shifted into high gear on Tuesday as party leaders prepared for the French-language debate after a relentless attack on Liberal Prime Minister Jean Chretien in Monday's English debate.
The troubling issue of Quebec independence will be in the forefront of Tuesday night's French debate among the leaders of the five major parties, ahead of the June 2 election.
"When it gets into (national) unity, there's an emotional attachment there that has to be responded to," Reform Party leader Preston Manning said on Tuesday. "I believe it is emerging as one of the defining issues."
Manning scored points in the English debate when he attacked Chretien for bringing Canada to the brink of separation.
Quebeckers narrowly voted to keep their French-speaking province in Canada in Quebec's 1995 sovereignty referendum, by 50.6 percent to 49.4 percent, despite assurances by Chretien that a solid vote against separation was virtually assured.
"You almost blew it, sir," Manning told Chretien. "You do not deserve a second chance."
But Manning faces a challenge as he tries to get his national unity message across in the French debate. Since he speaks only English, his participation will be limited to addresses at the beginning and the end of the debate.
The pressure is also on Gilles Duceppe, leader of the separatist Bloc Quebecois, who must shine during the French debate after a low-key performance in the English debate.
The Bloc became Canada's main opposition party in the last election in 1993, despite its aim to partition the country.
But the Bloc's grip on Quebec is threatened by early campaign gaffes and a new controversy over whether Quebec's separatist government would have unilaterally declared independence if it had won the 1995 referendum.
Duceppe, Chretien and Conservative leader Jean Charest -- all Quebeckers -- were expected to dominate the French debate. Alexa McDonough, leader of the left-wing New Democratic Party will also participate.
Charest stirred the English studio audience to applause on Monday when he proclaimed: "I intend to make this country work, because if there's one commitment I made to my children, it's that I'm going to pass on to them the country I received from my parents."
He said on Tuesday that he expected to be the main target during the French debate.
"Tonight I think you'll see them very aggressive with regards to my own participation," he told a morning news conference.
The Liberals have a huge lead in opinion polls, with the backing of between 42 and 47 percent of decided voters.
