Canada's French-language televised debate for the June 2 federal election was cut short suddenly on Tuesday when the moderator collapsed, leaving the five political party leaders stunned.
Moderator Claire Lamarche, a well-known television personality in French-speaking Quebec, fell out of her chair moaning about the heat in the room, just as the five political party leaders were about to attack the defining election issue of national unity -- Quebec independence.
"We decided together that the debate should not continue under the circumstances," Arnold Amber, one of organizers of the debate, said in a hastily arranged news conference. "All the parties are in agreement with this."
The party leaders left without speaking to the media.
Canadians had been expecting a lively debate on how to handle the troubling issue of Quebec. But the moderator's collapse made the abbreviated exchange anti-climactic, said political scientist Ken McRoberts at York University in Toronto.
"There might have been some dramatic moments in the exchange over the response to a (pro-sovereignty vote)," McRoberts said in a phone interview from Toronto. "So (separatist Bloc Quebecois leader Gilles) Duceppe must be quite frustrated."
Duceppe, a francophone, was sidelined in the English debate on Monday night but observers expected him to use the French-language debate to rally the separatist forces and gather support for his waning campaign.
The debate was about two hours into its scheduled 2-1/2 hours when the moderator collapsed, just as Prime Minister Jean Chretien was asked if he would recognize a vote in favor of Quebec sovereignty if it were by a slim margin.
In 1995, people in French-speaking Quebec voted 50.6 percent against Quebec separation, while 49.4 percent voted in favor of separation, prompting federalist forces to claim victory.
But instead of exploring how the next government would handle an expected referendum on sovereignty next year, the debate focused on Canada's high unemployment rate, robbing Duceppe of the chance to stir up much nationalist spirit.
