Canada's French-language televised debate for the June 2 federal election was cut short suddenly on Tuesday when the moderator collapsed, leaving the five political party leaders stunned.
Moderator Claire Lamarche, a television personality in French-speaking Quebec, fell out of her chair moaning about the heat in the room just as the five political party leaders were about to attack the key election issue of national unity.
"We decided together that the debate should not continue under the circumstances," Arnold Amber, one of organizers of the debate, said in a hastily arranged news conference. "All the parties are in agreement with this."
The party leaders left without speaking to the media.
Canadians had expected a lively debate on how to handle the troubling issue of Quebec independence. But the moderator's collapse made the abbreviated exchange anti-climactic, said political scientist Ken McRoberts at York University in Toronto.
"There might have been some dramatic moments in the exchange over the response to a (pro-sovereignty vote)," McRoberts said in a phone interview from Toronto. "So (separatist Bloc Quebecois leader Gilles) Duceppe must be quite frustrated."
Duceppe, a francophone, was sidelined in the English debate on Monday night but observers expected him to use the French-language debate to rally the separatist forces and gather support for his waning campaign.
The debate was about two hours into its scheduled 2-1/2 hours when the moderator collapsed, just as Prime Minister Jean Chretien was asked if he would recognize a vote in favor of Quebec sovereignty if it were by a slim margin.
In 1995, people in French-speaking Quebec voted 50.6 percent against Quebec separation, while 49.4 percent voted in favor of separation, prompting federalist forces to claim victory.
But instead of exploring how the next government would handle an expected referendum on sovereignty next year, the debate focused on Canada's high unemployment rate, robbing Duceppe of the chance to stir up much nationalist spirit.
"You decreased the deficit on the backs of the poor," Duceppe accused the prime minister.
But Chretien, much feistier in the French debate than in Monday night's English debate, fended off his competitors time and again, speaking about his party's economic record.
Unemployment, especially among young Canadians "is a very serious problem," Chretien said. "However, first you have to have an economy which creates jobs, and this is the reason why we have to get rid of the deficit."
Under Chretien's Liberals, the budget deficit has been cut back from about C$42 billion (US$30.3 billion) in 1993 to a projected 1996 defecit of C$16 billion (US$11.5 billion). But Canada's unemployment rate has hovered stubbornly between nine and 10 percent for much of Liberals' term.
Chretien, Duceppe and Progressive Conservative leader Jean Charest -- the three francophone leaders -- spent much of the evening trying to show their parties had Quebec's best interests at heart.
The two anglophone leaders -- Preston Manning, the leader of the right-wing Reform Party, and Alexa McDonough, who heads the left-leaning New Democratic Party -- were marginalized by their poor French.
Over the two days of debates, Charest appears to have fared better than the other leaders. "My sense is that Charest shone, as he did (Monday) night," McRoberts said. "He is very articulate and very well prepared."
Charest's leadership has already translated into a surge in his popularity in Quebec. A recent poll indicated he was the most popular of federal party leaders in Quebec.
The Progressive Conservatives have a long way to go, however. They currently hold only two of 295 seats in the House of Commons after being decimated in the last federal election.
The Liberals have a huge lead in opinion polls, with the backing of between 42 and 47 percent of decided voters.
