Canada supports the U.S. bid to speed up free trade talks among 34 countries in North and South America, a Canadian foreign affairs spokesman said on Friday.
"We're certainly pushing for an early start to negotiations as well," spokesman Charles Larabie said in a telephone interview.
Ministers from the 34 countries were meeting in the Brazilian city of Belo Horizonte this week to decide when to start formal negotiations for the Free Trade Area of the Americas. But the meeting faced a north-south divide on how to pace the talks.
Brazil and its supporters want to proceed cautiously, negotiating in stages with tariff cuts until last.
But the United States is pushing for more concrete decisions and a faster pace in talks, threatening on Friday to "pack its bags" if it did not get its way.
The group aims to achieve a free trade deal by 2005.
While Canada would like to see faster progress, "I wouldn't say we're ready to pack up our bags," Larabie said.
Canada also has a backup plan if formal negotiations for the FTAA do not go as fast as hoped.
Canada would push to join the South American free trade bloc Mercosur, which precluded the United States, Larabie said.
Mercosur is a free trade pact involving Brazil, Argentina, Uruguay and Paraguay. Chile and Bolivia are associate members.
"For us there's a tremendous market there," said Larabie.
Canada sees two major impediments to formalising free trade talks to form the FTAA. First, President Bill Clinton does not have so-called fast-track authority to negotiate free trade deals. Second, Brazil and its supporters wanted to take their time negotiating the FTAA, said Larabie.
So while the United States struggled to push the FTAA agenda, Canada was busy preparing the groundwork for a Mercosur deal that would preclude the Americans and give Canadians "a foot in the door" with South America, Larabie said.
As for the United States, "they can join the party later," he added.
"Cleary Brazil stands out as the major opportunity for us in Mercosur," he said."Argentina is also attractive for us."
Trade between Brazil and Canada was worth about C$2.5 billion ($1.79 billion) in 1996, almost double that of 1993.
A Canadian deal with Mercosur would not be the first time Canada moved ahead without the United States, as Clinton awaited fast-track authority.
Canada has negotiated a free trade deal with Chile rather than waiting for the United States to agree to let Chile enter the North American Free Trade Agreement.
