Canada's political leaders, campaigning for re-election on June 2, are accusing one another of being too American in their approach to Canada's cherished but malnourished health care system.
Canada's universal medicare plan has suffered injury after injury in recent years as governments at the federal and provincial levels have taken a hatchet to health care spending in an effort to rein in galloping deficits.
While all Canada's main political parties are pledging to reinvest in health if successful on June 2, the sensitive issue has become a political game of numbers and name calling.
The ruling Liberals as well as the Conservative and Reform parties want to cut health care and are "pushing Canada ever closer to an American-style two-tiered system," Alexa McDonough, leader of the left-leaning New Democrats, charged.
"Look past the rhetoric and look at the numbers," she said, adding that only her party would sustain federal support for medicare.
Government-funded universal health care is a sacred cow in Canada and a key way for Canadians to distinguish themselves from their powerful American neighbours. Polls show that preservation of health care is a major election concern.
But even as U.S. politicians have weighed adopting elements of Canadian health care in the past few years, Canada has moved further away from its traditional universal approach, adopting elements of the U.S. setup, the New Democrats say.
The Liberals have cut health and education spending to C$12.5 billion ($9.1 billion), down about C$6 billion ($4.4 billion) from 1993, when they first took office under Prime Minister Jean Chretien.
Critics say the cuts have shortened hospital stays, led to hospital closures and forced many Canadians to pay for their own home care -- shifting the system toward a U.S.-style one in which only the poor and the elderly receive care paid for by the government.
But the Liberals claim to have defended the principles of universal medicare by preventing doctors and hospitals from charging extra for their services and prohibiting private health care clinics.
"All Canadians should have equal access to high-quality care," Anne McLellan, a Liberal candidate and Cabinet minister, said on Tuesday at a news conference. "We will never accept one system for the very wealthy and another for the rest of us."
The day after Chretien called the June election, his government announced it would reverse C$4.8 billion ($3.5 billion) in planned cuts in transfers to the provinces for health and social spending over the next five years.
