Hundreds of mining prospectors, armed with axes and machetes, are racing through swamps and thick brush in remote Northern Ontario this week in one of the largest staking rushes in decades.
The Ontario government invited prospectors to explore a 617,500-hectare area in the Temagami region, making the land available for the first time in 23 years.
But there was a shortage of experienced prospectors in the area, so big companies trained local high school track teams to fill in.
"There's a lot of potential," provincial government geologist Elaine Basa said. "It's an area that hasn't been open to new technology. It's like virgin territory and that's what's exciting to a lot of people."
Up to 600 prospectors, many of them hired by international mining companies, have been clambering across the rugged Canadian Shield, hoping to find gold or base metals.
The parcel of land is not far from existing gold mines and old copper and base metal mines, Basa said.
"That's why it's such a big target," she said. "A lot of people want a piece of the pie."
The Ontario government closed off the area in 1973 after a local Indian band laid claim to the land. The claim was struck down in 1991 and the government eventually decided to open the area to logging and exploration again -- despite raucous protests from environmentalists.
Major international mining companies, small explorers and independent prospectors have flocked to the rocky Canadian Shield. Most spent the weekend camping in the bush, preparing for what many saw as the chance of a lifetime.
Prospectors must follow strict rules to stake their claims.
"You physically have to define the boundaries out in the field," said Roy Denomme, a government mining recorder.
The race started Tuesday morning, with prospectors sprinting through the thick bush to pound a huge stake in each corner of the property. Between each stake, they had to blaze a boundary by marking trees with their axes along the way.
Some prospectors spent the weekend hiding stakes in the thick forest near the claim corners, hoping to get an edge on their competitors, said Basa.
The first person to stake all four corners and file a claim wins the rights to the property. Prospectors have 31 days to file their claims.
Basa expects a lot of wheeling and dealing in the next few days as the powerful mining companies manoeuvre for the best properties.
Toronto-based Falconbridge Ltd. sent a team of prospectors to the area in helicopters.
"It's a real crap shoot," said Paul Severin, vice president of exploration for Falconbridge, whose huge copper-zinc Kidd Creek mine is in nearby Timmins, Ontario.
