Canada's French-speaking political leaders voiced anger on Friday about a new pre-election ad that suggested Quebec-born politicians did not have what it takes to keep Quebec from leaving Canada.
"The suggestion that where you are born should determine whether or not you should be prime minister of the country is to say the least offensive," a sombre Jean Charest, leader of the Conservative Party, told reporters in Ottawa.
The ad, promoting the right-wing Reform Party, shows three French-speaking Canadian party leaders -- including Canadian Prime Minister and Liberal leader Jean Chretien -- along with Quebec Premier and leading separatist Lucien Bouchard.
As the ad calls for "a voice for all Canadians, not just Quebec politicians," the images of the four Quebeckers are circled in red and then each face is crossed out.
Canada has had Quebec prime ministers for 19 of the last 20 years -- Quebec has a crucial one-quarter of the population -- and Chretien led Canada in an October 1995 referendum that Quebec sovereigntists lost by only one point.
Three of the five political leaders contesting the June 2 election are from Quebec: Charest, Chretien and the leader of the separatist Bloc Quebecois, Gilles Duceppe.
Aside from Reform's Preston Manning, from the West, the New Democratic Party's Alexa McDonough is the only non-Quebecker to lead a major political party in this campaign.
"Mr. Manning is setting a very bad example," the normally upbeat Charest said, looking troubled. "He's sending a message here that one part of the country doesn't count."
Chretien declared in Niagara Falls: "I want to tell Mr. Manning that people don't like his divisiveness."
Manning, who advocates decentralization to please both Quebec and other provinces, contends the traditional parties have failed to devise a method to keep Canada together.
"The separatists do damage by what they do. The old-line federalists do damage by what they do not do, the plan that they do not have, the alternative model they do not have, the strategies they do not have for the next referendum.
"We're saying each is equally dangerous in its own way to the unity of the country."
But Manning -- running second in the polls outside Quebec -- has no voter base in Quebec and a poll released on Friday showed the Liberals, the Conservatives and the Bloc Quebecois neck-and-neck in the vote-rich French-speaking province.
It was not clear how his strategy would play across the country, but as often before in this 36-day campaign, he managed to get other politicians talking about his issues.
"It can divide the country. What he is doing I think is an act of desperation," said one Liberal voter, retired engineer Bal Sandhu of from the western city of Edmonton, Alberta.
But many voters are sick of the Quebec issue coming up again and again and think Quebec manages to get a disproportionate share of Ottawa's attention.
"They get more opportunities than the rest of the country, because the government is bending over backwards to try and keep them in the confederation," a disenchanted Edmonton technologist, John Mushka, said in a phone interview.
Charest has been rising steadily in popularity since televised leadership debates last week which put national unity at the center of the election campaign.
He is on an intense two-day tour of Quebec to build momentum, with a keen eye on forming the official opposition. The Bloc Quebecois fills that role, giving Canada an official opposition whose goal is to break up the country.
The Reform Party, with its strong support in Western Canada, also has hopes of forming the official opposition.
The stakes are high for Charest, who is personally popular but whose party suffers from a turbulent past. The Tories fell to only two seats in the 1993 election after controlling the government for eight years. And former Conservative Prime Minister Brian Mulroney is reviled across Canada.
