A potential new source of revenue -- oil -- offers hope of a fresh start for Chad's fragile economy as it rebuilds after three decades of war.
"Soon work will begin," Foreign Minister Saleh Kebzabo told Reuters recently. "Chad should get some royalties so we can free the country through development."
Chad has known coups, civil war or conflict with its northern neighbour Libya for much of its life from independence in 1960. Sporadic cross-border rebel raids remain a problem.
But after July's presidential election won by former warlord Idriss Deby, who seized power in a 1990 French-backed coup, there are signs of durable peace and opportunities for growth.
Deby's Patriotic Salvation Movement is strongly placed to win a comfortable majority in the new national assembly which will convene on March 31 after runoffs on February 23.
"Some public spirit is needed and southerners must have a feeling of sharing wealth," said one French diplomat. "Deby has kept a peace for nearly six years and he now also has a political mandate."
Oil offers the main hope for the 21st Century, with local units of Exxon (Esso Exploration and Production Chad Inc.), Shell (Societe Shell Tchadienne de Recherches et d'Exploitation) and ELF (Elf Hydrocarbures Tchad), prospecting in the south and west.
Little has leaked out about terms and royalties.
Chad's projected revenue from its first oilfield at Doba, which has reserves estimated by Exxon at 900 million barrels, are also unclear. Production is planned to run for 15 to 20 years from 2001. Backers of the project plan to build a 650-mile (1,060 km) pipeline to tanker terminals in Cameroon.
FEAR OF CORRUPTION FROM OIL WEALTH
The discovery of oil has raised fears of mismanagement or corruption. "I am frightened about the oil. The experience of most African countries is that it is mismanaged," Kebzabo said.
But donors say oil should give Chad, which has only 300 km (190 miles) of paved roads, a chance to develop infrastructure, public services and particularly education.
Chadians and businesses can also expect a brighter future and cheaper overheads from a combined fuel and power plant project to be fed by oil or gas from the Sedigi field in the west.
A 12 MW heavy fuel power plant with possible gas feed is expected on line by 2000 in association with a mini-refinery.
"We hope to cut electricity costs to French levels from among the world's highest," said the refinery project finance director Souradj Koulamallah.
Donors have been backing economic and political reforms and business and development projects to boost Chad's main export earners -- cotton, livestock and gum arabic.
World Bank loans include $430 million for structural adjustment, among other things, to improve public finances and improve the environment for private business.
France has chipped in with a 60 million French franc ($11 million) grant and will offer a further 45 million French francs if Chad sticks to International Monetary Fund proposed reforms.
World Bank figures give gross domestic product per capita in 1995 of $170. On the negative side, external debt rose to $817 million in 1996 from $803 million in 1995 and 1996 GDP growth was projected at 0.5 percent, down from 4.5 percent in 1995.
The population of 6.5 million grows by 2.5 percent a year.
DROUGHT LEADS TO FOOD SHORTAGE
Inflation fell from 40.4 percent in 1994 to 10 percent in 1996 but Chad's World Food Programme bureau points to food shortages after drought cut cereal output by eight percent.
High overheads and devaluation of France's CFA franc in 1994 squeezed small businesses. France's Caisse Francaise de Developpement (CFD) development agency has frozen lending to many small and medium-sized firms.
But the outlook seems rosier for Chad's main export, cotton.
State monopoly COTONTCHAD expects a record 205,000-tonne crop and higher world price rises in 1997. Low prices and little or no textile manufacturing to add value have kept income down.
Livestock prices are rising despite drought and Chad, its neighbours and donors are studying ambitious irrigation projects.
The United Nations and France are backing projects to develop gum arabic -- a natural stabiliser used widely in the food and drinks industries but until recently eclipsed by synthetic substitutes. Both predict renewed demand and higher prices.
Chad's 80 percent rural community is plagued by drought, with cereal food shortages forecast for 1997.
Poor roads are seen as partly at the root of food shortages in some regions. Crops can be cut off in storage by rain for up to four months a year when some tracks are ordered closed.
($1 = 5.5 French francs, 540 CFA francs)
