Ivory Coast has received three formal proposals for building new cocoa processing factories but no approvals have yet been notified, Ivorian Commodities Minister Guy Alain-Gauze said on Friday.
"There are projects involving Canatalou, STF-CI and Cargill," Gauze told Reuters after three days of cocoa sector reform talks with International Cocoa Organisation, donor and Ivorian officials. "All have submitted formal proposals to the government which are being considered," he added.
Ivory Coast aims to process annually 50 percent of its cocoa production it wants stabilised at 900,000 tonnes a year.
In 1995/96 (Oct-Sept) an unexpectedly large 200,000 tonne mid-crop (April-Sept) took output to a 1.2 million tonne record.
Total 1996/97 season output is expected to be over a million tonnes and higher, depending on the shape of the mid-crop.
Rumours of factory plans surfaced in late 1996 with many firms said to be interested without deals signed.
French Perpignan-based confectioner Cantalou, which makes CEMOI brands, has submitted proposals for building a 60,000 tonnes of beans a year capcity plant.
An Ivorian firm, STF-CI, and a French partner are discussing building a 15,000 tonnes to 25,000 tonnes capacity plant for exporting cocoa butter and liquor exports to a Chinese chocolate factory under construction.
U.S-based commodities giant Cargill, in discussions with Ivorian cocoa exporter SICC for construction of a third plant, has also submitted plans to Ivory Coast's government.
Its capacity would be over 50,000 tonnes a year according to industry sources.
SICC told Reuters its first processing project was likely to take shape in early 1997. The firm handles a total of 200,000 tonnes of cocoa in 1996/97 for clients including Cargill's Netherlands processing subsidiary Gherkens.
"We cannot think of handling that much without going into processing. We want to start in 1997 and are now at the decision stages with our partners," Deputy-Director Guillaume Adome told Reuters in an interview.
One European processor industry in Abidjan for cocoa talks said he was surprised that a 25,000 tonne plant would be used for cocoa butter as well as powder production.
"It seems a bit on the small side for that," he said.
Other industry delgates to the cocoa talks said it would be difficult to built plants by the end of 1997 but not impossible.
Philippe Mian, technical advisor to Prime Minister Daniel Kablan Duncan, yesterday told Reuters all three plans were firm but that other factory plan proposals also existed.
"Procurement stages are advanced so it would be possible," he said, referring to the end of 1997 date.
Mian presided over of three days of Consultative Committee cocoa reform talks which ended in Abidjan on Friday during which cocoa processing and cocoa quality were discussed.
Gauze told Reuters Ivory Coast would be on target to meet its home processing goal if the plans went ahead.
Ivory Coast currently has three processing factories with capacity for 180,000 tonnes. One is expected to increase capacity by 21,500 tonnes by 1998 taking Ivorian total capacity to 201,500 tonnes.
If all three plant proposals are given government approval capacity would rise top a maximum of around 336,500 tonnes.
Some industry observers have said Ivory Coast's processing target is unattainable.
Local procesing of beans is part of an overall policy to add value to exports while taking low quality mid-crop (April-Sept) beans off the international market.
"Most output would have no effect on this year as it usually takes up to a year to build a normal plant," said one local processing official.
-- Abidjan newroom + 225 21 90 90
