Ivory Coast plans to discuss further reform of its cocoa industry in May, officials said on Monday.
This follows a review by a committee of industry, donor and Ivorian delegates on February 5-7 which identified quality and marketing problems.
"The Prime Minister attaches great importance to the deliberations of this committee and its conclusions," Commodities Minister Guy-Alain Gauze said afterwards, adding that the state Caistab marketing body would retain a role in future.
"The state must retain a quality control role," he added, saying no solutions to concerns had been agreed but that proposals would be discussed in May. "The product must be stamped with an Ivory Coast quality label."
Findings of the consultative committee -- set up in October and chaired by Prime Minister Daniel Kablan Duncan's technical adviser Philippe Mian -- would be considered at cabinet level before May.
A government statement released after the private talks gave no details of discussions but said prices, quality, the auctions, cocoa conditioning and fixed contracts had been on the agenda.
World Bank officials, seen before the talks as opposing changes to the rules governing Ivorian cocoa auctions, said they would reconsider ideas put forward by exporters.
"There will be another ASAC (World Bank Agricultural Sector Adjustment loan) meeting in April," World Bank spokesman Jean-Claude Balcet said on Friday.
Cocoa and coffee sector liberalisation linked to an earlier $150 million ASAC loan led to the introduction of an export auction system that the industry believes encourages overbidding for contracts.
Donors want a sharp reduction in the role played by the Caistab, which until 1994 monopolised internal and external marketing and whose functions now include setting guide farm gate prices.
"The Caistab still has substance," Gauze said. "There has been a dispersal of its activities and we are now attempting to re-centre them.'
He added, "It is the government which forms policy and the Caistab which effects a marketing plan."
Exporters want the Caistab to act as a trade service, providing quality assurance, trade information and statistics.
Government ministers recently said that Caistab statistics were not reliable.
Ivory Coast only carries out port cocoa quality checks, but proposals for detailed checks from farm to port are expected to be put forward in May.
"Quality is the name of the game," Netherlands Cocoa Association managing director Loouis Bensdorp said on Friday.
Amsterdam expects to receive 350,000 tonnes of cocoa in bulk rather that in bagged form next year in response to the requirements of large processors. One shipping line manager told Reuters up to 50 percent of Ivorian cocoa could soon be shipped in bulk.
But this would mean quality and origin would be harder to monitor.
Liberalisation of cocoa and coffee markets in Cameroon and Nigeria led to the emergence of a large numbers of inexperienced operators and a loss of quality premiums.
-- Abidjan + 225 21 90 90
