War baby Yegue Badigue was born at one of Chad's darkest hours.
To make matters worse, a hereditary defect struck him blind when he was little more than a year old.
But the boy who entered the world as Libyan and Chadian forces fought over the sprawling desert nation's capital in 1980 had a hidden talent -- the gift of music.
"We started Yegue off on Do-Re-Mi and he just started improvising with melodies," his father Jean Badigue, a soldier and director of Chad's army band, told Reuters. "Then we gave him a harmonica and soon realised he was no ordinary child."
Today, Yegue's musical talent is helping build bridges within the former French colony's blind community -- which some say is the world's largest as a percentage of the population.
His teachers, who have brought together children from Chad's rival Moslem and Christian communities, offer his case as a symbol of hope -- in a country starting to enjoy relative stability after decades of civil war or conflict with Libya.
"He joined the first of our mixed-religion classes and learned the piano in five years flat," said Roman Catholic Archbishop Jean Williet, who took over N'Djamena's diocese in 1986 and has taken a special interest in his case.
MUSIC "HOLDS US TOGETHER"
"We cannot see each other so music for us is as solid as sight for others. It holds us together," said Yegue, 16, who is dependent on others -- until he sits at his piano.
Williet runs three blind centres around the capital.
"We had to do something as no one had ever reached out to the blind community," he said, bouncing his battered Peugeot through dusty backstreets from school to school. "Chad after all has the highest blind population per head in the world."
World Health Organisation figures show that 135,000 of Chad's 6.5 million are blind -- a third of them aged under 20. Many live by begging.
Williet says many cases of blindness are preventable.
Children become blind because of untreated early diseases such as chickenpox, measles and dangerous concoctions prescribed to clear symptoms, he adds. Poor hygiene is a factor.
Others, like Yegue, simply go blind for hereditary reasons.
Williet started Yegue on the piano by guiding his hands over a piano keyboard to teach him elementary theory and practice by feel and sound.
"We had an old Russian grand in those days but later scraped together the money for an electric piano so we could take it about with us," Williet said.
PLAYS TO INTERNATIONAL AUDIENCES
Before long Yegue was lifting the roof of N'Djamena's vast Notre Dame cathedral with the strains of Bach, Mozart or the Little Prince of Africa -- a piece composed by Williet himself.
Yegue, little over five feet (1.5 metres) tall and as thin as a reed, now plays to international audiences at the capital's plushest hotels.
"He played to a 400-strong audience of Lion's Club charities at Christmas," said Williet. "They were dumb-struck."
Yegue is one of 55 students aged from six to 20 in Williet's schools. They follow a full curriculum ranging from maths, braille and French to carpentry and basket weaving.
The aim is to integrate them into normal schools or a craft-based career. Religious instruction is optional.
Yegue's father says his son will have to decide what he wants to do next.
Yegue himself already has plans. "I hope to be a teacher or go to music school," he said, his eyes fixed blankly on a wall as he raced through Franz Kuhlan's Sonata Opus 55.
Other blind children are following his example.
A full band of Moslem and Christian drummers, guitarists, singers and actors perform regularly in N'Djamena.
"He is a real symbol for peace time and how the community can work together after 30 years of war," said Williet.
