African coffee producers will meet March 6-7 for talks on implementing a robusta export limit set in Brazil in January to boost world prices, the Interafrican Coffee Oraganisation (IACO) told Reuters on Monday.
"Ministers will discuss exports and the implementation of the decisions for the rest of the coffee year," said IACO Seceretary General Arega Worku.
The Association of Coffee Producing Countries (ACPC) held an emergency meeeting in Rio de Janeiro last month after African producers' calls for action to boost flagging late-1996 prices.
Members agreed to cut robusta exports by one million bags (60 kg) and arabica exports by 300,000 bags between January and June 1997.
The IACO Special Ministers Conference, to be held on March 6-7 in Ivory Coast's commercial capital, Abidjan, will include ministers from IACO's 25 member states under IACO Chairman and Ivorian Commodities Minister Guy-Alain Gauze, Worku said.
"The initiative of the Africans boosted coffee prices," said Worku. "Now we think we should reinforce this performance and think of other measures for which we would like to have the recommendations of the member countries."
IACO last met in Abidjan for its 36th General Assembly in November when it decided to consider "prompt response" measures depending on market price direction.
"We must now reinforce the current limitation programme coupled with a prompt response strategy," IACO Chief Economist Donald Kaberuka told Reuters on Monday.
Ivory Coast had originally pencilled in a late February date for the latest IACO talks.
World robusta prices soared after January's ACPC meeting.
"Market perceptions are as important as fundamentals and fund activities," Kaberuka said, referring to some market analysts' belief that ACPC cuts had not caused the rises.
Indonesia said after the ACPC talks it would cut its robusta exports by 150,000 bags, leaving Arican producers to decide on how to share the rest of the one million bag quota.
Ivory Coast, Africa's main robusta exporter, has forecast a 1996/97 (Oct-Sept) crop of 230,000 tonnes but has had qualtiy problems in some areas.
Industry sources told Reuters the Ivorian crop could exceed 250,000 tonnes. One quality inspector said he doubted more than 150,000 tonnes would be marketable.
Kaberuka said high robusta prices would mean a market would be found for even poorer grades.
"Low quality coffee can be sold. Especially at these prices ($1,600 a tonne on Monday basis March)," he said.
Robusta makes up around 72 percent of Africa production.
Ivory Coast opened its 1996/97 coffee season in November with guide farmgate prices down 200 CFA to 500 CFA.
In late 1996 Ivory Coast said it would for the first time consider adjusting its guide farmgate coffee price in mid-season if necessary.
Industry sources close to the Caistab say such a move could be made around the time of the IACO talks planned for March.
"We will first have to see if coffee prices consolidate at their higher level," said a source.
Ivory Coast will soon receive a private consutlants' report on coffee sector liberalistion steps to meet donor loan terms.
-- Abidjan newroom + 225 21 90 90
