Ivorian warehouses remain largely full of cocoa after slow shipments ahead of an expected March export peak, leaving some exporters short of coffee storage space, industry sources said on Wednesday.
"There is so little space we are having problems with coffee marketing operations," said one exporter. "Some people have to wait 10 days for space," he added.
Large cocoa shipments have recently left Ivorian ports, freeing some warehouses space, but a strong February tail to the main cocoa crop (Oct-Sept) has meant rapid replacement of shipped stocks.
Latest arrivals data show 880,000 tonnes taken to Ivorian ports by February 23, leaving warehouse stocks of up 380,000 tonnes. Port sources put usually available cocoa warehouse space at 400,000 tonnes.
Port sources put February cocoa exports at up to 100,000 tonnes.
"(February Cocoa) exports by the weekend were around 80,000 tonnes but that will rise to about 100,000 tonnes by March," said a port source.
The same warehouses usually take in coffee as cocoa marketing eases off in late February. Cocoa arrivals figures have dipped as coffee arrivals gather pace but cocoa shipments have been slower than usual.
Coffee exports have been sluggish on lack of demand and low world prices, coupled with poor quality.
Arrivals had reached 30,000 tonnes by early February but exports were languishing at 12,000 tonnes, compared to around 24,000 tonnes by February 1995/96.
"Marketing picked up in February and people now have coffee to move out," said one exporter.
Poor coffee harvesting methods and little if any grading by farmers have meant poor quality, made worse by December rains moistening beans.
Extensive re-grading was required before export to meet a busy February contract month, exporters said, adding that this meant the coffee had to spend more time in storage.
An early harvest but a late start to marketing had partly led to quality problems. "The (coffee) crop was harvested early so it has been sitting in stores in not very good conditions," said one industry source.
Some warehoused cocoa had suffered crush damage at the bottom of warehouse stacks but industry buyers say quality losses are minimal and undetectable after factory grinding.
A brief February dockers dispute at San Pedro, coupled with a build-up of unshipped semi-finished cocoa products, had also contributed to a lack of warehouse space at Ivory Coast's second port, San Pedro, exporters said.
Shipping activity recently ground to a halt at San Pedro but port sources say boats were loading this week.
-- Abidjan newsroom +225 21 90 90
