Rains spread inland from coastal Ivory Coast cocoa areas this week after February drought which has threatened to stress trees and reduce late mid-crop (April-Sept) potential, weather and crop analysts said.
Industry sources say the mid-crop is likely to determine whether the 1996/97 season harvest is in line with government projections of 950,000 tonnes or close to 1.1 million tonnes -- as some industry players predict.
"The trees are still holding up but heavier rains will be needed in early March to ensure mid-crop prospects," one said.
"There are plenty of flower pinheads (buds) on trees but rains are needed to prompt pollinating activity by insects."
Flowers would give pods maturing in August and September.
Weather data show little rainfall up to February 20 but another crop analyst returning to Abidjan along the coast this week drove for four hours through heavy rain showers.
The first heavy rains for three weeks fell as a thunderstorm over Abidjan on Thursday, following the appearance of clouds over the past 10 days.
"Heavy showers have fallen in the past few days in coastal areas but northern Ivory Coast is still experiencing dry Harmattan weather conditions," said a national weather station spokesman.
Ivory Coast produced a record 1.2 million tonnes 1995/96 crop after a bumper 200,000 tonnes mid-crop.
Some industry forecasters raised 1996/97 crop forecasts after strong main crop arrivals. Mid-crop prospects are expected to be clearer by mid-March.
Upcountry buyers said rains had also fallen inland as far as Gagnoa. New grass could be seen growing through fire-cleared verges on remote roads suggesting rains in those areas.
Buyers north of Gagnoa said dry dusty condions had not yet cleared.
Crop analysts said a build-up of dust on leaves cutting photosynthesis would only be washed off if rain continued to fall.
"If early March rains are good, trees will react well. There is no sign they have suffered any more than normal," one said. "It is the dry season after all," he added.
Official weather data for the second 10 days in February showed a total of 13.1 millimetres were recorded at 10 weather stations compared to 0.6 mm in the previous 10 days.
Rains were concentrated in coastal regions east of Abidjan with little falling in the commercial capital itself.
Data for the past week were not immediately available.
In the first and second 10 days of February in 1996 rainfall totalled 303 mm and 361 mm. Weather analysts said this year's totals were 21 percent of the long-term average after higher than normal January levels.
Rains have traditionally increased from little rainfall in January towards the main rainy season from April to June followed by a dry spell in July and August.
Deforestation has meant convection rainfall patterns are more uneven than in the past with more usually falling in areas with stands of trees left intact -- mostly western areas where new cocoa tree planting is concentrated.
Temperatures in cocoa growing countries usually range between a minimum of 18-21 Celsius and a maximum of 30-32C.
Temperatures in some Ivory Coast areas have touched 37C in February. Soil moisture levels had partly compensated for the heat after heavy December and light January showers, said crop analysts.
The data, from Ivory Coast's national weather station, showed the following rainfall for the second 10 days of February in key growing areas plus the commercial capital Abidjan:
Dalao 0 mm, Gagnoa 0 mm, San Pedro 0.1 mm, Tabou 0 mm and Man 0 mm, Dimbokro 0, Yamoussoukro 0 mm, Abidjan 2.7 mm, Sassandra 0 mm, Adiake 10.3 mm, Korhogo 0 mm.
-- Abidjan Newsroom + 225 21 90 90
