Wilt disease killing Zaire's coffee trees surfaced three years ago, but a revolt in the east has hampered efforts to study and control it, a state coffee board official said.
Christian Feruzi, Commercial Director of the Zairean Coffee Office (OZACAF), told Reuters in an interview that production and export data since war started in October was limited and contradictory.  
No coffee from rebel-controlled eastern regions was included in export data, he said, adding that about 10,000 tonnes of coffee was exported from October to December 1996 from the west.
"IACO (Interafrican Coffee Organisation) and Zaire are carrying out a study to see how much of our production is recoverable but the war is handicapping efforts," Feruzi said in the interview at an African coffee meeting in Ivory Coast.  
Rebels under Laurent Kabila, who has vowed to topple Zaire's veteran president Mobutu Sese Seko, control much of the east and are poised to attack Kisangani, Zaire's third largest city.
Feruzi said coffee exports made up 15 percent of Zaire's export revenue before the war, after copper and diamonds.
"Where Kabila is in command we cannot get production estimations for the east. We are completely cut off from people on the ground," he added.  
Most arabica is grown around the eastern town of Goma and in remote eastern hills in North Kivu bordering Rwanda and Uganda. Lesser amounts are grown in South Kivu.
Robusta is grown throughout Zaire, except in mineral-rich Shaba region in the south.
Feruzi said wilt disease or Tracheomycosis surfaced up to three years ago but had already cut into production volumes.  
"Before the war the Office du Cafe took intiatives to stamp out the disease by uprooting trees, burning and replanting new stock," he said. "The ICO (International Coffee Organisation) is studying a request we made for help with the programme and we are hoping for a reply soon."
Feruzi said output was growing before the war.
Coffee production totalled about 100,000 tonnes in 1995/96 (Oct/Sept). "Only 60,000 tonnes was exportable," he said.
"About 55 percent of our coffee came from eastern regions (now occupied by rebels) and 45 percent from Western areas (still in Zairean government hands)," he added.  
Export data from January 1997 were not available. "About 10,000 tonnes of western regional coffee was exported from October to December 1996, mainly from Boma and Matadi ports."
Feruzi said exports were strongest from October to December with June to August exports higher than January to June.
OZACAF said in January rebels in the east were trying to legitimise export procedures, adding that a lack of security for buyers meant most coffee would probably be smuggled abroad.  
"Exports are escaping all official state agencies," Feruzi said, citing Uganda and other neighbours as likely exit points.
Uganda, Africa's largest coffee producer and another wilt sufferer, said smuggling did not show up in trade data.
"The quantities are negligeable," Uganda Coffee Development Authority Secretary-General William Naggaga told Reuters. "Our figures do not show a lot of smuggling," he said in Abidjan.  
Uganda had no role in selling its coffee but did monitor quality at export warehouses, he said.
Zaire coffee usually goes to western ports by road or rail.
"We do not know how many trucks and trains have been trapped but supply routes have all been cut. Farmers are most likely not selling except in remote areas," said Feruzi.
Some of Zaire's estimated 30 state-approved exporters, some with operations in both eastern and western areas, had fled to western Zaire, said Feruzi. Numbers were not clear.  
Zaire last week agreed a new export limit for its les busy January to June period.
African producers met in Ivory Coast last week to share out a 850,000 bags export cut agreed at an Association of Coffee Producing Countries (ACPC) meeting in Brazil in January.
Zaire was allocated 7.86 percent (66,180 bags) of the cut.
"Zaire has agreed to limit coffee exports to 331,000 bags (20,000 tonnes) between January and June (1997)," said Feruzi.
OZACAF comes under Zaire's umbrella coffee policy unit, the Commission Mercuriale de Prix de Cafe, which groups ministerial, customs, banking, quality and other functions.
((-- Abidjan newsroom + 225 21 90 90))
