Stowaway deaths in the holds of cargo ships leaving West Africa are prompting calls for concerted international action to combat the problem.
Dockers at one port in Britain found the bodies of seven young Africans amid the cargo in ships carrying variously cocoa, coconut and oilseeds.
Three Africans died in the hold of another cocoa ship in Ivory Coast's main port Abidjan in February after inhaling toxic pecticides, leading to rejection of the 10,000 tonne consignment by American buyers.
Veterans in the cocoa trade recall the curious case of an African head that turned up in a sack of cocoa from Nigeria.
"The West African problem is fairly intense at the moment," says Chris Horrocks, Secretary-General of the International Chamber of Shipping.
"Industry has to gear up Western governments to bring the matter up but as their interests are not directly at stake it is often a token gesture," he said by telephone from London.
British Prime Minister John Major agrees something needs to be done.
"We do need to examine both with the host countries and with the shipping lines better arrangements to ensure that they (stowaways) are not hidden away on their ships," he told parliament in response to a question.
GOVERNMENTS RELUCTANT TO ACT
But shipping officials say governments fail to act out of fear of facing the bills for handling stowaways, a cost normally borne by shipping lines and their insurers.
Horrocks said the U.N. International Maritime Organisation in London had set up a committee to consider recommendations for a convention on stowaways but a rapid conclusion was unlikely.
Many stowaways, fugitives from war or poverty, are looking for a better life in the West. Others simply want adventure.
"One boy was found at Marseille with his toothbrush and identity papers," said a shipping agent who investigates such cases. "He asked us to send him back home so he didn't miss any more classes. He was a real Tom Sawyer type."
Most stowaways carry no proof of identity or nationality, prolonging procedures for repatriation or granting of asylum.
Ivory Coast, a beacon of economic and political stability in West Africa, has become a magnet for stowaways from neighbouring states -- especially Nigeria, Ghana and war-ravaged Liberia.
Port police say about 200 cases were reported in Ivory Coast in 1996.
"Stowaways slip on board from the lagoons at night or climb over port walls," said an Ivorian Transport Ministry spokesman. "How to stop them is purely a police matter."
SOME DEATHS MAY NEVER GET REPORTED
Investigators say many cases probably go unreported. "If bodies are found at sea they are reported at the destination port but some are probably thrown overboard," one said.
Shipping agents say port security is very low on the list of priorities in the African countries concerned. Posting extra port guards is costly and of little value when guards can be bribed to turn a blind eye.
"All African ports suffer from the same problem," said a ship surveyor who has worked in most of Africa's principal ports for over 25 years. "We always have a number of cases in hand."
"People talk about complicity of the crew but I find it hard to believe stowaways are paying for their passage. Most are completely destitute when they get on board."
As immigration laws around the world are tightened, particularly in rich countries targeted by stowaways, captains find it more and more difficult to land illegal passengers.
They face the prospect of having to keep stowaways on board for years or heavy fines or jail for letting them ashore.
SOME STRIKE IT LUCKY, MANY DON'T
Some stowaways reach their promised land. Some manage to stay there. Many don't.
The unlucky ones drown, starve, suffocate.
Eleven Nigerians survived a three-day ordeal off South Africa's Dyer Island in January when they were cast adrift on an oil-drum raft in shark-infested waters.
Seven Ghanaians who stowed away on a cocoa ship heading for France were not so lucky. Their plight -- and the story of an eighth stowaway who survived -- became the subject of a joint British-American film released in Ghana and worldwide last October.
The case highlighted problems of international jurisdiction over murders at sea. Testimony of the survivor, Kingsley Ofusu, before a French court in 1996 led to murder convictions for the Ukrainian captain and crew of the MC Ruby.
Ghana launched a campaign to publicise the deaths and discourage other would-be stowaways.
It has also tightened security at the ports but the lure of the bright lights of Europe and the Americas remains a powerful incentive -- as the rising death toll illustrates.
