Rains in Ivory Coast's southern cocoa belt picked up in late February and an overall deficit stretching into March has not stressed trees too much, weather and crop analysts said on Tuesday.
"Rains have continued along the south coast and in forest areas, and soon we expect them to start moving further to the north," said a national weather centre spokesman on Tuesday, adding that there was no reason for trees to be over-stressed.
Crop analysts said trees were beginning to show some reaction to prolonged dry weather but no signs of damage.
"People are forgetting that we had over 200 percent of normal rains in December and January," said one. "We will be in trouble if there are no rains in March but all the signs indicate that will just not be the case."
Ivorian commodities minister Guy-Alain Gauze said on Monday the 1996/97 crop would be less than one million tonnes, despite private estimates of up to 1.1 million.
"The weather has been very dry, despite reports that it has been raining recently...We do not call this rain," he said.
Little or no rain fell in most areas during the first 20 days of February leading to concern that possible damage to trees would reduce mid-crop (April-Sept) potential and reduce bean sizes in developing pods.
But official data for the last eight days of the month show average rainfall at 10 weather stations of 12.24 mm, against 1.31 mm in the previous 10 days and 15.5mm for the last eight days of February last year.
Ivory Coast produced a record 1.2 million tonnes 1995/96 crop after a bumper 200,000 tonnes mid-crop.
Some industry forecasters raised 1996/97 crop estimates after strong main crop arrivals. Mid-crop prospects are expected to be clearer by mid-March as pod counters complete tallies.
Late mid-crop volumes depend partly on rains up to April.
"Normally we get a bit more rain in early March but they are a bit late," said the weather centre spokesman. "If dry weather continues until the end of the month trees might be over-stressed but some stress is normal for this time of year."
A crop analyst said, "There is some yellowing of leaves which we usually see in January, but I am not worried."
Others returning from growing areas said drizzle had fallen in southern regions with isolated thunderstorms.
"There was not much rain but we are still optimistic that levels will increase soon," one said. "My figures show average rainfall of 20 mm for February against (an average) 54 mm."
Late 1996 rains and a mild January harmattan wind meant the effects of drought in February had not been as harsh as might otherwise have been the case, said crop analaysts.
On some eastern cocoa and coffee plantations, fires that had been started to clear undergrowth had got out of control.
"There has been some damage to badly maintained plantations but on farms we usually visit the fire swept through undergrowth in a flash and did not affect trees," said one crop analyst.
"Overall, there doesn't appear to have been much serious damage at all," he said. "It sounds worse than it is, although some coffee farms were burnt to the ground."
Data from the 10 national weather stations showed the following total rainfall for the last eight days of February in key growing areas plus the commercial capital Abidjan (previous 10 days in brackets)-
Dalao 2.7 mm (0), Gagnoa 20.2 mm (0), San Pedro 12.6 mm (0.1), Tabou 21 mm (0.1) and Man 2.0 mm (0), Dimbokro 32.3 (0), Yamoussoukro 0 mm (0), Abidjan 8.9 mm (2.7), Sassandra 8.8 mm (0), Adiake 13.9 mm (10.3), Korhogo 0 mm (0).
Rains fell in Abidjan on Monday and Tuesday as skies remained overcast.
-- Matthew Bunce, Abidjan Newsroom +225 21 90 90
