Ivory Coast plans to flush illegal cocoa and coffee planters out of protected forests but crop production is likely to fall by less than five percent of annual output, say donors and crop analysts.
The government forecast 1996/97 (Oct-Sept) cocoa production of 950,000 tonnes but some private analysts expect closer to 1.1 million tonnes by the time the season ends in September.
Ivory Coast's government said on Friday that 72,000 peasant farmers and their familes were illegally occupying protected forest.
"This explains the gap between our production forecasts and the eventual outcome," Commodities Minister Guy-Alain Gauze said on the sidelines of an International Cocoa Organization meeting in London this week. "It is a big problem," he added.
Ivory Coast produced an unexpected record of 1.2 million tonnes of cocoa in 1995/96 (Oct-Sept) and 180,000 tonnes of coffee.
A cabinet statement on measures to protect forests in line with donor loan terms said 72,000 farmers, and a total of 450,000 people, had settled in classified forest.
It gave no timetable for destroying illegal plantations, relocating farmers and reforesting lands.
Donors say protected forest cover has been slashed from 13 million hectares before independance from France in 1960.
"By 1998, only 3.6 million hectares survived," World Bank analyst Leandre G'Beli told Reuters on Wednesday.
Peasants slash and burn to clear protected forest, undeterred by the presence of armed guards. Forested areas generally receive better rainfall than deforested areas, which are exposed to drying winds harmful to trees.
"Cocoa production continues its increasing trend, contrary to what many feared," said one donor official who would not be named. "Remaining forests are being put into production."
Illegal production was concentrated in 21 of Ivory Coast's 60 or more protected forest areas, he added.
One crop researcher regularly making deep forays into forests to assess cocoa crop prospects recently took a helicopter trip over Tai, the largest national forest.
"The forest is now a doughnut," he said. "There is a massive hole in the middle."
Refugees from Liberia's eight year civil war have been blamed for raising output in Tai where it borders on Liberia but critics say Ivory Coast's traditionally rural population is mainly responsible for swelling crop volumes.
Gauze put illegal output at about 100,000 tonnes but donors say the figure is smaller, due to low labour and land productivity and poorly defined land tenure laws discouraging careful farm management.
"It is less than five percent (of annual production)," World Bank analyst Leandre Gbeli told Reuters, adding: "A lot of other forest has been chopped down but that is not protected. The two should not be confused."
A spokesman for Ivory Coast's state forestry corporation SODEFOR said government eviction plans were not yet clear.
Donors, including the World Bank, have made forest conservation a condition for loans.
"(Cocoa) continues to provide the best remuneration for farmers," said one donor official. "We will believe (the plan) when we see results on the ground... Announcements are not necessarily put into effect."
Ivory Coast launched a donor-sponsored National Environmental Action Plan in late 1996 which included Forest Sector Projects up to 2010 aimed at working closely with villagers to protect forests. The government is also looking at a new forestry tax regime to augment funds for World Bank-sponsored re-forestation. --Abidjan newsroom +225 21 90 90
