A Sino-French group has submitted a proposal to build a new cocoa processing factory in Ivory Coast to supply Chinese chocolate manufacturers, an Ivorian government spokesmen said on Thursday.
"It is a completely new plan which the government will study this week to clarify its position on financial support," said Philippe Mian, cabinet technical advisor to Prime Minister Daniel Kablan Duncan. "The idea is still only a proposal."
Managers from French cocoa firm Touton S.A. and Chinese chocolate factory owner Shanghai Collin met Duncan last week to discuss investing 12 billion CFA in the new factory, he said.
Details were still under wraps but a new company called Societe Ivoirienne de Cacao (SICAO) would be set up if given the green light and enough government support, Mian added.
Ivory Coast, the world's largest cocoa producer, wants to process 50 percent of its annual cocoa production locally by the year 2000 to add more value and remove from export sale lower grades of cocoa.
Ivory Coast's inward investment arm CEPICI (Centre de Promotion des Investissements en Cote d'Ivoire) said the sponsors of the project had proposed an initial investment of eight billion CFA, rising to 12 billion CFA over about two years.
"They are looking for a site around Vridi (Abidjan port)," said CEPICI director Michel Koffivi. "We cannot say what the processing capacity will be at this stage," he added.
Plant construction could begin as early as September.
Touton managing director Patrick De Boussac declined earlier this week to clarify factory plans after last week's visit to Ivory Coast by co-director Alexandre Turincev and Shanghai Collin's president Foo Sam.
"I have no comment," he said by telephone from Bordeaux.
Formal factory proposals have already been submitted by three other investors looking at processing in Ivory Coast.
An Ivorian-Chinese-French group under the name STF-CI had submitted proposal for a plant to process 15-25,000 tonnes of beans a year, Commodities Minister Guy-Alain Gauze told Reuters last month. That plant also aims to supply promising Chinese markets with semi-processed products.
Ivorian exporter SICC and U.S.-based commodities giant Cargill recently opened talks over a 50,000-tonne capacity factory but sources close to discussions said a final decision was unlikely within the next three months.
French Perpignan-based confectioner Cantalou, which makes CEMOI brands, has submitted proposals for a factory with a capacity of 60,000 tonnes of beans a year but would not give details until later this year, a Cantalou spokesman said.
Ivory Coast is urging processors to use lower grade mid-crop (April-Sept) cocoa beans after constant complaints from buyers that sub-grade beans were being mixed in with beans for export.
Gauze said in early March that Ivory Coast aimed to process 300,000 tonnes of its 1996/97 crop.
"Capacity is currently 200,000 tonnes but we are working on increasing this," he told Reuters at the sidelines of an International Cocoa Association in London.
Ivory Coast produced a record 1.2 million tonnes of cocoa in 1995/96 and originally predicted 950,000 tonnes for this year before Gauze said in March only 800,000 would be exported -- partly due to increased local processing.
Four factories with a (bean) capacity rising to 180,000 tonnes in late 1997 are already operating in Ivory Coast.
Industry sources say over 130,000 tonnes of beans could be processed this year if factories operated normally.
New processing capacity was unlikely to be on line in 1997, taking into account application processing time and a minimum of six months to build a basic factory, one said.
Private forecasters have put Ivory Coast's 1996/97 crop at up to 1.1 million tonnes.
($1=567 CFA francs) -- Abidjan newsroom + 225 21 90 90
