Ivory Coast's mid-crop cocoa harvest is set to exceed 100,000 tonnes, and rains may boost production to 160,000 or more, crop analysts said on Friday.
"It is possible but not definite," said one analyst after touring plantations. "There is maybe two-thirds of that (160,000 tonnes) on trees at the moment but (the total) depends on what happens in the next three weeks."
Weather and other factors are highly variable at this time of year. National weather centre forecasters expect rains to strengthen in the next two to three weeks -- favouring pod development.
"There are less (pods) than last year but no worse than the average over the past four to five years," said the analyst.
Ivory Coast set a record 1.2 million tonne total crop in 1995/96 (Oct-Sept) after a bumper 200,000 tonne mid-crop from end-April.
Crop analysts disagreed over mid-crop data -- let alone five-year averages. Tonnages arriving at ports are often 30-60,000 tonnes down on harvests as farmers and buyers build stocks hoping for a price rise as new seasons open in October.
"People's statistics and carryover estimates differ, but mine show a tree crop of 175-180,000 over the past five years," said one analyst, adding that some private mid-crop forecasts were issued after taking off an estimated carryover figure.
Main crop arrivals by March 7 totalled at least 920,000 tonnes, closing in on last year's one million.
"If the rains come in the next couple of weeks pod setting, leaf flushing and canopy regeneration will be good for the end of the mid-crop and the early main crop (1997/98)," said the analyst.
The rate of arrivals this week had slowed to a trickle with bean sizes slipping below export standard (105 per 100 grams, with eight percent or less humidity) in some areas.
"Main crop cocoa is fading out...There is still some at farmer level in some areas, mainly the southwest," said one exporter.
Volumes are expected to pick up, particularly in June and July, after a gradual rise in May.
"If the main crops are becoming larger there is no reason to suppose the mid-crop will remain static," said one analyst.
Fears that mid-crop cocoa would be ravaged by drought had partly eased. A drought in February was broken by light rains and thunder showers around the end of the month.
"I do not think the trees are in terrible condition and there are a reasonable number of pods on them," an analyst said.
Recent rains have been heavy in some areas, with trees reported falling around Soubre in the west.
Overall levels remain down compared with last year, but crop analysts said trees were bearing up well despite localised damage.
Plantations in eastern areas bordering Ghana had suffered most, with some destroyed by bush fires in February.
"That is not a great problem as most of the trees are old," said one analyst.
-- Abidjan newsroom + 225 21 90 90
