Ivory Coast is planning to streamline management of mining policy to cut red tape and attract more investors to its expanding gold mining sector.
"There should be some big changes in about three weeks," a foreign advisor to the Ministry of Mines told Reuters. "Existing rules will not change but management will be tightened to make things run smoothly."
Ivory Coast, the world's largest cocoa producer, introduced a new mining code in 1996 to simplify rules for investors and broaden its agriculture-dependent economy.  
Ministry of Mines officials said around 24 companies holding a total of over 55 exploration permits were searching mainly for gold and nickel.
Firms rushing to West Africa since the Cold War ended have been attracted by Ivorian political and mining code reforms.
Three new permits were approved in March alone but prospectors, and two working gold mines, point to bureaucracy which they say still dogs operations. They want decision times cut and better coordination between mining and other ministries.  
"What the Minister of Finance and what the Minister of Mines says are two different things," Philippe Palanque, managing director of Ivory Coast's largest mine, SMI (Societe des Mines d'Ity), which is prospecting around its existing site.
"Administrative decisions are sometimes taken all the way up to the Prime Minister," said another exploration geologist.  
Ivory Coast's annual gold output of less than three tonnes a year is dwarfed by mining giant Ghana's annual output of 40 tonnes. Recent finds in Mali are set to at least double national production to over 10 tonnes, but underlying Birimian greenstone geology is similar throughout the sub-region.
"Ivory Cost had no mining experience like Ghana, so development has been slow while Mali and Burkina have raced ahead in the 1990's," Joe Hinzer, General Manager at Ivory Coast's other gold mine SOMIAF (Societe Miniere d'Afema) told Reuters.  
"Ivory Coast has good potential but discoveries like Ghana and Mali follow no rhyme or reason," said one geologist, adding that a find of one million ounces would be seen as good.
SMI opened in 1990 and was privatised last year. It predicts a gold production, by leaching ores with cyanide, of 1,523 kilos in 1996/97 after ouptut of 1,276 last year.
SOMIAF says its production is set to jump to 935 kilos against 565 last year and has started feasibility studies for expanding operations in the next three years.  
Newcomers are undeterrred by small gold ouptut, pointing to geological potential, infrastructure, and political stability.
"(The mining code) is not a star example but it works. There are some pretty good tax exemptions," says Peter Pelly, geologist for South Africa-based Gencor which, with other firms, has joined a gold rush to West Africa.
Exploration companies are given a customs duty waiver on imports but they say red tape delays securing the exemption.
State participation in projects has waned however, with mining develpment arm SODEMI a candidate for privatisation.  
"In the last year since the mining act a lot of companies have gone straight into ventures without Sodemi," says Gencor.
Mining firms arriving in Ivory Coast in the early 1990's are still tied into joint-ventures but benefit from 30 years of mapping and prospection by SODEMI.
"Sodemi is improving as it gains more experience but at one stage we almost pulled out as the goal posts kept changing," said one geologist, citing problems over board representation.  
Other mining and investment laws give the state a free ride of 10 percent of mining profits but allow firms to repatriate funds and dividends.
Taxes are now levied at three percent of turnover rather than profits, while tax breaks apply for mining investments of 500 million CFA or more.
Processing time for permits of up to 1000 square km, valid for three years but renewable twice for two years, was slashed from over a year to a few weeks.  
"The fiscal regime is also better but there needs to be more work on banking and accounts as well as uniform implementation of different mining code provisions," said one mine manager.
Ivorian officials say relaxation of unwritten gold sales rules are being considered. Gold from SMI is currently marketed at spot rates through West Africa's central bank, (BCEAO).
"We are paid the going gold rate but payments are often delayed," says Planque. "We cannot raise loans against the gold or stabilise profits on the futures market,"  
SMI, which is planning to open a new gold mine as part of a French (BRGM) and Australian (Normandy Mining) group, La Source, also wants clearer rules on illegal mining at its proposed site.
"At the moment there are too many, over 5,000, artisanal miners from Liberia, Guinea and Mali," says Palanque.
-- Abidjan newsroom, = 225 21 90 90
