New crop cocoa arrivals at Ivory Coast's San Pedro port are expected to rise slowly to a peak in November and December then tail off rapidly at the beginning of next year, buyers and exporters say.
"November and December will be the strongest months," said the manager of a large cooperative store in San Pedro.
Pods on south coast farms seen by Reuters were concentrated in mid to large ranges, suggesting a November/December harvesting peak. Smaller pods due to mature around January were fewer.
Some farms had insect damage and there was limited black pod, but farms were in generally good condition.
"There might be a small boom at the beginning of October as people have been stocking," exporter agent Kone Lassana said, adding that arrivals would probably dip again before the peak.
Some stored mid-crop might be mixed in with early 1996/97 (Oct-Sept) cocoa but the bulk of it would be marketed before the end of this season, exporters said.
"They (farmers and merchants) will not risk moisture damage by holding stocks for another two weeks," one said. Most buyers said they expected no internal price rise for the new season so there was little incentive to stockpile.
San Pedro exporters said they had stopped buying during the August holiday but several had restarted in the past week.
They expected to take delivery of most mid-crop stock from buyers before the start of the main crop in October.
Mid-crop bean size was much better than at the same time last year, with counts averaging around 105 beans per 100 grammes. Main crop bean counts are usually in the range of 85-90 and the official maximum for exportable beans is 105.
"We are not stocking. Bean sizes are good," private buyer Amer Bilal said at his store in Sassandra. Late mid-crop would be sold to a processing plant in San Pedro, he added.
One buyer in San Pedro said he had beans with a six percent mould content that he would mix in gradually with the better-quality main crop.
He said heavy rainfall in July had made drying difficult. August had also been a bit wetter than usual but conditions were now more favourable, with showers and bright spells.
One San Pedro exporter said he was still receiving some damp cocoa but it was not a major problem. Most buyers were drying cocoa outside their stores before sending it to the exporters.
Feeder roads in the main southwestern growing zone were in reasonable shape despite the July deluge and some in the Maedji area had been recently graded, making cocoa collection easier.
Crop forecasters expect the 1996/97 main crop to be around 850,000 to 900,000 tonnes against one million tonnes this season. The total 1995/96 harvest is seen at a record 1.2 million tonnes.
"The main crop might be down 15-20 percent and will be earlier here than in the south," said the manager of Soubre branch of one large exporting firm. Other local trade sources expected a smaller total crop next season.
"In June the crop was not looking good, but now it is OK. I foresee not more than 950,000 to 980,000 tonnes in total. One million (tonnes) is too much, it might approach that but not pass it," he said.
