Ivory Coast has opened a new Mining Commission (COMINE) to streamline permit approval for its booming exploration sector and cut red tape for investors, a government statement said on Wednesday.
"COMINE will allow consideration of mining applications with speed and transparency and will guarantee coherence of points of view from different ministries," said the statement issued by the Ivory Coast's ministry of Mines and Energy.
Mining permit approval times would be limited to 45 days from receipt of applications while equipment import requests would be handled within 15 days, it added.
Ivory Coast set a new mining code in 1995 which came into effect last year but exploration firms have said red tape continues to dog operations.
Mines and Energy Minister Lamine Fadika told Reuters last week COMINE would begin work on Monday and handle permit approval, environmental studies and import tax matters.
COMINE brings together over 17 government ministries, departments and other related groups involved in decisions. In the past policy was handled by the Direction des Mines, with decisions passed up for ministerial approval.
In future, permit applications will be received by the government's inward investment agency, CEPICI and handed to COMINE for co-ordination of decisions, said a mining ministry official.
Policy management would be streamlined without changes to existing mining code rules, said mining officials.
Ivory Coast, along with other West African countries, has liberalised economic policy and attracted a lot of mining interest since the early 1990s.
Gold production stands at less than three tonnes a year from two gold mines but a third mine is due to open later this year.
Fadika said 55 permits had been issued to up to 25 companies over the past two years. Most prospectors were looking for gold -- but nickel, manganese and bauxite deposits were also promising, he said.
"We have already adopted a plan for a (nickel) factory to be in production by 2002," he added in an interview.
Canada-based Falconbridge, is carrying out feasibility studies for mining 250 million tonnes of ore with a nickel content of about two percent, he added.
Proven bauxite deposits could also be mined.
"We are in discussion with several groups but we still have not chosen a consortium leader," said Fadika, putting reserves at one billion tonnes.
Talks were also being held with South Africa-based Purity Metals on mining an estimated 2.7 million tonnes of ore with around 44-47 percent manganese content, he added.
Diamond mining is also being given more attention by South African groups and studies are planned on potential coastal rutile sand deposits, a Direction des Mines research manager said.
--Abidjan newsroom, + 225 21 90 90
