Ivorian port cocoa stocks stand at up to 175,000 tonnes as arrivals trickle in at about 1,000 tonnes a week, but April and brisk May exports will reduce levels, port sources said on Friday.
"The main season (Oct-April) is over so arrivals will be down until early May," said a source. "Some exporters have stock at the margins of (export) quality limits so they will be waiting to mix it with fresh mid-crop (May-Sept)."
Sources put stocks at Abidjan at 100,000 tonnes with 75,000 at the second port of San Pedro.
Exporters' agents said some exporters were short of cocoa for immediate shipment, but others said this represented a temporary commercial squeeze rather than a broader supply problem.
"Smaller exporters may have bought contracts beyond their capacity, the Caisse may have issued too many contacts or maybe a few exporters are holding large stocks," said one shipping manager. "I have people crying out for cocoa," he added.
Another agent said, "We must wait and see if the Caisse renews export licences if contracts are broken."
Latest bean sizes were around 90-105 beans per 100 grams, against an export standard of 105 with up to eight percent humidity, industry buyers said.
"Bean sizes are tailing off now but smaller ones are still up-country," said one.
Exporters are gearing up for mid-crop arrivals after returning from Easter holidays, but crop analysts have not completed up-country pod tallies to give an indication of volumes, they said.
Early estimates range from 100,000 tonnes to well over 160,000, down on 200,000 in the 1995/96 season, crop analysts said.
"If good rains now carry on and cherelles survive through April and May, I see no reason to be pessimistic," said one. "Estimates will be out later in April but most pod counters will be up-country in mid-April."
Some main crop could be held back to mix with mid-crop to reach an overall export standard.
Tree crop and declared mid-crop could vary widely, he said.
Warehouse stocks totalled up to 400,000 tonnes in early 1997 as exporters held back cocoa bought through auction for December contracts from the Caistab marketing body.
Auction prices were out of line with world rates before a rally ahead of March contracts, they said at the time.
-- Abidjan newsroom + 225 21 90 90
