Ivory Coast's power capacity is set to increase by one third but with domestic demand slim export customers will be needed, power engineering firms and distributors said on Wednesday.
"They have about 1,200 megawatts (MW) installed but there are no large industrial users," a West Africa-based manager for Swedish power group Asea Brown Boveri (ABB) told Reuters. "One of the top 10 power consumers is a hotel."
The head of Ivory Coast's privatised power firm Compagnie d'Electricite Ivoirienne (CIE) agreed, and expected exports.
"The (domestic) problem is not so much one of construction. The techniques of construction are not a problem. It's the capacity to absorb the investment, to repay. There must be a market," CIE president Marcel Zadi Kessy said earlier this year.
ABB and five other bidders submitted proposals in April to build a $300 million, 450 MW, gas-fired power plant near the capital Abidjan on build-own-transfer terms.
The plant, at Azito, would start operating within 12 months with an initial capacity of 300 MW, which could be upgraded.
The supplier will be chosen on the basis of competitive bids based on kilowatt/hour charge, with the winner is due to be declared in May.
Plant ownership would pass to Ivory Coast after 20 years.
"Industrial companies would give us some baseload and make us less reliant on (an economy largely dependent on) cocoa and coffee prices," said ABB sub-regional manager Koen Beckers in a recent interview.
Ivory Coast, the world's largest cocoa producer, is keen to diversify export earnings away from its rural economy.
Power companies see promising markets in mining and food processing sectors, although domestic consumption is also set to rise, with a plan to supply 7,000 more villages over the next few years.
In the 37 years since independence from France only about 1,000 villages have been connected.
"CIE (Compagnie d'Electricite Ivoirienne) has already invested quite a lot in improving grid quality," said Beckers.
A nickel mine producing 30,000 tonnes a year is planned to open around the year 2002 at Biankouma in western Ivory Coast, which could raise industrial energy consumption by a further 150 MW, he said.
About 24 companies, including many newcomers, are exploring mainly for gold in 55 permits, each of up to 1,000 square kilometres.
Ivory Coast aims to triple cocoa bean processing capacity from about 150,000 tonnes to allow domestic processing of 50 percent of its long-term average yearly cocoa crop.
Three factories are working and a further five are under discussion.
Power exports began with Ghana after Ivory Coast achieved energy self-sufficiency in 1995.
"Now they (Ivorians) are discussing interconnecting Mali," meaning Ivory Coast would be connected to five other countries, said Beckers.
Power deals now link Ivory Coast, Ghana, Togo, Benin and Burkina Faso.
Ivory Coast also exports natural gas after using 60 percent of offshore output to feed its own thermal power stations, recently converted from other fuels.
Ivorian mines and energy Minister Lamine Fadika in April urged Ghana to fuel a new 300 MW power station at Takoradi, due on line this year with new Ivorian offshore gas under development by Shell and UMIC, a unit of Houston-based United Meridian Corp.
Ivory Coast's six hydroelectric plants can produce 604 MW and the Vridi thermal plant near Abidjan can produce 300 MW-plus.
Another 210 MW came on stream in April from CIPREL plant, a joint-venture between French firms Bouygues and Electricite de France.
A planned Regional West African Energy Community would "allow countries with excess... gas or electricity, to fulfill the needs of neighbouring countries," said Fadika at a March conference in Accra on "Meeting Africa's Oil and Gas Needs".
-- Abidjan newsroom, + 225 21 90 90
