Ivory Coast's second port of San Pedro is gearing up to play an increasingly important role in the key cocoa and coffee sector -- both as a shipper and as a processor of the beans.
Three large new warehouses are under construction and the first of two planned cocoa processing factories is nearing the tendering stage.
"A factory site has been chosen and construction is about to go out to tender," said a spokesman for Abidjan-based Ivorian exporter ERAF.
"When a bidder has been selected ground-levelling starts and work will be around the clock to open in March 1998," export manager Claude Caissagnon told Reuters.
ERAF has announced plans for a 25,000 tonnes a year bean processing plant in San Pedro with Paris-based partner, Orebi and Dutch firm Nederland.
Plans for a second factory by Ivorian group SOLEGI are less clear but San Pedro exporters told Reuters they expect it to go ahead.
Ivory Coast aims to process 50 percent of its annual cocoa crop by the year 2000 to boost export value.
Industry sources point to attractive tax incentives behind a spate of industrial development in and around San Pedro - including cocoa and coffee industries and timber sawmills.
Three private factories can already process up to 160,000 tonnes of cocoa beans a year but after a record 1995/96 harvest of 1.2 million tonnes exporters doubt the 50 percent target date will be met.
Caissagnon said ERAF's planned factory -- producing only cocoa butter and cake -- could expand capacity to 75,000 tonnes/year. Existing Ivorian factories also produce powder and cocoa mass by grinding beans.
San Pedro's importance has grown with rising southwestern cocoa output since 1990.
A loosening of commodity marketing by the state Caistab cocoa board has also meant buyers' transport costs are lower than to the main eastern, port of Abidjan.
Port arrivals of cocoa for the 1996/97 season are already close to end-April 1995/96 levels of around one million tonnes as young, hybrid plants in the area around San Pedro have swollen local output.
Ivory Coast wants to limit long-term annual production to around one million tonnes and has said it will destroy illegal farms in classified forests.
Three warehouses under construction are due to be ready by the 1997/98 season (Oct-Sept). Construction managers said the warehouses would be owned by Omais, a Lebanese coffee and cocoa buyer and exporters PACI and SHAC.
An accute shortage of warehouse space in 1995/96 meant trucks of cocoa were left stranded at port approach roads.
Ivorian forwarder SIVOM was also expanding warehouse space and extra space could result from laws limiting exports of tropical timber, he added.
National bean processing capacity is set to increase to 180,000 tonnes later this year with the addition of capacity to Abidjan-based UNICAO -- part-owned by U.S.-based Archer Daniel Midland (ADM).
Up to four other factory proposals, apart from ERAF's, could raise capacity to well over 400,000 tonnes over the next few years.
SACO, Ivory Coast's largest cocoa processor, owned by Europe's Callebaut Barry group, has two factories with a total capacity of around 90,000 tonnes. Its second plant at the northern entrance to San Pedro opened in the 1995/96 season.
"ERAF's site is on the opposite side of the road from SACO with access routes possible from Sassandra and Soubre directions," said Caissagnon.
