The 1996/97 cocoa harvest in central Ivory Coast could be earlier than in the main southwest growing area and more prolonged if good rains continue for the next few months, buyers in the central region said.
"October and November will be the strongest," said Daloa-based private buyer Antoine El-Hayek.
"A total of 950,000 tonnes would be surprising...the harvest now depends on good rain before January," he told Reuters, adding, "Mould is a danger. With this humidity and no sun, drying has been hard."
Other buyers expected main crop quality to be better in 1996/97 than this year because farmers could spend more time treating the smaller harvest.
Forecasters predict a 1996/97 main crop of 850,000 to 900,000 tonnes against one million in 1995/96.
Pod sizes on farms seen by Reuters between Daloa and the central town of Gagnoa suggested a relatively early start to the season and a bigger harvest in early 1997 than further south.
But there was little flowering, indicating weaker March harvests.
Good quantities of early main-crop cocoa were seen drying on the roadsides between Daloa and Gagnoa.
Buyers said they were not stocking 1995/96 mid-crop cocoa and they had seen little being stored by farmers.
"There is a little in the bush, but not much, and that is (being held by) those who are not in a hurry for cash," private buyer Makkram Haddad said.
Farmers are often squeezed for cash at this time of the year because of the cost of sending children back to school in October.
The manager of a cooperative store in Gagnoa said he aimed to attract more cocoa by paying farmers a 30 CFA a kg bonus at the end of the season. This would come out of the transport commission element in the marketing price structure set by the government at the start of each season.
A large competing buyer had recently set up in Gagnoa, he added.
He expected 1996/97 cocoa purchases in the Gagnoa area to be on a par with 1995/96, despite lower tree yields.
Marketing in the area had been disrupted by civil disturbances in the run-up to last October's presidential election, he said.
Pesticide use on farms remained minimal, according to the cooperative's figures on sales of Endosulfan and Diazinon-based products, which were used to fight capsid attacks.
The store manager said many farmers found the cost of a full spraying programme prohibitive. Annual treatment of a typical three hectare farm would cost around 55,000 CFA.
