Ivory Coast is destroying some cocoa farms in its protected forests but the impact on 1996/97 (October-September) output will be minimal as officials await clear eviction plans, forestry officials and crop analysts say.
"Nothing has really been done," said one state forest agency (SODEFOR) manager.
"We are told to get them (farmers) out but we are waiting for practical policies on the way to go ahead," south coast area manager Tanoh Yao told Reuters during a recent tour of protected forests.
Ivory Coast said in March that 30 percent of protected forests were "illegally occupied" by up to 450,000 farmers and their relatives, growing up to 100,000 tonnes, roughly one-tenth of the 1996/97 cocoa crop.
World Bank officials put the figure at around 50,000 tonnes.
The March 7 decree said officials would "systematically destroy all plantations in parks and reservations" to stop clearance of classified forests and national parks. A "decontamination" period would allow individual cases to be considered and give farmers time to quit farms.
No timetable or details of implementation were given.
Crop analysts expect Ivorian forest protection plans to bite in 5-10 years as World Bank and international pressure grows, but they predict limited action over the next few years.
"(The evictions) could be bluff so we do not expect any short-term effect," said one, adding that "illegal" output was impossible to quantify. "The ("illegal") yield would change each year with tree age and as planters move around."
Donors say protected forest cover has dropped to 3.6 million hectares from 13 million at the time of independence from France in 1960.
SODEFOR offices in forest areas have displayed copies of the decree near entrances next to local newspaper articles on evictions of farmers and destruction of cocoa trees.
Yao said some farms had been destroyed in increasingly productive forests bordering the large Tai National Park in south-west Ivory Coast near Liberia, but elsewhere the action had been limited.
"At Guiglo (western district) and around Tai, it has begun," said Yao. "(SODEFOR) is also replanting along roadsides as a first step to cut down on access to deeper forest areas."
Up-country buyers say a large SODEFOR base north of Ivory Coast's increasingly important cocoa export port at San Pedro has recently been expanded.
"People had one-hectare farms or so but then chopped more and more forest down. Now there are no more animals so we have to walk 20 km to hunt," said one village cooperative buyer for a main Ivorian exporter. "The policy is a good idea."
Exporters said one farmer had lodged a complaint with San Pedro's prefect in April after eviction from a nearby farm outside Meadji. Others in deep forest areas had also been hit.
Crop analysts say large swathes of protected forest have been cut down but farming techniques there were poor.
Tai forest officials say loosely-defined tenure laws could make the destruction of plantations and villages difficult.
"The farmers are in negotiations with SODEFOR. Some of them have been in the forest for 20 years so we don't know where they will be lodged," says Commandant Koffi N'Dri, head of the Tai forest protection unit PACPNT (Projet Autonome pour la Conservation du Parc National du Tai.
"Illegal production in Tai itself is very small but in the surrounding forests it is another matter," he added.
Tribal chiefs south of Tai said oil palm plantation owners had destroyed more forest than cocoa and coffee growers.
"In five or 10 years we will no longer have any forest in our region," one Tai forest chief told Reuters.
"There is some cocoa and coffee but it is closer to main roads," he said. "(The state says it owns) the forest but we want to rent land so at least our children have a future."
Palm oil firms had chopped down forest and recruited villagers to work plantations without any rent or tenure provisions.
Refugees from neighbouring Liberia's war had mainly planted food crops, rather than cocoa and coffee, chiefs and missionaries living in south-western forest areas told Reuters.
"Oil palm prices are better than for cocoa here," said one priest near the Liberian border.
