Ivory Coast opened talks with donors on Monday on implementing reform of the cocoa and coffee sector to qualify for the final part of a loan for agricultural restructuring.
Donors said agreement on releasing the final $45 million of a $150 million loan may not be reached until 1998.
"We will mainly discuss cocoa and coffee but some questions will probably not be resolved until the end of the year," said a World Bank official attending the talks, which end on May 7.
Ivory Coast, the world's largest cocoa producer, has declined to release trading data to the World Bank on an export-contract auction set up last May with the help of donor funds. The Bank would like to know volumes, prices and dates of trades at the auctions but Agriculture Minister Lambert Kouassi Konan has said the figures were commercially confidential.
Industry sources have complained that the auction encourages price speculation and overbidding to win export contracts. They also complain that auction contract rules on shipment dates and bid confirmation are not enforced.
Some exporters have already complained of difficulties in obtaining contracts because larger companies can bid above world market rates because of better access to finance. That threatens the viability of smaller exporters and market competition.
Exporters and the World Bank failed to agree on three proposed changes to auction rules when European Union, IMF and French development agency officials last met for talks on the system in September 1996.
Exporters, the World Bank and European industry officials subsequently proposed changes in auction rules to ensure cocoa quality. The Ivory Coast has not responded directly to those proposals.
Industry delegates are due in Ivory Coast in mid-May for follow-up talks aimed at finding a solution to concerns about the auction and quality.
Coffee sector talks have recently focused on how to liberalise marketing while maintaining adequate quality checks.
A report laying out options for Ivory Coast by British Consultant Landell Mills was expected in January but lack of guidance from Ivory Coast on which options to develop had delayed completion, said one donor.
"They are now in the process of writing it," he added, without indicating a delivery date.
The structural reforms to be funded by the loan also include the rice, sugar and cotton sectors.
--Abidjan newsroom, + 225 21 90 90
