Zaire's embattled President Mobutu Sese Seko went into a mini-summit in Gabon with a handful of fellow French-speaking African presidents on Thursday to try to find a peaceful end to the war threatening his capital.
Witnesses said Mobutu, sporting his trademark leopard skin cap, embraced Gabonese president Omar Bongo, another veteran leader who came to power in 1967, two years after Mobutu.
The two walked up a red carpet into the presidential palace to meet the presidents of Chad, Congo, the Central African Republic and former Spanish colony Equatorial Guinea. Cameroon, chairing the Organisation of African Unity (OAU), was represented by the foreign minister.
One Zairean opposition newspaper, the Potentiel, dubbed the meeting Mobutu's "Goodbye summit".
But Zaire's government, in the person of Information Minister Kin-Kiey Mulumba, rejected suggestions that Mobutu's departure for Gabon was a veiled flight into exile and said the veteran leader would return to his capital after the meeting.
"There's no question of the president fleeing the country," he told Radio France International on Thursday.
He said the only thing that would prevent Mobutu from returning immediately would be another meeting. "He is coming back after the summit, unless there is another meeting. There is no reason why the president should flee the country no reason."
South Africa's President Nelson Mandela, who brought Mobutu and rebel leader Laurent Kabila together on board a South African ship in Congo's port of Pointe Noire on Sunday, said at the time he would organise a fresh meeting within 10 days.
Hundreds of civilians and fighters from both sides were reported dead after a battle for Kenge, a town 200 km (125 miles) east of Kinshasa. Church and humanitarian sources hoped to establish whether massacres had taken place.
Mobutu, 66 and struggling with cancer, has dominated Africa's third largest country for more than three decades.
He has seen his hold over three quarters of the mineral-rich nation broken by Kabila and his rebels, who took up arms in October demanding Zairean nationality for ethnic Tutsis.
A spokesman in the Gabonese president's office, Vincent Mavungu, said Thursday's mini-summit aimed to find a negotiated settlement after the weekend meeting between Mobutu and Kabila.
"It is therefore normal that consultations take place at all levels to try and find this solution, that is what explains the presence of a certain number of heads of state," he said.
One U.N. source said he doubted very much whether there would be another face-to-face meeting between Mobutu and Kabila. "They (the Central African presidents) will try to get Mobutu to withdraw in a dignified way," the source added.
Gabon's Bongo indicated that Mobutu's poor health had prevented the veteran president from meeting other heads of state on Wednesday. "You know his state of health," Bongo said.
The Mobutu-Kabila weekend talks ended inconclusively.
Residents of Kenge, in radio contact with Kinshasa, said the rebels were in control of the town on Wednesday after Mobutu's forces recaptured it briefly on Sunday night. They said at least 200 civilians, 106 government soldiers and 15 rebels were killed.
Kinshasa was reported calm on Thursday but residents of the city of five million people remain apprehensive -- a mood reflected in the capital's newspapers.
The independent Reference Plus quoted Mobutu's security adviser Honore Ngbanda as saying the city was a powderkeg and any fire lit there could be very difficult to put out.
