Central African leaders on Thursday welcomed a decision by President Mobutu Sese Seko not to seek reelection, saying it opened a way for a peaceful end to Zaire's civil war and gave its transitional parliament a key role.
Mobutu and the presidents of Gabon, Chad, Congo, Central African Republic and Equatorial Guinea urged the parliament to fill the vacant post of speaker -- Mobutu's constitutional successor in the event of death or incapacity.
"The heads of state of Central Africa took note of the important statement made by President Mobutu Sese Seko, according to which, because of his health problems, he will not stand for reelection," a statement issued after a summit in Gabon's capital Libreville said.
This provided "new prospects for a negotiated political, settlement of the conflict", it added.
"The heads of state invite Zaire's political forces under the direction of the High Council of the Republic - Transitional Parliament to proceed with the election of its president to allow normal functioning of institutions and favour an orderly and democratic transition," the statement said.
Mobutu, who has prostate cancer, met with his fellow leaders during a morning session. The other leaders met without him during much of the afternoon.
Mobutu aides say he will return to Kinshasa by Friday.
Mobutu, 66, has dominated Africa's third largest country for more than three decades. Laurent Kabila and his rebels, who took up arms in October demanding Zairean nationality for ethnic Tutsis, now control three quarters of the mineral-rich nation.
Kabila has said he will drive Mobutu from Kinshasa if he does not hand power to him before rebel fighters arrive.
Residents say they are around 200 km (125 miles) from the city. A spokesman for South Africa's Nelson Mandela, who brought Mobutu and Kabila together on a South African ship on Sunday, said the rebels appeared to have halted their advance in line with a pledge from Kabila.
In Tanzania, South Africa's Deputy President Thabo Mbeki said a second meeting between Mobutu and Kabila was set for next Wednesday, adding that the place was uncertain because of Mobutu's health.
In Paris, U.S. special envoy Bill Richardson said a fresh summit was crucial to ensure a peaceful transfer of power.
"I think the probability is high for a second meeting and I'm also encouraged that this second meeting will produce a result that does not involve a violent end, and that includes also an inclusive transitional government," he said.
One Zairean opposition newspaper, the Potentiel, dubbed the meeting Mobutu's "Goodbye summit" but Zaire's information minister, Kin-Kiey Mulumba, rejected suggestions that his departure for Gabon was a veiled flight into exile.
He said the only thing that would prevent Mobutu from returning immediately would be more talks. "He is coming back after the summit, unless there is another meeting. There is no reason why the president should flee the country, no reason."
Mandela promised after Sunday's inconclusive meeting in Congo's port of Pointe Noire that he would bring Kabila and Mobutu back together within 10 days.
Mandela's spokesman Parks Mankahlana said South Africa expected the two men's aides would first thrash out a formula "which we hope will define very clearly the roles of both in the transition process".
