A world chocolate industry group meeting Ivorian officals to discuss cocoa quality and supply will meet donors in Washington on Monday to discuss effects of market reforms on bean quality, a spokesman said Friday.
"We know that where there has been liberalisation in the past there has been a drop in quality," said a spokesman for the world industry forum OICCC (Office International du Cacao, du Chocolat et de la Confiserie).
OICCC officials would meet World Bank officials in Washington on Monday, he said.
"You must protect quality and you must protect the forward market," OICCC spokesman Tom Harrison told Ivorian Commodities Minister Guy-Alain Gauze at a meeting with journalists after separate talks with donors and ministers on Friday.
The talks on Friday between OICCC representatives, Ivorian agriculture and commodities ministers and industry delegates, were held against a background of stricter food legislation worldwide and rising demand for quality chocolate in some countries.
World supply has also fallen or stabilised in other producer countries, including Brazil, Malaysia and Indonesia, leaving chocolate manufacturers more dependent on Ivorian production.
"Legislators and consumers are putting pressure on us," said one delegate. "There are a lot of factories going up in Eastern Europe and Asia and we cannot afford hiccoughs."
Ivory Coast has closed upcountry cocoa checking stations and liberalised cocoa marketing since 1995 under the terms of a $150 million World Bank farm sector loan.
Industry buyers say cocoa bean quality has dropped as a result. Donors reject the idea and say only a complete liberalisation of marketing prices will provide farmers with enough incentive to improve husbandry.
Ivory Coast also put in place a cocoa export contract auction system but there have been concerns that rules encourage exporters to overbid to win contracts, creating a parallel price above terminal market levels.
"We have particular problems in blending good cocoa with poor cocoa... particularly since the Caisse (state marketing board) stopped upcountry quality checks," said Harrison.
Exporters say poor and good quality beans are often mixed together to meet Ivory Coast's export grade standard of 105 beans per 100 grammes with under 10 percent humidity.
Harrison also called for Ivory Coast to produce more of the high-quality beans that could be used to give chocolate its cocoa flavour.
"We do use some Ivorian beans in our flavour element (for chocolate) but we have to be highly selective," he said. "To make high quality chocolate we need beans with no off-odours," said Harrison.
"Only one country produces the beans which give us the flavour element in our chocolate and that is Ghana," he added.
The size of Ghana's crop is between a third and a quarter of Ivory Coast's annual crop, which in 1996/97 (Oct-Sept) hit a record 1.2 million tonnes.
It has kept upcountry checks in place and this week said it would not go ahead with donor-sponsored liberalisation of internal marketing.
Ghanaian cocoa usually attracts a $30 dollars a tonne premium over other origins, including Ivory Coast.
Ivory Coast and the World Bank held discussions in May on further cocoa sector liberalisation but disagreed on policies to increase competitiveness while maintaining quality.
-- Abidjan newsroom + 225 21 90 90
