Worldwide shipments of personal computers climbed 18 percent to 70.9 million units in 1996, with Compaq Computer Corp., International Business Machines Corp. and Dell Computer Corp. showing the biggest gains, market research firm Dataquest said Sunday.
Struggling Apple Computer Corp. suffered the biggest worldwide decline in shipments and saw its market share decline further, Dataquest said in its year-end report.
While the PC industry had robust growth, the increase in unit shipments was less than that in 1995 because of declining growth in the consumer market, the research firm said.
"While some vendors suffered from slowing PC home sales, others excelled," said Scott Miller, senior PC analyst at Dataquest, based in San Jose, Calif.
Led by strong sales to corporate customers, Compaq, IBM and Dell showed the biggest increases in shipments.
Meanwhile, the companies that specialize in selling PCs to home users, such as NEC Corp.'s Packard Bell NEC Inc. and Apple Computer Corp., suffered amid a lack of exciting new products to draw customers to PC stores, Dataquest said.
Compaq retained its position as the No. 1 PC vendor in the world for three years in a row, with 7.1 million units shipped in 1996, an increase of 19 percent from 1995.
The Houston-based company widened its market share to 10.1 percent from 10 percent, Dataquest said.
IBM had a strong year as its worldwide PC shipments jumped 28 percent to 6.1 million. Big Blue also increased its market share to 8.6 percent in 1996 from 7.9 percent the previous year.
Hewlett-Packard Co. showed the largest growth among the top five vendors worldwide as unit shipment surged 52 percent to 2.9 million, Dataquest said.
In the United States, Dell showed the biggest shipment increase with a 71 percent gain to 1.8 million, Dataquest said.
Worldwide, Apple had the biggest decline in shipments as consumers avoided buying the beleaguered company's Performa line of Macintosh computers. Worldwide shipments plunged 22 percent to 3.7 million, according to Dataquest. Apple's market share in 1996 declined to 5.2 percent from 1995's 7.9 percent.
Packard Bell NEC, which specializes in selling multimedia PCs to home users, saw its shipments fall 5 percent to 4.3 million units.
"Our ongoing consumer research in the U.S. shows increased interest in PC ownership," Dataquest analyst Miller said. Whether that means consumer sales will rise again this year is unclear, he said, but "the fundamentals are in place for a strong home market in 1997."
