Apple Computer Inc. will lay off more employees this year as part of its plan to return to profitabilty by 1998, an Apple spokesman said Friday.
The fourth-biggest U.S. maker of personal computers also is taking a closer look at unprofitable product lines with an eye at discontinuing them, said David Harrah, Apple's corporate spokesman.
As first reported in USA Today, the upcoming round of job cuts is part of Apple's plan to slash up to 20 percent of its costs to compensate for falling revenue. The company, based in Cupertino, Calif., has not yet determined how many it will fire, Harrah said.
Apple dismissed about 1,300 people last year as part of a broad corporate restructuring programme.
Earlier this month the company said it would launch another restructuring programme aimed at cutting another $400 million in costs. At the time Apple executives said additional layoffs were possible but they provided few details.
On Friday, Harrah confirmed layoffs will be part of the plan.
"There will be layoffs as part of a larger restructuring," Harrah said. "We are taking a look at the entire business" including the possibility of discontinuing lines such as the handheld Newton computer and the Pippin home entertainment console.
Abandoning Newton and Pippin would mark a return to Apple's core business of focusing on traditional PC products rather than other forms of technology. It would also signal a departure from the vision of former Apple Chief Executive John Sculley who pushed for the Newton before he was fired in 1993.
The move comes weeks after Apple reported a fiscal first quarter loss of $120 million on a sharp decline in sales. The struggling computer maker recently warned it does not expect to return to profitability until September, six months later than originally scheduled.
Apple's troubles are a setback to Chairman Gilbert Amelio's plan to stanch Apple's losses by 1997. Under his plan, Apple aims to reduce its costs so it can break even at $8 billion in annual sales.
Apple executives have blamed weaker-than-expected sales of the company's consumer-oriented personal computers for the decline in revenues.
To bolster sales, Apple on Friday said it cut price cuts on many of its product lines by as much as 27 percent. The company slashed prices of its consumer-oriented Performa machines, its high-end Power Macintoshes and its business-oriented Workgroup Servers.
For example, the price of the Power Macintosh 9500/200, a machine popular with graphic artists, was slashed to about $3,200 from $4,200.
