When Gilbert Amelio took the top job at Apple Computer Inc. last year, many analysts predicted he would follow the same game plan he used to turn around National Semiconductor Corp.
Known as an expert cost-cutter, Amelio was expected to bring order to Apple's chaotic structure and stop the bleeding.
Things, however, have not gone according to plan.
After reporting a surprising $25 million profit in the fourth quarter, Apple reported a stunning loss of $120 million in the first quarter of fiscal 1997. The company expects the losses to continue until at least June.
Now, as Amelio prepares to meet with shareholders Wednesday, the company is planning another round of layoffs aimed at bringing its costs under control. Some analysts now wonder if Amelio can pull off his plans at all.
"It's not happening," said Michael Murphy, editor of the California Technology Stock Letter in Half Moon Bay, Calif. Based on the simple measure of Apple's stock price, trading near its all-time low, Amelio has not done a good job at all, Murphy said.
Under Amelio's original plan, he hoped to stanch Apple's losses in 1996, unveil new products in 1997 and show increasing revenues in 1998.
Analysts said Amelio did not quite accomplish the first goal and may not accomplish the other goals on time.
The trouble is, customers are hard-pressed to find a reason to buy a Macintosh instead of a personal computer based on Microsoft Corp.'s Windows software.
According to market researcher Dataquest, Apple's worldwide market share slipped to 5.2 percent in 1996 from 7.9 percent in 1995.
Returning Apple to profits is not a matter of reducing expenses and cutting jobs anymore, analysts said. Apple has to make a new revolutionary computer to leapfrog rivals in technology, ease of use and power to win back customers.
With Apple still about a year away from introducing a new generation of computers to polish its technology image, experts say the prospects of a quick turnaround are fading.
"A lot of people want instant gratification," said Lou Mazzucchelli, analyst at brokers Gerard Klauer Mattison &amp; Co. in New York. "In this case, you're not going to get it. This is a tough problem."
To improve the fundamental software technology of the Macintosh, Amelio approved the $400 million purchase of Next Software Inc.
But some analysts doubt whether the bet will pay off.
"It's hard for me to say it was a good decision since we won't see a product until the end of this year, early next year," said John Coyle, investment officer at S&amp;P Equity Group in New York.
Some Apple watchers also questioned the generous compensation doled out to Apple's management at a time when the company is contemplating massive layoffs to cut expenses by 20 percent by the end of the year.
For 1996, Apple had a compensation plan that would give senior executives bonuses based on Apple's financial performance for the first and second half of the year.
In the first half, Apple reported a cumulative loss of $809 million. In the fiscal third quarter ended June 28, 1996, Apple had a loss of $32 million. In July, Apple's compensation committee replaced the original bonus plan with a special plan that made the bonuses of Apple's senior management based solely on whether Apple reported a profit in the fiscal fourth quarter.
For the fourth quarter, which ended Sept. 30, Apple reported a profit of $25 million, surprising Wall Street, which had been expecting Apple to report a modest loss.
Much of that profit, however, came from a one-time gain Apple recognised for an inventory adjustment. Without that gain, Apple would have reported a modest loss or would have simply broken even, one analyst estimated.
Based on that one profitable quarter, Apple's senior executive received "175 percent of their special bonus target," according to Apple's proxy statement. Amelio, who had a separate compensation agreement with the company, received a $648,000 bonus on top of his $990,000 base salary. Apple did not disclose the bonuses of the other executives.
In the following quarter, which ended Dec. 31, Apple went back into the red, leading some experts to question whether the fourth-quarter profit was a one-time event aimed at hitting the bonus target.
"Apple should win the Nobel Prize for executive compensation plans," said Graef Crystal, editor of the Crystal report and an executive compensation expert in San Diego. "Apple is one of the worst abusers of executive compensation."
Apple officials said the special bonus plan was meant to encourage executives to meet their turnaround goals.
"It was basically to motivate them to achieve profitability," said Apple spokeswoman Nancy Paxton. She said the executives had expected financial performance to improve following the fourth quarter.
