Apple Computer Inc. Chairman Gilbert Amelio said Wednesday he was suspending the merit bonuses of executives, including himself, until the struggling computer maker reported consistent profits.
Facing a crowd of grumbling shareholders at Apple's annual shareholder meeting, Amelio said he was as disappointed as the shareholders about Apple's $120 million loss in the latest quarter, declining revenue and a stock price near an all-time low.
"Let me assure you that my highest priority is to get this company in the black as early as possible," Amelio told shareholders near the company's headquarters in Cupertino, Calif.
The freeze is on the portion of the bonus that top executives would receive for meeting performance goals. Amelio said the freeze would be in effect until the board rescinded it.
The suspension came a day after the company announced its second restructuring in two years. It also came a month after Apple, the fourth-biggest personal company, reported the stunning $120 million loss.
To get the company back to profits, Apple plans to cut costs by $400 million by the end of its fiscal year in September. Amelio said cost reductions would involve job cuts and possible sale or discontinuation of product lines.
"It's time for Apple to face the fact that we cannot do everything," Amelio said. "We can't be in every market. We can't support every technology."
Amelio would not specify the number of jobs Apple was considering cutting nor whether the company would discontinue the Newton handheld computer, as has been reported.
Industry analysts have said they expect Apple to cut between 2,000 and 3,000 jobs from its work force of 13,000.
Amelio said when he took the helm of Apple one year ago, "we were broke." He added that financial liquidity was so tight the company barely had enough reserves to manage its daily business.
"The company was simply doing too much, moving in too many directions, and not enough of it was profitable," Amelio said. "I sometimes think that, when it comes  to cool new projects, Apple's eyes were bigger than its stomach."
Businesses were so fragmented, he said, the company was using no fewer than seven different financial systems and its forecasting system was "completely inadequate".
Amelio outlined actions he has taken to address these crises, including the company's decision in December to acquire Next Software Inc. for $400 million to help Apple develop a new stable, high-operating operating system.
The decision to suspend the executive bonus programme comes after the company revealed some executives received substantial bonuses last year when Apple reported an unexpected fourth-quarter profit.
Apple's compensation board approved a special bonus plan in July 1996 based on whether the company would report a profit in the fiscal fourth quarter, ended September 1996.
For the fourth quarter, Apple reported net income of $25 million. Much of that net income, however, came from a one-time gain Apple recognised for an inventory adjustment. Without that gain, Apple would have reported a modest loss or would have simply broken even, one Wall Street analyst estimated.
Based on that one profitable quarter, Apple's senior executives received "175 percent of their special bonus target," according to Apple's proxy statement. Apple did not disclose the target levels nor the amount of the bonuses.
Amelio, who had a seperate compensation agreement with the company, received a $648,000 bonus on top of his $990,000 salary. Apple officials said the bonus plan was meant to encourage executives to meet their turnaround goals.
Apple stock dipped 12.5 cents to $15.25 on Nasdaq.
