Apple Computer Chairman Gilbert Amelio told the annual shareholders' meeting Wednesday that he was suspending Apple's executive cash bonus plan until the struggling computer maker returned to profitability.
"Let me assure you that my highest priority is to get this company in the black as early as possible," Amelio told Apple shareholders.
Amelio said that when he took the helm of Apple Computer Inc. one year ago, it faced five crises, which he has sought to address.
"We were broke," he said, adding that financial liquidity was so tight the company barely had enough reserves to manage its daily business.
Amelio's comments came a day after the company announced another restructuring and less than a month after Apple stunned Wall Street with a $120 million loss in the first quarter of fiscal 1997.
Amelio did not provide specifics about the restructuring or how many jobs might be cut as Apple seeks to cut costs.
But he said the company planned to suspend the executive bonus plan until Apple returned to profitability. Recently, Apple officials said they expect to begin making profits again by the end of the 1997 fiscal year in September.
The decision to suspend the cash payouts came after Apple revealed some executives received substantial bonuses last year when Apple reported an unexpected fourth-quarter profit.
The payout was the result of a change in the compensation plan which allowed the executives to receive bonuses based on the company's fourth-quarter rather than full-year results.
For the fourth quarter, which ended in September, Apple reported a profit of $25 million, surprising Wall Street, which had been expecting the company to report a modest loss.
Much of that profit, however, came from a one-time gain Apple recognised for an inventory adjustment. Without that, Apple would have reported a modest loss or broken even, one analyst estimated.
Based on that one profitable quarter, Apple's senior executives received "175 percent of their special bonus target," according to Apple's proxy statement. Amelio, who had a separate compensation agreement with the company, received a $648,000 bonus on top of his $990,000 base salary. Apple did not disclose the bonuses of the other executives.
Apple officials said the special bonus plan was meant to encourage executives to meet their turnaround goals.
"It was basically to motivate them to achieve profitability," Apple spokeswoman Nancy Paxton said on Tuesday. She said the executives had expected financial performance to improve after the fourth quarter.
Apple stock fell 12.5 cents to $15.25 on Nasdaq.
