Apple Computer Inc., beleaguered by rivals offering cheap and easy-to-use personal computers, will unveil an aggressive advertising campaign attacking the PCs' shortcomings.
Distracted by massive financial losses and two restructurings in one year, Apple has been on a year-long hiatus from ads that poke fun at the intricacies of rivals' computers.
"Our advertising is fluff, soft and not very visible," Apple Chairman Gilbert Amelio told investors Wednesday at the company's annual shareholder meeting. "We lost our edge in advertising. And that's unacceptable. I told our advertising people that their job is to get the edge back."
So Amelio charged his advertising people -- the BBDO Worldwide unit of New York-based Omnicon Group Inc. -- to come up with a series that touts the Macintosh's famed ease-of-use and multimedia capabilities.
"Warning. Don't try any of these things on a Windows PC," is the headline of one ad to appear soon in newspapers highlighting the Mac's sound and video features.
The ad may placate Macintosh fans and Apple investors, who have been lamenting the company's marketing silence.
Millions of computer users swear the Macintosh is still easier to use than PCs running software based on Windows 95. But their word-of-mouth has been drowned out by the combined marketing juggernaut of computer powerhouses Microsoft Corp. and Intel Corp.
At Wednesday's shareholder meeting, the most vocal criticism against Amelio came not from angry investors holding stock trading near an all-time low, but from Mac fans who want more advertising to spread the Macintosh name.
Apple has not done nearly enough to bolster its image during its restructuring in the past year, said John Lister, principal of brand identity consulting firm Lister Butler Inc. in New York.
"The perception of an organisation is almost as important as the product," Lister said. "The perception about Apple is that they have lost energy and are slipping behind, whereas Microsoft and the rest of the industry is gaining energy."
Lister said although employees of his firm mostly use Macintoshs, none of them could recall recent advertisements.
For the past year, Apple has had far bigger problems to contend with than advertising. The company reported losses totalling more than $800 million in 1996, and saw 1,300 of its employees leave through lay offs or resignations.
The perception that Apple may not survive kept customers away from the Mac aisle at computer stores this Christmas, as well. Apple reported a stunning $120 million loss for the quarter ended in December as sales plunged 32 percent to $2.13 billion.
Amelio said part of his latest restructuring plan is for his marketing department to "go on the attack."
"We've been frustrated with the direction we've gotten from Apple's marketing" while the company went through its turmoil, said David Lubars, chief executive of BBDO West and the chief creative officer behind Apple's ads. "We're now ready to put the edge back in."
Apple will return to its in-your-face style of advertising where it pokes fun at all the intricacies of operating a Microsoft-based PC, Lubars said.
He said Amelio recognised that the blame for weak advertising fell on Apple's own marketing organisation, now BBDO. The agency gets an estimated $100 million from Apple each year. The account, Lubars said, was not in jeapordy.
"Actions speak louder than words, we're still here," he said.
