Versant Object Technology Corp, a database software company, expects to do more business with MCI Communications Corp despite a stalled project last summer, Versant's chief executive said.
"We anticipate ongoing business from MCI," said David Banks, CEO of Versant, based in Menlo Park, Calif. "They are still a customer of ours. They are using our licenses in existing projects and there are new projects on the horizon."  
A lot is riding on Versant's relationship with MCI. Ever since the long-distance phone company put a major project to revamp its billing system on hold, Versant's stock has been in a funk.
Versant was supplying MCI with some of the fundamental software for the project. So when MCI last summer halted work to re-evaluate the project, code-named Horizon, investors assumed the worse about Versant and guessed the software company was the cause of the snafu, analysts said.  
Versant's stock plummeted from a high of 28-3/8 in late November to as low as 8 three weeks ago. On Tuesday, Versant was unchanged at 14-3/4.
In 1996, Versant's sales of software to MCI totaled about $4.8 million, or about 26 percent of the $18.4 million reported for the year.
"There have been rumors going around Wall Street implying that the relationship between MCI and Versant went sour," said James Mendelson, an analyst at brokerage SoundView Financial. "I don't believe Versant was at fault."  
Banks said he could not discuss the technical details of Horizon, or why it was halted, because of a confidentiality contract with MCI. An MCI spokesman said the company simply decided to change the goals of the project, and would not comment about Versant's performance.
But analysts said MCI's actions speak louder than words. Even though MCI never finished Horizon, MCI paid Versant all the money the software company was due.
In June, MCI placed a $3.9 million order for Versant software to revamp its billing system. In September, MCI told Versant that it was re-evaluating the project. So Versant decided not to recognize revenue from the project in the third quarter. In the fourth quarter, MCI renegotiated terms of the contract with Versant and paid the software company $4.4 million.
"MCI met all their financial obligations," Banks said. MCI also is still using Versant software, but Banks declined to say how much more revenue his company would receive from MCI.
Mendelson said he expects Versant's revenue to nearly double in 1997 to $30 million as the company finds new customers outside of the telecommunications industry.
