Vantive Corp. said over the weekend that Federal Express Corp. will use its help-desk software for a key customer service project -- a potentially huge source of revenue for Vantive.
Federal Express, the Memphis-based package delivery company, will initially use Vantive's software to set up a computer system that lets technicians keep track of internal Fedex troubleshooting projects, the companies said.
Federal Express then will use Vantive's products to set up a help desk that will let the customer service department troubleshoot Fedex terminals in customers' mail rooms.
Depending on how well Vantive's products perform in the first two projects, Fedex potentially could deploy Vantive's software to 60,000 of its employees within three years, said Jim Colson, Fedex's vice president of technology services.
Terms of the transaction were not disclosed. But since Vantive gets a fee of up to several thousand dollars for every workstation, the agreement with Federal Express could be a huge source of revenue in coming years, analysts said.
"It will be a significant deal for Vantive, definitely," said Ed Bierdeman, analyst at Dakin Securities in San Francisco.
Bierdeman said he estimates Vantive will get about $4 to $5 million in revenue in 1997 from Federal Express.
Vantive, based in Santa Clara, Calif., writes computer programmes that help companies improve their customer service departments. Its Vantive Support product, for example, lets technicians log and track customer calls.
Depending on each project, Vantive gets about $30,000 for the central piece of its software and up to $2,500 for every user.
The deal with Fedex also gives Vantive an image boost. Late last year, America Online Inc., one of Vantive's high-profile customers, decided to base a revamped customer-service system on software from Scopus Technology Inc., a Vantive rival.
Although Vantive did not feel any financial damage from America Online's switch, the move raised concerns among investors about Vantive's technology.
With the Fedex deal, Vantive polishes its image, analysts said. Wall Street watches which products and technologies Fedex uses because Fedex has a track record of picking out hot products first. The company, for example, was one of the first to recognise the World Wide Web as a way to reach its customers.
