Sony Corp. on Monday cut the U.S. price of its PlayStation video game machine by 25 percent to $149, a move that is expected to boost the entire video game industry.
Sony also cut the price of all of its new software titles for the PlayStation to $49, making games for the machine cheaper than many of its rivals' offerings.
The price cuts make the PlayStation $50 cheaper than the Nintendo 64, Nintendo Co. Ltd.'s rival video game machine. Sony's move could force Nintendo to cut its prices, which would accelerate hardware and accelerate software purchases, analysts said.
"Hardware price cuts are good news for everybody," said Mike Wallace, analyst at UBS Securities in New York. "The most important thing to the industry is a bigger installed base" of video game machines.
Sony's price cut could be the start of a boom for the video game industry, similar to the one in the late 1980s.
For the past three years, game companies have had lukewarm sales because of high prices for the new generation of video game machines, based on so-called 32-bit or 64-bit technologies. While the next-generation offerings from Sony, Nintendo and Sega Enterprises have much better graphics and sound than their predecessors, they have been too expensive for most households, analysts said.
With the price cut, the number of PlayStation units in use in the United States could almost double to 6 million by Christmas, from about 3.4 million right now, Wallace said.
Sony officials said even with the price cuts they make money on each PlayStation. They also said they do not expect their software price cuts to hurt outside software publishers, since Sony's software prices are slightly higher than the rest of the industry's.
Software executives applauded Sony's move.
"This is obviously great for the software publishers," said Bobby Kotick, chairman of video game software company Activision Inc.. Kotick said with hardware prices getting closer to $100, he expects 18 million to 20 million machines to be sold by year-end.
Nintendo officials said they are analysing Sony's move. Nintendo is sold out of the Nintendo 64 machine and has a month's backlog of orders at $199 apiece, so it does not have a reason to cut its prices for now, said George Harrison, Nintendo vice president of marketing in Redmond, Wash.
Sega officials could not immediately be reached for comment.
