Apple Computer Inc., undertaking a second restructuring in a year, could announce on Friday bigger-than expected job cuts and forecast a big loss for the second quarter, analysts said.
The Cupertino, Calif., personal computer maker also is expected to specify which product lines it plans to drop as it concentrates on businesses that are still relatively healthy.  
Since Apple announced in January that it expects to report quarterly losses until at least September 1997, trade magazines and newspaper reports have speculated that the company would have to fire between 2,000 and 5,000 of its 13,000 employees to adjust its costs to declining revenues.
"I would not be surprised if the layoffs were deeper than the original estimates," said James Poyner, an analyst at investment bank Oppenheimer &amp; Co in New York.
Apple executives have said they expect revenue for this fiscal year ending September to decline about 20 percent to about $8 billion.  
The company has said it would have to cut at least $400 million in costs this year to break even.
Apple may have to cut costs even deeper because Macintosh sales are declining faster than expected, analysts said.  In the March quarter, worldwide shipments of Macintosh computers will fall to about 804,000 units compared with 884,000 units in the March quarter of 1996, said Matt Sargent, analyst at market research firm Computer Intelligence InfoCorp.
Apple also will tell investors which product lines it will cut.  
Analysts have speculated that Newton handheld computers could be discontinued or sold to another computer company.
Last week, Chairman Gilbert Amelio told employees in an internal letter that the company would specify the cuts this Friday.
"I would like to hear clear bullet points on what they are going to do and what they are not going to do," said Stephen Dube, analyst at Wasserstein Perella Securities in New York. "Every time Amelio has spoken he has sent confusing messages."
Dube said he expects Apple also to forecast on Friday the size of its loss from operations for the quarter ending March.
Wall Street expects Apple, based in Cupertino, Calif., to post a loss from operations of $0.79 a share, according to a recent survey by First Call.
