Apple Computer Inc., undertaking a second restructuring in a year, is expected to announce Friday thousands of job cuts and a huge loss for the second quarter, analysts said.
The Cupertino, Calif., personal computer maker also will specify which product lines it plans to drop as it concentrates on businesses that are still relatively healthy.
Since Apple announced in January that it expects to report quarterly losses until at least September 1997, trade magazines and newspaper reports have speculated the company would have to fire between 2,000 to 5,000 of its 13,000 employees to adjust its costs to declining revenues.
"I would not be surprised if the layoffs were deeper than the original estimates," said James Poyner, an analyst at investment bank Oppenheimer &amp; Co. in New York.
Apple executives have said they expect revenue for this fiscal year ending September to decline about 20 percent to about $8 billion. The company would have to cut at least $400 million in costs this year to break even.
Apple may have to cut costs even deeper because Macintosh sales are declining faster than expected, analysts said. In the March quarter, worldwide shipments of Macintosh computers will fall to about 804,000 units, compared with 884,000 units in the March quarter of 1996, said Matt Sargent, analyst at market research firm Computer Intelligence InfoCorp.
Apple also will tell investors which product lines it will cut. Analysts have speculated the Newton handheld computer could be discontinued or sold to another computer company.
Last week, company Chairman Gilbert Amelio told employees in an internal letter the company would specify the cuts this Friday.
"I would like to hear clear bullet points on what they are going to do and what they are not going to do," said Stephen Dube, an analyst at Wasserstein Perella Securities in New York. "Every time Amelio has spoken, he has sent confusing messages."
Dube said he expects Apple on Friday will forecast the size of its losses from operations for the quarter ending in March.
Separately, Apple will announce in the next few weeks that it is changing its licensing agreements with makers of computers that use its Macintosh operating system.
Companies such as Umax Technologies Inc. and Power Computing Corp. have thrived in recent months since they introduced personal computers that use Macintosh-based software. Their success has come partly at the cost of Apple, because the clone makers sell machines that cost less than comparable offerings from Apple.
Analysts said they expect Apple to raise the royalty fee it charges the clone makers. An Apple spokeswoman said the company is reviewing its royalty agreements but would not say whether it will raise them.
The success of the clone makers has had one silver lining for Apple: it has raised the Macintosh operating system's share of the market.
In the December quarter, Apple's share of the U.S. PC market fell to 5.4 percent, according to market researcher Dataquest Inc. Counting sales of Mac clones, the Macintosh has 7.2 percent of the market.
By raising its licensing fees, Apple would hamper the growth of the clone makers and discourage software companies from developing products for the Macintosh, said Matt Sargent, an analyst at market researcher Computer Intelligence InfoCorp in San Diego.
