Apple Computer Inc. Friday said it plans to cut 4,100 jobs in a restructuring aimed at returning the company to profitability.
The troubled computer maker said the restructuring, its second major overhaul in the last 12 months, will result in a $155 million charge in its second quarter ending in March.
The reserve would be in addition to a planned $325 million charge the current quarter for the previously announced purchase of Next Software Inc.
The cuts -- including 2,700 full-time employees and 1,400 contract workers -- were slightly less than what some analysts had expected. Apple said it planned to begin notifying employees about the layoffs later this month.
Apple, once the darling of the computer industry, has suffered in recent years from missed opportunities, management turmoil and failed strategies that resulted in the firings of former Chief Executives John Sculley in 1993 and Michael Spindler in 1996.
Apple Chairman Gilbert Amelio, who took over about a year ago, said the latest restructuring was aimed at boosting Apple's core business.
"The top priorities guiding our reorganization are the rapid delivery of distinctive products for our loyal business, education, and home customers, and the development of a robust next-generation operating system to carry them into the future," Amelio said in a statement.
"We can best achieve these goals by streamlining our organization, simplifying our product lines to deliver fewer but much stronger models, and stopping investments in activities that are not central to these core businesses," he said.
Over the last five quarters, Apple has posted more than $900 million in losses, reflecting slower sales of its flagship line of Macintosh personal computers and restructuring expenses.
In a statement issued after the market closed, Apple said it will phase out its slow-selling Performa Macintosh home computers this spring in favor of Power Mac models.
Disappointing Christmas sales of the Performa line led to a stunning $120 million loss in the first quarter of fiscal 1997 and a steep decline in Apple's market share.
According to research firm Dataquest, Apple's share of the worldwide PC market tumbled to 5.2 percent last year from 7.9 percent in 1995.
As part of the restructuring, Apple said it was exploring options for its Netwon hand-held personal assistant and will no longer produce Apple-branded Pippin devices, which enable television sets to access the Internet.
While Apple will continue to enhance its Mac Operating System, the company said some parts of the system -- such as the Open Doc component software technology, Cyberdog, Open Transport, Game Sprockets, and Mac OS Development Tools -- will receive less money for upgrades.
Apple will also halt funding for the Video Conferencing Solution and AIX Server Software.
The moves are aimed at cutting Apple's expenses by at least $400 million a year so the company can be profitable with revenues of around $8 billion.
Apple said it was revising the delivery schedule for future Mac Operating System releases but still plans to deliver its latest version, code-named Rhapsody, in 1998.
