Lam Research Corp., expanding its expertise in semiconductor manufacturing equipment, said Monday it agreed to buy OnTrak Systems Inc. for $225 million in stock.
The acquisition would help Lam enter one of the fastest-growing parts of the semiconductor equipment industry, analysts said.
As part of the agreement, Lam also will get a new chief executive: James Bagley, the current chief executive of OnTrak and an industry veteran who could help Lam manage its growth better, analysts said.
Seperately, Lam said it expected to report a loss of $1.40 a share in the fiscal third quarter because of slower-than-expected sales and write-offs of obsolete parts for older products. Wall Street expected Lam to report a profit of 7 cents for the quarter ending March 31.
In last year's fiscal third quarter, Lam reported a profit of $38.6 million, or $1.37 a share.
Lam Research, a manufacturer of machines used in computer chip factories, will trade 0.83 of its shares for each of OnTrak's shares and options outstanding. Based on Lam's Monday closing stock price of $31.50, Lam would pay about $26.15 for each OnTrak share. OnTrak shares closed at $28.
"The main reason for the acquisition is to fill out our product line," said Roger Emerick, Lam's current chief executive, who will give up that role but retain his position as chairman.
OnTrak's chemical mechanical planarization machines -- devices used to polish semiconductor wafers during the chip manufacturing process -- would help Lam enter an industry segment that is growing 31 percent a year, Emerick said.
More important to Lam is getting Bagley, the executive who helped Applied Materials Inc., the biggest semiconductor manufacturing equipment company, grow from $70 million to $4 billion, said Dan Hutcheson, president of market researcher VLSI Research Inc.
"Lam's weakness has been operations. Operations is Bagley's strength," Hutcheson said.
Lam could use Bagley's help. At the same time Lam announced the acquisition, it told investors that it will report an unexpected loss for the quarter ending in March.
Most of the loss will come from write-offs of obsolete inventory. Part of it will come from slower-than-expected sales as some customers put off major purchases until the fourth quarter, the company said.
