Technology stocks jumped Wednesday amid investor optimism that major computer, software and chip companies will report solid earnings.
Technology stocks also responded to a slew of optimistic investment recommendations from analysts, who have said in recent days that the shares are undervalued.
"A number of people, including yours truly, believe it's time to start nibbling again on the stocks that form the technology infrastructure," said Bruce Lupatkin, director of research at investment bank Hambrecht &amp; Quist Group Inc. in San Francisco.
The month-long sharp decline of stocks like Cisco Systems Inc., Netscape Communications Corp. and Oracle Corp. represents a buying opportunity, Lupatkin said.
Cisco, the world's biggest network equipment maker, jumped $4.50 to $52.375 on Nasdaq trading of 18 million shares, making the issue the most active in U.S. markets.
Intel Corp., the world's biggest computer chipmaker, rose $7.375 to $140.625. Microsoft Corp., the biggest PC software company, gained $3.94 to $94.25. And Oracle, the No. 1 database software company, rose $1.50 to $40.50.
Analysts have said in recent weeks that technology sales seem to be slowing because of the strengthening dollar, weak sales in Europe and Japan and slow consumer sales. Stocks like Intel, Cisco and 3Com Corp. slumped on those expectations.
But some stocks slumped too far.
On Tuesday, John Skeen and Thomas Thornhill, the influential directors of research at Montgomery Securities Inc., said they believe the recent lows in stocks like Cisco, Oracle and Intel are "buying opportunities."
Based on Cisco's low share price and earnings prospect, the stock's rating was raised on Wednesday to a "buy" at Josephthal Lyon &amp; Ross in New York.
"We think the stock is extremely undervalued at these levels," said Larry Rice, Josephthal's director of research.
Other stocks that gained Wednesday include 3Com, up $2.125 to $35.50; Dell Computer Corp., up $3.94 to $71.44; and Micron Technology Inc. up $2.125 to $40.875.
Some analysts said, however, the one-day rally might not last.
"It's going to be volatile for a while, I think," said John Rohal, managing director at Robertson, Stephens &amp; Co. in San Francisco. Investors likely will wait until the second half of the year to gauge earnings performances before committing to technology stocks again, he said.
