The stock of Apple Computer Inc. rose in heavy trading Thursday on a report that the chairman of software company Oracle Corp. said once again he was interested in buying the troubled computer maker.
Larry Ellison, Oracle chairman, told the San Jose Mercury News Wednesday that he was forming an investor group to raise $1 billion to buy a majority stake in Apple.
Ellison, a flamboyant software billionaire, has said since April 1995 that he would like to buy Apple with his own money, partly to prevent Microsoft Corp. from dominating the computer industry.
Based on its stock price, Apple is worth $2.17 billion. Ellison's stake in Oracle is worth about $6 billion.
Apple rose $2.25 to $19, while Oracle fell $1.125 to $39.375 on Nasdaq, where both stocks were among the most active issues in late trading.
Ellison told the newspaper he was publicly reasserting his interest in buying Apple partly to gauge investor support in the next few days. Based on the reaction, he will decide soon whether to make a bid.
Previously, he has said he approached unidentified big investors about a joint bid. He also has mulled the idea with his friend Steve Jobs, the Apple co-founder who was kicked out of the company in 1985 and returned in December as a part-time advisor to Apple Chairman Gilbert Amelio.
Ellison could not be reached for comment. Katie Cotton, Apple spokeswoman, said the Cupertino, Calif.-based company had no comments about Ellison.
Wall Street analysts said they doubted Ellison actually would attempt to buy Apple because he has not taken any concrete steps in the two years that he has expressed an interest.
"The deal doesn't make sense for (any outside investor) to take him up on it," said David Wu, analyst at investment bank ABN Ambro Chicago Corp.
Still, Ellison's comments should not be dismissed, some analysts said.
"It would be a mistake to analyse this as a pure business issue, as there is substantial ego involved," said Paul Saffo, a tracker of Apple and Ellison and a research fellow at Institute for the Future, a Silicon Valley think tank.
Ellison, the third-richest software tycoon behind Microsoft co-founders Bill Gates and Paul Allen, is intent on slowing Microsoft's dominance of the software industry, he has said in recent interviews. Apple, with its huge following of Macintosh fans, could be a key weapon.
Saffo also said Jobs, since returning to Apple late last year, has been very influential in trimming the company, and could be "sprucing up" Apple for an acquisition.
Jobs recently became a member of the Apple board following Apple's $400 million acquisition of his Next Software Inc.
Apple has suffered declining market share for its famous brand of easy-to-use computers and endured several rounds of restructuring in recent years. The stock has languished in the mid-teens since early January and is at a 10-year low.
In mid-March, the company said it planned to discontinue several product lines and lay off 4,000 employees, or one-third of its staff, in its latest bid to slash costs and turn the company around.
