Oracle Corp. Chairman Larry Ellison late Thursday confirmed he has formed an independent investor group to gauge interest in taking over troubled Apple Computer Inc.
The move, which is not the first time Ellison has raised the possibility of personally leading a bid for Apple, comes as the computer maker is struggling to recapture a profitable role in the intensely competitive PC industry.
The stock of Apple Computer Inc. rose in heavy trading Thursday, closing up $1.875 at $18.625 in Nasdaq trading after a newspaper reported that Ellison had renewed his interest in leading a takeover of Apple.
Ellison issued a statement late Thursday saying he and "an undisclosed investor group" had set up an e-mail address at savapple(at)us.oracle.com to test investor support for an acquisition of Apple.
"Presuming the successful acquisition of Apple by the Ellison investor group, what do you believe should be its single top priority?," was among the questions Ellison asked.
Ellison, a flamboyant software billionaire, has said for two years he would like to buy Apple with his own money, partly to prevent Microsoft Corp. from dominating the computer industry.
He restated his interest in acquiring control of the Cupertino, Calif., computer maker in an interview with the San Jose Mercury News, saying he would seek to raise $1 billion to buy a majority stake in Apple.
Although Ellison said any bid would be independent of Oracle, the database company's stock fell $1.125 to $39.375. Apple and Oracle were among the market's most active issues.
Based on its stock price, Apple is worth $2.17 billion. Ellison's stake in Oracle is worth about $6 billion.
Ellison said that based on the reaction from Apple investors, he will decide soon whether to make a bid in the next few days.
Previously, he has said he approached unidentified big investors about a joint bid. He also has mulled the idea with his friend Steve Jobs, the Apple co-founder who was kicked out of the company in 1985 and returned in December as a part-time adviser to Apple Chairman Gilbert Amelio.
Ellison could not be reached in person for comment. Katie Cotton, Apple spokeswoman, said the company had no comments about Ellison or his prospective bid.
Wall Street analysts said they doubted Ellison actually would attempt to buy Apple because he has not taken any concrete steps in the two years that he has expressed an interest.
"The deal doesn't make sense for (any outside investor) to take him up on it," said David Wu, analyst at investment bank ABN Ambro Chicago Corp.
Still, Ellison's comments should not be dismissed, some analysts said.
"It would be a mistake to analyze this as a pure business issue, as there is substantial ego involved," said Paul Saffo, a tracker of Apple and Ellison and a research fellow at Institute for the Future, a Silicon Valley think tank.
Ellison, the third-richest software tycoon behind Microsoft co-founders Bill Gates and Paul Allen, is intent on slowing Microsoft's dominance of the software industry, he has said in recent interviews. Apple, with its huge following of Macintosh fans, could be a key weapon.
Saffo also said Jobs, since returning to Apple late last year after it acquired his Next Software Inc., has been very influential in trimming the company, and could be "sprucing up" Apple for an acquisition.
Apple has suffered declining market share for its famous brand of easy-to-use computers and endured several rounds of restructuring in recent years. The stock has languished in the mid-teens since early January and is at a 10-year low.
