Apple Computer Inc. stock rose Thursday on renewed speculation that the troubled computer maker was trying to sell itself to a bigger company.
The stock of the Cupertino, Calif., company gained 87.5 cents to $18.875 on trading of 4.9 million shares, making it one of the most active issues on the Nasdaq. Earlier, the stock traded as high as $19.125.
On Wednesday, Saudi billionaire Prince al-Waleed bin Talal revealed he bought a 5 percent stake in Apple for $115 million because he expects the company to turn itself around.
Last week, software billionaire Larry Ellison, chairman of Oracle Corp., said he intended to form an investor group to try to buy a majority stake in Apple, take control of the company and revamp it with a new management team.
The New York Times, citing unnamed Apple sources, also reported Thursday that Apple was actively seeking to sell itself and has approached high-performance computer maker Sun Microsystems Inc. again. Sun tried to buy Apple in late 1995, but negotiations fell apart over price.
An Apple spokeswomen declined to comment about the speculation. Sun Chief Executive Scott McNealy also declined to comment about the rumours, "no matter how accurate or silly they may be."
Mulling takeover bids is nothing new at Apple. In addition to Sun, Apple negotiated with International Business Machines Corp. about a merger two years ago. IBM also demurred over price.
Former high-level Apple executives who keep close contact with the company said Thursday they have not heard of any recent moves by Apple to approach suitors.
One former executive said, however, that increasing pressure from investors -- who hold stock near a 10-year low -- may make Chairman Gilbert Amelio more receptive to any takeover proposal that might come along.
Trouble is, none might come along, analysts said.
"It's always possible, but we're not putting a lot of weight into it," said Peter Andrews, analyst at brokerage AG Edwards &amp; Sons Inc. in St. Louis.
Even though Apple still has a huge following of Macintosh users, the company will not be able to stop its sales from falling for at least another year, making it an unattractive buyout, analysts said.
In the past five quarters, Apple has reported financial losses of close to $1 billion and has had two rounds of job cuts totalling 5,400. Despite the massive expense reductions, the company does not expect to report a profit until the September quarter.
Company executives have told investors they expect revenue for the year to fall about 20 percent to $8 billion.
The most likely suitor for now is Ellison, the flamboyant head of Oracle who has publicly criticised Amelio for failing to turn the company around.
Ellison set up a World Wide Web site last week to solicit e-mail from investors to gauge support (http://www.us.oracle.com/corporate/press/html/apple.html). Depending on the response, he would launch a bid.
A spokesman for Ellison said it was too early for him to comment on the results. Ellison could not be reached immediately for comment.
Some investors said they were not impressed by Ellison's offer.
Richard Ash, a private investor who owns 3,000 Apple shares, said he would not sell his stock to Ellison because he was not offering a premium over the current stock price.
