Apple Computer Inc. Thursday launched the second wave of a massive advertising campaign started earlier this year to raise the profile of its computers and rebuild its tarnished image.
In 16 U.S. daily newspapers, Apple's eight page inserts, headlined "Only Apple," touted the benefits of its new products, including a speedy Power Macintosh for home and small-business use, and a Mac that can run programmes written for Microsoft Corp.'s Windows, the dominant operating system software for personal computers.
The advertising campaign is part of Apple Chairman Gilbert Amelio's promise to shareholders in January to put the troubled company's marketing department "back on the attack."
Apple, which virtually created the personal computer 20 years ago with an easy-to-use machine, has been struggling amid fierce competition from cheaper PCs based on technology from Microsoft and semiconductor giant Intel Corp.
In recent months, Apple's products have been overshadowed by dismal financial results, management turmoil and takeover speculation.
Just last week, Saudi billionaire Prince al-Waleed bin Talal disclosed he had purchased more than 5 percent of Apple, fuelling speculation he might team up with Oracle Corp. Chief Executive Larry Ellison to acquire the company.
Industry analysts said the advertisements were an effort by the Cupertino, Calif.-based computer maker to draw attention away from its dismal financial performance and back to its new products.
"A week from now they're going to release what can be considered really bad news," said Tim Bajarin, president of market research firm Creative Strategies Research International. "This is a preemptive move to get people off the bad news and onto the good news, which is some really exciting new products."
Next week, Apple is expected to report a loss of more than $500 million for the second quarter of fiscal 1997, bringing its total red ink over the last six quarters to more than $1.5 billion.
In addition to a couple of one-time items -- a charge for laying off 4,100 workers and another charge for acquiring Next Software Inc., Apple's second quarter is also expected to feature a hefty operating loss, reflecting slower than expected sales of its flagship Macintosh line.
Experts say Apple's new line of computers should help slow down its eroding market share but it remains to be seen if Apple can regain its former glory.
"The new products are the best they've had in a long, long time, and will help them stay afloat," said Scott Miller, computer industry analyst at market researcher Dataquest. "The advertising for the products is icing on the cake."
Apple declined to comment on how much the campaign costs, but it is certainly more than the $1.6 million Apple spent in 1984 to tout the Macintosh in a brash TV spot aired during the Super Bowl. The 60-second spot, featuring an athlete hurling a hammer at a huge video screen helped establish Apple as an innovative company out to change the world.
Since 1993, Apple's share of the worldwide computer market has been cut almost in half, tumbling to 5.2 percent in 1996 from 9.4 percent in 1993.
Apple customers and shareholders had criticised Amelio for not having done enough to tout the Macintosh's ease-of-use and technical superiority over Windows-based personal computers.
Apple started the current campaign in February, with two-page advertisments in newspapers such as the Wall Street Journal and the New York Times. The previous advertisements and the ones unveiled Thursday focus on the Mac's technical superiority.
Apple plans to run more ads in coming days. The company also is planning more multi-page spreads in coming months as new products come out.
