Intel Corp. said Monday its first-quarter net income more than doubled, but its better-than-expected performance was overshadowed by a warning that it expected little revenue growth in the second quarter.
Intel, the world's biggest chipmaker, also said the number of chips it shipped in the first quarter was flat compared with the fourth quarter. That suggested its new line of Pentium microprocessors with souped-up multimedia capabilities is not helping to boost personal computer sales, analysts said.
"It was a solid quarter, showing Intel's dominance," said Peter Andrew, analyst at investment bank AG Edwards in St. Louis. "But the flat revenue projection could upset some people."
Intel, based in Santa Clara, Calif., said net income rose to $1.98 billion, or $2.20 a share, from $849 million, or $1.02 a share, in the same quarter a year ago.
Wall Street expected Intel, based in Santa Clara, Calif., to earn $2.07 a share, according to a recent First Call analyst survey.
First-quarter revenue rose 39 percent to $6.45 billion from $4.64 billion in the same quarter a year ago.
Intel, however, said it expects revenue in the second quarter -- when PC sales tradionally pick up from the after-Christmas lull -- to be flat or only slightly higher compared with the first quarter.
Intel is a bellwether for the entire computer industry. Flat sales could mean PC sales have "plateaued" for now, said Drew Peck, analyst at Cowen &amp; Co. in Boston.
On top of the flat revenue, Intel plans to boost marketing expenses by 7 percent to 9 percent in the second quarter.
"When you factor in these guidelines, you would have to expect earnings to be down" in the second quarter compared with the first, Peck said.
Intel released its earnings after the market closed. Its shares had closed up $3.25 at $133.75. The stock initially rose in after-hours trading but then fell as low as $129.25 due to concerns over the revenue forecast.
Intel executives told analysts in a conference call that it had strong demand for its new high-end chips, the Pentium Pro and Pentium with MMX media enhancement technology.
The company also said it expects strong demand for its Pentium II microprocessor. Scheduled to be launched in May, Pentium II crunches numbers much faster than its predecessors.
Intel said its revenue in the first quarter rose in all geographic regions except the Americas. Asia-Pacific revenue, which accounts for about 20 percent of Intel's total, almost doubled.
At the end of the month, the company also will cut some of its chip prices -- some analysts have estimated by as much as 20 percent.
Intel cuts its chip prices regularly about once a quarter. While the cuts are expected to drive PC prices down and increase demand, some investors have seen it as a defensive move against rivals Advanced Micro Devices Inc. and Cyrix Corp.
Two weeks ago, Advanced Micro revealed the K6 microprocessor, a chip that works faster than high-end Pentium chips but costs 25 percent less.
Cyrix, another competitor, has been selling a high-powered Pentium knock-off since the beginning of the year that sells for much less than comparable offerings from Intel.
Even with the conservative revenue forecast and the first real threat of competition in years, Intel is one of the strongest stocks, analysts said.
International markets are booming, which could offset slowing PC sales growth in the U.S., said Martin Pyykkonen, analyst at investment bank Furman Selz in New York.
And business software based on Microsoft Corp.'s Windows NT is driving demand for Intel's speedy chips, he said.
