AirTouch Communications Inc. agreed on Friday to buy U S West Media Group's cellular phone operations for about $4.5 billion in stock and debt, replacing a complex 1994 agreement between the companies.
If the transaction goes through, AirTouch would become the second-largest cellular service provider in the United States -- behind AT&amp;T Corp. -- with 5.3 million customers in 20 states from the West Coast to the Mississippi River.
The companies warned, however, that they would call off the acquisition if Congress passes legislation that closes a popular corporate tax loophole.
Under the agreement, AirTouch, based in San Francisco, would pay about $2.2 billion in stock and assume $2.2 billion of U S West's debt.
AirTouch would acquire New Vector, U S West's domestic cellular operation, and U S West's interest in PrimeCo Personal Communications, an advanced wireless joint venture among three Baby Bell regional phone companies.
"It's a good move to put the companies together," said Charles DiSanza, telecommunications analyst at investment bank Gerard Klauer Mattison in New York.
"They've been operating together for a while and already the economies of scale have helped the U S West operations get substantially more profitable."
AirTouch shares rose $1 to $24.50 in midafternoon trading on the New York Stock Exchange. U S West, based in Englewood, Colo., rose 50 cents to $17.75
Analysts said AirTouch would be paying a relatively cheap price for a healthy enterprise.
"The markets U S West has -- Seattle, Denver, Salt Lake City -- are some of the fastest growing cellular markets in the country," said Mark Lowenstein, analyst at Yankee Group, a market research firm in Boston.
The U S West acquisition also would give AirTouch a strong regional "footprint" against AT&amp;T's cellular business, Lowenstein said.
AirTouch and U S West agreed to merge their cellular operations back in 1994 in a complex, three-step transaction. But that deal never won much favor from investors because the final value was to be determined by an outside appraisal of U S West's operations.
Friday's transaction "eliminates much of the uncertainty investors had about the previous agreement," said Kevin Roe, analyst at investment bank ABN AMRO Chicago Corp. "This one clearly spells out the terms and the timeline."
The companies could scrap the acquisition, however, if Congress passes legislation introduced Thursday. The bill seeks to bar so-called Morris Trust transactions, which let companies sell chunks of their operations without paying taxes.
If the bill passes and regulators apply it to U S West, the companies could consider going back to their original agreement, the companies said.
Customers of U S West Media Group's cellular service will not notice any service changes, the companies said. Most of U S West's domestic cellular employees also will become AirTouch employees. UMG.N  T.N
