Apple Computer Inc. reported a $708 million second-quarter loss Wednesday, reflecting a charge for the layoff of a third of its employees and weaker sales of its personal computers,
Apple said, however, that strong sales of new, speedy PCs and laptops and lower expenses would help the company meet its goal of reporting a profit by its fiscal fourth quarter, ending in September.
The Cupertino, Calif.-based computer company's net loss, equivalent to $5.64 a share, for the fiscal quarter ended March 28 compared with a net loss of $740 million, or $5.99 a share, in the year-ago quarter.
Apple's loss from operations of $186 million, or $1.48 a share, was worse than the consensus industry analyst forecast of $1.22 a share, according to First Call, which tracks analyst forecasts.
The $708 million net loss included a $155 million charge to cover the cost of layoffs and a $375 million charge for the acquisition of software developer Next Software Inc.
Apple said, however, that it expects to see higher revenue and a reduced operating loss in the third quarter as its restructuring programme takes hold. In March, the company said it would lay off 4,100 employees and reorganize operations to cut costs.
"Don't open champagne bottles yet, but the process seems to be working," said Lou Mazzucchelli, analyst at investment bank Gerard Klauer Mattison in New York.
During the quarter, Apple introduced a jazzy laptop and a speedy desktop machine for small businesses, schools and homes. Sales of the new machines have been strong, the company said.
"We feel the worst is behind us and our strategy is on track," Apple Chairman Gilbert Amelio said in a telephone conference call with analysts. He said sales will probably increase in the third quarter over the second and that the company probably will meet its goal of being profitable again by the fourth quarter.
Still, even with better financial health, Apple faces serious problems, analysts said.
The number of Apple computers shipped worldwide in the second quarter plunged 33 percent to 602,000 units, compared with 892,000 units in the same quarter a year ago. The drop was bigger than most analysts expected.
Sales in Japan and Europe also were weak, Apple executives said in the conference call.
"I want to see a couple of positive quarters before I say they're beginning to turn the corner," said Michael Kwatinetz, analyst at the DMG Technology Group investment bank in New York.
To keep costs in line with declining sales, Apple in the past year has laid off more than 5,000 employees. The company also has seen its entire management suite change in 15 months.
The uncertainty about the company's future still is keeping customers away from the Mac aisle at stores, analysts said.
Dataquest, which tracks PC sales worldwide, says Apple's share of the worldwide market fell to 5.2 percent last year from 7.9 percent. The slide left Apple's market share at the lowest point in three years.
