Apple Computer Inc. Tuesday said it plans to release an operating system that looks like the Macintosh and runs Mac software, but will run on personal computers based on chips from Intel Corp.
At its annual developer conference, the company also said it will release programming tools in the next few months that allow companies to write software for the Macintosh once, and automatically convert their products to run on PCs based on Intel chips and Microsoft Corp. Windows software.
The radical strategy is part of Apple's plan to keep software companies from abandoning making Macintosh products, Apple Chairman Gilbert Amelio told a crowd of 1,900 programmers in San Jose, Calif.
"For those of you who seek substantial business on both the Mac and Windows platforms, this new development environment holds tremendous promise," Amelio said. "You can (write your applications once) and with a simple recompilation release them for both platforms."
Until now, the Macintosh operating system -- the programme that controls the basic functions of Apple computers -- has run only on machines designed by Apple.
Amelio said Apple's next-generation operating system, code-named Rhapsody, will not only run on Apple-designed computers, but on PCs based on Intel chips and using Microsoft software.
For the past two years, Apple has been scrambling to come up with improvements to the Macintosh that would set it apart from the PCs. Until 1995, Apple had relied on its computers' famed ease-of-use as a selling point, but Microsoft's release of Windows 95 took away much of the impact of Apple's pitch.
Last year, Apple gave up a mired effort to revamp the Mac OS, the fundamental programme that gives the Mac its look. In December, the company bought Next Software Inc. to get its software overhaul going again, and to use its software as the foundation of a next-generation operating system.
The move concerned lots of programmers, though, because of fears that the new operating system, Rhapsody, would not run the products they designed for the older Mac operating system. Programmers also were not thrilled to have to develop products for yet another operating system.
Apple plans to spend the rest of this week convincing programmers that it is a worthwhile investment to write software for Rhapsody. Apple's stock edged down 19 cents to $17.375 on Nasdaq in late trading.
