Beijing's top negotiator with rival Taipei sought on Tuesday to allay Taiwan's fears that China would swallow up the island if Taipei lifts a decades-old ban on direct trade and transport links between the two.
"We feel this kind of strange logic is very ridiculous," Tang Shubei, vice-chairman of the Association for Relations Across the Taiwan Straits, said of Taiwan's concerns.
"We advocate that after reunification, 'you don't eat me up and I don't eat you up'," he told reporters in his Beijing office.
Taiwan has banned direct air and shipping links with China since Chiang Kai-shek's nationalist troops lost the civil war to Mao Zedong's communist army in 1949 and fled into exile in Taiwan. Taiwan allows indirect links through Hong Kong or third countries.
Taiwanese businessmen have poured more than $20 billion into China. Many of them have been clamouring for direct transport links, but Taiwan authorities are reluctant to lift the ban lest the island become an economic hostage to China.
Tang said scrapping the ban would help both sides and said Taiwan's losses would be greater than China's in the long run if it resisted direct links.
China unilaterally introduced a series of regulations in August to pave the way for direct shipping links with Taiwan. China first called on Taiwan to lift the ban 17 years ago.
The ban would in effect be scrapped in mid-1997 in any case when the British colony of Hong Kong reverts to Chinese rule, Tang said, adding that Taiwanese aircraft and ships could continue to land and dock in Hong Kong.
He said the reunification of China and Taiwan would become a more glaring issue after the nearby Portuguese enclave of Macau reverts to Chinese rule in 1999.
"The Taiwan problem will stand out in front of us after Hong Kong's return in 1997 and Macau's return in 1999," Tang said.
Tang said time and patience were needed for China and Taiwan to reunify, but declined to spell out a timetable.
"Time is needed to resolve the Taiwan problem. We have adequate patience," he said, but urged Taiwan not to seek to declare independence. Beijing has threatened to invade if Taiwan declared independence.
He renewed an offer to hold political talks to end almost five decades of animosity. "Political differences must be resolved (through) political talks," Tang said.
But Tang said Taiwan must first abandon its attempt to break out of diplomatic isolation.
Beijing regards Taiwan as a rebel province and has sought to push the island into isolation.
Ties between Beijing and Taipei plunged after the landmark, private visit by Taiwan's President Lee Teng-hui to the United States in June 1995 that China saw as a move to raise the island's international profile.
China's military conducted missile tests and war games off Taiwan before the island's first direct presidential elections last March, which Lee won by a landslide.
Last week, China accused Taiwan of standing in the way of reunification by creating obstacles to economic and trade cooperation, saying the island was "squashing its own feet with a rock" by refusing to end the ban.
