China said on Wednesday Japan was heading for confrontation with an election platform reiterating Tokyo's claim to disputed islands in the East China Sea but said it was not too late for Japan to stop its reckless gamble.
"Japan is turning a deaf ear to warnings and protests from China...and has embarked on the road to confrontation," the official China Daily said, commenting on the election platform of Japan's biggest political party, the Liberal Democratic Party (LDP).
"It is still not too late for Japan to stop this reckless gamble," the newspaper said in a commentary. "It is high time for Japan to take measures to stop the game for the sake of the world and its own future."
The LDP announced last week an election platform that reiterates Tokyo's claim to the East China Sea islands, which Tokyo calls the Senkakus and which Beijing and Taipei call the Diaoyus.
"Japan has not learnt the lesson of its militarist expansion and...it is going into another dangerous game," the newspaper said.
On Monday, about 300 Taiwanese and Hong Kong protesters aboard a 50-boat flotilla pierced a Japanese maritime cordon around the islands and briefly raised the flags of Beijing and Taipei on the rocky outcrops in a challenge to Tokyo's claim of sovereignty.
Japan has sought to calm passions in the dispute and asked China and Japan to prevent a recurrence of Monday's landings. Tokyo has said it would not recognise a lighthouse built on one of the islands by Japanese rightwingers this year.
Japanese rightwingers sailed to the islands in July and repaired the lighthouse, rekindling the dispute.
Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Shen Guofang on Tuesday accused Japan of taking an irresponsibile approach by encouraging landings on the islands by the rightwing groups.
Shen warned that the will of the Chinese people "cannot be bullied" and that sovereignty ranked above everything else.
The row was aggravated last week when a Hong Kong activist drowned after diving into stormy seas near the islands as part of a protest against Tokyo's sovereignty claim.
Tokyo's claim dates back to 1895, when it defeated imperial China and seized the uninhabited islands. Japan says the issue is not open for discussion.
China has claimed sovereignty over the islands for centuries.
Taiwan has no diplomatic ties with Japan, which only recognises Beijing's Communist government.
The China Daily commentary also slammed the LDP's election platform for containing an endorsement of visits by cabinet ministers to a Tokyo shrine to Japan's war dead.
"Japanese politicians have waged a war to reverse the verdict on Japan's war shame concluded by the world half a century ago," the commentary said.
Japanese prime minister and LDP leader Ryutaro Hashimoto in July broke a decade-long taboo on prime ministerial visits to Tokyo's Yasukuni Shrine, saying it was time for Japan to stop apologising for honouring its fallen soldiers.
"Such dishonest activities, which reinvigorate militarism, have naturally caused indignation in the war-victimised countries," the newspaper commentary said in reference to visits to the shrine by Japanese leaders.
Last week, Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Shen Guofang expressed strong indignation over the LDP's election platform.
