China's propaganda tsars have axed all the novels and two films of controversial writer Wang Shuo, among the earliest victims of a crusade to resurrect communist puritanism.
The state-owned Hua Yi publishing house decided recently to stop publishing a four-volume collection of Wang's 30-odd novels after coming under fire from the Propaganda Department of the ruling Communist Party, the author said on Friday.
"Someone reported me to the Propaganda Department. They said my works were reactionary...and ridiculed politics," Wang told Reuters by telephone.
"They said the taste and the language were vulgar...I do not deny this," said Wang, the author of colloquial novels that depict the underbelly of society in Chinese cities and are peppered with strong language and sex.
Propaganda tsars forced Hua Yi to write a self-criticism for publishing such politically incorrect books, Wang said.
"Hua Yi dared not continue publishing my books...No other publication house will dare to publish them," he said.
"The decision is very regrettable...I hope this is temporary...Not all my books have problems. I hope they will allow publication of some of them."
The publishing house and the Propaganda Department could not be reached for comment.
Hua Yi has published about 200,000 copies of the "Collected Works of Wang Shuo" since 1992. Wang earns more than 100,000 yuan ($12,000) a year from reprints of his works, about 20 times the average urban salary.
"Reprints each year are my major source of income. It will have a big impact on me," Wang said of the ban.
The publisher has not been required to recall Wang's books, but military-owned bookstores have been banned from selling them.
Pirated copies of Wang's works, such as "I'm Your Father" and "Life Fast, Die Happy", have reportedly now appeared.
Wang is the most prominent victim so far of the Communist Party's crusade to resurrect what it calls spiritual civilisation, communist jargon for toeing the party line that has been eroded by nearly two decades of economic reforms.
The Communist Party elite ended a four-day, annual closed-door plenum in Beijing on Thursday with a pledge to "use outstanding works that inspire people to cultivate citizens of a socialist (society) with ideals, morals, culture and discipline".
Chinese film censors have been dragging their feet on giving approval to the public showing of the movie "Dad", said Wang, who directed and wrote the script for the film and wrote the extremely popular television series "Stories from the Newsroom".
"Basically, it's done for," Wang said of his movie, which was completed late last year. A private film company spent 3.3 million yuan ($398,000) on the film.
Shooting of "Relations between Man and Woman" was halted in April because the movie had "mistakes and too much description of sex", said Wang, who wrote the script.
The spiritual civilisation campaign has left Chinese filmmakers at a loss and the number of movies shot so far this year has plunged to about 30 compared with an annual average of 160 in the past, a Chinese source said.
Eight movies shot by the state-owned Beijing Film Studio had met the same fate as Wang's films, the source said.
"People don't know what kind of movies can be approved," said the source who asked not to be identified.
Asked if he was repentant, Wang said: "I only have two roads to take. The first is to change my style and write things the government can tolerate and encourage. The second is to do nothing.
"It's very hard to write things the government likes...I will need two to three years to adjust," he said.
