China's Communist Party leader Jiang Zemin appears to be making all the right moves to shore up his position to retain power after the death of paramount leader Deng Xiaoping, diplomats and analysts said on Friday.
Jiang has declared war on corruption, crime and poverty -- scourges that have plagued China for centuries and led to the downfall of many a dynasty.
In his latest move, he used the party's four-day, annual closed-door plenum that ended in Beijing on Thursday to resurrect ideological puritanism -- spiritual civilisation -- which has been eroded by nearly two decades of economic reforms.
Whether Jiang would be able to stave off challenges from rivals in the party and cling to power in the post-Deng era hinged in part on the crucial 15th party congress to be held in late 1997, diplomats and analysts said.
The party's political heavyweights will be jockeying for position in the run-up to next year's congress, a five-yearly opportunity for reshuffles in the party's powerful Politburo and its yet more influential standing committee.
Chinese sources say the Communist Party is debating a plan to revive the post of chairman and to create one or two vice chairman positions -- one of which could be given to Premier Li Peng, a loose ally of Jiang whose term ends in 1998.
Li is required by the constitution to step down as premier in 1998 after serving two six-year terms and is keen to find another job to remain in the top echelons of power.
Armed with the weapon of spiritual civilisation -- communist jargon for toeing the party line -- Jiang is battling to avoid the fate of his two predecessors, analysts said.
Hu Yaobang and Zhao Ziyang were sacked from the party's general secretary post in 1987 and 1989 respectively because their "grip on material civilisation was tight but their grip on spiritual civilisation was loose", one Chinese analyst said.
"They did not pay enough attention to ensuring that the party's position could not be challenged...that was what brought them down," an Asian diplomat said of Hu and Zhao.
A plenum communique attested to Jiang's worries. "From the start to the end, we should be resolute on tightening the grip on both," the plenum communique said.
"At no time can we sacrifice spiritual values in the name of momentary economic development," the communique said.
The spiritual civilisation campaign aims to create a communist utopia -- stamp out superstition, tighten the party's grip on media, instil politically correct values and create heroes and model workers whose orthodox Marxist behaviour the populace at large should strive to emulate.
It is hardly rousing stuff. But Jiang may be desperate.
Analysts said Jiang remained overshadowed by Deng, architect of the market-oriented economic reforms and still influential even without an official post and despite increasingly fragile health.
"In the midst of his great triumph, Jiang Zemin if he is all that powerful...there is no need for him to go out of his way to mention Deng Xiaoping," a Western diplomat said referring to the communique that tips its hat to Deng.
"Jiang Zemin...is still in consolidation mode...in the process of selling himself," he said. "The jury is still out."
Jiang is eager to consolidate his power base even after amassing the three most important positions in China -- general secretary of the Communist Party, state president and chairman of party's powerful Central Military Commission.
Many diplomats see Jiang as a transitional figure after the death of Deng, which is widely expected to trigger a scramble for power among those eager to succeed him as the de facto emperor of the world's most populous nation.
