The mother of detained Chinese dissident Wang Dan said on Monday she would defend her son against the capital charge of plotting to overthrow the government and that he was prepared for a heavy sentence.
"Two defence counsels are allowed...I will be one of them," Wang Lingyun, a 61-year-old researcher at a museum who has no background in law, told Reuters in an interview.
"Wang Dan also wants me to defend him," she said. Chinese laws allow accused to be defended by family members.
A court spokeswoman confirmed Wang Dan, 26, had been charged with plotting to overthrow the government but declined to give further details.
Wang Dan's mother said the court had yet to inform her of the trial date, but said it could come as early as this week.
The dissident, detained without charge since May 1995, met his mother for the first time under police surveillance at a detention centre in Beijing, the Hong Kong-based Information Centre of Human Rights and Democratic Movement in China said.
"Wang Dan...was very calm and psychologically prepared for a heavy sentence," the group quoted the mother as saying. She added that she was worried about her son's health.
She told Reuters earlier that she would defend her son against the charge of collaborating with overseas subversive forces. "This charge does not stand up," she said, adding that Wang Dan had only taken a correspondence course at the University of California, Berkeley, in the United States.
"It has nothing to do with politics. I was the one who wanted him to attend the course...It has nothing to do with overthrowing the government," she said.
Asked to comment on the chances of winning the case, she said: "I'm not optimistic. But I must say it for the record. This will become history."
Relatives said last week they had found a lawyer willing to defend Wang after being given one day to find one.
The lawyer retained by the family would defend the dissident against other charges in the indictment.
Wang Dan, former leader of the 1989 pro-democracy demonstrations, has been charged with the capital offence of plotting to subvert the government, based on evidence such as writings critical of the state and accepting funds from abroad.
He was detained by police in a raid on his home in May 1995, but was not formally arrested or charged until last week.
On Friday, the family obtained a copy of the bill of indictment, which accused Wang Dan of plotting to subvert the government, a crime that carries a maximum penalty of death. The minimum sentence is 10 years, although the court can show leniency if it finds extenuating circumstances.
Wang has already served four years in prison for counter-revolutionary crimes, or subversion, for his role in the 1989 demonstrations centred in Beijing's Tiananmen Square, which were crushed by the army with heavy loss of life.
Wang had been expected to face new charges since last December, when the court that convicted veteran democracy activist Wei Jingsheng of plotting to overthrow the government also implicated the former student leader.
The court's verdict said Wei, who was jailed for 14 years, had links with people "convicted of counter-revolutionary crimes, including Wang Dan". It also referred to a tape-recorded conversation between Wang and Wei, but gave no details.
Wang had been active since his release from jail, defying persistent police surveillance and harassment to join in a daring appeal to communist leaders for the release of all those still in prison for their part in the 1989 protests.
