The trial of prominent Chinese dissident and former student leader Wang Dan for the capital charge of plotting to overthrow the government is expected to be held behind closed doors soon, a family member said on Tuesday.
The Beijing Number One Intermediate People's Court had yet to inform Wang's family of the trial date, the relative said.
The court was widely expected to fill the limited number of courtroom seats with carefully selected people to keep away foreign reporters and fellow dissidents.
"Only the people notified by the court can attend the trial. Others cannot attend," the family member said in a telephone interview.
"In reality, the trial will not be open...but the court will not admit it is not an open trial," the relative said. "It tells a group of people to attend and calls this an open trial."
A court official, contacted by telephone, declined to comment.
If last year's trial of Wei Jingsheng, father of China's tiny, struggling democracy movement, was an indication, Wang's trial would be kept from public view, a political activist said. Dissidents and foreign reporters were barred from Wei's trial.
Court officials have confirmed that Wang, detained since May 1995, has been charged with plotting to overthrow the government -- a crime that carries a maximum penalty of death and a minimum of 10 years in prison.
They have not given further details of the trial though one official said that Wang could appeal to the Higher People's Court if convicted.
Relatives said last week they had found a lawyer willing to defend Wang after being given one day to find one.
Wang's mother, Wang Lingyun, a 61-year-old museum researcher who has no background in law, has said she would defend her son in court. Chinese law allows an accused to be defended by a family member.
It also states that only lawyers can meet detained defendants. Wang's mother was allowed to meet the dissident at a detention centre in Beijing on Monday because she was his legal counsel.
The dissident was mentally prepared for a harsh sentence, Wang's mother told a Hong Kong-based group that monitors human rights in China.
"Wang Dan said he has not done anything wrong...He is very calm...and psychologically prepared for a heavy sentence," the group quoted the mother as saying.
"She is very worried about his health," the group said.
It added that Wang had back, throat and prostate problems.
"In the condition that Wang Dan is in, it would be difficult for him to hold out under another long prison sentence," it quoted the mother as saying.
Wang, 26, has already served four years in prison for counter-revolutionary crimes, or subversion, for his role in pro-democracy demonstrations that were crushed by the army in June 1989 with heavy loss of life.
Wang had been expected to face new charges since last December, when the court that convicted Wei Jingsheng implicated Wang.
The verdict said Wei, who was jailed for 14 years, had links with people "convicted of counter-revolutionary crimes, including Wang Dan". It also referred to a tape-recorded conversation between Wang and Wei, but gave no details.
Wang had been active after his parole in 1993, defying persistent police surveillance and harassment to join in a daring appeal to communist leaders for the release of all those still in prison for their part in the 1989 protests.
