China's flamboyant tycoon Mou Qizhong is hounded by creditors, faces lawsuits and investigation for alleged irregularities and cannot leave the country, company officials said.
The embattled chairman of the Land Economic Group, who has been identified by local media as China's second richest man, was down but not out and was counting on Russian-made satellites to bail him out of financial trouble, they said.
"We're in a crisis," Chen Fang, spokeswoman for Mou, told Reuters late on Monday. Mou declined repeated requests for an interview.
Domestic creditors had demanded repayment of loans, group officials said. Mou's Land Economic Group owes 200 million yuan ($24.1 million) at home and another 200 million yuan in Hong Kong and Russia.
"Some creditors...have asked for their money back even before the maturity date," Chen said, adding that the company was planning to repay the loans gradually.
Domestic banks had refused to grant Mou new loans and the group had given up seeking loans from Chinese banks. "Abruptly recalling loans could be fatal," Chen said in an interview.
At least one investor had demanded its money back, but agreed to convert its equity into a loan, company officials said.
"The major problem we're facing now is circulating funds getting cut off... As a result, many projects are held up," Chen said.
Government authorities had cleared Mou of suspicion of tax evasion and of using unlawful funds but he remained under investigation for other unspecified irregularities, company officials said.
The authorities had been dragging their feet on renewing his passport apparently out of fear that he may flee the country and join his wife and three sons in the United States. Mou hopes to visit the United States next month.
Salaries of employees were slashed to 270 yuan a month -- China's urban minimum wage -- in July and August and were 600 yuan in September from an average of 2,000 yuan a month in the past, the officials said. About 50 people have resigned, leaving some 300.
A contractor in Inner Mongolia had sued the Land Group for allegedly defaulting on a contract, and court officials foreclosed on company cars and office equipment in August.
"Many people say that this could be what is called in Buddhism an inexorable doom for Mr Mou or the Land Group," Chen said.
Chen blamed the woes of Mou on the media "surrounding and attacking" him since March as well as a smear campaign by former employees and a government credit squeeze to curb inflation.
"But the Land Group will not collapse," she said.
Mou plans to raise an unspecified amount of money through a planned share issue, for two Russian-made GALS communications satellites he owns, on the Hong Kong stock exchange, officials said.
The first was launched in January 1994 and the second in November 1995. Russia launched both satellites in Kazakhstan.
In addition, Mou has bought a 30 percent stake in a company that will develop, manufacture and launch two Russian-made Intersputnik communications satellites.
The first of the two satellites is due to be launched from Kazakhstan in late 1998.
The satellites were expected to bring Mou net profits of $500 million and bail him out of his current crisis, Chen said.
The group has assets worth 1.2 billion yuan and liabilities of just 400 million yuan.
It is not Mou's first crisis. He was sentenced to death but eluded execution in the 1966-76 Cultural Revolution for criticising chairman Mao Zedong.
Mou was released from prison in 1979 and established his company the following year. He was arrested again and jailed for one year on a charge of speculating in the early 1980s.
He ran up huge debts in the mid 1980s but managed to bounce back by importing small refrigerators from South Korea at low tariff rates, raking in millions of yuan.
