China sent a senior official to attend a reception at the Ukraine embassy on Friday despite a diplomatic rift over a visit to Kiev by Taiwan's vice president Lien Chan.
But an apparent guest list mix-up left both sides unsure over who would represent Beijing at the reception, held to mark Ukraine's independence day.
Ukraine's ambassador thought Chinese Vice-Foreign Minister Tian Zengpei would attend, but the Chinese thought it was Vice-Foreign Minister Zhang Deguang.
Zhang, however, fell ill and Vice-Foreign Minister Tang Jiaxuan showed up instead.
The confusion followed Taiwan Vice President Lien Chan's three-day trip this week to Ukraine which infuriated Beijing.
"It was a misunderstanding...a mix-up," Ukrainian Minister-Counsellor Leonid Leshchenko told Reuters, referring to the guest list.
Asked if he saw it as an intentional slap on the wrist, Leshchenko shook his head and said: "No, no no."
A Chinese Foreign Ministry protocol officer said Tian, the vice-minister that the Ukrainians were expecting, was abroad.
Ukrainian diplomats noted that Tang, the vice-minister who attended, was filling in for Tian as the acting first vice-minister and was actually higher in rank than the person who fell ill.
Ukraine's Ambassador Anatoly Plyushko emerged from a half-hour chat with Vice-Minister Tang, and said the vice-minister told him that China attached "great attention to bilateral relations" and "hoped to continue to develop" ties.
Plyushko said the vice-minister did not raise the issue of Lien's three-day Kiev visit.
"All Chinese guests...invited came," Plyushko said. "This is evidence...(of) their attitude towards our relations. I'm optimistic."
The atmosphere was less pleasant on Wednesday when the Chinese Foreign Ministry summoned Plyushko to protest against Lien's trip.
China regards Taiwan as a rebel province with no right to conduct foreign relations on its own, and has sought to push it into diplomatic isolation since a civil war separated them in 1949.
The former Soviet republic of Ukraine recognises China but not Taiwan.
In apparent retaliation against Lien's visit, Chinese State Councillor Li Tieying, a member of the powerful Politburo of the ruling Communist Party, has postponed a visit to Ukraine.
In Kiev, Ukrainian Foreign Minister Hennady Udovenko took a shot at Beijing on Thursday, saying China had over-reacted to Lien's visit and calling Beijing's protest "out of proportion".
