A son-in-law of China's paramount leader Deng Xiaoping has resigned as director of the armament department of the People's Liberation Army (PLA), Chinese sources with close ties to the military said on Sunday.
Major General He Ping, husband of Deng's youngest daughter Deng Rong, quit the post recently after his hopes for promotion were dashed, one source said.
"He Ping was unhappy... He wanted to become deputy chief of general staff, but the Central Military Commission would only make him assistant chief of general staff initially," the source, who requested anonymity, told Reuters.
The assistant chief of general staff is one rank below the deputy chief of general staff.
Another source said a replacement had been named to succeed He Ping as director of the armament department, which supplies equipment to the three million-strong PLA.
The commission's refusal to give Deng's son-in-law the post he wanted was not so much a blow to the first family as it was a boost to the position of Communist Party boss Jiang Zemin.
"It was not so much as a challenge to Deng Xiaoping. Rather, it was a sign that Jiang Zemin is now more powerful," the second source said.
The first source agreed. "Jiang Zemin does not have to do everything Deng Xiaoping says," the source said of the commission's decision not to promote He Ping to deputy chief of general staff.
Jiang, who is chairman of the commission, has moved in recent years to shore up his position by appointing allies to key military positions and shrug off Deng's shadow.
Deng, 92, no longer holds any office but remains highly influential. He has not been seen in public since early 1994.
The paramount leader vouched for his son-in-law, whose company was alleged to have been involved in the smuggling of the biggest haul of automatic weapons in U.S. history.
"Deng Xiaoping spoke. He said: 'It was not He Ping's fault'... He Ping does not have any more problems," the first source said of the arms smuggling scandal.
"It was a trap by the United States," the source said of the arms seizure. Many communist officials harbour deep suspicions of the United States and the view that the arms seizure was a U.S. conspiracy to undermine China.
China's two top government-run arms merchants, Polytechnologies Ltd and China North Industries Corp (Norinco), have rejected U.S. charges they were involved in the scandal.
He Ping is president of Poly Group, which is owned by the PLA's armament department. Poly Group subsidiary Polytechnologies is a joint venture with China's flagship multinational China International Trust and Investment Co and headed by Wang Jun, son of a late vice-president and close associate of Deng.
Norinco is a civilian organisation that has no direct relationship with the army but supplies it with arms.
In March, U.S. federal agents seized a shipment of 2,000 AK-47 fully automatic machine guns and 4,000 ammunition magazines, with a street value of more than $4 million.
U.S. agents arrested at least seven people, including executives of Norinco, in May and charged them with involvement in the ring.
The seizure was the culmination of a 16-month investigation of senior officials, based in both the United States and China, of Norinco and Polytechnologies.
The suspects had offered to sell much more powerful weapons to undercover agents, including mortars, rocket launchers, machineguns and a surface-to-air missile, U.S. officials have said.
