China's paramount leader Deng Xiaoping, reported to be in fragile health, was absent from a rally on Tuesday to pay tribute to him and other survivors of the 1934-36 Long March.
Deng, 92, one of about 700 surviving veterans of the Red Army who trekked 9,650 km (6,000 miles) across China on foot to flee Chiang Kai-shek's Nationalist troops, did not appear on state television which showed the 45-minute rally live.
Deng, who no longer holds any office but is believed to remain highly influential, has not been seen in public since early 1994.
His health is a matter of intense speculation in China, Hong Kong and the Asian region because his death is expected to trigger a scramble for power among those eager to succeed him as de facto emperor of the world's most populous nation.
The official line is that Deng is in good health for a man of his age.
Extensive preparations were made last year for Deng to grace official celebrations to mark the 50th anniversary of the World War Two victory against Japan, but his scheduled appearance was cancelled at the last minute, Chinese sources said.
The Long March rally was seen by some analysts as a show of support for Deng's successor, Communist Party boss and state president Jiang Zemin, who has been eager to shrug off the patriarch's shadow.
"It was staged to show Jiang has the support of military from the old to the present and future generations," one Chinese analyst said.
Long March survivors, including former state president and Jiang's bitter rival Yang Shangkun, were at the rally. A representative of the three million-strong People's Liberation Army pledged to follow Jiang's leadership.
Eight Young Pioneers -- China's version of boy and girl scouts -- recited poems at the rally at the Great Hall of the People in central Beijing adjacent to Tiananmen Square.
Wearing his trademark army uniform with no stars or stripes, Jiang urged the ruling Communist Party to inherit the spirit of the Long March.
"The spirit of the Long March...is a strong spiritual force that guarantees our walking from victory to victory," Jiang said, reading from a prepared statement.
The gruelling Long March slashed the Red Army's numbers to about 7,000 from 100,000, but survivors were hardened and went on to defeat and drive Chiang and his troops into exile in Taiwan at the end of the Chinese civil war in 1949.
"The road after the revolution is even longer and the work greater and tougher," Jiang said.
Jiang has declared war on crime, corruption and poverty -- problems plaguing China today -- and embarked on a crusade to resurrect socialist ethics, which have been eroded by almost two decades of economic reforms.
He paid little tribute to his mentor, mentioning Deng only twice in his lengthy speech.
The People's Daily, mouthpiece of the Communist Party, splashed on its front page a photograph showing portraits of Jiang, Deng and chairman Mao Zedong hanging over a cultural performance on Monday evening to mark the anniversary.
