China on Tuesday slammed Taiwan for failing to crack down on a new opposition party seeking independence for the island and warned that separatism was "a road to death".
"Not only do the Taiwan authorities fail to ban the formation of the Taiwan Independence Party, but they also tolerate it," a spokesman for the Taiwan Affairs Office under the State Council, or cabinet, said.
"The self-proclaimed anti-independence stand of the Taiwan authorities is a double-faced practice that deceives others as well as themselves," the official People's Daily quoted the spokesman as saying.
Beijing has regarded Taiwan as a rebel province since Mao Zedong's Red Army defeated and drove Chiang Kai-shek's Nationalist troops into exile in Taiwan at the end of the Chinese civil war in 1949.
A group of Taiwanese activists plan to break away from Taiwan's main opposition party and form the Taiwan Independence Party on December 12.
China has threatened to invade if Taiwan declared independence. China conducted missile tests and war games off Taiwan last March in the run-up to the island's first direct presidential elections to cow Taipei into abandoning any dreams of independence.
"Taiwan independence is a road to death that cannot be walked because it is blocked," the spokesman said.
The spokesman described the party as a "reactional political organisation" with the explicit purpose of splitting the motherland.
"The Taiwan authorities should adopt realistic anti-independence action as soon as possible. Compatriots on the two sides are waiting to see," the spokesman said.
"The Chinese government and the Chinese people will definitely not sit back idly and do nothing about it," the spokesman warned.
"Their scheme will never succeed," he said of the new party's drive for independence.
Taiwan says it is committed to reunification, but stresses that this cannot be achieved overnight and says China must democratise.
Beijing's criticism came a day after Taiwanese President Lee Teng-hui blamed China for deadlocked relations between the two.
Referring to the Communist authorities, Lee said in a speech on Monday: "They adopted a hegemonic attitude and stubborn policy toward Taiwan, singlehandedly blocked the development of history and caused the stalemate of cross-Strait relations."
The island maintains an official policy of anti-independence, but has decriminalised advocacy of independence, saying such calls are within the bounds of freedom of speech.
Ties between Beijing and Taipei, which began to thaw in the late 1980s, took an icy plunge after a landmark, private visit by Lee to the United States in June 1995.
China, which has sought to push Taiwan into diplomatic isolation, saw the trip as a bid to raise the island's international profile.
Beijing has stepped up its reunification overture in recent months, calling for political talks to end almost five decades of hostility.
China unilaterally introduced a series of regulations last August to pave the way for direct shipping links with Taiwan.
Taiwan has banned direct air and shipping links with China since 1949, but allows indirect links through Hong Kong or third countries. Taiwan is reluctant to lift the ban lest the island become an economic hostage to China.
