China demanded on Monday that the United States cancel plans to sell Stinger missiles, launchers and other weapons to Taiwan to prevent "new damage" to slowly recovering Sino-U.S. relations.
"We ask the U.S. side...to cancel plans to sell missiles to Taiwan to prevent creating new damage to Sino-U.S. relations," a Foreign Ministry spokesman told Reuters.
Beijing has regarded Taiwan as a renegade province since the end of the civil war in 1949. It opposes the sale of weapons to the island.
The United States should take Sino-U.S. relations into account and live up to its promise regarding the sale of weapons to Taiwan, the spokesman said without elaborating. Washington has agreed to reduce weapons sales to Taiwan.
Rejecting a similar demand by China on August 15, the U.S. Defence Department notified Congress last Friday of plans to sell Stinger missiles, launchers and other weapons to Taiwan.
U.S. officials said the weapons were defensive and the sale would not affect the basic military balance in the region.
The Pentagon said Taiwan wanted to buy 1,299 Stinger missiles, 74 guided missile launchers, 74 flight trainer Stinger missiles, 96 jeep-like Humvee vehicles and 500 rounds of .50 calibre ammunition for an estimated $420 million.
The principal contractors are the Hughes Missile Systems Co., Boeing Missile and Space Systems Co. and AM General.
Such sales must be made through the U.S. Defence Department, not directly by contractors, and Congress must be notified in case it wants to veto the sale.
Sino-U.S. ties have see-sawed in recent years over disputes ranging from human rights abuses and widespread copyright piracy in China to alleged nuclear proliferation by Beijing.
The ties plunged to new depths over the last year in a row over a landmark trip by Taiwan's President Lee Teng-hui to the United States in June 1995.
Earlier this month, Beijing warned Washington that a U.S. stopover by Taiwan's Vice-President Lien Chan could cause new damage to slowly recovering ties.
However, in a sign that China was eager to prevent Lien's visit from harming slowly warming relations, Beijing refrained from further comment while Lien was in the United States.
Ties between Beijing and Washington were set on better footing after a visit to Beijing by U.S. National Security Adviser Anthony Lake in July.
The trip laid the groundwork for an exchange of high-level visits later in the year, with U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher invited to China in November and Chinese Defence Minister Chi Haotian due to go to Washington before the end of December.
An exchange of visits by Chinese President Jiang Zemin and U.S. President Bill Clinton could go ahead next year, if Clinton wins re-election in November.
Chinese officials have said they expect Christopher's visit, his first since a 1994 trip that stumbled badly over human rights, to go smoothly with both sides keen to remove obstacles in their relations.
In a separate development that could strain Sino-U.S. ties, the Washington Post reported on Sunday that U.S. intelligence officials had concluded that Pakistan was secretly building a medium-range missile factory near Islamabad using Chinese blueprints and equipment.
Asked to comment on the report, Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Shen Guofang said: "The report is totally groundless."
