A group of foreign legal experts has asked China for permission to observe next week's trial of detained dissident Wang Dan, a human rights group said on Saturday.
Wang faces the capital charge of plotting to overthrow the government, a crime that carries a maximum penalty of death and a minimum sentence of 10 years in prison.
The legal team consists of French senator Robert Badinter, former U.S. attorneys-general Nicholas Katzenback and Richard Thornburgh and former Canadian solicitor-general Warren Allmand, the New York-based Human Rights Watch said.
"The request ... is in part to see whether the right of Wang Dan to a fair and public hearing by an independent and impartial tribunal ... is respected," the human rights group said.
Wang, 26, who vanished into detention in May 1995, would plead not guilty at his Beijing Intermediate People's Court trial which opens on Wednesday, family members have said.
The human rights group said the chances of China allowing the foreign legal experts to observe the trial were slim. "Admittance to the courtroom is often denied to ... journalists and other 'outsiders' on grounds that the courtroom is 'too small'," Human Rights Watch said.
Wang's court appearance would likely be held out of the public eye, as was last year's trial of Wei Jingsheng, regarded as the father of China's tiny, struggling democracy movement.
Wang's mother, a 61-year old museum researcher who has no background in law, would attend the trial as one of two defence lawyers. His father and a sister have been allowed to sit in.
The court has refused to give details of Wang's trial other than the fact that he has been charged with plotting to overthrow the government, but one official has said Wang could appeal to the Higher People's Court if convicted.
Wang's mother has said the dissident was calm and mentally prepared for a harsh sentence, though she has said his health has deteriorated during his detention.
Human Rights Watch was not optimistic about an acquittal. "He has not had adequate time to prepare a defence," it said in a statement made available to Reuters by facsimile.
"Chinese criminal trials seldom respect the presumption of innocence, and defence lawyers are generally restricted to arguing mitigating circumstances for a reduced sentence," the group said.
Wang's family have found a lawyer willing to defend the former student leader after being given just one day in which to do so.
Wang has already served four years in prison for counter-revolutionary crimes, or subversion, for his role in pro-democracy demonstrations in Beijing's Tiananmen Square that were crushed by the army in June 1989 with heavy loss of life.
He had been active after his parole in 1993, defying persistent police surveillance to join in a daring appeal to communist leaders for the release of all those still in prison for their part in the 1989 protests.
China has in recent months cracked down on its tiny band of remaining dissidents who have not fled into exile or been imprisoned.
