Beijing Mayor Li Qiyan is to step down in a long-delayed reshuffle after the downfall of his mentor, the Chinese capital's disgraced Communist Party boss Chen Xitong, sources with close ties to the city government said on Sunday.
Li, 58, mayor of Beijing since 1993, would become a vice-minister of labour and could eventually replace Li Boyong, 62, as labour minister, said the sources who asked not to be identified. The two Lis are not related.
Li Qiyan's departure was widely expected after one of his vice-mayors came under investigation for economic crimes and committed suicide in April 1995.
The suicide shocked the nation and led to the downfall of Li's mentor, Chen Xitong, who has since disappeared from the public eye.
Chen resigned as Beijing's Communist Party boss and was later sacked from the Politburo, becoming the most senior official to be ensnared in a corruption scandal since the communists came to power in 1949.
Officials say Chen was himself still under investigation for possible wrongdoing.
The city government had been virtually paralysed since Chen's disgrace, the sources said.
"After Chen Xitong stepped down, the (city) government lost its credibility ... and could maintain only the most basic operation," one source told Reuters. "It could not embark on huge projects ... It could not do anything."
Li would be replaced by Jia Qinglin, 56, party secretary of the southeastern province of Fujian, the sources said.
Jia arrived in Beijing last week to take up his new post as acting mayor, the sources said. Jia is expected to formally become the capital's mayor after his nomination is approved by the Beijing People's Congress.
In the run-up to the party's 15th congress next year, Jia could be promoted to Beijing's Communist Party secretary and land a seat in the party's powerful Politburo, they said.
The vice-mayor who committed suicide was found to have used his position to amass 116 houses illegally and build himself a villa on the outskirts of the city. He also masterminded a $37 million embezzlement and graft scam, officials have said.
Corruption was virtually eliminated in the years after the communists came to power in 1949, but has staged a comeback along with economic reforms in the past 17 years.
Communist Party chief and state president Jiang Zemin has declared war on corruption, warning that the scourge was a virus which threatened the party. Courts frequently impose the death penalty in major corruption cases.
Earlier this month, prosecutors filed charges of corruption against 30 people, including Zhou Beifang, former head of two publicly listed Hong Kong affiliates of a China steel giant, and two former officials of the Beijing city government.
The announcement of the charges against Zhou was among the first against one of China's so-called "princelings", the popular sobriquet applied to the children of the ruling party elite, who enjoy wide influence.
Zhou, detained in February, 1995, is the son of Zhou Guanwu, former chairman and Communist Party secretary of Beijing's giant Capital Iron and Steel Corporation, also known as Shougang, and among the largest conglomerates in China.
