The mayor of China's capital resigned on Tuesday in a reshuffle that had been expected since the downfall last year of his mentor, disgraced Beijing Communist Party boss Chen Xitong, in a corruption scandal.
The Beijing People's Congress had approved the resignation of city mayor Li Qiyan, the official Xinhua news agency said.
It did not explain why Li, 58, was stepping down, saying only that he would become secretary of the Labour Ministry's Communist Party committee.
Chinese sources have said Li Qiyan could eventually replace Li Boyong as labour minister. The two men have the same surname but are not related.
Diplomats and Chinese sources said Li was forced to step down because of his close links to Chen, who resigned as Beijing party boss in April 1995 after his protege, a vice-mayor, came under investigation for economic crimes and committed suicide.
"Li Qiyan had been closely associated with Chen Xitong...and Li Qiyan's departure was inevitable," a Western diplomat said.
"When revelations about the extent of corruption in the Beijing government became public, sweeping changes of the Beijing leadership were required but could not be done in one go in the interest of preserving stability," the diplomat said.
Chinese sources said the city government had been virtually paralysed since Chen's downfall and that authorities had decided they could no longer delay naming a new mayor.
Chen was sacked from the party's powerful Politburo in September 1995, the most senior official to be ensnared in a corruption scandal since the communists came to power in 1949.
He has since disappeared from public view and has come under investigation for possible wrongdoing.
It was not known if Li was under investigation.
Xinhua said the Beijing People's Congress, or city council, had approved the appointment of Jia Qinglin, 56, as vice and acting mayor of the nation's capital.
The Central Committee of the Communist Party named Jia to the post of vice secretary of Beijing's party committee.
Jia had resigned as party secretary of the southeastern province of Fujian and was replaced by Fujian Governor Chen Mingyi, Xinhua said.
Fujian Vice-Governor He Guoqiang would replace Chen as the provincial governor, it said.
In the run-up to the party's 15th congress next year, Jia could be promoted to chief of the Beijing municipal party committee and even land a seat in the Politburo, Chinese sources have said.
Corruption was virtually eliminated in the years after the communists came to power in 1949, but has staged a comeback along with economic reforms in the past 17 years.
Wang Baosen, the vice-mayor who committed suicide was found to have used his position to amass 116 houses illegally and build himself a villa on the outskirts of the city. He also masterminded a $37 million embezzlement and graft scam, officials have said.
Communist Party chief and state president Jiang Zemin has declared war on corruption, warning that the scourge was a virus that threatened the party. Courts frequently impose the death penalty in major corruption cases.
