China began the trial of prominent dissident and former student leader Wang Dan on Wednesday on the capital charge of plotting to overthrow the government, a court official said.
"The trial started at 9.00 a.m. (0100 GMT)," said an official of the Beijing People's Intermediate Court reached by telephone. He declined to give further details.
Security was tight around the court building in western Beijing, with dozens of police preventing the public from approaching the building and manning roadblocks to prevent access.
The father of the former student leader protested his son's innocence just hours before the start of the proceedings and said the family would not give in to the authorities.
"He is definitely innocent," Wang Xianzeng told reporters as he left his home with the dissident's mother, Wang Lingyun, to go to the court. "It just depends on whether the government wants to convict him or not."
Wang's mother, a 61-year old museum researcher who has no background in law, would attend the trial as one of two defence lawyers. His father and a sister would be allowed to sit in.
"I'm not optimistic about the results," Wang Xianzeng said. "We will definitely appeal... We will not give in.
"Speech can't overthrow the government," he said.
The court indictment against Wang, 27, includes the charge that his writings in foreign publications were evidence of his plot to try to overthrow the government.
He is also accused of accepting foreign funds, of colluding with subversives living overseas and of conspiring with domestic plotters to organise the overthrow of the government.
Wang Lingyun said on Tuesday she expected Wang to receive a harsh sentence although he would plead not guilty.
The former student leader faces a minimum 10-year sentence and a maximum penalty of death.
The mother has said the dissident was calm and mentally prepared for a harsh sentence, although she has said his health had deteriorated since he vanished into detention in May 1995.
She said court officials told her the verdict could be delivered as early as Wednesday or in two days. Family members had been under surveillance for several weeks, she added.
The New York-based Human Rights Watch said last week the chances of acquittal were slim because Wang has not had adequate time to prepare a defence.
Human Rights Watch attacked the trial on Tuesday as a sign of the Chinese leadership's increasing intolerance of dissent.
"The fact is that China's urban dissident movement...has in effect been comprehensively smashed," it said in a statement.
Wang's court appearance was expected to resemble the in-camera proceedings last December against Wei Jingsheng, regarded as the father of China's tiny, struggling democracy movement.
Wang has already served four years in prison for counter-revolutionary crimes, or subversion, for his role in pro-democracy demonstrations in Beijing's Tiananmen Square that were crushed by the army in June 1989 with heavy loss of life.
He was politically active again after his parole in 1993, defying police surveillance to join a daring appeal to communist leaders for the release of those still jailed for their part in the 1989 protests.
China has recently cracked down on the few remaining dissidents who have not fled into exile or been jailed.
