The father of Chinese dissident Wang Dan protested his son's innocence on Wednesday, just hours before the start of the former student leader's trial, and said the family would not give in to the authorities.
"He is definitely innocent," Wang Xianzeng told reporters as he left his home to go to the court.
The trial of Wang Dan, 27, on the capital charge of plotting to overthrow the government was due to begin on Wednesday morning at the Beijing People's Intermediate Court.
The public was effectively barred from the court, which was surrounded by police who had set up roadblocks across all major roads leading to the building.
"It just depends on whether the government wants to convict him or not," Wang Xianzeng told reporters.
"I'm not optimistic about the results... We will definitely appeal... We will not give in," he said.
"Speech can't overthrow the government," he said.
The court charges against Wang say that his writings in foreign publications are part of evidence to back up the charge that he had tried to overthrow the government.
His mother, Wang Lingyun, said on Tuesday she expected Wang to receive a harsh sentence although he would plead not guilty to the capital charge.
She said court officials told her the verdict could be delivered as early as Wednesday or in two days. Family members had been under surveillance for several weeks, she added.
The former student leader, who vanished into detention in May 1995, faces a minimum 10-year sentence and a maximum penalty of death.
The New York-based Human Rights Watch said last week the chances of acquittal were slim because Wang has not had adequate time to prepare a defence.
His family found a lawyer willing to defend the dissident after being given just one day in which to do so.
Wang's mother, a 61-year old museum researcher who has no background in law, would attend the trial as one of two defence lawyers. His father and a sister would be allowed to sit in.
The mother has said the dissident was calm and mentally prepared for a harsh sentence, although she has said his health had deteriorated since he was detained in May 1995.
Human Rights Watch attacked the trial on Tuesday as a sign of the Chinese leadership's increasing intolerance of dissent.
"The fact is that China's urban dissident movement...has in effect been comprehensively smashed," it said in a statement.
"At least where political dissidents are concerned, all the judicial signs thus far point...to intensified repression by the country's state security forces," it said, calling for a freeze on trade missions from the United States, Europe, Japan and Australia.
Wang's court appearance was expected to resemble the in-camera proceedings last December against Wei Jingsheng, regarded as the father of China's tiny, struggling democracy movement.
Wang has already served four years in prison for counter-revolutionary crimes, or subversion, for his role in pro-democracy demonstrations in Beijing's Tiananmen Square that were crushed by the army in June 1989 with heavy loss of life.
He was politically active again after his parole in 1993, defying police surveillance to join a daring appeal to communist leaders for the release of those still jailed for their part in the 1989 protests.
China has recently cracked down on the few remaining dissidents who have not fled into exile or been jailed.
