China called on Taiwan on Tuesday to show goodwill by lifting a decades-old ban on direct trade and transport links, saying attempts by the island nation to block such links would be futile.
"Obstructing the three links between the two sides...will be futile...is against the will of the people on both sides," a commentary by the Xinhua news agency said of Taiwan's ban on direct trade, transport and mail links with China.
"(We) hope the Taiwan authorities can make a pragmatic, goodwill response," said the commentary carried by major newspapers on Tuesday.
Last week, China introduced a series of regulations to pave the way for direct shipping links.
Taiwan has banned direct trade, transport and mail links with China since Mao Zedong's communist army defeated and drove Chiang Kai-shek's Nationalist troops to the island at the end of a civil war in 1949.
Indirect links between the two sides have been allowed since the late 1980s through Hong Kong or a third country.
The commentary accused the Taiwan authorities of creating obstacles to direct trade and transport links in recent years, saying this would not be conducive to prospects for peaceful reunification. The commentary did not explain how it would not be conducive.
China regards Taiwan as a renegade province and has threatened to invade if the island declared independence. It has also sought to push Taipei into diplomatic isolation.
Many Taiwanese businessmen, who have poured more than $20 billion into China, clamour for direct trade and transport links, but Taiwan has been reluctant to lift the ban, which it views as its last bargaining chip in talks with the communists.
Taiwan says it is committed to reunification but stresses this cannot be achieved overnight.
Last week China heaped pressure on Taiwan by offering to hold political talks to end almost five decades of hostility.
Nearly 80 prominent Taiwanese business leaders and politicians were scheduled to arrive in Beijing on Tuesday for a a high-profile, 12-day visit, despite reservations voiced by the island's leaders about depending too heavily on China.
The visit has aroused attention because the delegation is led by Kao Ching-yuan, a senior member of Taiwan's ruling Nationalist Party and vice-chairman of President Enterprises, the island's biggest investor in China.
Taiwanese newspapers said Kao would meet Chinese President Jiang Zemin and other senior officials.
The trip comes less than two weeks after Taiwan's President Lee Teng-hui called for a review of economic policy toward China with the aim of avoiding over dependence on the mainland.
The China Times Express newspaper in Taipei said on Sunday that Taiwan's economic planners had drawn up measures -- including contingency plans to restrict Taiwanese investment on the mainland -- if Taiwan-China relations deteriorate.
The Taiwanese delegation would be the largest to visit China since easing tensions across the Taiwan Strait began to fray in mid-1995 over a landmark, private visit by Taiwan's President Lee to the United States.
In apparent retaliation, China denounced Lee and held intimidatory war games off Taiwan before the island's historic presidential elections in March in which Lee was re-elected.
