Chinese dissident Wang Dan has appealed against his 11-year jail sentence for plotting to subvert the government, but his mother said on Tuesday she held little hope of an acquittal or a lighter sentence.
Wang Lingyun said she hoped U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher and German President Roman Herzog would raise her son's predicament in their meetings with Chinese leaders when they visit China later this month.
"Wang Dan... should be acquitted because... he's innocent," she told Reuters by telephone. "We hope for an acquittal or a reduced sentence... but it is unlikely."
Wang Lingyun, who acted as one of two defence lawyers in her son's case, said court officials had asked her to submit a written defence for the appeal and that family members may not be allowed to attend the appeals court trial.
Experts on China's legal system have said the chances of the appeals court overturning the lower court's verdict were slim.
An official of the Beijing Higher People's Court said the 27-year-old dissident had filed his appeal. She declined to provide further details.
The Beijing Number One Intermediate People's Court took less than four hours last Wednesday to convict and sentence Wang, who had already served four years in prison for his role as a leader of the 1989 student demonstrations for democracy that were crushed by the military with heavy loss of life.
On Monday, visiting Swedish Prime Minister Goran Persson said he had expressed his disapproval to Chinese Premier Li Peng over the jailing of Wang.
A foreign ministry spokesman defended China at a news briefing on Tuesday, saying Beijing would not impose its laws on others and that foreign countries should take a similar stance.
The spokesman also said China opposed using human rights as a pretext to interfere in the internal affairs of any country.
An international human rights group denounced what it said was the "secret trial" of Wang on a trumped-up charge.
"What (the court) brought to bear on Wang Dan was a secret trial in which the facts were deliberately hidden and the truth distorted," the New York-based Human Rights in China said in a statement made available to Reuters by facsimile.
"A fabricated charge was used to wantonly convict Wang Dan," the group said. "Wang Dan's case... is suppression and persecution of thought and speech by the Chinese government."
When told during the trial of his right to seek the removal of any biased judges, Wang demanded all judges and prosecutors be removed from the case. The tribunal rejected his request after a few minutes of deliberation, the group said.
China said it was an open and fair trial but Human Rights in China said no foreign reporters, diplomats or other international observers were allowed to attend.
The group said more than 10 people wearing tags identifying themselves as reporters attended the trial but there was no mention of the conviction in the local Chinese-language media.
The jailing of Wang was the latest in a series of crushing blows to China's struggling pro-democracy movement. Most dissidents have already been forced into exile or are serving long sentences in prison or labour camps.
Human Rights in China accused the official Xinhua news agency of preparing English-language stories about the results of the trial and an interview with the chief judge even before the verdict was delivered.
Asked to comment, an official of the foreign affairs office of Xinhua said: "It is not necessary to find out whether the story was prepared before or after the sentencing... News agencies have different ways and practices of releasing news."
After breaking the news of Wang's conviction, it took Xinhua only 1-1/2 hours to put out a 54-paragraph story on the interview with the chief judge.
