Leading Chinese dissident Chen Ziming has been placed under tight police surveillance after his release on medical parole and needs permission to consult a doctor, a relative said on Thursday.
"Some conditions (after his parole) are not as good as when (he) was in prison," the dissident's sister, Chen Zihua, said after meeting him earlier on Thursday at his home.
"When he was in prison he could still go downstairs for some air," she said in a telephone interview. "(Now) he can't even go downstairs to get some sun... He cannot go out."
Chen Ziming has been under tight police surveillance since he was released on medical parole and returned to his eighth-floor Beijing home late on Wednesday.
Asked about Chen's plans, the sister said he did not talk about anything besides his wish to get medical treatment.
The dissident needs police permission to see a doctor, the sister said. He has heart, liver and digestion problems. He had been treated for cancer.
He is barred from talking to foreign reporters. Uniformed and plainclothes police on Thursday prevented reporters from approaching Chen's home and that of his parents.
Asked if the dissident was under house arrest, Chen's sister said: "(I'm) afraid it's a little graver than that. It's just moving the prison from one place to another."
But his release was a welcome surprise to the family.
"We felt surprised to a certain degree. Of course, (we) are happy (he) could be released," the sister said. "His medical parole...was a little unexpected."
Chen, 44, was sentenced to 13 years in prison in 1991 for engaging in "counter-revolutionary", or subversive, activities during a student-led campaign for democracy that was centred on Beijing's Tiananmen Square in 1989.
Chen had been singled out by Beijing authorities as the "black hand" behind-the-scenes organiser of the demonstrations, which were crushed by the army with heavy loss of life.
He won medical parole in 1994 in a move widely seen as part of a successful bid by Beijing to persuade Washington not to revoke China's Most Favoured Nation trade status on grounds of persistent human rights violations.
Chen was returned to prison on June 25, 1995, after joining calls for Beijing to release political prisoners and reverse its verdict that the Tiananmen Square protests were seditious.
His release on Wednesday came seven days after a Beijing court took less than four hours to convict former student leader Wang Dan and sentence him to 11 years in prison for plotting to subvert the government.
Wang's imprisonment was the latest in a series of crushing blows to China's embattled dissidents, most of whom were already either in exile or serving long terms in administrative detention or prison.
Asked if Chen's release was a gift to U.S. President Bill Clinton on his re-election, the sister said: "It gives (Clinton) face."
Human rights have long been a major irritant in Sino-U.S. ties already strained by disputes over trade, copyright piracy, arms proliferation and Taiwan.
U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher is scheduled to travel to Beijing this month for a visit widely seen as a vital step toward rebuilding the cross-Pacific relationship.
