China announced on Saturday a massive restructuring of one of its biggest conglomerates after reportedly meting out a suspended death sentence to the son of the former company chairman, one of the country's ruling elite.
State media announced the restructuring of Capital Iron, or Shougang, on Saturday but made no mention of the suspended death sentence handed down to Zhou Beifang, the former head of two of the steel giant's Hong Kong-listed affiliates.
A Beijing court gave Zhou the suspended death sentence for corruption as part of China's highly-publicised anti-graft campaign launched last year, a Chinese source said on Saturday.
The sentence was the heaviest handed down in recent years to one of China's so-called "princelings", the popular sobriquet applied to the children of the ruling party elite, who enjoy wide influence.
Shougang, one of China's biggest conglomerates, was thrust into the limelight after Zhou's detention in February 1995.
The arrest of a man symbolising Beijing's efforts to wield capitalist influence while retaining a socialist veneer underlined the vulnerability of that system to nepotism and abuse.
Zhou Beifang's father, Zhou Guanwu, 78, resigned as chairman and Communist Party secretary of Shougang in February 1995, citing old age following his son's detention.
The Zhous have close ties to the family of paramount leader Deng Xiaoping.
Last month, prosecutors filed charges of corruption against 30 people, including Zhou Beifang and two former officials of the Beijing city government. No other details of the case were available.
Chinese courts frequently impose the death penalty in major corruption cases. Suspended death sentences are often commuted to life imprisonment after two years.
Court officials could not be reached for comment on the sentencing.
The China Daily said the restructuring of Shougang draws a clear line between the property rights, responsibility and management of the parent company and subsidiary.
In the past, a large percentage of the parent company's profits went to branch companies, many of which are running in the red, the newspaper said.
Shougang's parent company would gradually cut off financial subsidies to subsidiaries which would be forced to sink or swim in the market economy as part of the restructuring programme.
"We will provide financial support for our subsidiaries for a few years, helping them in investment, finance and discharge of their debts based on an appraisal of their fixed assets," Bi Qun, Communist Party secretary of Shougang, told the newspaper.
"Once that is done the subsidiary companies will develop strategies to stop losing money and begin to make profits," Bi was quoted as saying.
The number of employees of the parent company would be gradually slashed to 58,000, or one-fourth of the group's total, the Xinhua news agency said. It gave no timetable.
The group's 27 subsidiaries would employ 176,000 people.
The group registered 1.653 billion yuan ($199 million) in pre-tax profits in the first 10 months of 1996, Xinhua said. It gave no comparative figures.
Corruption was virtually eliminated in the years after the communists came to power in 1949, but has staged a comeback along with economic reforms in the past 17 years.
Communist Party chief and state president Jiang Zemin has declared war on corruption, warning that the scourge was a virus that threatened the party.
