Two Chinese magazines are struggling for survival after being targeted in a crusade by China's propaganda tsars to cleanse the media of liberal influences, Chinese sources said.
"Focus" magazine in the southern boomtown of Shenzhen has suspended publication for two issues after a Hong Kong newspaper reported the magazine defied propaganda tsars and ran a cover story on the anniversary of the chaotic 1966-76 Cultural Revolution, the sources said.
The Propaganda Department of the Communist Party had frowned on any commemoration of the decade of turmoil unleashed by revolutionary leader Mao Zedong to purge political rivals and infuse the nation with renewed ideological vigour.
A writer for the magazine said the suspension was due to a Hong Kong newspaper report of the article's publication.
"Had it not been for the foreign report, the magazine would not have suffered this kind of setback," said the writers, peaking anonymously "This was a kind of punishment...by the party."
In a telephone interview, Li Mei, publisher of Focus, disputed this assessment, saying the suspension was linked to unrelated financial trouble.
Other Chinese sources said the problems at "Focus" stemmed from the Communist Party's clampdown on publications and authors who dare to break away from a stultifying diet of state-approved fare.
"If a publication takes a detour (from the party line), it will be suspended for restructuring. There will be no exceptions," one source quoted propaganda tsars as saying.
Propaganda tsars are also debating the fate of the Beijing-based magazine "Orient" for publishing a series of book reviews on the "Collected Works of Gu Zhun", sources said.
The Propaganda Department of the ruling Communist Party had ordered a gag on all debate on the thoughts of Gu, an independent thinker who angered Beijing before his death during the Cultural Revolution.
Gu openly opposed totalitarianism and supported the rule of law and civil rights.
The fifth edition of the magazine was published in September under the watchful eyes of censors, the sources said.
"We will still be able to publish the sixth edition. After that we don't know," a magazine editor, who asked not to be named, said in an interview.
"They did not say what exactly the problem was with the magazine," said the editor who suggested that politics could be the cause.
The axe has fallen on other publications, authors and filmmakers.
In August, the Press and Publications Administration suspended publication of the Economic Work Monthly, based in the southwestern province of Guizhou.
The suspension followed the magazine's publication of an article critical of a privately circulated tract known as the "10,000-word essay" that urges a return to class struggle and warns of the erosion of the state sector by private enterprise.
In September, Cui Enqing was sacked as president of the Beijing Youth Daily after the Chinese capital's most outspoken newspaper reported a poisoning case that caused a plunge in sales of a state-owned beverage manufacturer.
Propaganda tsars also have banned all of the novels and two films of controversial writer Wang Shuo.
The campaign to enforce ideological orthodoxy has left Chinese filmmakers at a loss as to what kind of movies would receive the blessings of propaganda tsars. The number of movies made this year has fallen sharply compared with previous years.
