China's former first lady Wang Guangmei auctioned her private antique collection on Tuesday and said she would use proceeds to help impoverished mothers.
Wang's collection, consisting of porcelain bowls and plates and a brush holder made of ivory dating back to the Qing (1644-1911) and Song (960-1279) dynasties, fetched 566,000 yuan ($68,000) at an auction at a Beijing hotel.
"My mother gave them to me ... They are priceless to me," Wang told Reuters.
She is the widow of former president Liu Shaoqi who died in prison during the chaotic 1966-76 Cultural Revolution.
The Sungari auction house had put the value of the antiques, some of which were Wang's dowry from her wealthy capitalist father, at up to 510,000 yuan ($61,000).
The collection was seized from Wang and eluded destruction by radical Red Guards during the Cultural Revolution. The authorities returned some of her collection when she was released from prison 11 years later.
"They were at Zhongnanhai or they would have all been smashed during the Cultural Revolution," Wang said. The Zhongnanhai compound in central Beijing still serves as home and office to many of China's leaders.
Liu, China's former president, was deposed during the Cultural Revolution and died in prison in 1969. He was rehabilitated posthumously in 1980.
Wang said she had deep emotional ties to the collection but these were outweighed by concerns for those living in poverty.
"I would be reluctant to part with what my mother left me without a reason ... (but) my heart aches even more when I see impoverished mothers," the former first lady said.
"It shouldn't be like this. The country led by our Communist Party cannot let families be this destitute," she said.
China has about 65 million people still struggling to get by with incomes under the official absolute poverty line of 530 yuan ($64) a year, officials say.
In September, Communist Party chief Jiang Zemin vowed to "gnaw the hard bone" of poverty by pouring funds into the drive to raise living standards for the poorest segment of the nation by the turn of the century.
The communists, who swept to power in 1949 on public resentment against widespread poverty and corruption, fear the widening gap between rich and poor today could spark social unrest and undermine its grip on power.
China says it reduced the number of people living in abject poverty by five million in 1995.
About 3,500 destitute mothers in western and southwestern China were expected to benefit from Tuesday's auction.
Proceeds would go to an anti-poverty fund headed by the former first lady to lend money to impoverished mothers to help them get started in farming, raise livestock or make handicrafts to earn a living in future, Wang said.
The fund would also provide education and give medical treatment to destitute mothers, she said.
