Taiwanese business leader Kao Ching-yuan on Wednesday urged Beijing to resume talks with Taiwan, saying the island's investors would lose confidence in China if political friction impeded relations.
"If the relations between the two sides are kept at a low ebb due to political and ideological problems... Taiwanese businessmen will lose confidence because of higher risks," said Kao, vice-chairman of President Enterprises, Taiwan's biggest investor in China.
Chinese Vice-Premier Li Lanqing earlier told the same seminar in Beijing no one could stand in the way of direct trade and transport links between China and Taiwan which have been banned by the island since 1949.
Kao is heading a delegation of nearly 80 prominent Taiwanese business leaders and politicians who arrived in Beijing on Tuesday for a high-profile visit. Taiwanese economic officials are visiting in a private capacity.
Kao called for the resumption of talks suspended last year after Taiwan's President Lee Teng-hui made a landmark trip to the United States. Beijing regards Taiwan as a rebel province and has sought to push the island into diplomatic isolation.
"I would like to suggest here... that the two sides resume as soon as possible talks on trade and investment," Kao said.
Taiwanese newspapers said Kao would meet Chinese President Jiang Zemin and other senior officials during the current trip, which comes less than two weeks after President Lee called for a review of economic policy toward China with the aim of avoiding overdependence on the mainland.
Taipei's China Times Express newspaper said on Sunday that Taiwan's economic planners had drawn up measures -- including contingency plans to restrict Taiwanese investment on the mainland -- if Taiwan-China relations deteriorated.
Li, the Chinese vice-premier, took a swipe at President Lee, saying no one could block direct trade and transport links between China and Taiwan, rivals from the time of the Chinese civil war that ended in 1949.
"Economic development between the two sides is the general trend and no single person can obstruct this," Li said.
"Any person who tries to place artificial barriers to restrict economic cooperation is going against the will of the people of the two sides," he said.
He also told the seminar he hoped Taiwan authorities would allow direct links as soon as possible.
Indirect links between the two sides have been allowed since the late 1980s, through Hong Kong or a third country.
Many Taiwanese businessmen, who have poured more than $20 billion into China, are eager for direct trade and transport links. But Taiwan has been reluctant to lift the ban, which it views as its last bargaining chip in talks with the communists.
China has been pressing Taiwan to open direct links. Last week, China introduced a series of regulations to pave the way for direct shipping links.
The Taiwanese delegation is the largest to visit China since a trend of easing tensions was reversed by Taiwan President Lee's mid-1995 visit to the United States.
