China announced on Thursday that a court had rejected the appeal by a son of one of the country's politically powerful families, upholding a suspended death sentence for bribery.
The court showed leniency to Zhou Beifang, 43, former chairman of Hong Kong-listed affiliates of the giant state-owned Capital Iron and Steel Corp (Shougang), because he showed remorse, the official Xinhua news agency said.
Zhou's death sentence was suspended for two years. Such suspensions usually mean the sentence will not be carried out if the prisoner repents and cooperates with authorities.
Zhou is one of China's so-called "princelings", or children of the ruling party elite, who enjoy wide influence due to their top level connections.
The Zhou family has close ties to the family of paramount leader Deng Xiaoping.
The court also showed leniency because Zhou voluntarily returned ill-gotten wealth even before prosecutors obtained evidence against him, Xinhua said.
Zhou was convicted of accepting bribes totalling 9.28 million Hong Kong dollars ($1.2 million) between June 1993 and April 1994, Xinhua said. It gave no details of who paid Zhou the bribes or why.
He was also found guilty of paying 1.2 million yuan ($144,600) in bribes to three people, including two former officials of the Beijing city government, so that his wife and daughter could move to the British colony, it said.
Xinhua quoted the Supreme Court as announcing the decision though it was the appeals court that handed down the verdict.
The agency gave no explanation. It did not say when Zhou was convicted, when he appealed or why his appeal was turned down.
Court officials reached by telephone declined comment.
State television showed a grim Zhou wearing a stylish, striped blue shirt and examining documents held by a court policeman as a court tribunal looked on.
Zhou's conviction was part of a highly-publicised anti-graft campaign launched by China last year. It led to the suicide of a Beijing vice-mayor in April 1995 and the fall of his mentor, former Beijing Communist Party boss Chen Xitong.
Zhou's father, Zhou Guanwu, 78, resigned as chairman and Communist Party secretary of Shougang in February 1995, citing old age. He stepped down days after his son's detention.
The court also rejected the appeal of co-defendant Chen Jian, 39, former deputy director of the General Office of the Communist Party's Beijing Municipal Committee. It upheld his 15-year prison sentence for accepting bribes from Zhou, Xinhua said.
Another former official of the Beijing city government, Li Min, did not appeal against his sentence of life imprisonment, also for accepting bribes from Zhou, the agency said.
In a related case, the court rejected the appeal of businessman He Shiping, who was sentenced to 16 years for accepting bribes. A fifth defendant, who was given five years in prison, did not appeal, it said.
Television showed lengthy footage that include Li staring at the floor and a dejected He Shiping wiping tears from his eyes.
Corruption was virtually eliminated in the years after the communists came to power in 1949. But it has staged a comeback since economic reforms were introduced 17 years ago as living standards climb but at the cost of eroding party discipline.
