A Chinese court on Friday will consider the appeal of dissident Wang Dan against his 11-year sentence for plotting to overthrow the government, a hearing held days before a visit by U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher.
The Beijing Higher People's Court was widely expected to reject the 27-year-old dissident's appeal and uphold his conviction, Chinese lawyers said. In China, appellate courts rarely overturn rulings by lower courts.
Asked what the chances were of an acquittal, Wang's mother, Wang Lingyun, told Reuters on Thursday: "I feel there's practically none. There is no precedent."
Wang's appeal comes four days before the scheduled arrival of the U.S. secretary of state, who diplomats say was expected to raise human rights issues in his meetings with Chinese leaders during his November 19-21 visit.
Sino-U.S. relations have been strained over the last year by a range of issues from human rights to Taiwan to arms proliferation and trade.
Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Cui Tiankai told a briefing on Thursday that Wang's trial had no bearing on Sino-U.S. relations because it involved a Chinese citizen and not an American.
Beijing has slammed Western criticism of its human rights record as interference in its internal affairs.
Christopher would not be not alone in bringing up Beijing's shortcomings in human rights.
Former British prime minister Margaret Thatcher said on Thursday that harsh sentences slapped on Wang and Wei Jingsheng, widely known as the father of China's modern democracy movement, had caused dismay in the international community.
"The recent harsh sentences imposed on Mr Wei and Mr Wang have caused dismay in the wider world," Thatcher told a business conference in Beijing.
Last week, Swedish Prime Minister Goran Persson said he had expressed his misgivings over the jailing of Wang to his Chinese counterpart, Li Peng.
Wang's mother said court officials had told her that she would be able to attend her son's hearing as one of two defence lawyers, but she would not be allowed to speak. She has submitted a written defence.
The dissident's father and older sister would also be allowed to sit in on the hearing at the appellate court in Beijing, the mother said.
"If we don't go, Wang Dan would feel even more isolated. Our going is spiritual encouragement for him," the mother said.
The dissident's lawyer is unlikely to attend because only Wang would be allowed to speak.
The jailing of Wang was the latest in a series of crushing blows to China's struggling pro-democracy movement. Most dissidents have already been forced into exile or are serving long sentences in prison or labour camps.
The lower court took less than four hours to convict and sentence Wang on October 30.
Wang had already served four years in prison for his role as a leader of student demonstrations for democracy that were crushed by the military with heavy loss of life in 1989.
The New York-based Human Rights in China has denounced what it said was the "secret trial" of Wang on a trumped up charge.
China said it was an open and fair trial but Human Rights in China said no foreign reporters, diplomats or other international observers were allowed to attend.
There has been no mention of Wang's conviction in the local Chinese-language media.
