China's Supreme Court announced on Thursday that a court has rejected the appeal of a son of one of the country's political elite, upholding a suspended death sentence for bribery.
The appellate court showed leniency because Zhou Beifang, 43, former chairman of Hong Kong-listed affiliates of the giant state-owned Capital Iron and Steel Corp (Shougang), showed remorse, the Xinhua news agency said, quoting the Supreme Court.
Chinese courts frequently impose the death penalty in corruption cases but as Zhou's death sentence was suspended for two years it could be commuted to life imprisonment by the time it was due to be carried out, as is often the case in China.
Zhou is one of China's so-called "princelings", the popular sobriquet applied to the children of the ruling party elite, who enjoy wide influence.
The Zhou family has close ties to the family of paramount leader Deng Xiaoping.
The appellate court also showed leniency because Zhou voluntarily returned ill-gotten wealth during the investigation even before prosecutors obtained evidence against him, Xinhua said.
Zhou was convicted of accepting bribes totalling 9.28 million Hong Kong dollars ($1.2 million) between June 1993 and April 1994, Xinhua said. It gave no details of who paid Zhou the bribes or why.
He was also found guilty of paying 1.2 million yuan ($144,600) in bribes to three people, including two former officials of the Beijing city government, so that his wife and daughter could move to the British colony, it said.
Xinhua did not say when Zhou appealed, when he was first convicted or why the Beijing Higher People's Court rejected his appeal.
Court officials reached by telephone declined to comment.
Zhou's conviction was part of a highly-publicised anti-graft campaign launched by China last year.
The drive led to the suicide of a Beijing vice-mayor in April 1995 and the fall of his mentor, former Beijing Communist Party boss Chen Xitong.
Zhou's father, Zhou Guanwu, 78, resigned as chairman and Communist Party secretary of Shougang in February 1995, citing old age following Zhou Beifang's detention.
Shougang has been restructured since Zhou Guanwu's downfall.
The appellate court also rejected the appeal of co-defendant Chen Jian, 39, a former senior official of the Beijing city government, and upheld his 15-year prison sentence for accepting bribes from Zhou, Xinhua said.
Another former official of the Beijing city government, Li Min, did not appeal against his sentence of life imprisonment also for accepting bribes from Zhou, the agency said.
The appeal of a fourth defendant who was sentenced to 16 years was rejected while a fifth defendant who was given five years in prison did not appeal, it said.
Corruption was virtually eliminated in the years after the communists came to power in 1949, but has staged a comeback along with economic reforms in the past 17 years.
