A Chinese court on Friday took 10 minutes to reject the appeal of dissident Wang Dan and uphold an 11-year prison sentence for subversion, his mother said.
The verdict came four days before the scheduled arrival of U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher, who diplomats say was expected to raise human rights issues in his meetings with Chinese leaders during his visit.
Angry family members staged a one-hour sit-down protest in front of the Beijing Higher People's Court after the court rejected Wang's appeal against his conviction, she said.
"It (the verdict) was all prepared in advance," Wang Lingyun told Reuters in a telephone interview.
"I'm very angry. It was very unfair," she said. "The (appeals) court just copied the verdict of the first trial."
The 27-year-old dissident was not allowed to speak at his appeal hearing as a judge read from a brief, prepared statement, the mother said.
Wang was convicted of plotting to subvert the government by publishing articles in foreign publications and receiving funds from hostile overseas organisations.
The mother said she would petition the appeals court but that it would be a formality and would not involve the court holding another trial.
Court officials, reached by telephone, declined comment. The tightly-controlled state media made no mention of Wang's conviction.
Police earlier kept reporters away from the court building, the family's home and nearby subway stations.
The dissident, wearing a red sweater and grey suit, appeared in low spirits and poor health, the mother said.
"(But) he was psychologically prepared. It came as no surprise. He does not have any illusions about them (the authorities)," she said.
The former student leader had already served four years in prison for his role in student demonstrations for democracy that were crushed by the army in 1989.
The U.S. secretary of state, scheduled to arrive on Tuesday, was likely to bring up human rights when he meets Chinese leaders.
Sino-U.S. relations have been strained over the last year by issues ranging from human rights to Taiwan to arms proliferation and trade.
Beijing has slammed Western criticism of its human rights record as interference in its internal affairs.
Former British prime minister Margaret Thatcher said in Beijing on Thursday that the world was dismayed by harsh sentences slapped on Wang and fellow dissident Wei Jingsheng, the father of China's modern democracy movement.
The jailing of Wang was the latest in a series of crushing blows to China's struggling democracy movement. Most dissidents have already been forced into exile or are serving long sentences in prison or labour camps.
China has said Wang's trial last month by a lower court was open and fair but the New York-based Human Rights in China said no foreign reporters, diplomats or other international observers were allowed to attend.
Human Rights in China has denounced the trial as a "secret trial" on a trumped up charge. The lower court took less than four hours to convict and sentence Wang on October 30.
