American movies, hamburgers, jeans -- and U.S. bashing -- are all the rage in China today.
China and the United States have gone from confrontation in the 1950s and 1960s to odd bedfellows in the 1970s and 1980s to a love-hate relationship in the 1990s.
"More and more ordinary Chinese people are disgusted with the deeds of the United States," said Tang Zhenyu, one of five authors of "China Can Say No", a controversial bestseller which is capitalising on anti-U.S. sentiment.
For Tang, the fondness he once had for the United States ended in March when Washington sent aircraft carrier battle groups to waters near Taiwan where China was conducting war games and missile tests to cow the island into abandoning any dreams of independence.
"I believe this was the turning point for most ordinary Chinese people," Tang said in a recent interview.
Washington sent the warships in a show of force to support Taipei, Beijing's rival since the end of the Chinese civil war in 1949, as Taiwan held historic direct presidential elections.
For some Chinese, their American dream turned into a nightmare when Beijing lost its bid to host the 2000 Olympics in 1993. Many blamed Uncle Sam.
Anti-U.S. sentiment mounted after Chinese state media played up what was described as unfair and discriminatory treatment meted out to Chinese Olympians at the Atlanta Games.
"In the past, the United States had the wrong impression that the Chinese government was anti-U.S. while the people were pro-U.S.," said Wang Jisi, director of the Institute of American Studies of the prestigious Chinese Academy of Social Sciences.
"China Can Say No" touched a sympathetic chord with many Chinese fed up with the United States.
It has chapters entitled "Burn Hollywood" and "If necessary, create another Saddam" in a reference to Iraqi leader, Saddam Hussein.
"China Can Say No" sold so well that its authors have put out a sequel. It has given rise to a flurry of anti-U.S. books, including "Why Does China Say No?"
Beijing and Washington have also wrangled over human rights, arms proliferation and trade. The two giants narrowly avoided a bruising trade war in 1995 and again this year over U.S. charges that China condoned copyright piracy.
Many Chinese welcomed the re-election of U.S. President Bill Clinton this month as the return of a devil they knew and are hoping for a new post-election approach from Washington.
"Now, a good opportunity has presented itself for improving and expanding Sino-U.S. relations," Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Cui Tiankai said of Clinton's re-election.
U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher is scheduled to visit China next week to help push that process along. China last week blasted U.S. penalties against textiles ahead of Christopher's visit, but said the two sides had more in common than differences.
The Sino-U.S. honeymoon began in the 1970s when China's bamboo curtain came down and the country opened up to the West, triggering an influx of U.S. pop culture.
McDonald's is now a household word to many Chinese children and China's youth have traded yesterday's navy blue Mao suits for today's jeans.
U.S. blockbusters, such as "True Lies" starring Arnold Schwarzenegger and Tom Hanks' "Forrest Gump", have taken China by storm, raking in millions.
Beijing's honeymoon with Washington ended with the collapse of the Soviet Union and the Chinese military crackdown on a student-led drive for democracy in June 1989.
Sino-U.S. ties were dealt another jarring blow after the United States allowed a private visit by Taiwan's President Lee Teng-hui in June 1995. Beijing regards Taiwan as a rebel province and has sought to push the island into isolation.
Sino-U.S. ties have improved since the March war games but China still suspects Washington is trying to contain it.
"The United States does not wish for the rise of a strong country which does not listen to it and does not do things according to its rules," said Wang of the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences.
