A Tibetan nun has had her jail term doubled to 18 years for refusing to recognise Beijing's choice as the reincarnation of the region's second holiest monk, the Tibet Information Network (TIN) said on Monday.
The sentence of 19-year-old Ngawang Sangdrol, jailed since she was 15, was doubled in July, partly because she refused to accept Beijing's choice as the Panchen Lama, according to the London-based TIN, which monitors human rights in the Himalayan region.
"Ngawang...is now facing (more time) in jail than any other female political prisoner in Tibet," TIN said. She is due for release in the year 2010.
Officials reached by telephone in the Tibetan capital of Lhasa denied knowledge of the report.
The 10th Panchen Lama died in 1989, and Beijing has anointed a six-year-old boy as his reincarnation.
The Dalai Lama, Tibet's exiled spiritual leader, has named another six-year-old boy as the 11th Panchen Lama, and many Tibetans see the Beijing-backed child as a pretender.
Beijing's choice is in the Chinese capital under state protection against any possible assassination attempts by radical Tibetans, Chinese sources have said.
China denies there are political prisoners in Tibet and says foreign critics of its human rights record are interfering in its internal affairs.
Ngawang is already serving nine years -- three years for taking part in a pro-independence demonstration in 1992 and six years for singing nationalist songs in prison in 1993, according to TIN.
Her sentence was doubled in part because she refused to tidy her cell in Lhasa's Drapchi prison in March in apparent protest against a political re-education campaign, TIN said.
The campaign is designed to force prisoners to accept Beijing's choice as the reincarnated Panchen Lama.
Ngawang also refused to stand up in the presence of a Tibetan official, Brigade Commander Khandrol Jangpe, TIN said.
The human rights group, which had reported in August that Ngawang was on a restricted diet and confined in a cell with no windows, said it had only recently received confirmation of the longer jail term through a former prisoner who fled Tibet.
China has vowed to curb the influence of Buddhism and the Dalai Lama in Tibet, saying socialism must take precedence over religion.
The Dalai Lama, the most revered figure in Tibetan Buddhism, fled into exile in India in 1959 after an abortive uprising against communist rule. He won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1989 for his non-violent campaign for autonomy for his homeland.
State media have complained that monks and nuns outnumber high school students and that too much money was spent on the region's monasteries.
