Chinese activists, in a statement on Tuesday hours ahead of a visit by the U.S. Secretary of State, protested against American backing for Japan's bid to become a permanent member of the U.N. Security Council.
"We hold that Japan is not qualified to become a permanent member of the Security Council of the United Nations," the activists said in a letter to U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher, who is due to arrive in Beijing later on Tuesday for a three-day visit.
The letter, signed by 15 activists, said they opposed Japan becoming a permanent member of the Security Council because many Japanese politicians had been reluctant to apologise for its war atrocities and had tried to whitewash history.
China says more than 35 million people were killed or wounded during Japan's invasion and occupation of most of China from the early 1930s to 1945.
"(We) strongly protest the U.S. government supporting Japan's (bid) to become a permanent member of the U.N. Security Council to draw Japan over to its side," said the letter, a copy of which was made available to Reuters.
Tong Zeng, a leader of the group, said he would forward the letter to Christopher through the U.S. embassy in Beijing.
The Chinese government, eager for more low-interest loans from Japan, has been reluctant to antagonise Tokyo and has not taken a public stance on the issue.
The United States has long supported giving Japan and Germany permanent seats on the Security Council.
The council currently consists of five permanent members that were the main victors in World War Two -- the United States, Russia, Britain, China and France -- and 10 non-permanent members who serve two-year terms.
Most Chinese have been slow to forgive Japan's war past.
"U.S. backing for Japan's (bid)...will undoubtedly encourage the resurrection of Japanese militarism and bring a new threat to the peace and stability in the Asia-Pacific region," the letter said.
The anti-Japanese activists recounted what they said were U.S. mistakes, including not putting Emperor Hirohito on trial after the end of World War Two in 1945.
"After the end of the war, the United States harmed the feelings of the Chinese people several times...sheltering Japan's top war criminal Emperor Hirohito," the letter said. Hirohito died in 1989.
The activists also faulted the United States for "ignoring historical facts" and handing disputed islands in the East China Sea to Japan in 1971.
Sino-Japanese ties were strained this year over the islands, which Beijing calls the Diaoyus and Tokyo the Senkakus.
A Japanese right-wing group built a makeshift lighthouse on one of the islands in July, triggering anti-Japanese demonstrations in Hong Kong and Taiwan.
Taiwan's Nationalist rulers, who lost the Chinese civil war to the Communists in 1949, also claim the islands. Activists in the British colony of Hong Kong, which reverts to Chinese rule in 1997, have opposed Japan's territorial claims.
Emotions were fanned in September when a Hong Kong activist drowned after he jumped into stormy waters around the islands to demonstrate support for Chinese claims.
