Bankruptcies in China -- unheard of for almost four decades -- are expected to more than double in number this year as authorities try to shed hopelessly indebted firms.
The figure is expected to rise even further next year as officials become more determined not to subsidise loss-making state firms.
More than 5,200 Chinese companies were expected to go under in 1996, up from 2,200 in 1995 or more than the previous six years put together, Cao Siyuan, architect of China's bankruptcy law, said.
"Whether enterprises are psychologically prepared for it or not, the rate of bankruptcies gradually increasing is unavoidable," Cao said in a recent interview.
In the first half of this year, 1,692 enterprises declared bankruptcy, soaring by more than 107 percent compared with the year-ago period, said Cao, who now runs a consultancy to help enterprises seeking to merge or go bankrupt.
A total of 1,625 firms declared bankruptcy in 1994, up from 710 in 1993, 428 in 1992, 117 in 1991 and 32 in 1990.
China passed a breakthrough bankruptcy law in 1988 in the first flush of an ambitious campaign to force lumbering state-owned enterprises to sink or swim in the marketplace.
However, official fears of mass unemployment and social unrest if loss-making firms are allowed to go under has hampered implementation of the bitter medicine.
But China was expected to accelerate bankruptcies and mergers of state firms next year to reduce the burden on state coffers and slash subsidies to state enterprises.
There is little need for alarm for the ever-increasing number of bankruptcies because it is only a fraction of the total number of enterprises, said Cao.
"One can't say it's too big," Cao said of the number of insolvent enterprises. "Currently, the bankruptcy rate is less than 0.1 percent (of the total number of firms)... One percent is normal."
About one percent of China's estimated 100,000 state enterprises were hopelessly in debt and completely unattractive to investors looking for cheap companies to purchase or to merge with, Cao said.
In Huangshi city in the northern province of Hubei, about 80 percent of medium- and large-size state enterprises are losing money, the official People's Daily said.
China's state sector reported a historic net loss of 3.0 billion yuan ($361.4 million) in the first quarter, the first such deficit since the country embraced paramount leader Deng Xiaoping's economic reforms in 1979.
The government allocated 20 billion yuan this year to write off bad debts of state firms which go under, but this is hardly enough, the People's Daily said.
In Wuhu city in the central province of Anhui, 420 million yuan is needed to write off the bad debts of 35 state firms, but only 50 million yuan has been allocated, the newspaper said.
"Mergers and bankruptcies... are roads without detour," the People's Daily, mouthpiece of the ruling Communist Party, said.
"(Enterprises) which should die should be allowed to die," the newspaper said. "Mergers and bankruptcies are a reform in which we have more to gain than lose."
But bankruptcies and mergers must guard against social unrest, debt evasion and theft of state assets, it said.
($1 = 8.3 yuan)
