Two sons of Beijing's disgraced Communist Party boss, Chen Xitong, have been detained and face possible prosecution for economic crimes, Chinese sources said on Friday.
The fate of Chen himself was unknown. He was one of the most powerful men in China before his fall in April 1995 after one of his proteges, Beijing Vice-Mayor Wang Baosen, came under investigation for economic crimes and committed suicide.
"It all depends on the (party's) Central Commission for Discipline Inspection...(which) is investigating Chen Xitong," one source said in reference to whether the commission would hand Chen's case over to courts for prosecution.
Court officials, reached by telephone, declined to comment.
"This is a test of whether the government's anti-corruption drive is for real," the source said told Reuters. Critics say the campaign targets only petty officials.
Two sources with ties to the party said Chen's eldest son, Chen Xiaoxi, and younger son, Chen Xiaotong, were being held at the Qincheng Prison in a northern suburb of Beijing and faced possible prosecution.
The younger son has been in custody since last year but it was unclear when the older son was detained.
The sources said they were uncertain over precisely what charges might be filed against either of the two.
Prison guards were transferred to Beijing from other provinces to ensure the two men remained under tight security. Beijing was the political powerbase of the family.
Outlook magazine, published by the official Xinhua news agency, said this month that Chen Xitong's case "will not just fade away".
Chen Xitong, 66, has not been seen in public since April 1995 when he resigned as Beijing's Communist Party boss. He was ousted from the party's powerful Politburo in September 1995, becoming the most senior victim of a crackdown on corruption.
Chen, who was promoted to the Politburo in recognition of his hardline stand against student-led demonstrations for democracy in Beijing in 1989, is believed to be under virtual house arrest. He is officially said to be under investigation for "serious mistakes".
Unpublished party documents have said Chen, who ran Beijing for 12 years, first as mayor and then as party boss, had abused his office by amassing $24 million in unauthorised funds and lavishing favours on friends, associates and a mistress.
Chen gave nine flats around Beijing to his mistress and her relatives, according to the documents.
In December 1995, Beijing Vice-Mayor Zhang Baifa shed light on Chen's whereabouts. Zhang said: "His life is better than mine... He plays table tennis...eats what he wants."
A second source quoted official documents as saying the younger son illegally channelled government funds to his father's mistress, He Ping.
The younger son, a former executive of a Sino-Japanese joint venture hotel in Beijing, also tipped off his father's mistress about the vice-mayor's suicide and told her to go to Hong Kong and not come back, the source said.
The brothers are among China's so-called "princelings", or children of the ruling party elite who enjoy wide influence due to their top level connections.
Corruption was virtually eliminated after the communists came to power in 1949, but has staged a comback along with economic reforms in the past 17 years.
