China's breakaway Catholic Church has ordained about 50 graduates of one of the country's biggest seminaries into the priesthood this year, clergy at the seminary said on Monday.
The new priests, five of whom were ordained on Sunday, were the first group of clergymen installed by the National Catholic Seminary since 1991, they said.
The officially authorised seminary in Beijing did not accept any new students for six years from 1986 due to a lack of funds and space, the clergymen said.
"It's a big problem. Funds are too limited," a priest surnamed Meng told Reuters by telephone.
The seminary receives 10,000 yuan ($1,200) a year from the government, or one-sixth of its annual budget, another priest said. It raises the rest from donations.
Father Meng, who graduated in 1991, said there was no shortage of youths, many of them poor, who wanted to become priests.
He and other priests denied that government pressure had played a role in the lack of new students between 1986 and 1991.
Catholics in communist China are allowed to worship openly only if they belong to the state-sponsored Catholic Patriotic Association.
The association, which supervises the national seminary, appoints its own bishops and does not recognise the Pope as universal Catholic leader.
The official church has the blessings of the Communist Party but it too must walk a fine line between the demands of the party elite and the needs of the faithful.
The Washington-based Human Rights Watch/Asia has said Beijing has been stepping up harassment of unauthorised Catholic and Protestant groups in recent years.
The group said the crackdown on Christians included stricter controls on contacts with foreigners and was part of a broader drive begun in 1994 against all forms of religion as well as political dissent.
Bishop Zong Huaide of the state-backed church ordained five graduates of the seminary on Sunday. Zong delivered mass at the Church of the Holy Saviour, built in 1703, which was packed with about 3,000 people.
China has 31 seminaries and about 1,100 priests, 700 of whom are state-anointed young men.
The official Catholic Church in China counts four million members, while the underground church is believed to have several million members.
Vatican relations with Beijing have alternately cooled and warmed over the decades since the late 1950s, when links were severed over the Vatican's recognition of Taiwan.
China has said it will not normalise relations until the Vatican severs its ties with Taiwan, which Beijing has regarded as a rebel province since the end of the Chinese civil war in 1949.
The Vatican, on the other hand, has demanded recognition of the Pope's primacy before it renews ties with China.
