Chinese President Jiang Zemin tried to reassure Taiwanese businessmen on Thursday, saying Beijing would not allow political differences to stand in the way of trade and investment.
"We maintain that political differences should not be allowed to affect and interfere with economic cooperation between the two sides," state radio quoted Jiang as telling visiting Taiwanese business leaders.
The economies of China and Taiwan were complementary, Jiang said, adding that the two sides should strengthen economic cooperation to benefit the entire Chinese race.
"We will continue to carry out our long-time policy of encouraging Taiwanese businessmen to invest," Jiang was quoted as saying. "No matter what the circumstances, we will protect all legitimate rights of Taiwanese investors."
A delegation of nearly 80 Taiwanese business leaders and politicians arrived in Beijing on Tuesday for a high-profile visit. Taiwanese economic officials are part of the delegation in a private capacity.
Taiwan has banned direct trade, transport and mail links with China since 1949 when the nation's Nationalist rulers fled to the island after their defeat by the communists.
Indirect trade and investment has been allowed since the late 1980s, usually through Hong Kong.
Jiang said China has always sought to speed up the establishment of direct trade and transport links with Taiwan.
Beijing has stepped up pressure on the island to lift the ban. Last week it unilaterally announced a set of regulations to pave the way for direct links.
Many Taiwanese businessmen, who have poured more than $20 billion into China, are eager for direct trade and transport, but Taiwan has been reluctant to remove the curbs, which it views as its last bargaining chip in talks with the communists.
Kao Ching-yuan, head of the delegation, urged Beijing on Wednesday to resume talks with Taiwan, saying the island's investors would lose confidence in China if political friction impeded ties.
The talks were suspended last year after Taiwan's President Lee Teng-hui made a landmark trip to the United States. Beijing views the island as a rebel province and insists it is not entitled to official links with other states.
Kao, vice-chairman of President Enterprises, a major Taiwanese conglomerate, was quoted by state television as saying the Chinese market had great potential and many Taiwanese businessmen were pushing for expanded economic cooperation.
President Enterprises is Taiwan's biggest investor in China.
Kao's visit came less than two weeks after Taiwan's President Lee called for a review of economic policy toward China with the aim of avoiding overdependence on the mainland.
The Taiwanese delegation was the largest to visit China since a trend of easing tensions was reversed by Lee's mid-1995 U.S. visit.
