The seven-year-old boy chosen by China as Tibet's second holiest monk attended a ritual in Beijing last week to celebrate the first anniversary of his enthronement, major Chinese newspapers said on Wednesday.
Monks pounded drums, rang bells and chanted Buddhist scriptures as Beijing's choice as the reincarnation of the Panchen Lama visited the Yonghe Lamasery -- the Temple of Harmony and Peace, on November 22, the newspapers said, quoting a report by the official Xinhua news agency.
Xinhua gave no reason for the delay in reporting the celebrations which were held a week before the actual anniversary on November 29.
Tibet's exiled god-king, the Dalai Lama, has named another boy as the reincarnation of the 10th Panchen Lama, the Himalayan region's second holiest monk who died in 1989.
Many Tibetans see the Chinese-sanctioned child, Gyantsen Norpo, as a pretender.
State media has given Beijing's choice much publicity in an apparent bid to convince Tibetans that he is the real reincarnation.
Major Chinese newspapers on Wednesday ran a picture of the child wearing traditional robes and a cap and surrounded by monks as he toured the Yonghe Lamasery which was built in 1694.
The boy blessed believers and preached from the seat reserved for the 10th Panchen Lama before his death.
Chinese sources have said Beijing's choice currently lives in the Chinese capital under state protection against any possible assassination attempts by radical Tibetans.
Western human rights groups have accused Beijing of detaining the boy recognised by the Dalai Lama and persecuting monks and nuns who refused to accept Beijing's choice.
The London-based human rights watchdog Tibet Information Network said last week a 19-year-old Tibetan nun had her jail term doubled to 18 years for refusing to recognise Beijing's choice.
China denies the accusations, saying the Dalai Lama's choice is "leading a free life, just like other Tibetan children".
But Beijing has refused to reveal the whereabouts of the Dalai Lama's choice or allow diplomats or foreign reporters to meet the boy.
China has lashed out at the exiled Tibetan leader, quoting the boy it anointed as the Panchen Lama as saying the Dalai Lama was the cause of turmoil in the region.
The Dalai Lama fled his homeland along with thousands of followers in 1959 after an abortive uprising against communist rule. He heads a government-in-exile, which is not recognised by any country, in the Indian town of Dharamsala.
The Dalai Lama won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1989 for his non-violent campaign for autonomy for his homeland, but Beijing views international support for Tibet's holiest man as a Western plot to split China and contain its development.
