China has retired its navy and air force commanders due to old age, a source familiar with the reshuffle said on Tuesday.
Admiral Zhang Lianzhong and Lieutenant General Yu Zhenwu, both 65, have stepped down as navy and air force commanders respectively, said the source who spoke on condition of anonymity.
Zhang was replaced by navy deputy commander Rear Admiral Shi Yunsheng, 56, the source said. Yu was succeeded by air force deputy commander Liu Shunyao, believed to be in his early 50s.
Communist Party boss Jiang Zemin approved the reshuffle in October in his capacity as chairman of the party's Central Military Commission, or commander-in-chief of the People's Liberation Army (PLA), the source said.
Asked if the reshuffle was intended to further consolidate Jiang's power in the military, the source said Zhang and Yu retired due to old age.
"It's professionalisation of the military," the source said.
However, a Chinese analyst said the four vice-chairmen of the Central Military Commission were already aged between 67 and 82 and still active. The two youngest vice-chairmen were appointed by Jiang.
Both the new appointees are believed to be proteges of Jiang, another analyst said. Jiang ordered the promotions of Shi and Yu to navy and air force deputy commanders in January, 1995 and December, 1994 respectively, the analyst said.
Some diplomats and Chinese analysts have dismissed Jiang as a transitional figure lacking the personal clout, political power base and administrative ability to step into the shoes of paramount leader Deng Xiaoping after the death of the 92-year-old patriarch.
But Jiang, who has no military pedigree, has moved in recent years to shore up his position in the military with a string of reshuffles.
The PLA is the world's largest armed force with three million members.
It is believed to be planning to pare that number by 500,000 in a streamlining that reflects the end of the Cold War and a desire to redirect state funds to economic development.
