A Chinese court has rejected the appeal of veteran dissident Liu Nianchun against a labour camp term for writing petitions, saying freedom of speech must not endanger the security of the state.
Beijing's Chaoyang District Court rejected Liu's lawsuit on Monday on the grounds that a petition he initiated in 1995 "contained attacks against the people's government", said a copy of the verdict seen by Reuters on Tuesday.
The petition "exceeded the limits of the constitution and the law", the verdict said.
Liu had argued in his appeal that the constitution guaranteed his right to freedom of speech.
The court rejected Liu's argument, saying freedom of speech "must not endanger the security, honour and interests of the state", the verdict said.
Liu's wife, Chu Hailan, said she would appeal even though chances of victory were slim. She has 15 days in which to file an appeal.
"I will definitely appeal. This is our right," Chu said by telephone on Tuesday. She attacked the court ruling as "unfair... not objective and unjust".
Chu said that during the visit of U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher to China last month police had shunted her to a labour camp in the northeastern province of Heilongjiang where her husband is held to prevent her meeting U.S. officials.
"It's a very desolate place. Life's awfully hard there," she said. "Liu Nianchun... eats only two meals a day."
She said her husband was sharing a 14-square-metre (150 square-ft) cell with 15 other people.
Last July, police ordered Liu, 48, to serve three years of re-education through labour on top of nearly one year in detention for drafting the petition, which urged the government to re-evaluate its crackown on student demonstrators in Tiananmen Square on June 4, 1989, and to free all political prisoners.
He was also accused of accepting illegal aid from human rights organisations abroad and of trying to form a group to promote protection of workers' rights.
Re-education through labour is a form of administrative punishment that can be imposed by the authorities without recourse to prosecutors or the courts.
Western human rights activists say it is increasingly favoured by the authorities as a way of removing dissidents from circulation without the complications and publicity of a trial.
Liu took part in the Democracy Wall movement of the early 1980s and was sentenced in 1981 to a three-year jail term for "counter-revolutionary propaganda and incitement", or subversion.
Prominent dissident and former student leader Wang Dan, who drafted the petition together with Liu, was sentenced to 11 years in prison last month for conspiring to subvert the government -- a sentence that triggered international condemnation.
China dismisses criticism of its human rights record as interference in its internal affairs.
The Chinese authorities have dealt crushing blows to the struggling democracy movement in recent months.
Most dissidents have already been forced into exile or are serving long sentences in prison or in labour camps.
Three pro-democracy activists are currently standing trial on charges of counter-revolutionary propaganda and incitement in Hefei, capital of the central province of Anhui.
In the southern boomtown of Shenzhen that adjoins Hong Kong, two labour activists are standing trial for conspiring to subvert the government.
