China pledged on Wednesday to curb a rush by provinces to invest in high-profile industries, but economists said defiance from regional authorities would impede attempts by the central government to restructure the economy.
The People's Daily, mouthpiece of the ruling Communist Party, said many new state enterprises were doomed from the beginning due to blind investment in many provinces.
"From the day production began, (many enterprises) entered a vicious cycle of high investment, high consumption of resources, low production efficiency and poor management," the newspaper said in a front-page commentary.
Many old enterprises, unable to upgrade their technology, lose their competitive edge and become inefficient, it said.
The newspaper said blind investment was widespread, citing 22 provinces that listed car production as one of their pillar industries in their Five-Year Plan between 1996 and 2000 and the plan for 2010.
Twenty-four provinces listed electronics as one of their pillar industries through 2000, and 16 provinces said they would concentrate on machinery and chemicals, the newspaper said.
"This has been a major problem for China's economy for a long time," economist Mao Tianqi said in a telephone interview when asked about the blind investment.
Blind investment had also led to monopolies and local protectionism, with many provinces banning competitive products from neighbouring regions, the newspaper said.
It said China's economic structure was "unreasonable", with too many small enterprises, not enough large enterprises, too many low-end products and insufficient high technology items.
The central government planned to restructure the economy next year to curb concentration in high-profile industries and to boost efficiency, the newspaper said.
"Restructuring the economy...is a mission of extreme importance," it said.
The central government would try to divert investment into the manufacturing of products with big demand as well as high technology products, the newspaper said. It did not elaborate.
The government would try to break monopolies by encouraging joint ventures among provinces, the newspaper said, adding that business groups would be encouraged to shed affiliates that are not related to production, such as hospitals and kindergartens.
"There are many difficulties and contradictions in adjusting and improving the economic structure, but...the State Council's (cabinet's) determination will not waver," the newspaper said.
But economist Mao was not optimistic.
"This is not a problem that can be resolved in one year," Mao said.
Many local governments would defy or skirt decisions by the central government to limit investment in certain industries to a few regions, he said.
About one percent of China's estimated 100,000 state enterprises are hopelessly in debt and unattractive to investors looking for cheap companies to buy or to merge with.
The government has been dragging its feet on bankruptcies due to fears of mass unemployment and social unrest.
However, the number of bankruptcies in China -- unheard of for almost four decades -- was expected to more than double to 5,200 this year, or more than the total of the previous six years put together.
