China's parliament, eager to shed its rubber stamp image, has vowed to crack down on lawless officials by intensifying supervision of the government's executive and judicial branches.
Tian Jiyun, vice-chairman of the National People's Congress, had conceded that the problem of officials disregarding the law was very serious in some departments, major newspapers said on Friday.
"Some officials are not strict when implementing the law and do not investigate legal violations," Tian told the opening of a nine-day seminar in the booming southern city of Shenzhen on Thursday.
"These phenomena are very serious in some regions and departments," said Tian, a member of the ruling Communist Party's 19-member Politburo.
Official media frequently carry reports of abuse of power by local officials, who run their areas of jurisdiction as virtual fiefdoms. The word of an official is often taken as law.
"Some officials go as far as to replace the law with their word," Tian said. "There are laws but some officials do not do things according to the law.
"Some use power to suppress the law, those enforcing the law break the law and some take the law into their own hands."
Some Chinese analysts saw Tian's remarks as an attempt to increase the say of parliament in Chinese politics.
Tian and his mentor, Qiao Shi, chairman of the National People's Congress, who sits on the party's omnipotent seven-member Standing Committee, have moved in recent years to boost the status of parliament.
Tian urged lawmaking bodies at all levels to step up supervision of the executive and judicial branches.
"Supervision is a very weak link of the work of the People's Congress," Tian said.
He urged all lawmakers to conscientiously supervise trials and the work of the government, prosecutors and police.
Last month, a court took 10 minutes to reject the appeal of dissident and former student leader Wang Dan and uphold an 11-year jail term for conspiring to subvert the government.
Another dissident, Chen Longde, attempted suicide in August by jumping from a third-floor window because he could no longer stand beating by guards at a labour camp, his family has said.
The labour camp denies any wrongdoing.
Chen, who broke his right leg and smashed three teeth, has been discharged from hospital and sent back to the labour camp, where he is serving three years of re-education through labour for sending a petition to parliament demanding the release of all political prisoners.
Re-education through labour is a form of administrative punishment that can be imposed by authorities without recourse to prosecutors or the courts.
Western human rights activists say the punishment is increasingly favoured by the authorities as a way of removing dissidents from circulation without the complications and publicity of a trial.
