A Chinese court has jailed a 56-year-old dissident for five years for subversion, dealing another blow to the country's tiny, struggling democracy movement.
The Intermediate People's Court in Xi'an city, in the northern province of Shaanxi, convicted Zhang Zong'ai this week of spreading "counter-revolutionary propaganda and incitement", his lawyer, Zhang Jiankang, said on Saturday.
The dissident, detained since June, has appealed to the Shaanxi provincial Higher People's Court, the Hong Kong-based Human Rights and Democracy in China Information Centre said.
"Their (Chinese authorities) intention is to kill the chicken for the monkey to see... to frighten other dissidents," a spokesman for the centre, which monitors human rights abuses in China, said in a telephone interview.
Zhang was previously jailed for five years for demanding Premier Li Peng be impeached for ordering the military to crush student-led pro-democracy demonstrations centred in Beijing's Tiananmen Square in June 1989, the human rights watchdog said.
He lost his seat in the local lawmaking body along with his teaching job at the Xi'an Institute of Statistics and his wife divorced him after his incarceration in 1989, his family said.
Asked to comment on Zhang's latest conviction, his sister, Zhang Xin, said he was innocent.
"He was wrongly accused," the sister said by telephone. "He didn't commit any crime... He didn't do anything."
His lawyer told Reuters the court had found Zhang guilty of attacking China's judiciary in an interview with former student leader Wang Dan that was later published in a Hong Kong newspaper.
Wang, a former student leader of the 1989 democracy demonstrations, was sentenced to 11 years in prison last month for conspiring to subvert the government.
The court also found Zhang guilty of signing a petition last year urging authorities to show political tolerance, the lawyer said.
The court cleared Zhang of any wrongdoing in accepting money from an overseas group, the lawyer said. The court ruled Zhang did accept money but that he did not use the funds for counter-revolutionary activities.
The lawyer said the verdict also did not mention a charge in the bill of indictment that accused Zhang of "pledging loyalty" to the Taiwan authorities by writing to General Wego Chiang.
Chiang is the sole surviving son of the late Nationalist leader Chiang Kai-shek, who fled to Taiwan after losing the Chinese civil war to the Communists in 1949. China regards Taiwan as a rebel province.
The dissident had not mailed a letter to Chiang that was found in his home in Xi'an.
Beijing's Communists and Taipei's Nationalists have been political rivals for almost five decades.
In recent months, the Chinese authorities have dealt crushing blows to the struggling democracy movement.
Most dissidents have already been forced into exile or are serving long sentences in prison or labour camps.
China dismisses criticism of its human rights record as interference in its internal affairs.
Three pro-democracy activists are currently standing trial on charges of counter-revolutionary propaganda and incitement in Hefei, capital of the central province of Anhui.
In the southern boomtown of Shenzhen that neighbours Hong Kong, two labour activists are standing trial for conspiring to subvert the government.
