Taiwanese business leader Kao Ching-yuan has invited one of China's top policymakers on Taiwan to visit the island, but Beijing was tight-lipped on whether to accept the offer.
The invitation was offered to Wang Zhaoguo, director of the Chinese cabinet's Taiwan Affairs Office, in a private capacity, a spokesman for Kao told Reuters.
If Wang accepted and Taiwanese authorities allowed him to visit, he would be the most senior Chinese official to set foot on the island since the end of China's civil war in 1949.
Wang was quoted by the spokesman as saying he would be happy to visit if he had an opportunity, but there was no definite commitment to accept.
"If there was this opportunity, he would be very happy to go (to Taiwan). There is no definite concrete time," the spokesman said, speaking by telephone from the north China city of Tangshan.
In Taipei, a spokesman for the cabinet-level Mainland Affairs Council, which formulates Taiwan's policy towards China, said the council would be happy to see a visit by Wang but noted that procedures must be followed.
The Taiwan Affairs Office declined to comment on the council spokesman's remarks. Earlier, the office denied Taiwanese newspaper reports that Wang had accepted the invitation.
Kao is head of a delegation of nearly 80 Taiwanese businessmen, economists and officials, who arrived in Beijing on Tuesday for a 12-day visit.
Chinese President Jiang Zemin met members of the delegation on Thursday and tried to reassure Taiwanese investors, saying Beijing would not allow political differences to stand in the way of trade and investment.
In his meetings with other Chinese officials, Kao, vice-chairman of President Enterprises, had raised tax and labour problems faced by Taiwanese investors in China, the delegation's spokesman said. President Enterprises is Taiwan's biggest investor in China.
On Wednesday, Kao urged Beijing to resume talks with Taiwan, saying the island's investors would lose confidence in China if political friction impeded ties.
The talks were suspended last year after Taiwan President Lee Teng-hui's landmark trip to the United States.
Beijing has viewed Taiwan as a rebel province since the Nationalist government collapsed on the mainland and fled to the island in 1949. China insists Taiwan is not entitled to official links with other states.
China has stepped up pressure on Taiwan to lift a decades-old ban on direct trade and transport links between the two sides. Last week Beijing unilaterally announced a set of regulations to pave the way for direct links.
Taiwan has banned direct trade, transport and mail links since 1949. Indirect trade and investment has been allowed since the late 1980s, usually through Hong Kong.
Many Taiwanese business executives, who have poured more than $20 billion into China, are eager for direct trade and transport, but Taiwan has been reluctant to remove the curbs, which it views as its last bargaining chip in talks with the communists.
