Britain's B.A.T Industries said on Monday it was keeping an open mind about opportunities to restructure its operations after news reports that the group is continuing its search for a partner for its financial services businesses.
Tobacco and financial services company B.A.T, however, refused to comment directly on reports that talks with another company -- said to be insurance group Commercial Union Plc -- had foundered. Commercial Union was similarly tight-lipped, declining to confirm or deny the rumours.
Bolstered by the deal talk, B.A.T shares pushed 17p higher to 468-1/2p on Monday, but a spokesman for the company said its position had not changed.
"We were widely reported as having ruled out a demerger at the third quarter (results) and now we're reported to be ruling it in. The true position is that we have an open mind."
Pressure on B.A.T, whose operations include Eagle Star, Allied Dunbar and U.S. insurance unit Farmers, to enhance shareholder value after a disappointing share price performance over the past year is seen as behind the move.
The exposure of B.A.T's tobacco business to litigation in the United States has proved a particular drag on the share, reviving talk about a possible separation of the financial services business.
Add to this the potential for cost-cutting and the perceived need for B.A.T to bolster management in its financial services arm and the attractions of a merger are clear.
Britain's biggest insurer Royal &amp; Sun Alliance is currently reaping the rewards of just such a move with the group forecasting annual savings of 175 million pounds ($287.5 million) by 1998 after the merger of Royal and Sun back in July.
A lack of any distinct competitive advantage and a number of strategic questionmarks at B.A.T's Eagle Star and Allied Dunbar operations are compounding the desire to find a partner and to follow Royal Sun in the achieving critical mass in the highly competitive domestic market, industry analysts said.
"The idea of a demerger has been doing the rounds for ages and B.A.T must be looking at the options. There is value trying to get out but I don't think a deal is imminent and I don't think it would be easy," said one analyst.
Rates are under pressure, the market is in a downturn and pressures from new entrants are severe but the prospect of some sort of a deal before too long in the sector has boosted share prices in recent months, traders said.
The industry itself is no stranger to such moves with the drive to create economies of scale and cut costs in fragmented markets producing a number of big insurance deals in the last 12 months -- in the U.S., France and the UK.
"There probably will be more agreed mergers but the big debate is whether they're worthwhile or not; the jury's still out on that," said one analyst who preferred not to be named.
"There's no doubt that you can achieve reductions in costs pretty rapidly. The question is are they sustainable. In the UK, U.S. and German markets over the past 10 years, for example, there hasn't been much correlation between efficiency, profitability and size in the insurance industry."
Hostile bids in the industry are likely to remain a rarity, however, with regulatory barriers, especially in the U.S., and a reluctance on the part of companies to take the hit from the required goodwill write-off.
"Most of the recent merger activity in the industry has been between companies that are large in their own domestic market but perceive themselves to have weaknesses that can be solved by cost-cutting, rationalisation and getting a bit more market share in their key areas," said one of the analysts.
-- London newsroom +44 171 542 7721  
($1=.6087 Pound)
