Britain's Guardian Royal Exchange said on Tuesday that 350 jobs are to go in a restructuring of the insurance group's area and branch network.
The job losses follow the 48 million pound ($79.2 million) acquisition of Legal &amp; General's commercial insurance operations in July and are the latest in a series of industry moves to cut costs.
Guardian said the restructuring is intended to enhance the level of service and to benefit from the opportunities for economies of scale flowing from the Legal &amp; General acquisition.
But the job losses were attacked on Tuesday as "arbitrary" by the Banking, Insurance and Finance Union (BIFU) who accused Guardian of trying to please industry analysts and the stock market.
The Guardian announcement comes at the end of an unsettling year for insurance company employees with consolidation within the industry leading to sharp cutbacks in staff levels as businesses look to reduce their cost base.
After the merger of Royal Insurance and Sun Alliance in May, it was announced that 5,000 jobs would be cut across the group, the majority in the UK where both had head offices. The merger of United Friendly and Refuge Group in August will lead to the shedding of 1,800 staff over the next two to three years.
The drive for cost savings, economies of scale and critical mass in an increasingly competitive market are widely expected to fuel further consolidation in the industry.
Britain's B.A.T industries is rumoured to be looking for a partner for its financial services arm which includes Eagle Star and Allied Dunbar after press reports that talks with Commercial Union have foundered.
Commercial Union has also been linked with General Accident and Guardian Royal Exchange while Legal &amp; General and Norwich Union have both been the subjects of bid speculation.
"Markets are remaining very competitive and companies are looking for ways to gain an edge," said one industry analyst. "Companies do take the opportunity to tackle their cost base with consolidation."
The insurance industry which is estimated to employ around 200,000 staff directly shed around 40,000 staff between 1991 and 1995.
Including brokers and the self-employed the industry provides work for around 350,000, one third of whose jobs could be at risk over the next couple of years according to BIFU.
Alongside the announcement of the closure of offices in Belfast, Birmingham, Bristol, Glasgow, Leeds, Manchester and Plymouth where there are currently both Guardian and former Legal &amp; General offices, Guardian said offices in five other locations would also shut. These include Bedford, Ealing, west London, Farnham, Surrey, Liverpool and Maidstone, Kent.
The restructuring is expected to be completed by mid-1997. -- London Newsroom +44 171 542 7721 ($ = 0.605 British Pound)
