British telecoms regulator OFTEL said on Wednesday it proposed to reduce the regulatory demands which were imposed on telephone group Mercury Communications in the early 1980s.
OFTEL said Mercury, part of the Cable &amp; Wireless Group, would have a simplified licence covering both domestic and international operations and that a number of obligations would be removed to reflect Mercury's non-dominant position, particularly in the domestic market.
Mercury, the second largest telecom company in Britain, has 11.5 percent of the UK's domestic telecommunications market compared with BT's 80 percent share.
Mercury welcomed the changes saying they provided more flexibility on pricing.
"We are delighted. Under the new regime we can be more flexible in our prices. It increases our ability to be more competitive," a Mercury official told Reuters.
OFTEL also said that rapidly developing competition in the international market may allow it to withdraw further still from detailed regulation and it would be keeping the proposals under review, with a view to lifting them in whole or in part as soon as competition was sufficient to allow it to do so.
The proposals include replacing Mercury's existing service obligation for inland services by standard obligations for non-dominant operators and draft licence proposals from the Department of Trade. International service obligations will remain unchanged.
OFTEL is also backing new conditions to ensure fair trading and effective competition in international markets.
In addition, it proposes to replace Mercury's obligation to publish its prices with more flexible conditions. These will be modelled on the price publication requirements in the draft International Facilities Licence, on which the Department of Trade and Industry is currently holding consultations.
The Mercury official described the measures as "another milestone" saying it would help close the gap with its much bigger rival British Telecommunications Plc (BT) as far as marketing of services were concerned.
"This reflects our relative market position and gives us the flexibility to offer our customers truly bespoke solutions, designed to meet their specific business needs. At the end of the day it's the customers who will be the winners," he said.
Analysts said the Oftel move was expected and would probably not lead to substantially more customers: "They can price services for different customers, but it is not a big deal," said James Golob at Deutsche Morgan Grenfell.
