Shares in British insurer Commercial Union (CU) jumped on Friday amid renewed speculation the insurance group may become the next victim in the industry's push to consolidate.
Rumours that a merger were in the offing were given a new lease of life after buying of CU shares late on Thursday. The shares rose on Friday, jumping in late trading to close 19-1/2p at 663-1/2p, ignoring worries about interest rates which sent stock prices across the rest of the London market tumbling.
Tobacco and financial sevices giant BAT Industries has been at the centre of the most recent rumours with reports last weekend that discussions between the two had foundered.
Both companies have maintained their silence on whether discussions have actually taken place but earlier this week BAT said it was keeping an open mind about the opportunities for finding a partner for its financial services arm.
The search for cost savings and economies of scale are behind the latest drive to consolidate in Britain's increasingly competitive and fragmented insurance industry.
New entrants selling insurance over the telephone such as Direct Line have added to competition while the selling of insurance products through banks, building societies and shops is also expected to gather momentum.
Royal Insurance and Sun Alliance combined operations back in July to create Britain's biggest insurer and estimates it will be able to cut costs by 175 million pounds ($289.6 million) annually by 1998, shedding some 5,000 employees in the process.
Like the retail banking industry, insurance companies tend not to be dependent on key individuals and mergers are not fundamentally difficult to achieve, said analysts.
One estimated that cost savings in a tie-up between Commercial Union and BAT Industries could probably add another 20 percent to combined operating profits.
While analysts conceded that reports the company has been discussing a deal with others in the industry may be true, they were quick to point out that such discussions have been commonplace in recent years.
"Anyone who wanted to talk to CU would at least be listened to -- they've got shareholders to consider. But these things are not new. These companies have been talking to each other for as long as I can remember on a regular basis," said one analyst.
"But I think CU feels quite capable of controlling its own destiny and I'm not convinced that they would think another insurance company had much to offer."
The question of which management would come out on top in any merger is another tricky issue and was said to have been behind the breakdown in talks with BAT.
Interest from abroad has also been rumoured with German insurance group Allianz said to have been contemplating a move for CU. General Accident and Guardian Royal Exchange have also been linked with CU.
A full-scale takeover is a more remote possibility with the necessary premium on the current share price likely to offset many of the cost savings.
But even a merger would bring with it a multitude of problems and would put questionmarks over relationships built up with banks and financial institutions in its continental European businesses.
"There's pressure on both the non-life and life industries to get together and cut costs and CU is as much a part of that as anybody else. I'm sure that most companies have talked or thought about talking to other companies. Whether anything comes of it or not is a completely different matter," said an analyst.
Takeover talk also extended to the insurance broking market late Friday as rumours circulated of a predator stalking Sedgwick Group Plc whose shares closed 5p higher at 125-1/2p.
($1=.6043 Pound)
