The second large merger between insurance brokers in the space of a week highlights the dilemma many in the industry face over how to counter overcapacity and increasing competition, analysts said on Monday.
The latest move, a 300 million pound ($500 million) merger between Britain's Lloyd Thompson Group and JIB Group comes hard on the heels of last week's $1.23 billion acquisition of New York's Alexander &amp; Alexander Services (A&amp;A) by U.S. broking giant Aon Corp.
Different in scale, the two deals are also very different in motivation but both point to a clear trend in the sector -- consolidation.
Vast overcapacity in broking has left the industry struggling in recent years.
The Aon/A&amp;A deal was driven by a desire to attack costs, increasingly seen as one of the few ways forward for an industry beset by falling rates and declining revenues.
But the merger of Lloyd Thompson and JIB to create Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group is different. It has not been prompted by a search for cost savings but by an effort to release the benefits from the two companies' "complementary" businesses.
Cost savings will be restricted largely to the companies' London operations and the opportunities to build upon each others existing businesses, particularly in Asia Pacific, will be the main drive in future growth, according to Lloyd Thompson chief executive Ken Carter.
However, elsewhere in the sector the need to find ways of offsetting the pressure on rates by stripping out costs, like Aon, has raised the prospect of further deals to come.
Rumours that Aon or Marsh &amp; McLennan were about to launch a takeover bid for British-based broker Sedgwick swept the insurance markets on Friday.
Such rumours are fuelled by the the hand-in-glove nature of the business, say analysts.
"The brokers are constantly in discussions about mergers; they chat all the time. And one is always surprised by seeing the industry bash on, trying to purge overcapacity through consolidation," said one analyst.
One of the main problems with any merger between brokerages is defection of staff. Another is the diminishing number of would-be predators.
While Aon refused to comment on Friday's Sedgwick rumours, a spokeswoman for the company did point out the need to "digest" its most recent prurchases.
The newly merged Jardine Lloyd Thompson will be positioned between global brokers such as Britain's Sedgwick and Willis Corroon and smaller niche brokers such as Lowndes Lambert and C.E. Heath. It is also likely to leave them in something of a dilemma.
As the number of more obvious deals are done, the pressure on those remaining to come up with a means of remaining competitive is likely to rise. Mergers or acquisitions may, however, become less attractive as the more logical tie-ups in the sector are done, leaving those left with fewer options.
"Brokers are all cutting costs but if rates continue to fall, they'll all be cutting back to keep up with the revenue stream coming down. There has to be a huge shock to the industry which will take out a few of the players. Until that happens brokerage isn't going anywhere," said one analyst.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 7721 ($ = 0.602 British Pounds)
