Two of Britain's leading insurance brokers Lloyd Thompson Group and JIB Group said on Monday they are to merge in a deal worth 300 million pounds ($496.4 million)
Lloyd Thompson chief executive Ken Carter said the main attraction of the deal was the complementary nature of the two companies' operations and the merger will create an international firm focused on profitable, growth businesses.
"The driver is not cost savings, it's entirely the business enhancements we can get out of the two groups coming together. The cost savings will be there but they would come out in the merger of any two companies," he said.
Carter will become chief executive of the new group which is to be renamed Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group Plc.
The deal comes at a time of increasing problems for brokers as insurance rates fall and revenues decline. Increasing competitive pressures are forcing many to contemplate deals to find a way of cutting costs and achieve economies of scale.
Only last week U.S. broking giant Aon Corp announced it was buying New York's Alexander &amp; Alexander services for $1.23 billion.
"Insurance brokers are going through very difficult times and any activity that will enhance margins has to be beneficial," said one analyst. "It's becoming quite evident that size is more and more important." Under the terms of the Lloyd's Thompson offer, JIB shareholders will receive four new Lloyd Thompson shares for every five JIB shares held. The companies said that deal was expected to be "significantly earnings enhancing" in 1998.
The merger has received the backing of Jardine Matheson Holdings which has a 60 percent stake in JIB. On completion of the merger it will have a 34 percent interest which it said, it intended to hold "for the long term".
The stock market reacted positively to the news. JIB shares rose 20-1/2p to 129-1/2p and Lloyd Thompson 1-1/2p to 174p.
The companies said they believed that the merger would bring significant strategic advantages allowing the development of new products, enhancing JIB's international operations and creating a leading international reinsurance business.
The deal would also deliver cost savings, in particular in the two London market operations' information technology and head office expenditure.
Lloyd Thompson, is currently involved predominantly in the London wholesale and reinsurance broking business. In contrast, JIB, operates in 30 countries worldwide and brings with it an international presence with the "very significant jewel in the crown" of its high quality Asia Pacific business, said Carter.
The newly merged group will be positioned between global brokers such as Britain's Sedgwick and Willis Corroon and smaller niche brokers such as Lowndes Lambert and C.E. Heath.
"We see Jardine fulfilling an essential demand from clients by being a strong international broker focussed on handling business wherever it is in the world outside the U.S. rather than looking to get a flag in every city in the world," said Carter.
Following the merger John Barton, currently chief executive of JIB will become chairman of the new group which is to be headquartered in London.
The company is to pay a special dividend of 6.0 pence per Lloyd Thompson share, subject to the merger with JIB proceeding. ($1=.6043 Pound)
