United Nations' plans to delay Iraq's re-entry to world oil markets lifted oil shares in Europe on Monday as a sharp rise in oil prices fed through to the stock markets, traders said.
Iraqi military activity in the Kurdish north, prompted the U.N. to put on hold a planned humanitarian Iraqi oil-for-food exchange, stopping the first sales of Iraqi oil since the Gulf War six years ago.
The increased tension in the Middle East and delays to Iraqi supplies lifted crude prices and, said analysts, was likely to raise market estimates for the third and probably fourth quarter.
October futures for benchmark Brent crude opened 70 cents a barrel higher on London's international Petroleum Exchange.
Shares in Enterprise Oil climbed 10-1/2p to 520p, while Lasmo rose three to 196-1/2. British Petroleum was up 5-1/2p at 628p and Shell Transport 6-1/2p at 939p. In Amsterdam, Royal Dutch rose 2.70 guilders to 250.70.
The Iraqi humanitarian oil sales had been expected to hit markets in the next few weeks but after the latest developments traders were questioning when and if those supplies would come back on stream.
That could mean an upward revision of as much as $1.50 on Brent crude oil prices for the next few months with the possibility of the Iraqi sales ban lasting into 1997.
"I'd rather wait and see how likely or how long delays to Iraqi sales are going to be before I get too panicky," said one leading oil analyst.
"Almost certainly there is going to be a strong fourth quarter now as well as the third. People are going to have upgrade numbers for this year but for next year it's a bit early to say."
The resultant boost to earnings forecasts are likely to provide support to share prices across the sector with most analysts having expected an oil price fall in the fourth quarter as the humanitarian sales came through.
Consensus forecasts had been around $17.70 per barrel for the fourth quarter compared with an average of just under $20 in the third, analysts said.
"We were forecasting $19.50 for the third. We'll have to raise that in the light of this news and also our fourth quarter which was $17.50 by between $1 and $1.50 per barrel," said Lehman Bros' Wendy Anderson.
"The purest plays are the exploration and production companies - Enterprise, Lasmo and Saga. You pick a pure play if you believe the delay will last into 1997," said Anderson.
Integrated majors Norsk Hydro, BP, Elf, Total and Royal Dutch/Shell also provided fairly good exposure, she said.
Total shares rose 4.2 francs at 376.7 in Paris and Elf gained 7.6 francs to 376.4. Norsk Hydro added two Norwegian crowns to 296.50.
But while the Iraqi situation will underpin stocks in the near term, it is long-term trends that will determine significant outperformance in the sector.
The real issue was at what point -- if at all -- people decided that forecasts for oil prices through 1997, 1998 and 1999 should be higher, said Nick Antill of BZW.
"At this stage I don't see anything that would make one want to do that. In investment terms, the sector is only really going to start motoring if people start bumping up the long-term trend rather than just this year's estimate," he said.
