Britain's Ladbroke Group Plc on Monday concluded a long-awaited global alliance with Hilton Hotels Corp (HHC) of the U.S., reuniting the Hilton brand worldwide for the first time in 32 years.
Despite the tie-up, which covers 400 hotels in 49 countries, the two companies denied there was a hidden agenda to progress to a full merger of the two groups.
"We're taking a first step in bringing the hotels business much closer. We're putting the relationship back together and who knows what may come of it," said Ladbroke chief executive Peter George.
Shares in Ladbroke initially firmed on the earlier-than-expected conclusion of the agreement, adding 2-1/2 pence to 236 pence in morning trading.
The companies said that the deal covering sales and marketing, loyalty programmes and development would fuel top-line growth and dispel the confusion that has surrounded the two groups in recent years.
Hilton has operated separately within and outside the U.S. since 1964 when Hilton International was spun off from HHC.
"From our customers' point of view this will look as if it's one company for the first time in 32 years. For many years we've confused our guests...They'll now no longer see a difference between a London Hilton and a Hilton in New York," said Stephen Bollenbach, chief executive of HHC.
"These two companies will have such a close alliance and so many points of contact with each other that I believe you will get all the benefits of one legal entity whether or not you become one legal entity."
The reunification would also help both groups capitalise on industry growth and make them more resilient in cyclical downturns, said George.
Announcing the signing of the agreements for the hotel deal, which was first unveiled last summmer, the companies also said a worldwide loyalty programme -- Hilton HHonors Worldwide -- would start on February 1.
That would be the single most important marketing link up between the two, George said, but there was scope for further cooperation in other areas such as gaming.
"There is a gaming provision as well whereby we're looking at doing some gaming projects together," said George.
"It's not a deal that involves a great deal of cost savings but the primary benefit is the top line -- it'll be driving revenues. It can be valued in the tens of millions of dollars to each company."
As expected the agreements provide for taking cross shareholdings of up to 20 percent. Hilton said it intended to acquire a five percent stake in Ladbroke in due course.
Mutual participation in future hotel development will focus primarily on management contracts and franchises, but the companies said it was no longer proposed that each make minority investments in the other's hotel real estate.
The deal is to be Ladbroke's number one priority in the near term but, said George, the company was still looking to develop the business by increasing the number of hotels around the world, and was always on the look out for additions to the existing business.
