British life assurance group Scottish Amicable on Thursday announced plans to shed its 170-year old mutual status in preparation for a 1.0 billion pounds ($1.68 billion) flotation on the London stock market in three to five years' time.
The group, based in Stirling, Scotland, said it is to use capital raised by the two-stage proposals to take advantage of opportunities for growth and increase its share of the life and pensions market.
Policyholders are to receive an initial special bonus totalling 75 million pounds after demutualising on May 1 this year, based on the length of time policies have been held.
At the top end of the scale, an individual with a 25-year policy maturing this April will receive 1,503 pounds.
On flotation another, larger payout - expected to amount to at least 200 million pounds but possibly "substantially higher" - will be made.
The move to seek a flotation is the second by a British life group, following plans announced last year by Norwich Union.
Scottish Amicable had been rumoured to be a takeover candidate but chairman Sandy Stewart said the group intended to hold on to its independence.
"Our plans do not include being gobbled up by anybody," Stewart told a news briefing.
Industry analysts said today's move would make any takeover "The policyholders are likely to get more by hanging on in there and having an interest in the future than a straight sale now," said one.
Scottish amicable said it believed the market was entering a growth phase and that it was well positioned to take advantage of an upturn but needed capital and a more flexible structure to take advantage of the opportunities.
The period before flotation is intended to allow it to develop the business and necessary profit-focused corporate culture.
Managing Director Roy Nicolson said that there remained value to be realised in the group and that an immediate flotation would have failed to reflect the true value of the business and sold policyholders short.
Industry analysts described the proposals as a good compromise between raising some capital in the near term but not selling out too cheap.
Under the proposals, the business, staff and operations of the group are to be transferred to a new company, Scottish Amicable Life, a 100 percent owned subsidiary of the newly formed Scottish Amicable Holdings.
Nicolson, is to become group chief executive of a new holding company Scottish Amicable Holdings. Paul Bradshaw, deputy managing director, will become chief executive of Scottish Amicable Life.
The first stage of the group's plans involves a deal with reinsurance giant Swiss Re and its affiliate Securitas Capital to provide an injection of cash of 395 million poounds.
Scottish Amicable's existing with-profit fund will receive an immediate cash contribution of 350 million pounds while Securitas Capital will invest up to 45 million pounds in return for approximately 20 percent of a new business fund being set up to transact all new business leading up to flotation.
The plans have to be approved by three-quarters of policyholders who vote and a special general meeting is expected to be held in March.
($1=.5958 Pound)
