British life assurer Scottish Amicable said on Thursday it planned to shed its 170-year-old mutual status in favour of a stock market flotation aimed at taking advantage of opportunities for profit growth.
The Stirling-based group outlined plans to float on the London Stock Exchange in three to five years' time and said it would pay policy-holders an initial special bonus of 75 million pounds ($125 million) after demutualising on May 1.
Scottish Amicable said pay-outs would be based on the length of time policies had been held by members.
The fist payment would be followed by benefits worth more than 200 million pounds as a result of flotation, which will give the group access to long-term capital, it added.
The group said it expected to have a market capitalisation of around 1.0 billion pounds on flotation.
Scottish Amicable said significant opportunities existed for profitable growth in its businesses. But it said in a statement that to take full advantage "requires access to external capital in both the short and long term."
There has been intense speculation that Scottish Amicable, founded in 1826, would be the subject of a takeover bid but chairman Sandy Stewart said the group intended to hold on to its independence.
"Our plans do not include being gobbled up by anybody," he told a news briefing.
The group said the process would be in two stages. Under the plan, the business, staff and operations of the group would be transferred to a new company, Scottish Amicable Life, a 100 percent subsidiary of newly formed Scottish Amicable Holdings.
The first stage involves a deal with reinsurance giant Swiss Re and its affiliate Securitas Capital "to provide substantial financial backing initially totalling 395 million pounds".
Under this agreement Scottish Amicable's existing with-profit fund will receive an immediate cash contribution of 350 million pounds "from the reinsurance by Swiss Re of certain categories of existing policy".
Securitas Capital has committed to invest up to 45 million pounds in return for approximately 20 percent of a new business fund being set up to transact all new business from the date on which the scheme becomes effective.
Swiss Re has also agreed to provide further reinsurance "expected to reach a level of 150 million pounds over the next five years in respect of future new business".
Scottish Amicable said Roy Nicolson, currently managing director of the group, would become group chief executive of Scottish Amicable Holdings, while Paul Bradshaw, deputy managing director, will become chief executive of Scottish Amicable Life.
Policyholders must first approve the plans at a special general meeting expected to be held in March. The group said detailed discussions had already been held with Britain's Department of Trade and Industry. ($1=.5958 Pound)
