The drive to cut costs and offset falling margins in insurance broking continued apace on Thursday as Lowndes Lambert Group Holdings Plc and Fenchurch Plc confirmed that they are to merge.
The two London-based brokers announced last week they were in talks and said the complementary nature of their businesses would offer significant benefits to clients, employees and shareholders.
The merger comes against a background of industry over-capacity and intense competition which has put increasing pressure on margins and led to an acceleration in consolidation as companies search for economies of scale.
The companies said they believed the deal would create a stronger, more broadly based and competitive group better positioned to win new business and revenues.
Another attraction of the deal is the scope it offers for cutting costs through the merger of head offices, the companies' branch networks and the rationalisation of support and administrative functions.
Such moves will produce cost saving of at least five million pounds in the 12 months to March 1998 and together with the improved prospects for revenue growth will significantly enhance earnings and dividend propects, the company said.
Fenchurch shareholders are to be offered 628 shares in the new company, to be called Lambert Fenchurch Group, for every 1,000 shares they hold, valuing Fenchurch at around 27.6 million pounds ($46.18 million).
Last year's results for the two groups highlight the difficulties faced in the industry with Lowndes' reporting a nine percent fall in pre-tax profits to 13.9 million pounds.
Fenchurch's profits dropped 27 percent to 5.9 million pounds, prompting it to more than halve its final dividend.
The deal comes just weeks after Lloyd Thompson Group Plc and JIB Group Plc announced they are to merge in a deal worth just under 300 million pounds.
The companies believe today's move will reinforce operations in areas where both are strong such as the the UK retail, marine cargo, international non-marine and reinsurance markets.
Lowndes position in marine, fine art and entertainment will also be complimented by Fenchurch's position in North American non-marine and aviation and the broad spread of operations would offer improved growth potential, they said.
Future growth is to be pursued through a combination of organic growth and acquisition.
Lowndes chief executive David Margrett is to become chief executive of the new group with Lowndes chairman Sir Robert Clark becomning non-executive chairman.
The costs of the merger are expected to amount to around 11 million pounds.
($1=.5976 Pound)
