Fund manager Nicola Horlick's row with her ex-employer Morgan Grenfell Asset Management (MGAM) continued to be played out in public on Wednesday as she admitted that she had been in talks with a rival banking group until several days before she was suspended.
But Horlick stressed that the talks with Dutch firm ABN AMRO were of an "informal and preliminary nature" and at no time had she provided confidential information about the business or colleagues.
"The talks terminated several days before I was suspended," said Horlick. "My aim was always to keep the clients and the team together for the benefit of all."
The benefit of all included MGAM whom, she said, she had never intended to leave.
Horlick, one of London's most prominent fund managers, resigned last week after being suspended amid allegations she planned to defect to ABN AMRO and was soliciting MGAM colleagues to go with her.
The suspension came just days after she had been promoted to be managing director of MGAM and since then her fight to be reinstated or compensated for the loss of her job has rarely been out of the headlines.
Once again the lure of the cameras proved difficult to resist on Wednesday and in a television interview, Horlick repeated her determination to clear her name.
"When you're faced with the fact that people are saying that you've done something wrong and you know you haven't you have to fight for yourself. It's one individual versus a very large bank," she said. "All I have is my reputation and I must defend myself."
The 35 year-old mother-of-five's battle with MGAM has raised eyebrows in the traditionally discreet and conservative banking industry but she maintained she saw no alternative to the action she had taken.
Horlick was catapulted onto the front pages last Friday when she turned up on MGAM's doorstep with a posse of journalists to confront her former employyers after her resignation.
Later to the surprise of everbody -- including her own lawyers -- she flew to Frankfurt to put her case to officials at MGAM's parent company Deutsche Bank.
ABN AMRO has denied trying to poach Horlick and her team and today said they had nothing to add to earlier statements.
Horlick has been in talks with her lawyers for the past few days and is considering taking legal action against her former employer for constructive dismissal.
MGAM is holding fast to its line that it will not reinstate Horlick nor offer compensation since she took the decision to resign her position.
