Scottish Amicable's plans to float on the stock market were under threat on Friday after Abbey National launched a surprise bid for the mutually-owned life assurance company.
The offer from the retail banking group values ScotAm at up to 1.4 billion pounds ($2.25 billion) and includes an immediate minimum payout of 400 million pounds to policyholders in cash or Abbey shares.
ScotAm was quick to denounce the bid as both "vague" and "inadequate" and said it intended to press ahead with its two stage plans to drop its mutual status and float the group over the next three to five years.
Those proposals, due to be detailed in a circular within the next two weeks, have themselves been criticised for not being generous enough to policyholders while offering the prospect of a windfall to management if growth targets are met.
Under the plans the 1.1 million policyholders will receive up to 1,500 pounds while 12 ScotAm directors stand to share around 14 million pounds.
The offer from the Abbey raises the possibility of a bidding war for ScotAm, which has made no secret of past approaches.
ScotAm chairman Sandy Stewart said that indications of interest from other parties had already been received.
"As you would expect there have been quite a number of telephone calls (from other interested parties) but there have been no firm approaches," Stewart told Reuters.
"I suspect some of them are competitors of Abbey National".
Stewart said Abbey National's offer had not been dismissed out of hand and that the interests of policyholders were uppermost in the management's mind.
"If we have on the table a firm offer which is quite clearly likely to be more beneficial to policyholders then we have to consider it. If we decide that is the case then we will put it to policyholders," Stewart said.
"At this stage the bid doesn't meet our requirements. It's vague and on the basis of what it (Abbey National) has said it appears to be inadequate."
Analysts agreed the two businesses would fit well together and that the Abbey, with its good cash generation ability, would have no problem financing the deal.
BZW analyst Hugh Pye upgraded its recommendation on Abbey National shares on the potential offered by the deal, which he said would improve the quality of the group's earnings and return on equity.
By early afternoon the shares were trading 6-1/2 pence higher on the day at 775-1/2 pence.
Despite the rejection by Scottish Amicable, the Abbey, Britain's fifth largest bank, said it was still hoping to persuade ScotAm, which has 14 billion pounds under management, to accept the offer and put it to its policyholders.
"We believe this offer will by very attractive to Scottish Amicable policyholders, providing them with immediate value and the long-term security of being part of one of the UK's strongest financial groups," Abbey chief executive Peter Birch said in a statement.
No discussions have been held between the two groups and ScotAm said it had no intention of talking to the Abbey ahead of the release of details on its demutualisation. ($1=.6237 Pound)
