Mutually-owned life assurance company Scottish Amicable on Friday rebuffed a takeover bid worth up to 1.4 billion pounds ($2.3 billion) from British retail banking group Abbey National Plc.
Scottish Amicable said it would pursue its own plan, announced earlier this month, to shed its mutual status and seek a stock market flotation in three to five years time.
"We believe this offer will by very attractive to Scottish Amicable policyholders, providing them with immediate value and the long-term security of being part of one of the UK's strongest financial groups," Abbey National chief executive Peter Birch said in a statement.
The Abbey offer, which surprised the market and sent its shares up 6.5 pence to 775.5, includes a minimum of 400 million pounds to policyholders in cash or Abbey shares and an immediate investment into the funds of 1.1 million with-profit policyholders of between 700 million to one billion pounds.
Despite the rejection by Scottish Amicable, the Abbey, Britain's fifth largest bank, said it was still hoping to persuade the life assurer, which has 14 billion pounds under management, to accept the offer and put it to its policy holders.
"We feel that we can offer something much more attractive to the Scottish Amicable policy holders," Abbey deputy chief executive Charles Toner told Reuters. "That's why we really want to talk to Scottish Amicable and we hope still to persuade them to put this more attractive deal to their policy holders."
Toner said that the ScotAm board had not yet had time to stand back and examine the proposals properly.
"They've been working on their scheme for some time and they probably can't consider anything else in their minds," he added. "In truth, they don't seem to want to discuss it at the moment but we hope that they will. It's early days, there's plenty of time for them to draw breath and talk to us."
The second element of the offer would see Abbey National invest between 700 million and one billion pounds into the with-profits fund, where the policyholder is entitled to a share of the profits from the growth of the fund.
Scottish Amicable said the approach from Abbey was vague and it was unclear how it was valuing the group. The insurer, based in Stirling, Scotland, said it intends to publish in 10 days time detailed proposals about a twin-phased transformation, involving losing its mutual status on May 1 and a 1.0 billion pound flotation in three to five years time.
"The start of a growth phase is the wrong time in the cycle for policyholders to put their businesss on the market," said Sandy Stewart, chairman of Scottish Amicable.
Later, a spokesman for Scottish Amicable's advisers said there was a "grave danger of policy holders being misled by the vague terms of Abbey National's pronouncements. They have misunderstood Scottish Amicable's proposals."
The spokesman said the benefits to policy holders of the flotation proposal had been conservatively stated and the actual value would be considerably higher.
Abbey's Toner said the Scottish Amicable business would be an excellent fit for its Scottish Mutual business which it bought in 1992. It has 8.0 billion pounds under management and sells its products through the independent financial adviser (IFA) network.
"We started quite cautiously with Scottish Mutual but now it's growing very strongly under our management but as the whole life sector continues to consolidate, we do think it would be good, with the right partner, to link Scottish Mutual with something else," he added.
Analysts agreed that the businesses would be a good fit and John Leonard of Salomon Brothers said the Abbey would have no problem financing the bid with its good cash generation ability. ($1=.6172 Pound)
