Abbey National on Monday called for Scottish Amicable to put on hold proposals to drop its mutual status and allow policyholders time to consider last week's offer for the life assurance group.
But ScotAm were quick to reject the demand together with renewed requests by Abbey for access to its books.
ScotAm said it had no intention of altering its plans and would proceed according to its own timetable and not one dictated by Abbey.
"They're asking for privileged access to information before policyholders," said a ScotAm spokesman.
"The policyholders have to get that information, see the detail of what we're offering and at that time Abbey can make a proper judgement of its offer."
The details of ScotAm's demutualisation and flotation plans are due to be published at the beginning of next week.
Until then an impasse looks likely with ScotAm refusing to discuss Abbey's approach and Abbey prevented from seeing more detailed financial information it says it needs.
It argues that policyholders should have the opportunity to compare ScotAm's plans with alternative offers based on the same information.
"Ours is a firm offer based on published information and it is a minimum offer. If we had the information they have, we'd be on the same level playing field," said an Abbey spokesman.
"The policyholders should be given the chance to vote on the best deal on the table. If Scottish know there's a firm offer from us - and there may be other interested parties - they should consider all of these and put them to policyholders at one go."
Many industry observers expect the move by Abbey which already owns Glasgow-based Scottish Mutual, to prompt an auction for ScotAm with interest anticipated from both Britain and overseas.
Insurance group Prudential has said it was "watching the situation with interest" and has made no secret that it is on the lookout for an acquisition in the life assuarnce sector.
Britain's Halifax building society, high street banking group National Westminster, Fortis, the Dutch-Belgian financial services company, and Dutch firm ING Groep have all declined to comment on reports they might throw their hats in the ring.
No talks have been held with any other parties and according to the ScotAm, none are planned ahead of the publication of its proposals. For the time being at least, the company remains dismissive of Abbey's approach.
It has repeatedly attacked what it describes as the "vagueness" of Abbey's offer - a minimum of 400 million pounds ($641 million) and between 700 million and one billion pounds for the embedded value of the with-profits fund.
But the company was keen to stress that the interests of policyholders remained the most important consideration and if a suitable offer emerged it would be put to policyholders.
"The kite being flown by Abbey has all the superficial attractions of an upfront cash offer to policyholders without any assurance of the long term welfare of policies," ScotAm chairman Sandy Stewart told Reuters.
"Abbey has said more to the press than it has put in writing to the board and that should alert policyholders that it's time for very careful reflection."
While ScotAm may be irked at what it sees as the way Abbey has conducted its bid through the press, Abbey contend it is the only way it can get its message across to policyholders. ($1=.6237 Pound)
