Scottish Amicable said on Tuesday it will be giving policyholders information about Abbey National's bid for the company when it details its own proposals to shed its mutual status and float on the stock market.
A spokesman for the life assurer, which has been fighting a public campaign against Abbey's offer said: "It's obviously only right that we tell policyholders that they made an approach for us...we don't want to hide anything from them."
It is unclear how much detail will be put before policyholders by ScotAm which has repeatedly rebuffed Abbey demands that the timetable for its demutualisation proposals be stopped to allow policyholders to consider the offer.
ScotAm has also turned down Abbey requests for access to its books or meetings to discuss the bid which values ScotAm at up to 1.4 billion pounds ($2.25 billion).
It includes an immediate 400 million pound minimum payout to policyholders in cash or Abbey shares.
Abbey, Britain's fifth largest bank, has complained that policyholders should have the opportunity to compare the ScotAm proposals with alternative offers based on the same information.
The public campaign between the two companies was stepped up on Tuesday with a full-page advertisement in the form of an open letter to policyholders, promising to give them all the information required to make a choice on the firm's future.
"At the precise moment when calm and considered reflection is of the utmost importance, the accent appears to be wholly on how much can be extracted by way of cash payments in the very short term, rather than on policyholders' long term best interests," said the letter which appeared in the Financial Times, the Daily Mail and Daily Telegraph newspapers.
It went on to promise that policyholders would be informed if a "definitive and demonstrably better offer" was made before any vote on the proposals was taken.
The ScotAm board's fiduciary duty is to policyholders who own the company and there has been speculation that it may be holding off from embracing Abbey in the hope of encouraging other bidders to come forward.
The bid is expected to spark an auction for ScotAm but other interested parties may decide to stay on the sidelines ahead of the publication of ScotAm's float plans within the next week.
"The board obviously has a duty to do the best by policyholders - they should be exploring all the avenues they can. By refusing to cooperate with Abbey they're making things harder for themselves," said one fund manager.
Martin Lees, life insurance specialist at ratings agency Standard &amp; Poors tipped Dutch insurance group Aegon and Australian Mutual Provident (AMP) as front-runners to enter the race for ScotAm.
AMP had already stated its interest in more British acquisitions and a company that used independent financial advisors as its main means of distribution would be a good fit, said Lees.
Aegon's previous acquisition of Scottish Equitable had demonstrated its ability to provide extra capital to allow aggressive development, he said.
Other companies reported to be interested include the Prudential, the Halifax building society, Dutch group ING Groep and Belgian-Dutch financial services firm Fortis.
All have declined to comment on the reports. ($1=.6237 Pound)
