The head of one of Lloyd's of London's largest corporate investors said on Wednesday he expected the number of traditional Names at Lloyd's of London to continue to fall to a core of between 4,000 and 5,000.
John Stace, chief executive of Angerstein Underwriting Investment Trust, told Reuters it was likely that the number of members' agencies looking after Names' interests would drop to just four or five.
Angerstein owns Stace Barr, one of the biggest remaining members agents, representing 933 Names.  
Stace said the aim was for Stace Barr to remain one of the top surviving members' agencies with around 1,000 Names.
Angerstein's operations director James Illingworth said Lloyd's 12,000 plus remaining Names would be faced with resigning membership, converting to some sort of limited liability or remaining as unlimited liability backers.
Around half are expected to resign in the coming years or convert to limited liability schemes.
Despite a number of schemes being set up to allow conversion to limited liability, these had so far been small and unsuited to mass conversion.  
"Scottish limited liability Partnership has not been that succesful. I don't think it is the answer to mass conversion," said Illingworth.
Angerstein has an interest in finding a solution to the conversion problem and like many others was working on it, but it was too early to say how long this would take, he said, adding that any scheme must be relatively simple.
An announcement is also likely by the end of April on the question of solvency ratios for individual names, Stace said.
At present, names must put up liquid assets of 20 to 30 percent of their underwriting limit, while Names in pooled underwriting arrangements, known as MAPAs, must put up 25 percent.
Most corporate investors do not enjoy such a high level of gearing and pressure is mounting for a change in the rules applying to Names.
"Four-to-one MAPAs solvency will change," Stace said, adding that his personal opinion was that three-to-one for Names was probably appropriate.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 7721
