Britain's largest insurance group Prudential Corp has become early favourite to win the auction for Scottish Amicable after its 1.9 billion pound ($3.0 billion) bid for the mutually owned life assurance group.
Industry analysts said the offer, which uses excess capital in the Pru's 50 billion pound life fund, will make it difficult for rivals to compete and may have delivered a knockout blow to Abbey National's hopes of buying ScotAm.
Pru shareholders are also likely to be pleased with the finacial engineering which has gone into the offer. Only 250 million pounds is coming from shareholders funds and Prudential shares added 12 pence to 566 pence on Thursday as the market digested the details of the deal.
The Pru's offer contains elements of both the Abbey bid and ScotAm's own flotation proposals but it is in its structuring that the deal may have stolen a march and narrowed the field of potentials bidders.
The 400 million pound bonus in cash and shares matches Abbey's payout but the Pru says it will add another 150 million pounds to policies as soon as practicable and pay a minimum additional 250 million pounds when policies mature.
It also says it will pay 1.1 billion pounds into ScotAm's life fund - a loan from its own life fund, allowing investments in equities to be increased, which historically have provided the best returns.
The Pru will close ScotAm's life fund to new business, the existing free assets which it estimates to be at least 400 million pounds, will no longer be required to write new business and so can be paid out to ScotAm policyholders.
"The deal returns all the working capital to policyholders which under the Abbey deal would have been retained in the fund to write the new business. For others to replicate that is difficult," said one industry analyst.
Other potential bidders such as the Halifax building society, National Westminster Bank, Belgian-Dutch financial services company Fortis, Dutch firms ING Groep and Aegon may now be having second thoughts about throwing their hats in the ring.
Only a couple of the stronger life companies mentioned as potential acquirors could come up with a similar structure.
Australian Mutual Provident which also has substantial excess capital in its life fund could in theory do so.
"I would struggle to name another one," said an analyst.
But Abbey, whose 1.4 billion pound offer last week sparked the bidding war is likely to find it very difficult to compete.
It lacks the capital strength in its life funds to readily replicate the Pru deal and would probably have to turn to external capital to raise its bid substantially, said analysts.
"Abbey could match the Pru's offer. Whether it would be sensible is another issue. It's hard to match and satisfy its own shareholders that its in its best interests." said one
The Pru may also hold the advantage it terms of the benefits accruing from a ScotAm acquisition.
There would be less overlap in the businesses than Abbey which already owns Scottish Mutual and it would lift the Pru's exposure to the independent financial adviser market (IFA).
Abbey has yet to detail its offer but said yesterday after the Pru's approach that once it had access to full financial information it was sure its final offer would be extremely attractive to ScotAm's policyholders, management and staff.
Industry analsysts, however, were sceptical that Abbey after setting the ball rolling in the battle for control of ScotAm, it could manage to compete with the Pru's financial muscle.
