Britain's NatWest Group said on Thursday it was setting up a new business grouping, NatWest Wealth Management, to tap the potential of private banking, long-term savings and investment markets.
The unit will bring together asset management company Gartmore, life insurance and pensions unit NatWest Life and Investment Services and NatWest Ventures.
Private banking unit Coutts Group will join the new arm in January 1998 following the completion of a restructuring process.
NatWest group chief executive Derek Wanless said the new business offered "potentially very strong growth" for the group.
"It's a market with major growth potential because of demographic changes, people's need to save for sickness and old age," he said in an interview.
"It's an area where we've put a fair number of the building blocks in place over the past few years, particularly last year, when we bought Gartmore and integrated it with our own investment management company."
NatWest Wealth Management will have funds in excess of 60 billion pounds ($98 billion) under management.
It will be positioned to offer a comprehensive range of products and services to clients, ranging from the private investor through to the most sophisticated pension fund sponsor.
Paul Myners, chairman of Gartmore, Britain's fifth-largest fund manager, which NatWest acquired in April 1996, will be chief executive of the new unit from April 1 and will report directly to Wanless.
Myners said the businesses in the new group were already well-established and successful and together represented a "substantial force in the provision of long-term savings and investment products".
Wealth management was a significant market for the group's future and the creation of a dedicated sector represented a logical progression of its strategy, said Wanless.
It was also looking to ensure it got the best out of combining the Gartmore and NatWest brands and making use of the groups' distribution channels to independent financial advisers (IFAs).
"Cost savings were essentially in the integration of Gartmore and NatWest investment management which took place last year. The benefits are really on the growth side; the income, not the cost side of the business," Wanless said.
"It has no negative implications for headcount. We genuinely think this is a growth opportunity where we're growing together some interesting businesses both in terms of distribution and fund mangement."
He said that last year's investment in Gartmore was the principal building block from outside needed for the move and that it was now substantially a case of organic growth, building the distribution channels and capitalising on the other strengths of NatWest UK and Coutts. ($1=.6120 Pound)
