International insurance broker Willis Corroon, reported a rise in 1996 profits on Thursday but gave a gloomy assessment of the problems of overcapacity and falling rates currently afflicting the industry.
The company said insurance rates were declining almost universally and competition in the U.S. retail market was intensifying.
It also warned that the recent rise in sterling which reduced 1996 profits by 3.1 million pounds ($5.1 million) may hit 1997 results and that profits from its Lloyd's members agency were unlikely to be repeated at the 1996 level.
The comments were made as Willis unveiled pre-tax profits for the year of 91.6 million pounds, a rise of 83 percent over 1995, which included 30 million pounds in exceptional charges.
Stripping out exceptionals and disposals, profits from continuing operations were up 13 percent at 89.1 million pounds.
Willis said it expected to benefit from a programme designed to enhance performance and competitiveness but the shares lost ground after the results, slipping eight pence by early afternoon to 131-1/2 pence.
Analysts said the results merely confirmed the difficulties the sector faced.
Willis chairman John Reeve, however, pointed to the rise in profits and elimination of net debt as evidence of the successful implementation of plans to restore the group's financial health.
"The group is now focused on its core operation, following a programme of disposal, profitability has been improved and the balance sheet has been significantly strengthened," Reeve said.
Willis also drew comfort from its success in growing revenues and despite the difficult market conditions. it said it remained sceptical about the benefits of the recent industry trend of pursuing cost economies through mergers.
"We think there are huge risks in people businessses associated with that. We have a strategy for growing our business which we're comfortable with and as far as we're concerned that's what we're concentrating on," group executive director Max Taylor told Reuters in an interview.
Following the implementation of the Lloyd's of London Reconstruction and Renewal plan (R&amp;R) the group's members agency returned to profit for the first time since 1992.
The 14.5 million pound profit commission for the 1993 year included reserves from prior years. These were partly offset by contributions of 6.3 million pounds to the R&amp;R plan.
Willis said present indications were that profit commission on the 1994 year, receivable in 1997, will be around half those of 1993.
Profits for the 1995 year were likely to be significantly down, however, said one analyst, and there were big questions over whether it would be profitable at all in 1997 given the rating environment.
After severance costs of 11.3 million pounds in the 1996 figures related to the change programme, Taylor said he expected further costs in 1997 to be lower.
He said a fall in staff numbers of 11 percent in 1996 was unlikely to be repeated and further reductions were expected to be on a smaller scale and absorbed through natural wastage.
The change programme is expected to span three to five years and last year's actions were taken to underpin it. The real effort would now be going into the longer term effort of building capabilities, skills and resources, said Taylor.
($ = 0.612 British Pounds)
