Scottish Amicable adviser SBC Warburg is hoping to close the first stage in the sale of the life assurance group with the signing of confidentiality agreements with all potential bidders by the weekend, a source close to the deal said on Friday.
So far three companies, Abbey National, Prudential Corp and Australia's largest life insurer Australian Mutual Provident (AMP) have signed the agreements.
These give the bidders detailed financial information on ScotAm to enable them to finalise their offers.
The agreements go further, however, in preventing the bidder from publicly disclosing any details of the offers and forcing them to accept the ScotAm board's decision as final.
A number of other companies are reported to have expressed interest in ScotAm but have yet to sign the agreements.
One company rumoured to have contemplated a bid, Belgian-Dutch insurer Fortis, is said to have ruled itself out of the auction process, but the company has consistently declined to comment.
Another tipped to make a bid, Dutch group Aegon, has yet to show its hand.
The whole process is expected to take between four and six weeks before a final offer is recommended to policyholders by the ScotAm board.
Mutually-owned ScotAm effectively put itself up for auction earlier this month when it said it was to seek definitive offers from parties interested in acquiring it.
The sealed bid process has come in for some criticism and Warburgs and the ScotAm board are likely to go to great lengths to ensure fairness is seen to be done.
"I suspect they are aware that they may have to give more detail than otherwise they may have done under a controlled auction," commented one industry observer.
Abbey National, Britain's fifth largest bank, sparked the auction when it announced at the end of January that it was prepared to make an offer worth up to 1.4 billion pounds ($2.27 billion) for ScotAm.
The move came barely two weeks after ScotAm had published its own proposals to drop its mutual status through a flotation on the London stock market.
Prudential threw its hat into the ring with a 1.9 million pound bid last week, a move which prompted ScotAm to open the way for other interested parties to declare their interest.
Abbey National has said it may raise its offer once it has had access to ScotAm's financial details.
In deciding who wins the race, the question of the value of the bid is likely to include not just how much policyholders get up front but where that money comes from, how much goes into policies and what the bidder can offer in terms of future investment flexibility. ($1=.6167 Pound)
