British insurers said on Tuesday they would require those wishing to take out new life insurance policies to reveal the results of genetic tests.
But the Association of British Insurers (ABI) said it would not ask people to take genetic tests when applying for life insurance for the next two years.
The policy statement, backed by all 440 ABI member companies, was a response to rapid developments in the area of genetics in recent years.
While still in its infancy, there is the possibility that new genetic tests will soon be developed that will be able to predict the chances of someone contracting certain diseases or their life expectancy.
Many U.S. companies already require applicants for insurance to undergo genetic testing. At present, Britons are asked to give results of tests they have undergone but are not asked to take tests to qualify for insurance.
Doctors can already diagnose the most common single gene defects such as muscular dystrophy and cystic fibrosis and screen for an individual's susceptibility to certain cancers.
Experts say it will soon be possible to predict the risk of more common disorders such as diabetes or rheumatoid athritis.
The ABI specifically pointed out Huntington's disease, a rare and untreatable hereditary disease that usually does not show up until middle age.
It is characterised by involuntary twitching and causes mental deterioration and eventual death.
Tuesday's announcement is likely to raise fears that an underclass may be created of people unable to insure themselves because of their genetic make-up.
But a spokesman for the ABI dismissed this possibility and said if new tests became available they were likely to benefit people, enabling them to adjust their lifestyles to the risks they run of heart and other diseases.
One expert on the ethics of genetics testing called the decision a good compromise.
"I very much welcome this decision because it seems to me to strike a balance between the private interests of individuals and the interests of insurance companies," said Ruth Chadwick, a University of Central Lancashire geneticist who coordinates Euro-Screen, a committee watching such developments.
Not requiring tests protected individuals, she said, while forcing people to disclose tests prevented those with genetic defects from taking out policies hoping for big payoffs.
But Chadwick warned: "There is a danger that genetic predisposition will be thought of as predicting conditions, which it is not."
Actuaries said they were concerned the debate on health insurance and genetic testing had barely started.
A statement from actuaries' professional organisations noted that Britain's National Health Service accepted good or bad risks without extra charge.
"The profession does not favour legislation on the use of genetic tests as it feels that no case has yet been made for such severe action nor has society discussed how commonplace such tests will be in future medicine," it said.
Genetic tests detrimental to applicants for life insurance up to a total of 100,000 pounds ($160,000) will be ignored where the insurance is linked to a new home mortgage under the new policy.
For new applications for other life insurance policies, individual companies will decide whether they wish to take account of the results of genetic tests previously taken.
($ = 0.621 British Pounds)
