Britons wishing to take out new life insurance policies will have to reveal the results of genetic tests under a new industry policy announced by the Association of British Insurers (ABI) on Tuesday.
But life insurers will not ask people to take genetic tests when applying for life insurance under the scheme, which will run for the next two years.
The policy statement is backed by all 440 ABI member companies and is a response to the rapid developments in the area of genetics in recent years.
While still in its infancy, there is the possibility that new genetic tests will soon be developed which will be able to predict the chances of someone contracting certain diseases or their life expectancy.
Many U.S. companies already require applicants for insurance to undergo genetic testing. At present, Britons are asked to give results of tests they have undergone but are not asked to take tests to qualify for insurance.
Doctors can already diagnose the most common single gene defects such as muscular dystrophy and cystic fibrosis and screen for an individual's susceptibility to certain cancers.
Experts say it will soon be possible to predict the risk of more common disorders such as diabetes or rheumatoid athritis.
Tuesday's announcement is likely to raise fears that an underclass may be created of people unable to insure themselves because of their genetic make-up.
But a spokesman for the ABI dismissed this possibility and said if new tests became available they were likely to benefit people, enabling them to adjust their lifestyles to the risks they run of heart and other diseases.
The ABI said insurance companies did not wish to be perceived as delaying the development of genetic science and said the statement represented a "very carefully considered and responsible contribution" to the challenges presented by genetic developments.
"It is important that insurance companies continue to see the results of genetic tests so they can monitor developments and gauge any financial impact on their company," it said.
Actuaries noted the long-awaited statement of policy by the ABI, saying they were concerned the debate on health insurance and genetic testing had barely started.
A statement from actuaries' professional organisations noted that Britain's National Health Service accepted good or bad risks without extra charge.
"The profession does not favour legislation on the use of genetic tests as it feels that no case has yet been made for such severe action nor has society discussed how commonplace such tests will be in future medicine," it said.
Genetic tests detrimental to applicants for life insurance up to a total of 100,000 pounds ($160,000) will be ignored where the insurance is linked to a new mortgage under the new policy.
For new applications for other life insurance policies, individual companies will decide whether or not they wish to take account of the results of genetic tests previously taken.
Insurers are considering collating information where genetic test results are given to help with future policy development.
The policy will be fully reviewed in 1999 to take account of future developments in genetics ($ = 0.621 British Pounds)
