Scottish Amicable on Thursday asked for firm offers for the company to be tabled by the end of February as it emerged that more potential bidders had joined the auction for the mutually-owned insurance group.
Three companies were already known to have signed confidentiality agreements which give access to ScotAm's books - Abbey National, Prudential Corp and Australian Mutual Provident (AMP).
But a source close to the deal said that others had also signed the agreements and that potential bidders were now "certainly more than three."
ScotAm said that all interested parties would be requested to table firm offers by February 28.
A spokesman for ScotAm declined to comment on either the number or the identity of companies who had signed the confidentiality agreements.
One possibility is Dutch insurance group Aegon whose acquistion of Scottish Equitable has already demonstrated its ability to provide extra capital to develop the business according to industry experts.
Another firm rumoured to have contemplated a bid, Belgian-Dutch insurer Fortis is reported to have ruled a bid out and Lloyds TSB said earlier this week it was not interested in bidding.
Lloyds chief executive Peter Ellwood said that the company had run a slide-rule over ScotAm but that the bid premium looked too high.
Meanwhile, The Scotsman newspaper on Thursday reported that AMP is considering moving its Bristol-based subsidiary London Life to Scotland if its Scottish Amicable bid is successful.
The paper said that AMP would use Scotland to expand into Europe, and that it placed considerable importance on the Glasgow office of Scottish Amicable Investment Managers (SAIM).
The Prudential and Abbey National are believed to have plans to downscale or close SAIM, the paper said.
Following the receipt of bids, ScotAm will hold further discussions after which bidders will be required to submit final, binding proposals.
At the end of the process, the board will recommend a single proposal and an announcement of the recommended acquiror is expected to be made by the end of March.
Under the terms of the confidentiality agreements the decision of the board is final.
"We believe the process we are publishing today will maximise value for policyholders and will be seen to have done so," ScotAm's chairman Sandy Stewart said.
In a move which may help deflect criticism of the sealed bid process, ScotAm said it would make firm offers public, if required to do so by a bidder.
In addition, the Department of Trade &amp; Industry and an independent actuary will be consulted fully prior to the announcement of the recommended offer.
ScotAm will also outline the board's reasons for its recommendation, the criteria used and summarise the relevant information on all "competitive proposals".
The circular to policyholders outlining the final bid is likely some time in May.
Abbey National sparked the auction at the end of January when it announced it was prepared to pay up to 1.4 billion pounds for ScotAm, barely two weeks after ScotAm unveiled its own proposals to drop mutual status and float on the stock market.
The Abbey offer was topped a week later by the Pru's 1.9 billion bid.
Both companies have said that their offers may be raised when they have more detailed financial information on ScotAm.
