Insurance group Guardian Royal Exchange PLC on Tuesday reported a sharp fall in 1996 profits and said it was considering a major acquisition within the next twelve months, possibly in the life sector.
The company blamed tough competition and the worst catastrophe weather claims in the U.S. for 75 years for the profits decline, while bad weather and continuing subsidence losses in Britain also taking a toll.
But news that Guardian may spend around one billion pounds ($1.6 billion) on a life acquisition and disappointment that it had no plans to return capital to shareholders prompted the shares to reverse an initial rise on the back of the results.
The company told industry analysts that a UK life acquisition was top of the list, that it could comfortably spend one billion pounds and would be prepared to spend more if necessary.
Guardian is not a major player in the UK life market and on the plus side an acquisition could give it critical mass and economies of scale.
But the possible goodwill write off such an  acquisition could prompt was a concern, analysts said.
"Guardian looks very expensive on both an earnings and a dividend basis. The asset value is the only rationale as to why the shares are sitting at current levels," said one.
"Any large life acquisition would almost certainly result in paying a very substantial premium to asset value."
The decline in 1996 profits was broadly in-line with market expectations. Despite continuing pressures on margins, Guardian chief executive John Robins said there were bright spots.
The company had seen some hardening of premiums in selected sectors and regions such as British motor insurance and difficult conditions in Germany had not been as severe as some commentators had forecast.
It predicted rates in the motor market could rise by as much as eight percent over the next twelve months with household rates likely to see smaller increases of the order of two percent.
Competition in commercial markets continued to be fierce, though even here there were hopes of an upturn in rates by the end of the year.
For 1996, however, Guardian trading profits were down over 17 percent at 281 million pounds, before restructuring costs of 39 million pounds.
Pre-tax profits including investment gains dropped to 651 million pounds from 812 million pounds last year. Total premium income was down only slightly at 3.73 billion pounds.
While competition had risen and was likely to increase further, Guardian said it was confident about the future and that this was reflected in the increase in the dividend payout for the year by one pence to 10.0 pence per share.
The figures were broadly in line with market expectations although the headline operating profit was flattered by reserve releases to the tune of 10 to 15 million pounds and by a profit contribution from the internal reinsurance operation which may not be repeated.
Progress had been made on the integration of last year's acquisition of Legal &amp; General's commercial business and of the RAC insurance business.
Restructuring of the group's operations in Britain was also moving ahead, the company said.
A new management structure was set up at the beginning of 1997 and cost savings in the next two years are expected to equal this year's 39 million pounds of exceptional charges.
Those charges are expected to cover all the costs required to complete the restructuring over the next 12 to 18 months and while these might include further redundancies, these were unlikely to be of the same order of previous rounds of layoffs. ($ = 0.612 British Pounds)
