Insurance group Guardian Royal Exchange Plc on Tuesday blamed competition and bad weather in the United States and Britain for a sharp fall in trading profits for 1996.
But despite continuing pressures on margins, Guardian chief executive John Robins said there were bright spots.
The company had seen some hardening of premiums in selected sectors and regions such as British motor insurance, and difficult conditions in Germany had not been as severe as had some commentators had forecast.
Trading profits for the year, however, were down over 17 percent at 281 million pounds ($458 million), before restructuring costs of 39 million pounds.
Pre-tax profits including investment gains dropped to 651 million pounds from 812 million pounds last year. Worldwide general insurance premium income was broadly unchanged at 2.91 billion pounds.
The figures were broadly in line with market expectations and Guardian shares were trading eight pence higher at 296 pence by mid-morning.
The dividend payout for the year was raised by 11 percent to 10.0 pence per share.
Robins said the results were achieved amid continuing competitive pressure, abnormally bad weather in North America and adverse weather and continuing subsidence costs in Britain.
But finance director James Morley told Reuters that the group expected premiums in the motor and household insurance markets to strengthen in the coming year although commercial rates were expected to continue to be weak.
"In UK household during 1996 we saw a rating environment where prices were going down. The particularly cold spell at the beginning of the year will have reminded people not to underprice household and we would expect the second half of the year to be flattish or slightly positive," said Morley.
Guardian said it wanted its business to grow organically and by acquisition. But it was not prepared to overpay and was determined to write for profit, not volume.
The results included a second half provision for the integration of the Legal &amp; General business and fundamental restructuring of the British insurance business. Robins said he believed they had achieved a great deal in effectively positioning the group for the future.
A new management structure was set up at the beginning of 1997 and cost savings in the next two years would equal this year's 39 million pounds of exceptional charges.
Those charges are expected to cover all the costs required to complete the restructuring over the next 12 to 18 months.
There will be some facility closures and further staff losses to come, said Morley, but he declined to put an overall figure on the number of likely layoffs.
The company said it continued to withdraw from non-core, non-performing markets and had three objectives -- greater attention to customer needs, greater focus on the cost base and increasing return on shareholders funds.
It continued to target increases in premiums only in sectors and regions where it was confident of profitable growth and acceptable underwriting margins.
"Where we have a strategic benefit from being in a market segment, then we will use our market presence to ensure we get the rate we require over the medium term. In the shorter term we will walk away from certain business if we can't get the right rates," said Morley.
($ = 0.613 British Pounds)
