Commercial Union (CU) became the latest victim of sterling's recent strength on Wednesday, as the British insurance giant reported a sharp fall in profits for 1996.
A 64 million pound ($104.8 million) currency loss by the company, three-quarters of whose profits come from outside Britain, largely accounted for a near 13 percent fall in operating profits for the year to 444 million pounds.
U.S. weather related losses of 41 million pounds and severe competition in the general insurance market were a further drag on profits.
But overall the results broadly matched market expectations with the life business, which accounts for around 44 percent of premiums, showing healthy growth once currency effects were stripped out.
CU said it intended to continue to expand its life operations to take advantage of its "more consistent profit streams and its exciting growth prospects".
Finance director Peter Foster said the group would not rule out acquisitions to stimulate further growth.
"Our strategy of more emphasis on life business has proved viable so far...we will be looking at any suitable acquisition that we may come across," Foster said.
This might include overseas businesses but the company stressed it did not mean it would grow solely through acquisitions and that the focus remained on organic growth.
According to CU the strength in sterling had masked significant profit rises in continental Europe.
Over the year as a whole, the pound advanced 10 percent against the dollar, 17 percent against the French franc and around 12 percent against the mark.
After adjusting for the exchange rate, overall operating profits were down just three percent on 1995 and life profits 13 percent higher at 241 million.
Despite the underlying operating performance worries about the impact of the currency on CU's net asset value (NAV) prompted a sharp markdown in the shares.
The NAV was down to 545 pence at year-end 1996 from 582 pence a year earlier, though analysts said there had been quite a strong recovery in net asset value in the last six weeks.
By late afternoon, CU shares were 21 pence lower at 669 pence.
In general insurance, good results in France, the Netherlands and Canada helped offset part of the effects of competition in the British market and U.S. weather claims.
Despite this and even adjusting for the currency, general insurance profits were 21 percent lower at 356 million pounds.
Echoing comments from Guradian Royal Exchange (GRE) which reported results yesterday, CU said it was seeing signs of a rise in motor market rates.
Like GRE it expected to see motor rates firming through 1997. Household rates were also likely to edge ahead, particularly given recent storms in Britain and a cold snap at the start of the year.
($ = 0.610 British Pounds)
