Almost 8 out of 10 people in Britain are opposed to insurance companies using genetic test results as the basis for charging higher premiums or refusing to provide cover, according to an opinion poll commissioned by The Genetics Forum released on Wednesday.
The news comes just a week after the Association of British Insurers (ABI) announced that people seeking life insurance would be required to report the results of any genetic tests to enable insurers to assess the financial impact on the industry over the next two years.
The poll also underlined fears that the ABI's stance would discourage people from undergoing genetic testing with almost three out of ten people asked saying they would not take a test now they are required to disclose the results to an insurer.
This could lead to people being deterred from seeking diagnosis of some treatable conditions or prevent them being able to make informed decisions about starting a family.
According to the ABI guidelines detrimental test results may be taken into account for any type of insurance except life cover linked to mortgages of less than 100,000 pounds though several larger companies have distanced themselves from this.
Standard Life, for instance, has said it would not seek the results of genetic tests for any policies.
Julie Sheppard of The Genetics Forum, a non-profit organisation committed to the socially responsible use of genetic engineering said that the poll showed that the public did not trust insurance companies with genetic information.
"Genetic tests are still in their infancy and their conclusions may remain uncertain and imprecise for many years. Many tests will only tell an individual that they may, as opposed to will, develop a disease in later life."
"It isn't sensible or fair to be charged more for your insurance or refused it altogether on the basis of a condition you may never get."
The Genetic Forum poll also found that almost four out of 10 people would object if a tissue sample which they had given anonymously was used for research without their knowledge or consent.
Seven out of 10 said they would object if their anonymous tissue was sold to a pharmaceutical company for research without their knowledge or consent.
The Genetic Forum said too much was being left to the discretion of insurance companies and individual researchers.
The Human Genetics Advisory Commission (HGAC) set up last year after a British parliamentary committee called for the creation of a body to consider the "broad social, ethical and/or economic consequences of developments in human genetics" meets for the first time on February 27.
