Pensions and property group Liberty International Holdings  said on Thursday it might go on the acquisition trail to develop its financial services interests.
The company, 69 percent-owned by South African insurance giant Liberty Life, said it was always open to acquisitions and was willing to use its strong balance sheet to fund them.
"We've got various developments in the financial services area -- unit trusts, pensions and offshore. Those are the areas we want to be in long term and if they lead us into acquisitions that's fine - but we don't feel any pressure to do them," said Liberty managing director David Fischel.
Liberty currently has around 380 million pounds ($619.1 million) in cash on its balance sheet though this may have little bearing on the size of any future acquisition.
"We could spend one billion, two billion or 50 million pounds, it depends on the quality of the acquisition," said Fischel.
Liberty, which has a 72 percent stake in Britain's fourth largest quoted largest property company Capital Shopping Centres, which it floated as a separate company in 1996, launched a new, low-cost pension vehicle -- PensionStore -- in January.
It also controls Portfolio Fund Management Limited, a British unit trust group with some 50 million pounds under management.
In October, the group announced an alliance with British Telecom and post office fund managers Hermes which it promised would "demystify" the British pension market.
At the launch of the venture which offers specialised investment services to the UK pensions industry, Liberty chairman Donald Gordon said he believed pensions would be the fastest growing business in the world over the next 20 years.
The possibility of an acquistion was raised as Liberty reported a seven percent increase in pre-tax profits for 1996 to 100.4 million pounds.
The dividend at 16 pence per share was up 10 percent on the previous year. Liberty shares, however, slipped on the results ending the day 13-1/2 pence lower at 466-1/2 pence.
The advance in profits was helped by the performance of CSC which owns two of Britain's largest out of town shopping centres - Lakeside, Thurrock, east of London, and the MetroCentre, Gateshead, in north east England..
Strong underlying rental growth - up 38 percent at Lakeside - in an improving retailing environment was the main factor behind the performance.
CSC, which has five of the top ten shopping centres in Britain and attracts over 155 million customers annually, was enjoying a "very good growth phase" and had a strong position in the market according to Fischel.
The group could grow it further by expanding existing centres or building new ones such as the 250 million pound shopping centre development at Braehead Park, Glasgow, he said.
Shares in CSC climbed 69 percent to 366 pence in 1996. Adjusting for the CSC share price, Liberty's net asset value per share would have amounted to around 500 pence per share at year-end.
The shares finished the day 1-1/2 pence lower at 392-1/2 pence. ($= 0.613 British Pounds)
