Britain's National Westminster Bank Plc said on Friday it would be making a first half provision of 50 million pounds ($81.4 million) after finding mispricing errors in the interest rate options book of its Natwest Markets unit.
The bank said a senior trader had been suspended for "failure to supervise", pending the conclusion of an internal inquiry.
A second trader, who had resigned from NatWest before the errors had been discovered, has been reported to the Securities &amp; Futures Authority (SFA) regulator.
NatWest said that no clients had been affected by the discovery, adding that the Bank of England was being kept informed.
The SFA confirmed NatWest Markets had sent it information which it was now studying.
An SFA spokesman said no statement was planned at the moment.
"Clearly we have to look at the information, assess the situation and decidewhat is the next step foward."
A Bank of England spokesman also declined to comment further.
Dealers were left guessing who was behind the transactions that led to the provision or even whether they took place on an exchange or the over-the-counter options market.
The London International Financial Futures and Options Exchange, the site for a large part of London's options trading, had no immediate comment on the news.
Options are contracts which give buyers the right, but not the obligation, to buy or sell an underlying security at a set price in the future.
Mispricing could arise in various ways, for instance, a broker could be given a price from clients but somehow get the price wrong in executing the trade.
One options dealer suggested it could be down to how an individual dealt with issues such as margins on his firm's trades.
"Basically if you're a senior trader or a top person you can actually change prices or positions for margining," the dealer said.
One highlight of Natwest Markets' results released earlier this week was a 25 percent rise in profits from what it called "other dealing" to 171 million pounds.
That was mainly the result of strong increases in rate risk management products, among them interest rate options.
Derivatives markets have been involved in a string of large losses for companies around the world.
While the exact nature of the "mispricing errors" is unknown at this stage, the memory of Nick Leeson's activities in the derivatives market is still fresh in many minds.
The $1.4 billion losses run up by Leeson eventually led to the collapse of Barings in 1995 and its subsequent acquisition by Dutch bank ING .
The banking industry attracted more bad publicity last year after Morgan Grenfell sacked fund manger Peter Young after it was discovered he had breached rules on investing in unlisted companies.
The huge bonuses paid out by banks has been cited by some as one reason for the high risks some, like Leeson, are prepared to take.
Only yesterday Donald Gordon, a leading figure in the financial services industry and chairman of Liberty International attacked the payment of large bonuses by investment banks as a "massive over-incentivisation of personnel".
He said it had produced an "excessively materialistic culture" in the world's finacial markets which had led to a number of financial accidents and would undoubtedly lead to more dramatic catastrophes in the years to come. ($ = 0.614 British Pounds)
