The battle for control of Scottish Amicable became a three-way race on Friday as the deadline for firm offers for the mutually-owned life insurer passed.
The company said that it had received three initial bids from high street bank Abbey National Plc and insurance groups Prudential Corp Plc and Australian Mutual Provident (AMP).
Details of the bids were not released.
While technically the door is still open for other bidders to come in, a source close to the deal said that was "unrealistic" at this stage.
Under the terms of the auction process, ScotAm agreed it would make firm offers public if required by a bidder. It said none had asked it to do so.
With the auction effectively a sealed-bid process and bidders unable to see competing offers, there would appear to be little advantage in one company giving rivals a target by making public its own proposals.
AMP development director Jonathan Schwarz said the group believed it would be wrong to handicap discussions with ScotAm by conducting them in the "glare of publicity".
Both the Pru and Abbey said they had nothing to add to earlier statements.
Discussions with the three companies will be held with a view to obtaining final offers by mid-March.
ScotAm chairman Sandy Stewart said the three proposals represented an "excellent outcome to this phase of the process".
"We can now move on to the next phase with every expectation of delivering maximum value to policyholders."
The company said it would not be expressing an opinion on the merits or otherwise of any proposal until the evaluation process was complete. Last week ScotAm asked for firm offers for the company by today. It hopes to recommend a single proposal to policyholders by the end of March.
National Westminster Bank was among a "about half a dozen" companies which signed confidentiality agreements to gain access to ScotAm's books but pulled out earlier this week. Lloyds TSB has also admitted it ran the slide rule over ScotAm but said it felt the bid premium looked too high. Schwarz said ScotAm was one of a number of current opportunities which fulfilled the group's criteria. He said the group was looking to acquire British and U.S. businesses with quality local management, marketing and distribution in place which, with the backing of AMP's financial strength, could deliver "substantial organic growth". The auction was sparked by Abbey National's bid for the company at the end of January. That came barely two weeks after ScotAm had released its own proposals to drop mutual status and float on the London stock market. Abbey's offer was topped a week later by the Pru's 1.9 billion pound ($3.1 billion) bid, though that figure includes a 1.1 billion pound loan element. Both companies have said that their offers may be raised when they had more detailed financial information on ScotAm.
($ = 0.614 British Pounds)
