Stiff competition and severe weather in the U.S. led to a 15 million pound ($24.2 million) fall in 1996 profits from British insurer General Accident Plc on Tuesday, despite a record final quarter.
The weather-related losses knocked 30 million pounds off operating profits which slipped to 421 million pounds over the year.
Echoing recent remarks from rival insurers, chief executive Bob Scott described the market as "increasingly competitive", although he was hopeful of a rise in motor premiums in the coming year.
General Accident intends to raise all motor rates, covering about 800,000 vehicles, by around 3.2 percent in April.
That increase will be reviewed in July and Scott said an eight percent rise for the year as a whole was the sort of increase needed given current market conditions.
The big question is whether such rises stick. Last year's four percent April increase resulted in an eventual rise of between two and three percent.
There were, however, no signs of rate increases in the homeowner or commercial sectors, said Scott.
Despite the fall in 1996 profits and even allowing for a 10 million pound boost from a change in the way the group accounts for overseas earnings, the results were at the top end of market expectations.
Year-end net assets per share, up a slightly less-than-expected three percent at 675 pence by year-end, have since risen to 734 pence.
A 10-1/2 percent increase in the dividend for the year to 34.25 pence per share was also ahead of forecast and by late afternoon the shares had added 11 pence to 848 pence.
Analysts welcomed a resilient underwriting performance, especially in the fourth quarter in Britain and the United States, and the level of profitability in new business in the group's life operations.
"There's some justification in adding some goodwill over the net asset value (NAV) into the share price for future profitable new business in life," commented one analyst.
The acquisition of Provident Mutual in January 1996 helped fuel a 37 percent increase in life and pension profits over the year to 108 million pounds.
Provident contributed 18 million pounds after reorganisation costs of 16 million pounds and Scott said the group was now looking to capitalise on the pension expertise which Provident had brought.
The key for the life company was the profitability of new business, said Scott, but he ruled out any major acquisitions in the drive to expand the business.
"At the present time there's nothing wrong with organic growth in life. We've proved we're capable of achieving that."
The group has set itself the goal of increasing the proportion of more stable life earnings to a level which covers dividends each year. In 1996 the proportion of dividend covered by net life earnings in 1996 was 44 percent.
Scott also dismissed speculation of a merger or takeover involving General Accident.
"We've got the benefits of scale in our major businesses. We don't have to do anything. We'd like to make further acquisitions in the U.S. Midwest but don't see any need to dramatically change our current shape," said Scott.
Investment income over the year was up seven percent but the rise in stock markets to record levels over 1996 has prompted the company to reduce exposure to British and North American equities over the past three quarters and shift money into bonds. ($ = 0.619 British Pounds)
