British insurer General Accident PLC reported a fall in annual profits on Tuesday, despite a record final quarter in 1996.
Operating profits slipped 15 million pounds to 421 million ($680 million) although a rise in weather-related losses of 30 million pounds more than accounted for the decline.
The recent strength of the pound was offset by a change to an average translation of overseas earnings instead of a year-end translation which added 10 million pounds to the operating line.
Despite the fall, profits were above market forecasts and a 10.5 percent increase in dividend for the year to 34.25 pence per share also beat expectations.
Net assets per share rose to 675 pence from 653 pence.
By late morning General Accident shares had added 8-1/2 pence to 845-1/2 pence.
General Accident chief executive Bob Scott described the market as increasingly competitive but added that the strategy of focusing on underwriting skills and building the life business was bearing fruit.
Scott said the group wanted to focus life operations in Britain and the goal was to increase the proportion of life earnings to a level that covered dividends each year.
The proportion of dividend covered by net life earnings in 1996 was 44 percent but Scott ruled out any major acquisitions in the drive to expand the business.
"At the present time there's nothing wrong with organic growth in life. We've proved we're capable of achieving that," said Scott.
Provident Mutual, acquired in January 1996, contributed 18 million pounds to the results, net of reorganisation costs of 16 million pounds and General Accident said it was now looking to capitalise on the pension expertise which Provident brought to the group.
The key for the life company was the profitability of new business and the group had done well in a year which included the integration of Provident, said Scott.
Scott dismissed speculation of a possible merger or takeover of General Accident.
"We've got the benefits of scale in our major businesses. We don't have to do anything," he said. "We'd like to make further acquisitions in the U.S. Midwest but don't see any need to dramatically change our current shape."
The rating environment continues to be mixed and General Accident echoed comments from Commercial Union and Guardian Royal Exchange that there were signs of firming motor rates.
"There are certainly signs that in personal motor rating increases are coming through. We're putting another rate increase through in commercial motor," said Scott.
There were, however no signs of rate increases in the homeowner or commercial sectors.
Like other insurers, General Accident results saw an increase in weather losses over the year and said that results from Australia were also disappointing. ($ = 0.619 British Pounds)
