B.A.T industries said on Wednesday it was interested in expanding its British life insurance activities through acquisition but had been put off bidding for mutual insurer Scottish Amicable by the price.
B.A.T. Chief Executive Martin Broughton made the comments as the group, which also has extensive tobacco interests, reported a three percent fall in trading profits at its financial services arm.
Those figures included a 160 million pound ($257.8 million) charge for U.S. environmental claims dating back to the 1960s.
"We've said in the past that the portfolio of brands in our British American Financial Services unit would benefit from filling out in the life broker business," said Broughton.
"Too many people were looking at Scottish Amicable, I think it would have turned out to be too high a price."
Scottish Amicable effectively put itself up for sale in February and is considering bids from Prudential Corp, Abbey National and Australian Mutual Provident.
Broughton's remarks mirrored comments made at the half-year stage that the group wanted to build its presence in the independent financial advice sector which accounts for around half of all British life insurance and pension business.
But B.A.T chairman Lord Cairns refused to comment on speculation that the group had approached Commercial Union as a possible partner.
He did say the company remained open-minded about its future structure, leaving the door open to a possible demerger.
B.A.T owns insurance groups Allied Dunbar and Eagle Star in Britain and Farmers in the U.S.
"We are not wedded to a particular structure... We have an open mind," said Cairns.
The unexpected provisioning in the 1996 figures came after a change in the way the group quantified possible environmental claims.
In the past these had been assessed on estimates based on claims experience.
Wednesday's provision followed a study by consultants Tillinghast-Towers Perrin which looked at individual sites in the U.S. to calculate B.A.T's possible exposure.
Given all the available information, the company said today's move would signal an end to such provisioning.
"They do now look fairly well reserved compared with the industry average," one analyst said.
In the United States, many companies have moved across to the more prudent way of reserving now used by B.A.T.
Echoing comments from competitors, Broughton said the general insurance trading environment remained difficult in 1996. The company had seen a slight pickup in motor rates but commercial lines remained very competitive, he said.
Excluding the environmental charge, general insurance profits were up three percent at 686 million pounds while life and investment businesses were up 16 percent at 495 million pounds.
Total premium income rose nine percent to 10 billion pounds.
Analysts said the results and comments on the state of the markets were broadly as expected.
Allied Dunbar trading profits rose 32 percent to 203 million pounds over the 12 months, though the comparison was flattered by a 1995 provision for costs associated with the Securities &amp; Investment Board pensions review.
Eagle Star profits fell 135 million pounds to 85 million pounds with competitive markets and the shedding of unprofitable businesses leading to a 12 percent fall in premium income.
Premium income in Eagle Star's life business was 18 percent higher at one billion pounds.
Profits at B.A.T's North American insurance business Farmers rose nine percent to 632 million pounds. Profits at the general insurance management business rose 12 percent to 476 million pounds and in the life business three percent to 156 million pounds. ($ = 0.620 British Pounds)
