Composite insurer Royal &amp; Sun Alliance Group Plc on Thursday reported lower results in its first year since it merged and said it would seek shareholder approval to buy in up to five percent of its shares.
But large provisions for U.S. environmental claims and the impact of the pound's strength took the gloss off the figures reported by the group, formed in a six billion pound ($9.7 billion) merger last year.
Including the increased provisions and 32 million pounds for currency movements, operating profits fell to 706 million pounds from 915 million in 1995 for the combined group.
After an initial gain on the buyback news, the shares closed down 9-1/2 pence at 494 pence.
A lower-than-expected net asset value and a poor performance in the British motor insurance market compounded the market's disappointment.
The 167 million pounds in provisions, largely put aside for U.S. asbestos and environmental claims dating back to the 1960s and 1970s, follows a change in the way the group assesses possible liabilities.
On Wednesday, B.A.T Industries subsidiary Eagle Star set aside 160 million pounds in a similar move.
Both companies have said that they expect it to mark the end to such provisioning.
The dividend for the year was raised to 19 pence per share in line with last year's management forecasts.
The operating figures did not include 201 million pounds relating to consolidation costs, some 30 or 40 million more than analysts had expected.
But management declared themselves pleased with the results and said the group remained on target to achieve the annual cost savings of at least 175 million pounds identified at the time of the merger.
Chief executive Richard Gamble said the integration was progressing well, especially on the staffing front, and the group was continuing to hold on to business.
But he played down the possibility of an acquisition to strengthen its life operations or exposure to Continental Europe, emphasising that the current focus was on integration.
The group had decided to buy back shares in anticipation of continued strengthening of its capital position, said deputy chairman Roger Taylor, who hinted that it could be repeated in the future.
The company will need shareholders' permission at the annual meeting in May before it can carry out the buyback.
U.S. weather costs mirrored the experience of competitors who have all highlighted the impact on profits of some of the worst weather on record in North America last year.
U.S. weather losses at 96 million pounds were 36 million higher for the year. Together with the reserving for environmental claims, this turned a 134 million pound profit in 1995 into a 14 million pound loss.
Profits for the general insurance business as a whole after the changes in claims reserving were 480 million pounds, down from 754 million in 1995.
In Britain, a 28 percent fall in profits reflected an increase in the frequency and average cost of personal lines claims -- motor claims frequency was up eight percent and costs seven percent -- and continuing competition.
The figures also included an unexpected 50 million pound increase in reserves split between reinsurance of the U.S. environmental costs and domestic insurance indemnity.
On a brighter note, Royal &amp; Sun said it was confident motor rates had bottomed out and was scheduling increases for 1997.
Worldwide life profits increased by 15 percent to 213 million pounds and were up 13 percent to 150 million pounds in Britain.
The company said it was appointing Patrick Gillam, chairman of Standard Chartered bank, as non-executive chairman from May 9. ($ = 0.620 British Pounds)
