Royal &amp; Sun Alliance Group plc , one of Britain's leading insurers, on Thursday unveiled its first set of annual results following last year's merger and said it would be seeking shareholders' permission to buy in up to five percent of its shares.
But large provisions for U.S. environmental claims and the impact of the pounds's recent strength took the gloss off the figures, the first since Britain's Royal Insurance and Sun Alliance were put together in a six billion pound ($9.7 billion) merger last year.
The 167 million pounds in provisions, largely put aside for U.S. asbestos and environmental claims, follows a change in the way the group assesses possible liabilities.
On Wednesday, B.A.T Industries subsidiary Eagle Star on Wednesday set aside 160 million pounds in provisions.
Both companies have said that they expect it to mark the end to such provisioning.
Including the currency and environmental charges operating profits for the year were 706 million pounds compared with 915 million pounds in 1995 for the combined group.
By late morning Royal &amp; Sun shares were trading eight pence lower at 495 pence despite an earlier jump to the day's high of 515 on initial reaction to the share buyback.
The operating figure did not include 201 million pounds related to the cost of consolidating operations, some 30 or 40 million pounds more than analysts had expected.
But management declared themselves pleased with the results and said the group remained on target to achieve the annual cost savings of 175 million pounds identified at the time of the merger.
Royal &amp; Sun chief executive Richard Gamble said the integration was progressing well, especially on the staffing front, and the group was continuing to retain business.
But he dismissed the possibility of an acquisition to strengthen its life business or exposure to Continental Europe.
"There's an awful lot going on in integrating the two companies and that is where our mind is focused. That's where we have to keep our concentration."
The dividend for the year was raised to 19 pence per share in line with management's forecast at the time the merger was announced last May. Net asset value per share was 399 pence at year-end and had increased to 417 pence by March 5.
"This was a very good operating result in a difficult year which was affected by exceptional weather in the U.S. and continuing soft markets," said Royal &amp; Sun deputy chairman Roger Taylor.
The group had decided to buy back shares in anticipation of continued strengthening of the group's capital position, added Taylor.
The weather related costs mirrored the experience of competitors who have all highlighted the impact on profits of some of the worst weather on record in North America last year.
Profits for the general insurance business after the changes in claims reserving were 480 million pounds, down from 754 million pounds in 1995. Improvements in Canada and Scandinavia were offset by reduced profits elsewhere.
U.S. weather losses at 96 million pounds were 36 million pounds higher than in 1995. Together with the reserving for environmental claims this turned a 134 million pound profit in the U.S. in 1995 into a 14 million pound loss and more than offset an improvement in the core book of business, the company said.
In Britain, a 28 percent fall in profits reflected an increase in the frequency and average cost of personal lines claims, changes in claims reserving and continuing competition.
Life profits increased by 15 percent to 213 million pounds with increases in both British and overseas operations.
($ = 0.620 British Pounds)
