The head of the Securities and Investments Board (SIB), Britain's top financial regulator, on Friday criticised slow progress made in compensating victims of pensions mis-selling in Britain, and called on all parties to ensure a speedy conclusion to the situation.
SIB chairman, Sir Andrew Large, said that progress had hitherto been "unacceptably slow" but welcomed signs of increased commitments to a rapid resolution emerging from meetings with major firms.
Large's comments followed a statement from British Treasury minister Angela Knight on Thursday urging the pensions industry to speed up payment to individuals hit by pension mis-selling in the late 1980s and early 1990s.
She said that she was looking for "rapid and decisive results from the pensions industry. Targets will be set to ensure that people are put right".
Large said he was determined to secure redress for those missold personal pensions and welcomed any contribution which helped secure that aim.
"All parties have a responsibility for bringing this review to a speedy conclusion - the industry, the occupational pension schemes, the regulators and the government."
Large is due to stand down as chairman of the SIB in May.
Knight's comments came just two days after the ruling Conservative Party, facing a General Election expected to be held on May 1, announced plans to overhaul the pension system in Britain.
As many as 1-1/2 million people in Britain may have been affected by being wrongly advised to take out personal pensions when they would have been better off remaining in occupational pension schemes.
An industry review was launched in 1994 but only a small proportion of those affected have so far been compensated.
Latest figures on the review published two weeks ago revealed that of nearly 500,000 "priority cases" just over 10,000 people had been offered compensation.
The SIB announced a simplified pensions review process last November in order to break the log-jam on the issue, but the results of this will not start feeding through until later this year.
The Personal Investment Authority, which regulates the sale of investment products to the public, has been holding discussions with major pensions providers to clear the backlog.
About 40 of the largest life companies account for around 90 percent of personal pension business. The discussions are likely to be concluded in the next three weeks.
