British insurer Legal &amp; General (L&amp;G) on Thursday reported a double digit rise in profits for 1996 and gave an upbeat assessment of the outlook for the group.
But the company ruled out acquisitions in the life and pensions business and said that despite stiff competition, rising sales and profits would continue to underpin strong dividend growth in the future.
"Our strategy is not dependent on mergers and acquisitions. We don't want our efforts diverted by someone else's problems," said L&amp;G chief executive David Prosser.
The in-line results and prospects for dividend growth helped L&amp;G shares to a new all-time high of 423 pence. By late morning the shares were trading at 415-1/2 pence, a rise of 9-1/2 pence on the day.
Analysts said there were few surprises in the figures, though the dividend was slightly ahead of forecast.
The trebling of the value of new business, was singled out as particularly positive.
"There were exceptional factors in there but nevertheless they've done a tremendous job in taking the new business value up from 20 million ($31.9 million) to 60 million pounds. That was the most striking piece of good news," commented one analyst.
Despite a "very competitive" trading environment, which he said was likely to continue, Prosser expressed satisfaction at the year's performance.
Sales growth continued to be based on competitive pricing and product innovation but reductions in profitability produced by cutting prices were being offset by increases in business volume, he said.
"There's a lot of market share about if you do this business sensibly and we do appear to be in a virtuous circle. We're winning additional sales growth, getting lower unit costs as a result, good growth in embedded value of new business and a good increase in shareholder value," he told Reuters.
More competitive products, supported by lower administartion costs, cost effective sales distribution and good investment returns, result in higher sales, greater customer loyalty and increased profit, said Prosser.
Despite a 54 percent jump in new business in 1996, L&amp;G still had less than five percent market share and the focus going foward would continue to be on growing volume, said Prosser.
But the sharp increases in British bulk annuity business in 1996 which saw single new premium business rise to more than four times 1995 levels, is unlikely to be replicated in 1997.
Operating profits for the twelve months were up over 15 percent to 291.4 million pounds and the dividend was raised 14 percent to 11.13 pence per share.
Profits from life and pensions businesses rose nearly 14 percent to 250 million pounds while general insurance profits rose to 29.9 million pounds from 23.4 million pounds the previous year.
The sale of the company's commercial lines business resulted in a pre-tax exceptional profit of 70 million pounds.
The investment maangement arm had a good year in winning new business and with 48.1 billion pounds under management, a 20 percent increase on the year, the group is now one of Britain's largest fund managers.
Like rival insurers the group had seen some firming in motor rates but this was slow and very selective.
"Household is more dificult. I think some people are seeing rate reductions and some are getting rate increases. Household is becoming more selective on underwriting and pricing of risk -- the shape of pricing is changing," said Prosser.
($ = 0.626 British Pounds)
