Three companies are expected to be left in the running for control of mutually-owned life insurance company Scottish Amicable at the deadline for final offers on Friday evening.
Insurance groups Prudential Corp and Australian Mutual Provident (AMP) and high street bank Abbey National have all been working on offers to be weighed up by the ScotAm board and its advisers SBC Warburg.
A source close to Warburgs said a bidder from outside the three front-runers was not anticipated.
The sifting of the offers is likely to take place behind closed doors with not one of the likely bidders opting to make public details of its proposals.
In an effort to deflect criticism of the sealed-bid process ScotAm had agreed to publish details of offers, if required by a bidder.
For the moment, none have asked it to do so.
"We're not at this stage asking for our bid to be revealed. I think everybody's waiting to see whether anyone wants to have a shootout now - it's a bit of a stand off... it's very much a case of playing by ScotAm's rules," said a source close to one of the bidders.
Those rules include confidentiality agreements and an undertaking to accept the board's decision, expected by the end of the month, as final.
ScotAm, based in Stirling in central Scotland, has arranged for an independent tribunal to resolve any dispute arising from the the takeover battle.
The board has repeatedly stressed that the interests of its 1.1 million policyholders will be uppermost in its final decision.
Those interests are not limited to headline figures and upfront payouts but extend to the bidders long-term investment plans.
One of Warburg's main difficulties will be comparing what are likely to be very differently structured proposals, and independent actuaries and the Department of Trade &amp; Industry will be consulted before a decision is made.
Job security for ScotAm's 2,200 employees is also likely to play its part and all three bidders have been quick to calm fears of job cuts at ScotAm.
AMP has said it would consider moving its Bristol-based London Life buisness to Scotland if it won while both Abbey and the Pru have said job preservation in Stirling would be a priority.
AMP, Abbey and the Pru are all that are left of half a dozen companies, including National Westminster Bank and Lloyds TSB who last month signed confidentiality agreements with ScotAm to evaluate the company as a takeover prospect.
The final price -- widely expected to top two billion pounds ($3.2 billion) -- is said to have deterred many from taking their interest further and Lloyds admitted recently that after running the slide rule over ScotAm, it felt the bid premium looked too high.
Both the Pru and Abbey have already said that their original proposals might be increased once they had access to more detailed financial detail on ScotAm.
Abbey's original bid was worth up to 1.4 billion pounds while the Pru's 1.9 billion pound offer included a loan element to bolster ScotAm's life fund.
Those bids came barely two weeks after ScotAm had published its own proposals to shed its mutual status and float itself on the stock market.
AMP has not yet given any indication of what it might be prepared to pay for ScotAm, but is financially strong has said it was keen to make acquisitions in both the British and U.S. market.
($ = 0.627 British Pounds)
