Britannic Assurance on Tuesday promised to speed-up the settlement of cases of pension mis-selling as the insurance group reported a near 50 percent jump in its profits for 1996.
The company admitted it had between 12,000 and 13,000 cases classified as priority cases but said that the resources already committed to the issue would help accelerate the resolution of those outstanding.
"Our objective is to complete a substantial proportion of priority cases this year... But that depends not only on our own resources but on the ability of occupational schemes to answer our queries," said Britannic chief executive Brian Shaw.
The industry was now in a much better position to clear up the backlog, he said, thanks to the work done over the past couple of years.
Pension providers have come under increasing criticism for the delays in compensating victims of pensions mis-selling in the late 1980s and early 1990s.
As many as 1-1/2 million people may have been wrongly advised by the financial services industry to take out personal pensions instead of staying in occupational schemes.
A review was launched in 1994 but only a tiny proportion of those affected have so far received compensation.
The Personal Investment Authority (PIA), which regulates the sale of investment products to the public, came under heavy fire last week for its handling of the scandal.
Shaw made his comments as Britannic reported a 47 percent increase in pre-tax profits to 93.9 million pounds ($149 million), helped by a 23 million pound boost related to February's announcement of a 209 million pound special bonus for policyholders.
The bonus resulted from a government clarification of ownership of 'orphan' assets -- money surplus to policyholders' needs in with-profit funds.
Under an agreement with the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI), 902 million pounds of the 5.68 billion pound life fund has been attributed to shareholders.
That helped lift the dividend by 82 percent to 28 pence per share, which Shaw said would provide the basis for double-digit dividend increases in the future.
Britannic shares added 12 pence to 871 pence.
Following a strategic review of its businesses, the company said it would be looking to build on its brand, investment management, distribution skills and product development capabilities to deliver enhanced value to shareholders and policyholders.
It also said that reversionary bonus scales for traditional business -- bonuses added to policyholder's investment during the course of the policy -- would be unchanged with modest reductions in annual bonus rates for unitised business.
Terminal bonuses for traditional business have been maintained.
New regular premiums rose 7.7 percent to 37 million pounds in 1996 and single premiums 16.8 percent to 137 million pounds.
It was also announced that William Haynes has been appointed to the Britannic board as sales and marketing director. ($ = 0.630 British Pounds)
