About three million Norwich Union  policyholders are to receive free shares under flotation plans announced on Thursday that would value the insurer at about five billion pounds ($8 billion).
Almost two million will receive shares worth 800 pounds on average and another one million "non-profit" members of the mutually-owned insurance group will receive a fixed hand-out of shares worth between 330 and 400 pounds on the group's flotation in June.
The demutalisation and flotation - the first by a British insurer - will rank Norwich among Britain's largest 50 companies.
Norwich Union's 10,000 employees will share in the giveaway, receiving 150 shares each.
Norwich's adviser Dresdner Kleinwort Benson estimated the shares would be worth between 220 and 265 pence each had they been listed at the end of February.
The company, Britain's third largest life insurer, also unveiled plans to raise a further 1.75 billion pounds through an offer of new shares in May.
Existing Norwich members will be able to purchase shares at a discount, the size of which has yet to be finalised.
Members will vote on the proposals at an extraordinary meeting in London on April 18 with the company needing the backing of three-quarters of those who vote.
The size of the planned payouts is comfortably ahead of the 500 pounds many industry observers had expected.
Norwich chief executive Allan Bridegwater said he believed the group's mutual structure was no longer appropriate and that flotation was the best way forward for the company and its members.
"The distribution of free shares represents a significant release of value to qualifying members," he said.
"The discounted offer of additional shares will give members a further opportunity to participate in the future of Norwich Union."
The share handout will be worth a total of around 3.1 billion pounds. The two million with-profit members will receive a minimum of 300 shares with additional shares based on the value and duration of their holdings as of October 1, 1996.
Three-quarters of with-profit policyholders - life insurance policies which share in the investment profits of the life fund through bonuses - will get between 300 and 600 shares. Non-profit members will get a fixed allocation of 150 shares.
Most of Norwich Union's half-a-million overseas members will have the choice of a cash payment instead of free shares.
The flotation will allow the separation of the group's life operations from the risks associated with its more volatile and cyclical general business.
It will also strengthen the group's financial position and allow the core life business greater investment freedom.
The general insurance business will be transferred from the life fund to shareholder ownership and the life and pensions operations to a subsidiary company.
Norwich Union, which reported pre-tax profit in 1996 of 483 million pounds, said it believed the opportunities for sustained growth were good but that results in its general insurance arm would continue to be affected by pricing pressure in 1997, particularly in Britain.
Around 1.5 billion pounds of the money raised under today's plans will go into the with-profits fund to enable the company to continue to keep up policy benefits to existing policyholders.
The balance, less the 120 million pound cost of the flotation, will be used for corporate purposes.
While the company did not rule out the possibility of future acquisitions, it said it had no immediate plans to do so and was not "raising a war chest."
Policyholders circulars were due to be mailed on Thursday and the group expects the prospectus for the additional share offer to be issued in May. ($ = 0.624 British Pounds)
