Britain's Racal Electronics took the spotlight off a predicted slump in profits on Tuesday by announcing an alliance with its rival ITT Defence team in the race to win a two billion pound ($3.4 billion) defence contract.
Racal chief executive, David Elsbury, said the alliance with the U.S. consortium could yield joint savings of 100 million pounds in development costs for the British Armed Forces Bowman communications contract, due to be decided on by March 1997.
The contract is crucial to Racal's future earnings and those of its existing partner, Siemens of Germany. The winner of Bowman will get an estimated two billion pounds in follow-through export orders on top of the two billion contract value. It would create 6,500 new jobs, said Elsbury.
But Racal's chief warned of tough implications if the contract is lost. "To win Bowman would be the prize. To lose Bowman, God forbid, we would still have a sizeable export market, but we would have to downsize the company."
He said the move by Racal and partner Siemens to link up with their U.S. rival followed news from the British government of further delays to the award process.
Both sides' bids were in danger of running to 100 million apiece on research and developments costs, said Elsbury. Racal's costs to date are running at between 30 and 50 million, he said.
ITT Defence said in a statement that Racal and partner Siemens, who form the Yeomans consortium, had agreed to link with its own CrossBow group on technical, production and manufacturing resources for Bowman.
Racal said if they won the order, the companies would form a joint venture and each take a equity stake. Elsbury refused to comment on how the work would be split, but said "We're happy with the arrangements."
The alliance news helped arrest Monday's 18 percent freefall in Racal's share price when the group issued an eleventh-hour profit warning, which triggered angry responses from shareholders, ahead of Tuesday's half-year results.
Shares were up five and a half pence at 230 1/2 by 1200 GMT after closing 50 pence lower at 225 on Monday.
As forecast, results for the half year to October 11 showed pre-tax profits down to 21.2 million from 30.1 million. Profits were 20 million lower than was expected this summer and were hit by a 10 million charge relating to the Data products unit.
The half year payout was held at 2.10 pence and sales rose to 602 million from 502 million.
Full year profits are now seen at 50 million pounds after 20 million of charges. The results fiasco was blamed by Elsbury on last minute delays in foreign government defence orders, hitting the company's revenue targets.
News of the order slippage was only uncovered as late as last Friday. The defence orders were earmarked for the radio division which provides defence related equipment to foreign governments.
The radio division is undergoing a strategic review which is scheduled for completion by March. Other divisions, including network services, had shown strong profit growth. The recently acquired British Rail Telecoms business was described as a "superb performer."
Data Products is on the verge of a turnaround. "In the second half we should see a profit. We haven't seen that for many years," said Elsbury.
($1=.5936 Pound)
