Once-mighty Anglo-U.S. conglomerate Hanson Plc reported a record 1.8 billion pounds ($2.9 billion) in pretax profits on Thursday, covering the last financial year before its demerger process began on October 1.
Lord Hanson, chairman and co-founder of the empire in the throes of a four-way split, said that prospects for its "family of companies" was very good.
But he was less happy about the progress of its share price performance which he said was "very disappointing".
The group floated Imperial Tobacco and Millennium Chemicals in the autumn. Its energy group is due to be demerged by February, leaving behind the rump building group.
The combined value of Hanson and the demerged companies was 195p on December 1, 1995 and now stands at 150p, said the chairman. "This in no way represents either our earning capacity or future prospects."
He added "Hanson's profit in each of the last five years has comfortably exceeded one billion sterling and this year's result shows clearly that the momentum continues."
Christopher Collins, Hanson vice chairman said in an interview that the market should take a longer view in judging the Hanson companies' value.
"Lord Hanson acknowledges that the share price is disappointing, given its earnings capacity. The time to judge is two years down the track," he said. But he declined to state what would be a more appropriate value.
The final pre-demerger results showed profits topping forecasts and up sharply from 1.22 billion last year.
But the figures were inflated by a one-off gain of 609 million pounds, compared with a 98 million charge last year. Earnings per share were 25.6 pence versus 18.2 pence and a dividend of one pence will be paid.
There was little extra information on the demerger process. Collins said the process remained "on track".
Looking at a breakdown of the peformance of the two divisions which will remain, building materials and equipment reported a slip in profits to 231 million pounds from 237 million. Sales were 2.45 billion verus 2.1 billion.
The British arm continued to suffer from tough housing and construction markets, but some signs of a turnaround were evident. Buoyant U.S. conditions helped to outweigh the negative effects of the British building market.
Energy enjoyed a "substantial" rise in profits "showing significant growth overseas and a further increase in British profit and market share. Operating profits were 458 million versus 167 million, with sales up sharply to 3.74 billion versus 1.4 billion.
The surge reflected Eastern electricity company's first full contribution since its takeover. It turned in 303 million in profit, comapred to a seven million contribution the previous year.
Collins said "Eastern has been a great success and peformed far in excess of our expectations."
Peabody Coal saw profits slip to 154 million from 160 million as it sought to raise productivity levels which are up 12 percent.
Hanson shares, now trading without Imperial Tobacco and Millennium, stood at 80-1/2 pence at 1545 GMT, up 3/4p.
($1=.6161 Pound)
