The British government warned on Friday it would refer the proposed transatlantic alliance between British Airways Plc and American Airlines to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission unless the carriers complied with a number of conditions.
Trade and Industry Secretary Ian Lang added that even if the conditions are met by both airlines, final clearance will hinge on an open skies deal being signed between Britain and the United States to liberalise transatlantic air traffic -- securing greater competition on the routes.
Lang backed the undertakings proposed by competition watchdog the Office of Fair Trading (OFT), which was asked to re-examine the case last month.
"I agree...that without suitable undertakings the alliance would be likely to lead to a significant loss of actual and potential passengers, on those routes where BA and AA (American) currently compete and for all passengers on the transatlantic market route between the UK and U.S.," he said.
The comments came just minutes after the latest set of open skies talks ended in London, with no deal signed. Industry sources said there was no new date for fresh talks and blamed the deadlock on uncertainty over whether the BA/American deal would be cleared.
Both BA and American were forming a response to the news and were unavailable to give an immmediate reaction.
The conditions for clearance of the alliance are that BA and American drop 168 slots at London Heathrow airport, the busiest in Europe.
BA's initial response late on Friday was that "unconditional divestiture of slots is unprecedented and if done it must be on the basis of fair market value". It added that it would be "prepared to take reasonable steps to assist the introduction of additional competition".
The government also wants BA to drop a clause in its agreement with USAir which bars it from competing on transatlantic routes.
Also, both BA and American should be prepared to reduce services on the London to Dallas-Fort Worth route in the event that a new entrant wishes to enter, because the OFT felt that competition on this route would be hampered by an alliance.
It also suggested losing some slots on the London to Boston route. The OFT has called for BA/American to allow third party access to their joint frequent flyer programme where the applicant does not have access to an equivalent scheme. Lang said responses should be made to the OFT by January 10 1997.
Richard Hannah, analyst at UBS, said: "There are only three obstacles to the deal -- one is the OFT conditions, two is the open skies pact and three is the anti-trust threat in the States. I would be surprised if a deal cannot be done."
But Will Whitehorn, spokesman for Virgin Atlantic Airways, a major rival on the UK-U.S. route, said "I don't think they will be able to meet these conditions. I think it will go to the MMC," adding: "Even if they complied with the conditions the alliance would still be anti-competitive."
On the open skies talks, he said that by linking the deal's clearance to an open skies pact, the British government was using its leverage to try and gain reciprocal access for British carriers into the restricted U.S. internal market. United Airlines also welcomed the OFT conditions to the deal.
The current aviation agreement, dating back to March 1991, restricts transatlantic access to Heathrow to BA, American, Virgin Atlantic Airways and United Airlines.
The DOT has refused to comment on whether it will now be seeking to set a date for new open skies talks in light of the OFT stipulation that alliance clearance hinges on open skies.
Under the BA/American alliance, BA would coordinate its 244 flights a week to 22 U.S. destinations with American's 238 flights from seven U.S. airports to 12 European destinations.
