The United States and Britain ended their latest round of "open skies" talks Friday, agreeing on some technical issues but failing to reach a full-blown deal to open up the trans-Atlantic air travel market.
No new date was set for more talks, although industry sources believed the next discussions could be in in weeks rather than months.
Just minutes after the negotiations ended Britain's Department of Trade and Industry announced that it would block the proposed British Airways alliance with AMR Corp.'s American Airlines on trans-Atlantic routes unless certain conditions were met.
Airline industry figures earlier had said the open skies negotiations would remain deadlocked until there was a British verdict on the proposed alliance.
Conditions on allowing the alliance to proceed were outlined by Britain's Office of Fair Trading.
However, even if both parties comply with those conditions, the Department of Trade and Industry said the alliance was still dependant on the clinching of an open skies agreement.
The U.S. Transportation Department said it was disappointed with the lack of progress.
"The U.S. side was disappointed with the lack of progress that was achieved in this round of talks and in light of this result we will consider what steps should be taken next," the department said in a statement.
Reporting on the open sky talks, a British Department of Transport official said "useful progress was made on a number of issues, but not all. No date has been set for further talks."
The meeting included representatives from the transport departments of the British and U.S. governments, as well as major airlines from both sides of the Atlantic.
It was understood to be friendly, "with no question of a breakdown in communications this time," said one insider.
The issues agreed upon in the meeting were peripheral technical matters pertaining to computer reservation systems and ground baggage handling, which are two components within a wider list under discussion for an open skies deal.
The wider deal hinges on Britain's verdict on the British Airways-American alliance, but a rumoured cabinet split led to British Trade and Industry Minister Ian Lang asking the Office of Fair Trading to seek concessions from British Airways and American.
Those include asking the two carriers to give up 168 landing slots at London's Heathrow airport per week.
The two airlines have yet to respond.
In the past, British Airways had refused to relinquish its slots, stating that other carriers have a bigger share of slots at their home hubs and should find access at Heathrow through trading and normal allocation procedures.
The last open skies talks, in August, broke down amid complaints by U.S. carriers that Heathrow is so crowded that open access would be meaningless unless they were to be granted more slots.
