The British government warned on Friday it would refer the proposed transatlantic alliance between British Airways Plc and American Airlines to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission unless the carriers accepted a number of conditions.
Trade and Industry Secretary Ian Lang added that even if the conditions are met by both airlines, final clearance will hinge on an open skies deal being signed between the British and U.S. governments to liberalise transatlantic air traffic -- securing greater competition on the routes.
Lang backed conditions proposed by competition watchdog, the Office of Fair Trading, which was asked to re-examine the case last month.
He said in a statement, "I agree...that without suitable undertakings the alliance would be likely to lead to a significant loss of actual and potential passengers, on those routes where BA and AA (American) currently compete and for all passengers on the transatlantic route between the UK and U.S."
The comments came just minutes after the latest set of open skies talks ended in London, with no deal signed. Industry sources said there was no new date for fresh talks and blamed the deadlock on uncertainty over whether the BA/American deal would be cleared.
Both BA and American were both forming a response to the news and were unavailable to give an immmediate reaction.
The conditions for clearance of the alliance are that BA and American drop 168 slots at London Heathrow airport, the busiest in Europe.
The government also wants BA to drop a clause in its agreement with USAir which bars it from competing on transatlantic routes.
Also, both BA and American should be prepared to reduce services on the London to Dallas Ft Worth route in the event that a new entrant wishes to enter, because it was felt by the OFT that competition on this route would be hampered by an alliance.
The OFT has called for BA/American to allow third party access to their joint frequent flyer programme where the applicant does not have access to an equivalent scheme.
Lang said responses should be made to the OFT by 1700 GMT on January 10 1997.
But Will Whitehorn, spokesman for Virgin Atlantic Airways, a major rival on the UK-U.S. route, said "I don't think they will be able to meet these conditions. I think it will go to the MMC...even if they complied with the conditions the alliance would still be anti-competitive."
On the open skies talks, Whitehorn said that by linking the deal's clearance to an open skies pact, the British government was using its leverage to try and gain reciprocal access for British carriers into the restricted U.S. internal market.
United Airlines said it thought the OFT conditions imposed on the alliance were in step with its own views.
The current aviation agreement, dating back to March 1991, restricts transatlantic access to Heathrow to BA, American, Virgin Atlantic Airways and United Airlines.
The DOT has refused to comment on whether it will now be seeking to set a date for new open skies talks bearing in mind the OFT stipulation that alliance clearance hinges on transatlantic flight liberalisation.
Under the BA/American alliance, BA would coordinate its 244 flights a week to 22 U.S. destinations with American's 238 flights from seven U.S. airports to 12 European destinations.
