British defence and industrial giant General Electric Co Plc saw its half year profits hit by a restructuring charge on Friday to cover an internal shake-up which includes a string of disposals and up to 1,000 job cuts.
Half year pretax profits slumped to 261 million pounds ($423.6 million) from 402 million after the 160 million pounds charge. Underlying profit growth was meagre once again, rising 4.7 percent to 421 million pounds. The interim dividend payout was 3.26 pence versus 3.10 pence per share last year.
In the first set of results delivered since George Simpson took over as head of the group from veteran managing director Lord Weinstock, GEC said the 160 million charge was being levied "for the restructuring of existing and acquired businesses" as well as marking down assets in its industrial group before sale.
GEC's shares were slightly lower after the results, trading down four and a half pence at 361 pence in a tumbling market.
"All in all, the GEC results are a bit disappointing," one analyst who declined to be named said. "The headline profits figure was just in line, the dividend increase wasn't very generous and the exceptional was unexpected."
David Newlands, finance director, said there could be up to 1,000 jobs cut at the newly acquired AG Power Transmission and Distribution and Hazeltine Corp of the U.S.
The related redundancy and closure cost is expected to be 45 million pounds of the total 160 million charge revealed earlier. Another 50 million of that total relates to asset write-downs at two unnamed units earmaked for sale.
"We've had many offers for companies in the industrial group over the years -- all have been well above the book value, except for these two," said Newlands.
He said the move was necessary in order to dispose of the two divisions with a string of other divestments. The first sale is expected to take place before Christmas.
"We are trying to accelerate the disposal programme. But is takes two to tango," he added.
The rest of the charge announced in Friday's results relates to restructuring within remaining firms.
In a divisional breakdown of the results, chairman Lord Prior said electronic systems and defence reported progress, with margins and profits ahead.
"GEC Alsthom maintained sales and profits in line with expectations. Telecommunications, consumer goods, office equipment and printing, medical equipment, industrial apparatus and distribution and trading all contributed higher profits," said the chairman.
But the Gilbarco unit in the U.S. saw a profit fallback. Weak world demand for semiconductors also hit electronic components. Newlands said he did not expect that market to recover until the spring or summer of 1997.
($1=.6161 Pound)
