UK defence to industrial giant GEC Plc said on Friday that it could impose up to 1,000 job cuts at its two newly-acquired businesses as part of the restructuring process announced in its results statement earlier.
Finance director David Newlands told Reuters that the job losses would hit in AG Power Transmission and Distribution and the Hazeltine Corp of the U.S., particularly the former.
The cost is expected to be 45 million stg of the total 160 million charge revealed earlier. Another 50 million of that total relates to asset write-downs at two other units.  
Newlands refused to name which two companies had seen reduced asset values, but he said that the move was necessary in order to dispose of them.
"We've had many offers for companies in the industrial group over the years - all have been well above the book value, except for these two." He said he expected the first sale of those companies marked for disposal to take place before Christmas.
"We are trying to accelerate the disposal programme. But is takes two to tango," said Newlands, who refused to name the firms. The rest of the 160 million charge announced in Friday's results relates to restructuring within remaining firms.  
On the continuing strategic review, Newlands said "George Simpson (the successor to former managing director Lord Weinstock) arrived in September and has been meeting with managers and getitng on with the task. We expect some announcement before we next speak to analysts in June/July."
He said the group would divest "Where a business is not making satisfactory returns on capital or has satisfactory growth prospects."
Commenting on the sluggish state of the semi-conductor market, which saw lower profits in the first half, Newlands said he did not see a recovery until "spring or summer of next year."
GEC reported a sharp fallback in half year profits on Friday to 261 million stg from 402 million after taking the 160 million charge.
Underlying profits rose just 4.7 percent to 421 million. The interim payout was 3.26 pence versus 3.10 pence. --London newsroom +44 171 5427717
