Wickes Plc, the British do-it-yourself retailer whose former bosses are being investigated for fraud, warned on Thursday it faced receivership unless investors backed its financial restructuring including a 53 million pound ($87.5 million) rights issue.
The recent discovery of accounting irregularities dating back five years forced the group to announce a major refinancing, including a cash call and the possible sale of its continental business.
Wickes chairman Michael von Brentano told shareholders that if investors voted against the plans at the extraordinary general meeting on January 6 "it would be likely that the company would be placed in receivership."
The rights issue is part of a shake-up which includes a capital reduction of 100 million pounds and new banking facilities of 52 million pounds. The refinancing aims to eliminate the deficit on the firm's profit and loss account.
The troubled company said in a statement: "The directors believe that the group is now in a position where, if the proposals and proposed banking arrangements are implemented, it can build on its market position, return to profitability and deliver a successful "New Wickes."
Wickes accounting debacle, which was uncovered in June and triggered a share suspension, led to a major overstatement of profits, forcing the group to restate 1995 results. Revised accounts showed a 1995 loss before tax of 279.3 million pounds, 21.3 million more than originally reported.
Wickes said it expected to make a loss before tax in 1996 of not more than 56 million pounds, with losses of 52.7 million pounds reported for the nine months to September 28.
It will not pay an interim dividend in 1996 or 1997, but may pay a final dividend in 1997 and an interim for 1998.
Under the cash call itself, 37,822,310 new shares will be offered at 150 pence per new share with one new share for every 10 old shares. The rights issue proceeds will be used to cut group debt.
The chairman said the trading outlook for the group was improving with 1996 cumulative like-for-like sales growth of 4.1 percent over 1995.
He said the investigation into former Wickes bosses by the police and Serious Fraud Office (SFO) was not expected to result in any liability for the group.
The newly appointed chairman blamed the accounting bombshell on "deliberate misrepresentation" in accounting procedures, blaming "serious mismanagement" in group operations.
Von Brentano has pledged to clean up accounting procedures and has installed a new team to replace the old guard which has resigned, including former chairman and chief executive Henry Sweetbaum.
The SFO has already indicated that it will be interviewing all the former senior executives of Wickes as part of its investigation. No charges or arrests have been made to date.
($1=.6056 Pound)
