Britain cleared CE Electric's 782 million pound ($1.3 billion) bid for regional electricity company (Rec) Northern Electric on Friday and analysts said the U.S. firm was now likely to net its prize.
"I think CE Electric will probably win, they already have 29 percent from the market in their back pocket, they have to be in pole position," said Nigel Hawkins of Yamaichi.
Trade and industry minister Ian Lang said in a statement approving the bid that CE Electric, which is 70 percent owned by U.S.-based CalEnergy, had given assurances addressing regulatory concerns including guarantees on Northern's financial and management resources.
CE Electric raised its bid to 650 pence per share from a previous 630 pence on December 6 and slapped a deadline of December 20 on acceptances. Northern has said the bid undervalues the company and that a price of 700 pence per share was indicated in talk
Northern says it has the backing of major investor Prudential Corporation, which owns more than 11 percent of its shares and has bought more at 600 pence apiece.
Prudential traditionally tends to back the target company's board in a hostile takeover situation. But in the latest war of words, CE Electric said it also had major investors on its side and was confident of victory.
"I believe investors will now back the offer. They have seen it cleared and there is no white knight (bidder) on the horizon. We are now confident of getting above the 50 percent threshold," said David Sokol, CE Electric's chairman and chief executive.
Northern shares jumped on news of the deal being cleared, rising 42-1/2p to close at 645p after sluggish sessions on concerns that the bid could be blocked.
But Northern's latest rebuttal said acceptance would mean shareholders "giving up almost one pound per share in dividends over the next nine months and to forego a prospective 1997/98 yield of over 10.5 percent," after it forecast a final dividend for this year of 50 pence, up 17 percent.
"We think 650 pence still undervalues Northern, but with the market currently looking so jittery and the political atmosphere possibly changing, investors might find the offer very attractive," said one analyst who asked not to be named.
A general election is due within five months and the opposition Labour party, which is riding high in polls, has promised to introduce a one-off windfall tax on utilities and could also tighten up pricing regulation.
In its defence, Northern has outlined plans to realise value by merging its electricity and gas supply businesses with another regional player and it wants to develop a 50 megawatt gas-fired power station in a joint venture with Rolls Royce.
Everything now hangs on next Friday, with both sides keeping up the campaign to clinch support from big investors.
CE Electric has just under 30 percent of shares in the bag and four percent of acceptances, needing 50 percent of Northern shares to win.
Northern had already escaped the clutches of one predator -- conglomerate Trafalgar House -- last year, with a defence package totalling 560 million pounds. ($1=.6043 Pound)
