Britain cleared U.S. utility CE Electric's 782 million pound ($1.29 billion) hostile takeover bid for Northern Electric on Friday, just days ahead of a final deadline for shareholders to accept the offer.
Removing the first hurdle to the deal, trade and industry minister Ian Lang said in a statement: "CE Electric has given me assurances to address the regulatory concerns...These include assurances relating to Northern's financial and management resources and to maintaining Northern's financial status."
The 650 pence-per-share bid, which electricity supply group Northern has said "short changes" investors, closes next Friday.
Northern says it has the backing of major investor Prudential Corporation, which owns more than 11 percent of its shares and has bought more at 600 pence apiece.
Prudential traditionally tends to back the target company's board in a hostile takeover situation. But in the latest war of words, CE Electric said it also had major investors on its side and was confident of victory.
"I believe investors will now back the offer. They have seen it cleared and there is no white knight (bidder) on the horizon. We are now confident of getting above the 50 percent threshold," said David Sokol, CE Electric's chairman and chief executive.
"The decision for shareholders is now crystal clear. You just have to look at the facts. The stock was at 495 pence per share before we came in with our (first) bid (at 630 pence).
"The stock will plummet if it's not accepted. Add to that the fact that the FTSE 100 index is looking at a correction. Here is an opportunity to take a very large profit, cash in the bank."
Northern shares were up sharply on news of the deal being cleared, rising 41 pence to 643.50. The British utility's share price had been sluggish in recent sessions on fears that the deal could be blocked.
But Northern's latest rebuttal said acceptance would mean shareholders "giving up almost one pound per share in dividends over the next nine months and to forego a prospective 1997/98 yield of over 10.5 percent."
Northern's defence has said it is worth more than 650 pence a share, with some analysts saying it is holding out for 700 pence.
The electricity firm has outlined plans to realise value by merging its electricity and gas supply businesses with another regional player. It also wants to develop a 50 megawatt gas-fired power station in a joint venture with Rolls Royce .
Everything now hangs on next Friday, with both sides keeping up the campaign to clinch support from big investors.
CE Electric has 30 percent of shares in the bag and four percent of acceptances, needing 50 percent of Northern shares to win.
Northern had already escaped the clutches of one predator -- conglomerate Trafalgar House -- last year. The electricity group won the day with a 560 million pound defence package.
But the package -- awash with cash -- prompted the electricity regulator to take a closer look at bumper industry profits, resulting in tougher price controls which wiped billions of pounds off shares in the sector. ($1=.6043 Pound)
