CE Electric, the U.S. utility giant in the throes of a hostile takeover battle for Northern Electric Plc, said on Friday it was confident of winning and claimed it had several institutional investors behind it.
Speaking just after the UK government had given clearance to a takeover deal, David Sokol, chairman and chief executive of the U.S. group, said: "I believe investors will now back the offer, they have seen it cleared and there is no white knight (bidder) on the horizon. We are now confident of getting above the 50 percent threshold," needed to clinch the deal.  
Sokol said he had spoken to a number of big invetors who indicated privately they would back the 650p per share offer. "They think that 650 pence is a very full price." So far, Northern has 30 percent of Northern shares in the bag and acceptances for four percent. The U.S. utility chief was unfazed by reports in the press that major shareholder Prudential Corp Plc, which holds over 11 percent, was going to back the Northern Board.
Northern confirmed in a statement that Prudential had bought extra shares at 600 pence per share.
But Sokol said the "economics of the bid are compelling."  
"You just have to look at the facts," he said. "The stock was at 495 pence per share before we came in with our (first) bid (at 630 pence per share).
"The stock will plummet if it's not accepted. Add to that the fact that the FTSE 100 index is looking at a correction. Here is an opportunity to take a very large profit, cash in the bank and add to that factor that Northern's proposal does not offer value."
Northern's defence has said the company is worth more than 650, with some analysts claiming the company is holding out for 700 pence per share.
The UK electricity firm has mentioned plans to realise value by merging its electricity and gas supply businesses with another regional player. It also wants to develop a 50 megawatt gas-fired power station in a joint venture with Rolls Royce.
--London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
