Britain's double-decker bus could be at the cutting edge of an environmental breakthrough.
For the past two years a London bus operator has carried out experiments with an Arab inventor who says he has the solution to the black diesel-based pollution fumes that led Britain's air quality levels to break world safety standards last summer.
Hassan Assali linked up with the London and Liverpool bus company Merseyside Transport Ltd (MTL) in a two-year experiment to test his invention -- an oil recycler which he told Reuters cuts pollution levels by 50 percent and saves on lubricating oil by recycling it six to 10 times.
"Last summer there was big talk about stopping vehicles entering towns altogether as pollution levels were going through the roof.
"With this," said Assali cradling his recycler at his West London headquarters, "we can cut the amount of oil used and dumped, cut pollution levels, plus save money."
The recycler, invented by Assali who is managing director of the company behind it called Pinmore, has taken six years to develop and millions of pounds (dollars) of investment funded by an anonymous Palestinian backer.
The Pinmore recycler prototype was made by a gunsmith in London's East End because: "It was the only way we could get the precision we needed," said Assali.
MADE IN CHINA
It is now being manufactured in China's Huzhan province and has sold 6,000 units at a cost of 250 pounds ($425.2) each.
Customers to date include an Algerian bus company which has ordered 3,000 recyclers and Saudi Arabia's frontier guards who bought 1,000 for their trucks -- "They're constantly plagued by desert sand getting into the oil," added the inventor.
In November Assali held a conference in Oxford, England attended by more than 40 delegates from the transport industry, including bus companies.
At the conference MTL publicly endorsed the recycler after two years of tests on its oldest London buses. Professor Gordon Andrews of the fuel and energy department at Leeds University and a consultant to the motor industry, also agreed it worked.
Phil Locke, systems manager for group engineering at MTL, told Reuters: "We've had a lot of success and it's given us tremendous savings. It's also given us smaller fuel emmissions, which are down sharply."
He said the bus group's initial scepticism had vanished and it is now considering buying up to 2,000 recyclers for its fleet in London and Liverpool.
"We've had so many people approach us in the past with different systems and they say it works. But most don't. We took a gamble on Mr Assali and it's working," said Locke.
"I think it's been looked at by enough people and they see the benefits -- it has the chance of turning into a big thing."
The reception from motor manufacturers like Nissan has been cooler, says Assali, despite the pressing environmental and health arguments to cut pollution.
Assali also says two major oil companies have called him to rubbish his work out of hand. "I was afraid they would send a hit-man," he joked.
But he says the evidence is in his favour. Pinmore carried out experiments for two years in north London with MTL.
RECYCLING BUS
The experiment fitted one bus with a recycler and one without, said Assali. "We said to the client "Run these buses in the worst conditions possible - stopping, starting continuously and braking suddenly'."
He claimed the old red Routemaster bus, the famous London symbol also renowned for belching black fumes, was fitted with the recycler in February 1995 and did not have to change its oil until July that year.
The London arm of MTL then invited Assali to its headquarters in Liverpool where "I explained the invention to the top brass."
Commenting on the financial benefits, he says that MTL as a company uses 40 tonnes of oil a year -- which can easily be cut by a sixth on average by using the recycler.
"We started with three principles in mind -- to save oil, maintain engine quality and to help the environment by cutting polluting emissions."
The Pinmore filters the oil using a secondary filter controlled by a microprocessor.
The filter has a pyramid of discs, down which oil cascades. Discs are heated to 160 degrees, bringing oil to 120 degrees, hotter than the engine temperature. As oil trickles down the discs the contaminants, such as water, diesel fuel and gases evaporate.
The resulting vapour is fed into a chamber where it is burned off separately.
Very old vehicles like the red Routemaster buses, some of which are 25 years old, can run for 60,000 kilometres (37,280 miles) without changing the oil -- that is six times the normal distance.
FIRST BUSES, THEN THE WORLD
Pinmore has high hopes for its product and plans to take polluting vehicles by storm. "We will hit the bus companies first and then the black cab market in London -- 23,000 cabs in total.
"We will then tackle the major UK cities -- Sheffield, Glasgow, Bradford. The market is massive. We could take it to Paris, Frankfurt, Berlin -- every diesel city in Europe."
MTL now plans to set up a mobile laboratory where anyone can inspect the recycler and the test results.
"We're working towards helping others fight pollution. We're not trying to keep it to ourselves," said Locke.
"If we put it into the bus market first, then perhaps someone from the government will say "If it works for buses then why can't it work for taxis or the private car?'." ($1=.5880 Pound)
