Britain's motor industry reported 1996 car registrations at a seven-year high on Tuesday, but admitted the figures masked problems of erratic retail sales, poor margins and the threat to exports posed by a surging pound.
Manufacturers faced the double whammy of sluggish domestic retail sales as imports continue to rise, while British exports are now exposed to the new worry of a rising pound.
The Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders put a brave face on car-makers' problems, pointing to 1996 new car registration growth of 4.12 percent on 1995 levels to 2,025,450 -- the third highest annual total on record.
Registrations in December showed a monthly rise of 9.23 percent in December. But most of the annual growth was due to company fleet car sales and heavy discounting which has eaten into manufacturers' margins. Retail sales to private British buyers rose by a paltry 2.3 percent on the year.
While the SMMT said 1997 would continue to show some growth, analysts said the industry could not afford to be hit by the stronger pound abroad while the home retail market remains erratic and the fleet car market is artificially boosted by heavy discounting.
"We continue to see a rise in imports and while exports did well (in 1996) they are facing tougher times ahead thanks to the pound," John Lawson, analyst at Salomon Brothers.
Lawson said car-maker Rover Group, part of Germany's BMW, is the most exposed to sterling strength, with players like Ford Motors and General Motors better placed to switch some capacity or sourcing of components outside Britain if the pound continues to power ahead.
On sterling's gains, Ernie Thompson, chief executive of the SMMT, said "Obviously it's (sterling strength) a risk."
Arthur Maher, head of forecasting at analysts LMC International, said "In the short term, UK exports are likely to impact on company financials rather than sales volumes."
"If sterling appreciation looks structural, manufacturers may look to reduce vehicle specifications and renew efforts to boost productivity," he said.
The sales trend in Britain has shown imports rise to take 62.03 percent of the British market, up from 58.94 percent in 1995. In 1994 imports took just 52.82 percent of British car sales. The SMMT said the upward import pattern is set to continue for the next two years.
Analysts are also worried that retail sales have not moved in line with the consumer spending binge in other parts of the economy.
Margaret Pyne, head of economics at the SMMT, said "The erratic nature of retail demand was particularly disappointing."
Car retail sales did bounce back in the last quarter of 1996, but Maher said "sales remain vulnerable to a post-election squeeze in 1997, with the retail consumer exposed."
An election is due by May, with the possibility of a fiscal tightening afterwards which could dampen consumer spending.
Thompson warned that British car makers would continue to feel the pressure with "intense competition and over-capacity hitting margins. Unless they start earning better profits it is difficult to see how they can afford to finance new models. That is a major concern throughout the world."
Analysts like Maher said car-makers faced the double bind of cut-throat competition and overcapacity coupled with a more demanding breed of consumer wanting up-to-date innovations at yesterday's prices.
