British Steel saw its share price skid to a 12-month low on Thursday after a rash of profit downgrades from analysts who said the pound's surge against the mark could slash group profitability.
British Steel told Reuters that the pound's advance against the mark was "a concern" and reiterated that it was carrying out a cost-cutting review which could see some jobs being axed as a result of the currency factor.
Analysts at Natwest Markets cut their profit forecast for the current year and joined Merrill Lynch and SocGen in halving profit predictions for the year after, ending March 1998.
All three blamed sterling's relentless rise against the mark and said that not only were exports to Europe in danger, but imports to Britain were also on the up as customers chose the cheaper option.
One analyst said "I think the pound will stay around the 2.60 Deutschemark level. The mark-based steel market is a big European market and the current exchange rate makes British Steel look expensive not just abroad but at home as well.
"British Steel is being hit on both fronts."
The British group's shares are currently trading at 151- 1/2 pence per share, down two and a half pence on the day. The shares have not been this low since January 1996 and have retreated from a high of 201-1/2.
Merrill analyst Paul Compton said the pretax profit downgrade on Wednesday to 280 million pounds from 650 million for the year to March 1998 was purely due to the potential impact of the UK currency.
"British Steel was probably using 2.30 (marks) to the pound for 1996/97," said Compton. "In 1997/98 it now looks like they will have to raise it to as much as 2.65 marks and the impact is around 350 million (on profits)."
Sterling is currently trading around the highest levels seen since it exited the European Exchange Rate Mechanism in late 1992. When Merrill made its forecast downgrade on Wednesday, the currency was trading at around 2.65 marks to the pound and $1.69.
SocGen analyst Andy Chambers told Reuters he had cut the British Steel pretax profit figures for the year to March 1998 to 400 million pounds from 700 million.
Industry sources said Natwest Markets had gone further by slashing the current year pretax profit forecast to March 1997 to 477 million pounds from 611 million. Natwest has cut its forecast for the following year to 355 million from 449.
All analysts reported that British Steel would be hit in European export markets which are mark/pound sensitive and that as the pound gains ground, the domestic market has also become vulnerable with customers buying cheaper imports.
Of British Steel's eight billion pounds in sales, the company said 50 percent is exported.
A spokesman for the steel giant said that up to three billion pounds of its total sales are sensitive to the pound/mark exchange rate.
