Britain's building sector has finally shaken off one of its nastiest ailments, with strong evidence that the long and painful decline in the domestic housing market is now over and sales are on the up again.
But celebrations failed to break out across the sector.
Housebuilders may be set to reap the rewards of the recovery, but some of the biggest companies in the building industry on Friday continued to suffer from other afflictions.
Building material giants like RMC Plc, Redland Plc and BPB saw their shares slide heavily on Friday due to continued problems in the key German market plus the pound's relentless rise against the mark and dollar which is eating into valuable export revenues.
RMC ended 36p lower at 903.5. Redland closed 5.5p weaker at 330, BPB 13p off 362.5p and Blue Circle 7.5p off at 368.
Optimistic reports of British housing starts at a seven-year high and earlier predictions of 1997 house price inflation of up to 10 percent were overshadowed by concerns about a continued deterioration in German GDP and higher unemployment.
For these big building materials firms, analysts say the impact of Germany -- accounting for up to 40 percent of profits -- far outweighs the small upside from the British house sector.
The second negative is the 10 percent appreciation in the pound against the mark over the last few months. Companies like Redland have already fired a warning signal on sterling's potential impact on profits.
UBS building analyst Simon Brown summed up the gloom: "Only a tiny proportion of the building material sector's business is in the UK. As a total of construction output, UK housing was 14 percent in 1995."
Looking at one of the biggest players in the sector, RMC, Brown said: "Less than 20 percent of RMC's profit comes from the UK and an even smaller part from UK housing. So it is a tiny proportion of overall earnings."
Downgrades have haunted companies exposed to Germany and the pound. But one player which has escaped the pessimism and is tipped as a "buy" in light of the housing recovery is Caradon.
Caradon is seen as the recovery stock, having slashed around 75 million pounds ($126 million) from costs in the last two years and rationalised its portfolio of businesses.
Its profits are seen rising sharply this year and next. It has sizeable exposure to the British housing market, through its double glazing window and shower product range. It can also cash in on demand for building material supplies from Britain.
"It has the highest proportion of output linked to UK housing," said UBS' analyst Brown. "Hepworth and Marley could also be worth a play," he said.
Howard Seymour, an analyst at brokers BZW, said in a note that he recommended buying Tarmac and Redland -- but that building material firm BPB was classed a "sell".
"We argue that the sector is displaying late cycle characteristics as speculative supply is following demand which gives a robust profile to recovery over 1997."
He said that expected rises in British interest rates this year would "take a back seat to profit recovery. Accordingly, investors should view the UK as their first choice for building materials investment over the next 12 months."
The main beneficiaries of the house market rebound will be housebuilder specialists. "Those which were best at buying land will be the most serious winners - Berkeley, Persimmon, Barratt and Beazer," said Brown. ($1=.5950 Pound)
