Tomkins Plc, the UK conglomerate with businesses spanning baking to engineering, is expected to sees a rise in half year pretax profits on Monday amid some market speculation that it could announce a share buyback.
Analysts were mostly predicting six month profits of around 160 million stg from 126.1 million in the previous year. The average forecast for the half year payout was 3.0 pence per share from 2.70 pence last time.  
The shares have recently seen brisk gains following a "buy" recommendation from Kleinwort Benson analysts. Tomkins was also listed as one of the nine stocks to buy in 1997 by Credit Lyonnais Laing. Shares are currently at 278 pence, down two pence.
Another reason for Tomkins' recent gains has been some market speculation about a possible share buyback. The group board obtained permission for a buyback of up to 10 percent of its shares in 1995 and currently has around 400 million stg in cash.  
But Ian Rennardson, analyst at Credit Lyonnais, said the group had given no indications since that it may launch a buyback at the interim stage. Other analysts are also sceptical.
Rennardson sees interim profits at 160 million stg and expects a solid trading performance. "This is a stock within a sector which has seen real underperformance. Tomkins has the best earnings, dividends and cashflow and after the Gates (Corp) deal, the shares are still looking reasonably cheap."
Another analyst, predicting the same profit levels, said investors would be looking for an update on Gates since its acquisition last summer for $1 bln.  
Gates is an automotive and components company.
Sterling is not expected to deal a blow to the Tomkins results this time round, said one analyst.  "Sterling will in fact benefit the year ending April 1997 as Tomkins has locked in (foreign exchange cover) at $1.52 to the pound," he said.
He anticipates a solid U.S. performance, with a slightly subdued UK market and continued good cash generation.
--London newsroom +44 171 5427717
