Tomkins Plc, the British baking-to-engineering combine, reported a sharp surge in half year profits on Monday but snuffed out hopes of a share buy-back for now as its chairman flagged possible acquisitions instead.
Pretax profits for the six months to November 2 rose 34 percent to 168.8 million pounds ($284 million), with the dividend up to 3.06 pence from 2.7 pence the preceding year.
Gregory Hutchings, executive chairman, said the results marked "another period of outperformance for Tomkins".
But Tomkins shares saw earlier gains slip away as buy-back hopes were dashed and profit-takers cashed in their spoils from last week's gains. This left Tomkins down 3 1/2 pence at 274 in an upbeat market by mid-afternoon.
Hutchings ruled out the possibility of returning Tomkins's 366.8 million pound cash-pile to shareholders this year. "We see sufficient (acquisition) opportunities to hold on to our cash for the time being," he told Reuters in an interview.
The group was likely to make a number of smaller buys. "It won't be one major deal, but it could be worth up to 200 million pounds," he said. If the acquisition opportunities failed to come through the group would reconsider ways of returning value to investors, he added.
One trader summed up market sentiment. "The main thing is the chairman has knocked speculation about a share buy-back on the head. The shares have had a good run and they were great results and a lot of people would be looking to take profits now," he said.
Tomkins was disappointed by the reaction to its latest set of bumper profits, blaming the anti-conglomerate climate which has buffeted shares in major firms such as Hanson Plc, mid-way through its demerger.
The results showed earnings per share growth for the 12th year in a row and the outlook for the second half was also seen as promising.
"Prospects for the second half look encouraging, with the majority of our operations having healthy order books and satisfactory market conditions. We are delighted with the purchase of Gates (Corp for $1.1 billion last year) which has proved entirely consistent with our expectations," said Hutchings.
Looking at a divisional breakdown, Gates contributed 259.5 million in sales and 20 million in profit in its first 14 weeks. It is seen turning in eventual savings of $12 million per annum and the group plans capital expenditure of $85 million a year.
Fluid controls saw sales of 189.2 million, with profits of 19 million versus 15.8 million.
Industry services saw sales rise to 219 million, with profits of 12.5 million versus 12.1 million. Professional garden and leisure products, including the Smith &amp; Wesson gun-maker, saw sales of 276 million and profits down to 8.5 million from 8.9 million.
Industrial products sales rose to 317.3 million, with profits of 34.3 million versus 28.5 million. Milling and baking, which includes the Hovis bread brand, saw sales up to 351.3 million, with profits at 15.4 million versus 13.7 million.
Food products, which includes Bisto gravy and the Robertson jam range, saw sales up to 543.5 million, with profits at 42.6 million versus 38.5 million. Excluding currency effects, organic growth in group operating profit was up more than 10 percent on sales which rose by seven percent.
Unlike other major export groups, Tomkins has so far been left unscathed by the pound surging against the dollar and mark owing to its hedging policy. Its mark-denominated business was minimal, it said.
On market conditions, Tomkins said the outlook for the United States was to remain firm, with Britain described as mixed. The French market is expected to continue to suffer due to economic problems. However, its French sales are very small. ($1=.5950 Pound)
