Four and a half thousand workers at U.S. car giant Ford Motor Co's Halewood plant in England face judgement day on Thursday when the management will meet unions to discuss the future, amid reports of 1,500 jobs cuts or full plant closure.
A report on the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) news service said late on Wednesday that Ford was set to announce the axing of 1,500 jobs at Thursday's meeting.
But a spokesman from Ford refused to comment on the rising tide of speculation about the plant's future.
"Ford has issued no statement to the press on a reduction in the workforce or restructuring of any plants in Britain," said the spokesman on Wednesday.
A statement is due from the company at midday on Thursday. The unions involved, led by the Transport and General Workers Union, will hold a press briefing at the plant.
But the unions also said late on Wednesday that they were unaware of any confirmation of job cuts from Ford ahead of the make-or-break meeting.
Ford's group boss Alex Trotman warned last year the group planned to take draconian action to end heavy losses in Europe and British newspaper have reported in recent days that Ford threatened to close the Halewood plant in northwest England unless new productivity targets were met.
Britain's Observer newspaper said Ford planned to tell unions unless they agreed to more efficient working practices and 500 job losses the entire plant faced possible closure.
But last Sunday Ford said in Detroit it would restructure but not close Halewood, with some job losses expected.
TGWU head of communications, Andrew Murray, said it all hinged on the future of Ford's new Escort model.
The next Escort version is due in 1999 and will be the first car engineered under Ford's new global product development structure called "Ford 2000".
Analysts said it was unlikely Ford would take the drastic measure of closing down a plant and axing all 5,000 jobs.
But Halewood is seen by some to be one of the least productive Ford plants in Europe.
Arthur Maher, head of European forecasting at LMC International, said: "Ford 2000 is about taking cost out of the organisation and reducing the number of (assembly) platforms.
"Europe is a big black hole for Ford in terms of money it's losing. It has too much capacity and the costs are above the levels they should be. Maybe Ford wants to try and extract further productivity improvements in return for some job security. I think that's where they are really coming from."
Industry observers believe manufacturing of the new Escort could be switched to Ford's other plants in Spain or Germany.
