UK bus to rail group Go-Ahead Group Plc said on Wednesday that allegations by opposition Labour MP Dale Campbell-Savours of company representatives using inside information to clinch a rail franchise and benefit through share dealings was "rubbish."
In an interview with Reuters, Martin Ballinger, Go-Ahead managing director, hit back at the MP's allegation, which was made in Parliament late last night.
It was  "absolute tosh," he said. "Nobody made any money as no-one sold (their shares)."  
The comments were made in a statement by Campbell-Savours in the House of Commons, where Members of Parliament  (MPs) are protected from libel suits by parliamentary privilege.
But Ballinger warned the Labour MP "I would certainly get my lawyers to take a look at any statements, so he better be careful what he says outside the (House of) Commons."
"The last MP who said something silly about us -- I've got his apology hanging in my loo (toilet). If Campbell Savours says this outside the House of Commons I'll have another framed apology to hang in the loo." said the transport group chief.
The allegations focus on its bid for the Regional Railways North East franchise, for which Go-Ahead was shortlisted on November 15.
Ballinger explained that in the bidding process it put in an "indicative' bid based on information which had more up-to-date accounts details because it had existing British Rail managers within its bid team.
But Ballinger said that the franchise regulator Opraf had adjusted Go-Ahead's bid to bring the accounts information in line with other bidders.
"The final bids were all on basis of information available to all parties. There is no way we are in possession of price sensitive information -- that is rubbish," he said.
"The only thing available to us was the expertise of our managers."
He said the sharp rise in its shares in recent months had been in line with the rest of the sector which had rallied.
Asked why Campbell Savours would make such accusations in light of Go-Ahead's defence, Ballinger replied: "He wants to cast aspersions on the (Conservative government's) privatisation process and he likes to invent government sleaze."
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
