Four and a half thousand workers at U.S. car giant Ford Motor's Halewood plant in England face judgement day on Thursday when the management will meet unions to discuss the future amid rumours of job losses and closure.
Ford said last year it planned to take draconian action to end heavy losses in Europe and British newspaper reports claimed that Ford had now threatened to close the Halewood plant in northwest England.
However, last Sunday Ford said in Detroit, the U.S., that it would restructure but not close Halewood, with some job losses expected and a Ford UK spokesman said on Wednesday that reports of closure were speculative.
A report in Britain's Observer newspaper claimed that Ford planned to tell unions unless they agreed to more efficient working practices and 500 job losses the entire plant faced possible closure.
Ford UK's spokesman told Reuters the meeting with unions led by the Transport and General Workers Union (TGWU) is due on Thursday morning.
"A number of issues are on the agenda. Reports of plant closure and restructuring are all speculative," he said.
The spokesman added the meeting followed an internal review of all UK operations including the sister plant in Dagenham, London.
TGWU head of communications, Andrew Murray, said it all hinged on the future of Ford's Escort model, adding that a statement was expected after the meeting.
The next Escort version is due in 1999 and will be the first car engineered under Ford's new global product development structure called "Ford 2000"
Analysts said it was unlikely that Ford would take the drastic measure of closing down a plant and axing all 5,000 jobs.
But Halewood is seen by some to be one of the least productive Ford plants in Europe.
Arthur Maher, head of European forecasting at LMC International, said "Ford 2000 is about taking cost out of the organisation and reducing the number of (assembly) platforms.
"Europe is a big black hole for Ford in terms of money it's losing. It has too much capacity and the costs are above the levels they should be. Maybe Ford wants to try and extract further productivity improvements in return for some job security. I think that's where they are really coming from."
He said a plant closure in the UK would be "a big political decision in the run-up to an election in Britain (due by May 1997)."
