Shares in British conglomerate BTR rose on Wednesday after it clinched a better-than-expected sale price for its Tilcon unit, though profit fears and strategic concerns remained to dampen sentiment, analysts said.
BTR sold its U.S. based building materials business Tilcon to Ireland's CRH Plc for 212 million pounds ($332.2 million), better than the 180 million anticipated by the market.
BTR's shares edged five and a half pence higher to 261, but analysts still expect a cut in dividend and profits when the group announces its interim results next Thursday.
Andrew Darke, analyst at Williams de Broe, said "The majority of analysts are expecting a cut in the dividend of one third and falling profits."
He added that the market welcomed the latest in a stream of disposals, which has raised 700 million pounds in 1996 excluding provisions, saying that this should improve the group's strained cash flow position.
Ian Strachan, BTR chief executive, said on Wednesday that the Tilcon sale proceeds would "be invested in our key industrial and engineering operations."
BTR is in the throes of a major strategic review which aims to shake-out 20 percent of existing non-core businesses leaving it to focus on the areas listed by Strachan.
The issue of cash flow, which ABN Amro Hoare Govett says has turned from an 89 million pounds inflow in 1994 to a 253 million outflow last year, remains a key concern.
Analysts also want to know how the group is going to fund its expansion in core businesses like automotive parts and packaging.
The market sees the dividend as an obvious tradeoff in BTR's spending plans. "It would be big news if they didn't cut the dividend," said Darke.
Future strategy on how BTR will expand its chosen core areas in industrial manufacturing and engineering is another unanswered question.
"There is a myriad of unanswered issues," said one analyst. "Strategy, dividend policy, restrcuturing. There is still quite a major information vacuum waiting to be filled," he said.
Despite the uncertainy, many of these concerns have been priced in following a heated debate in the summer which led to a shareprice meltdown.
BTR shares hit a low for the year of around 225 pence compared with the annual high of 344 pence before the concerns set in. ($1=.6382 Pound)
