U.S. car giant Ford Motor Co announced 1,300 job cuts at its plant in northwest England on Thursday and unions immediately raised the spectre of strikes in the British automobile industry.
Just months after giving the Halewood factory near Liverpool its global quality award for 1996, Ford told union leaders the new version of its mid-range Escort would not be built there.
The new model is now likely to be built in Spain and Germany. Ford's proposed job cuts will reduce Halewood's workforce to just over 3,000, compared with a peak of 14,000 in the 1960s and around 4,500 now. Britain's Prime Minister John Major told parliament Ford's decision was "very surprising" and "flies in the face of most investment decisions which are moving to the UK".
Ford has not said where the new model will be built. But unions believe the new model, due in 1999, will be built instead at Ford's plants in Valencia, Spain, and Saarlouis, Germany.
The main unions, including the Transport and General Workers, announced they would be holding mass meetings at Ford plants around the country over the next week to see whether workers would take action in protest at the job cuts.
The workers will be asked to support a motion backing "all necessary measures, including a ballot for strike action, to secure the future of Halewood and for an equal investment across Europe for all locations".
British car factories were notoriously strike-prone in the 1960s and 1970s but have been barely touched by union action in recent years. Stoppages have fallen to record lows throughout industry in the 1990s.
Ford sweetened the pill by saying Halewood could be the site to build a new vehicle, probably a multi-purpose people carrier.
Angry workers blamed the decision to cut jobs in Halewood on what they see as a lack of legal protection for British workers.
Britain has opted out of European Union's Social Chapter, which sets out minimum working conditions, and its generally looser labour laws make it "cheaper to dump labour in the UK than on the continent", one union boss said.
"In Germany, if Ford closes its plant there, it has to pay its people 18 months' pay in compensation. In the UK, we've got no Social Chapter, it's easier to shut us down," production line worker Phil Gornall said on his way into the Halewood plant.
Industry analysts said Ford's need to cut costs and the failure of the Escort rather than problems at the plant were behind Ford's decision. The Escort's British market share fell to six percent in 1996 from 11 percent or more in the 1980s. Ford Europe lost $472 million in the third quarter of 1996, up from a loss of $320 million in the same 1995 period.
Professor Garyl Rhys, a car industry expert at Cardiff university, said Halewood, now a model of industrial relations, was paying for the "bad old days" of the 1960s and 1970s, when the British car industry had a bad strike record.
"Because of the problems at Halewood and a number of other car plants in Britain, there was a reluctance to use them as sources for exports...You couldn't guarantee deliveries because of interruptions to production because of strikes," he said.
Unemployment in the area around Halewood is already a major problem, with some local housing estates suffering from a jobless rate of nearly 40 percent.
Local residents complained that shops, banks and supermarkets have closed as businesses moved out of the area, and they seemed resigned to further decline.
"I don't think the government is interested in Liverpool," said Mike Kelly, landlord of the Orient pub, used by many of the Ford workers. "I don't know how long this pub will be here now -- this place is becoming like a ghost town."
