U.S. car giant Ford Motor Co dealt a blow to its Halewood plant in northwest England on Thursday, announcing 1,300 job cuts and apparently switching production of a new model to plants in Spain and Germany.
Just months after giving the factory its global quality award for 1996, Ford told workers and their union leaders the new version of its mid-range Escort model would not be built at Halewood near Liverpool, an unempolyment blackspot.
The proposed job cuts will reduce Halewood's workforce to just over 3,000, compared with a peak of 14,000 in the 1960s.
The workers believe the new model, due in 1999, will be built instead at Ford's plants in Valencia, Spain, and Saarlouis, Germany. Ford has not said where the new model will be built.
Angry trade unions, including the Transport and General Workers Union (TGW) and the AAEU, blamed the decision on what they see as a lack of legal protection for British workers.
Britain has opted out of European Union's Social Chapter, which sets out working conditions, making it "cheaper to dump labour in the UK than on the continent,"one union boss said.
Ford attempted to soften the blow by saying Halewood could be the site to build a new vehicle, probably a multi-purpose people-carrier, but this remains at the concept stage. And Ford said that Halewood would continue to make the current Escort model through the year 2000.
"The actions we have announced today at Halewood assembly operations give the plant a realistic future, with an exciting new vehicle in the medium term, subject to approval and performance objectives being achieved," said David Gorman, European vehicle operations manager for Ford.
"We have had to take these steps to ensure our manned capacity is in line with our forecasts for sales," he said.
Industry analysts said the failure of the Escort rather than problems at the plant were largely behind this decision.
Ford of Europe is suffering mainly because people refuse to fall in love with the Escort-the small family car that competes with the Volkswagen Golf and Opel Astra, they said.
"People just didn't like the Escort. It was not as exciting as the competition, and Ford kept on having to revamp it," said Charles Young, director of Automotive Research at J.D.Power-LMC Automotive Forecasting.
Ford Europe lost $472 million in the third quarter of 1996, up from a loss of $320 million in the same 1995 period.
A Ford spokeswoman in Germany said the Halewood decision should be seen more in the context of Ford's continued over-capacity in Europe as a whole rather than in any purely national terms.
Halewood workers pledged to fight the proposals, with the TGW describing them as "morally unacceptable" and threatening nationwide action.
Union bosses said the Escort was a big seller in Britain and that some production should remain in the country.
The local community, the Speke area of Liverpool, already suffers unemployment of up to 39 percent and its crime rate has worsened as businesses have pulled out, residents said.
Landlord Mike Kelly of the Orient pub, the Ford workers' local, said, "I don't think the government is interested in Liverpool."
"I don't know how long this pub will be here now -- this place is becoming like a ghost town," he said.
Local residents complained that shops, banks and supermarkets have closed as businesses moved out of the area, and saw the problem getting worse with the Ford news.
Local Member of Parliament David Alton, an opposition Leberal Democract, told Reuters he had spoken to Ford, which said the jobs would be lost through voluntary redundancy.
"There's some good news in what they say as well -- that they're looking at Halewood as the probable European site for a planned new vehicle," Alton said.
"In Germany, if Ford closes its plant there, it has to pay its people 18 months pay in compensation. In the UK, we've got no Social Chapter, it's easier to shut us down," production line group leader Phil Gornall said.
Larry Brook of the MSF union added: "Britain is the cheapest place to dump labour. We are fighting for the future of Halewood."
Professor Garyl Rhys, a car industry expert at Cardiff University, said Halewood, now a model of industrial relations, was paying for the "bad old days" of the 1960s and 1970s, when the British car industry had a bad strike record.
"Because of the problems at Halewood and a number of other car plants in Britain, there was a reluctance to use them as sources for exports...You couldn't guarantee deliveries because of interruptions to production because of strikes," he said.
Ford cars were, however, the three biggest sellers in Britain in 1996, with the Escort ranked number two behind the smaller Fiesta and ahead of the Mondeo.
