U.S. car giant Ford Motor Co said on Thursday it would cut 1,300 jobs at its Halewood plant near Liverpool, northwest England, or almost one third of the workforce, through a redundancy programme.
Ford's British operations said that the Halewood plant would not build the planned new model of the Escort car, due in 1999.
Production of the new model is likely to transfer to continental European factories in Spain and Germany.
However, Ford held out the possibility of Halewood becoming the European source of a planned new vehicle, which is still only a concept at this stage. It added that Halewood would continue to make the current Escort model through 2000.
"The actions we have announced today at Halewood assembly operations give the plant a realistic future, with an exciting new vehicle in the medium term, subject to approval and performance objectives being achieved," said David Gorman, European vehicle operations manager for Ford.
"We have had to take these steps to ensure our manned capacity is in line with our forecasts for sales," he said.
Local Liberal Democrat Member of Parliament David Alton told Reuters he had spoken to Ford, which said the jobs would be lost through voluntary redundancy. He said Halewood was in the running to be the European manufacturing site for a new vehicle, possibly in the family saloon range.
"There's some good news in what they say as well -- that they're looking at Halewood as the probable European site for a planned new vehicle," Alton said.
The proposed job cuts will reduce Halewood's workforce to just over 3,000, compared with a peak of 14,000 in the 1960s.
Management met trade union representatives on Thursday morning to discuss the cuts.
Workers expressed anger as they entered the factory, blaming "flexible" British labour laws and its opt-out from the European Union's Social Chapter, which sets out minimum working conditions in other EU countries.
"I can give you one reason why the job cuts are here. The Social Chapter," said production line group leader Phil Gornall.
"In Germany, if Ford closes its plant there, it has to pay its people 18 months pay in compensation. In the U.K., we've got no Social Chapter, it's easier to shut us down," he said.
Larry Brook of the MSF union added: "Britain is the cheapest place to dump labour. We are fighting for the future of Halewood."
Even if a new family saloon is built at Halewood from the late 1990s, the plant would still have excess capacity, car industry experts said.
Production of the new Escort is now likely to be undertaken in Ford's plants in Valencia, Spain, and Saarlouis, Germany.
Professor Garyl Rhys, a car industry expert at Cardiff University, said Halewood, now a model of industrial relations, was paying for the  "bad old days" of the 1960s and 1970s, when the British car industry had a bad strike record.
"Because of the problems at Halewood and a number of other car plants in Britain, there was a reluctance to use them as sources for exports...You couldn't guarantee deliveries because of interruptions to production because of strikes," he said.
As a result, Halewood produced mostly for the home market.
The Liverpool area has a higher than average jobless rate and one in three people is unemployed on some of the housing estates near the plant. Union leaders pledged to fight the cuts.
