Northern England's glittering record of inward investment was tarnished this week by news of 1,300 jobs being axed at Ford Motor Co's Halewood plant, denting the region's record of attracting foreign firms.
Cheap local labour, flexible employment rules and government laws to keep trade unions on a tight leash have all combined to entice foreign investors into northern England.
The long list includes companies like Japan's Nissan Motor Co, Germany's Siemens, South Korea's Samsung Co and General Motor Co's British unit Vauxhall.
Prime Minister John Major said the cuts went against the trend. Chancellor of the Exchequer Kenneth Clarke was more philosophical, saying on Thursday: "You can't win them all."
Professor Charles Bean of the London School of Economics, said Major's decision to stay out of the European Union's Social Chapter employment protection meant: "We have low firing costs.
"So foreign companies are more likely to create jobs here when times are good and axe them in the UK first when times get tough."
But business chiefs in other northern regions were keen to play up the investment bonanza they have enjoyed.
Northern Development Co spokeswoman Christine Kennedy said in an interview: "Foreign investment has provided the building blocks for a regeneration in the north," after traditional industries like mining and shipbuilding declined.
Local business leaders in the north west of England also stressed that the Ford move was a one-off set against a good track record of inward investment within the region as a whole.
Inward', the north west's corporate development body, said that 2,600 jobs were created in the region in the financial year 1995/96.
Thirty one companies invested capital expenditure of 117.3 million pounds ($196.2 million) in the north west of England including the television shopping channel QVC which will create 1,100 jobs in Knowsley, Liverpool. That figure is seen doubling by 1998.
Liverpool Chamber of Commerce policy executive Peter Rigby, told Reuters that the discovery of oil and gas in Liverpool Bay was another bonus which could give the region a slice of up to 2,000 jobs from oil companies operating in the area.
Merseyside qualifies for an EU grant of 630 million pounds to boost employment because its GDP is one of Europe's poorest at 73 percent of the European average.
Rigby admits that Ford's job cuts were a blow, coupled with news that Manchester airport beaten Liverpool in getting the go-ahead for a second runway for its airport. This dashed hopes of 20,000 Liverpool airport-related jobs being created in construction, support staff and service industries.
Manchester airport will benefit instead, creating an estimated 50,000 new jobs.
Hardest hit in the region is the small Merseyside community of Speke, where the Halewood factory is based. It has one of the highest unemployment levels in Britain and has failed to enjoy a foreign-led renaissance.
Jobless rates in Speke already run as high as 39 percent in some council estates, compared to more than 11 percent in Liverpool and 6.7 percent nationally.
The Ford job cuts are seen triggering up to 1,200 job losses elsewhere in supplier anmd service industries.
The Speke community is seeing other businesses like banks and supermarkets shut down and move away as employers pull out.
One resident, Nicky McDonagh said after the Ford news: "The place is bad enough as it is -- it will just lead to more crime. Unemployment's already high -- most children leave school with no job prospects. I just want to get out now." ($1=.5979 Pound)
