Embattled Channel Tunnel operator Eurotunnel Plc assured investors on Monday that the financial fallout from last November's fire would not hit its debt rescue plan or derail long-term growth.
"The board...believes that the November fire should not have any significant effect on the long-term financial performance of the company, nor will there be any need to review the financial restructuring plan," said Eurotunnel in a statement.
The blaze swept through one of the cross-channel tunnels, causing a partial shutdown and reduced services. But Eurotunnel gave evidence that sales had survived the fire, with passenger numbers sharply up and the outlook for 1997 encouraging.
Richard Hannah, analyst at UBS, said: "The fact that the refinancing will not have to be restructured is the key message for investors."
A special shareholder meeting had been due in April to consider the debt refinancing, which was clinched in October. But Eurotunnel said it had now delayed that to June when full services would resume once tunnel repairs had been completed.
Eurotunnel said its banking syndicate had used the delay to ask the remaining syndicate of bankers to extend the debt standstill arrangement to December. It began in September 1995 and runs for 18 months.
Eurotunnel chairman Patrick Ponsolle also said he hoped to agree details of the debt deal with its steering group of banks before March. Ponsolle was speaking to Reuters before a news briefing on the year's outlook in Folkestone, England.
In the first major trading review since the fire, Eurotunnel reported that unaudited estimated turnover for 1996 was 450 million pounds ($752.5 million), up from 300 million in 1995.
The group said the sales growth was achieved "despite a substantial loss of revenue in the last seven weeks (of 1996)".
Thirteen million passengers travelled through the tunnel last year by the Le Shuttle car service or the Eurostar passenger trains, up from eight million the previous year.
The board described the outlook for 1997 as encouraging as the cross-channel ferry industry was cutting capacity in a move which holds out the prospect of firmer pricing.
Eurotunnel believes that once full services resume by June it should be able to raise its market share in the second half.
"This market share should be comparable to, if not higher than, autumn 1996, and revenues at the end of this year should be higher than at the end of 1996," it said.
"As expected, Eurotunnel has provided a morale booster," said Hannah. Growth in sales was in line with expectations. Passenger numbers had been expected to increase after a change of ownership in the Eurostar passenger train service last April.
It was taken over by London and Continental Railways with the aim of raising sales dramatically.
Looking at a breakdown of the latest Eurotunnel traffic data, Eurostar increased passenger numbers by 67 percent to 4.86 million for the full year, and by 69 percent for the 11 months up to the November fire which led to a temporary closure.
Le Shuttle car tourist traffic rose 70 percent to 2.07 million cars in 1996, with bus traffic up 148 percent to 57,692 coaches. Le Shuttle freight traffic was up 33 percent to 519,003 trucks for the year.
Eurotunnel shares edged up 1/2 pence to 76-1/2 in London and rose 10 centimes to 7.00 francs in Paris.
($1=.5979 Pound)
