Japanese car giant Nissan Motor Co geared up to expand European sales on Tuesday by announcing a new 215 million pound ($357 million) investment in its plant at Sunderland in north east England to build a new model.
The move will create 800 jobs at Nissan UK and is expected to create a further 2,700 jobs in British supplier firms.
The news came just days after U.S. rival Ford Motor Co said it was axing 1,300 jobs at its Halewood plant in Liverpool, north west England because of over-capacity in the world market and to stem painful losses in Europe.
In stark contrast, Nissan will create the extra jobs at the north east England plant by adding a third model to the production line at Nissan Motor (UK) Ltd (NMUK). The investment will be for production equipment such as moulds for the car.
Japan's second-biggest carmaker said that from the year 2000 it will produce an extra 100,000 cars a year in the mid-price Pulsar range, called the Almera, in Britain and elsewhere in Europe.
The decision to build a third model in Europe was the subject of an internal review at Nissan for some time. The review was led by European vice-president and head of UK operations Ian Gibson who worked his way up from the factory floor.
Gibson, chief executive of Nissan UK, told Reuters in an interview that the UK plant had beaten off internal competition to build the model in Japan by proving Sunderland could produce the model to the "same quality, and with similar efficiency and productivity levels as the plant in Japan."
"It is a considerable vote of confidence (for Sunderland)," he said in a BBC television interview .
"It's a successful plant and it has an extremely successful workforce and they have won the business," he added.
British Trade and Industry minister Ian Lang welcomed the move, saying, "This latest decision by Nissan marks a significant development in their presence in Europe and underlines the attractions of the UK as a place to manufacture."
Explaining the logic behind the decision, which is in sharp contrast to Ford's job cuts, Arthur Maher, analyst at LMC International, said: "There are two factors which are driving this decision for Nissan. One is economic and the other is political," he said.
"First, in the past Nissan has been hit by a high yen (since declined) -- a factor which they took seriously. They probably believed that it would remain a firm currency. The UK was also a cheap place to build cars for Europe, offering good productivity," he added.
"Second, politically. For a long time Japan has been held back from restrictive markets like Italy and France which have tight import quotas," Maher said.
He concluded that if Nissan wanted to break into these markets after 2000, when all export limits on Japanese car imports into Europe are lifted, it made sense to build locally to make the car more acceptable to European customers.
The British plant is a springboard into that potential market. Nissan has three percent of the European market.
The potential for Nissan to expand its market share is seen as greater than for the more dominant Ford which has seen sluggish sales in the region.
John Lawson, analyst at Salomon Brothers, said he believed that Nissan also had cheaper production costs than Ford in Britain because its salaries are 10 to 15 percent lower.
"Also despite the rise in the value of the pound, there is still a lot to be said for the decision to manufacture in the UK. Japan has much higher labour costs and then there is the shipping and tariff costs," said Lawson.
The Nissan Europe technology centre in Britain will be responsible for development of the new car. The decision follows recent Nissan announcements that it will start building diesel engines in Sunderland in 1997, and will launch an estate version of the Primera built in Sunderland in 1998, creating 150 jobs. ($1=.6021 Pound)
