British defence to electronics giant General Electric Company signalled a key shift away from the management legacy of ex-chief Lord Weinstock this week by giving itself a leaner structure, analysts said on Thursday.
Zafar Khan, analyst at SocGen, said "GEC has created a flatter structure, with divisional heads now reporting to Simpson directly creating a more modern-day business structure. There are more direct lines of control."
George Simpson, who succeeded Weinstock as managing director last September, announced on Wednesday GEC would halve the number of its corporate divisions to five key business units -- GEC Alsthom, GEC Marconi, GPT, GEC USA and the industrial group of businesses.
The newly separated industrial group includes the industrial apparatus unit.
GEC also created a central committee with representatives from the key activities of finance, legal affairs, strategic planning, personnel affairs, marketing and technical issues.
Analysts said the move brought GEC's corporate structure up to date and created a leaner and clearer chain of command.
The key new change is GEC's decision to group together the main U.S. businesses -- the medical equipment manufacturer Picker International, petrol pump maker Gilbarco and printer maker Videojet.
One analyst said the company had informed him that the regrouping did not necessarily mean that industrials was being separated off for sale.
"It has indicated that the split in two (of the U.S. and industrials) was due to (former deputy managing director Malcolm) Bates resigning. The strategic review is still six to seven months down the line so GEC is damping down speculation for now," he said.
Even so, market watchers believe that industrial apparatus and consumer electronics are two likely candidates for divestment.
Andy Crispin at SocGen added that these were businesses with "low margins and tough markets" making them sell-off targets.
GEC finance director David Newlands told Reuters at its half year stage last December that the group had received a spate of offers which were mostly above book value.
Simpson stamped his first mark on the company at the half year stage by announcing a 160 million pounds ($261.5 million) restructuring charge and the possibility of up to 1,000 job cuts.
GEC shares have turned more sprightly since Simpson took the helm. The company's shares are approaching a two-year high at 411 pence, up 2-1/2p on Wednesday's close, compared to 271 pence per share in January 1995.
($1=.6119 Pound)
