Hanson, Britain's most famous conglomerate in the throes of a four-way demerger, begins a new era next year as a building industry company -- inheriting the famous family name on the group's demise.
After starting out in 1950 as a fertliser maker before becoming the multi-industrial giant, Hanson will emerge from the family break-up with a legacy of low debt of around 200 million pounds ($313.4 million), lower asset values due to a recent writedown and a clutch of building material and construction firms.
The estimated 2.4 billion pounds demerger, which starts next month, will see the flotation of Millennium Chemicals and Imperial Tobacco on October 1, with The Energy Group due early next year.
Lord Hanson, group chairman, will remain on the "New Hanson" board and also brings his son Robert Hanson as director of corporate development, a move triggering controversy among some big investors. Andrew Dougal takes up the chief executive position.
But analysts, including UBS, warn "New Hanson" still faces old dangers like difficult construction markets and the future asset valuation of aggregates which represents two thirds of turnover from the ARC and Cornerstone units.
Its other units are Hanson Brick, Hanson Electrical and Grove Worlwide.
In the most recent nine-month results for Hanson, the building related businesses saw profits fall to 154 million pounds from 156 million. Turnover rose to 1.75 billion from 1.54 billion.
Despite its sales growth, the performance has been hampered by poor market conditions, particularly in Britain which has seen construction spending remain stagnant and margins pressurised.
The British housing market is also still in the doldrums, with the first flicker of recovery only just emerging.
Hanson says U.S. markets have become more vibrant, with U.S.aggregates unit Cornerstone seeing rising profits as the price of the material rose by four percent in the first nine months of the financial year.
But despite recovery in some U.S. sectors, UBS says there are still regional weak spots like California, for example.
Sentiment in the businesses was also dampened earlier this year by a cut in asset values by 2.3 billion pounds to 1.3 billion on the Cornerstone aggregates values.
UBS analysts say the future valuation of these assets will be of key concern.
Analysts have also privately voiced concern about the appointment of Hanson Junior to such a key position in the company, stating that some big investors are perturbed about his level of experience.
"The Lord may with one hand spare Hanson from the high debt levels of others (in the group), but he gives Robert Hanson with the other," said one analyst who requested anonymity.
But other sector watchers are more gracious in their assessment, citing the strong market position of units like UK aggregates arm ARC, seen as a first-class player.
"New Hanson's got low debt, good market positions and aims for acquisition-led growth," said one.
Another added that this particular company was free from the threat of environmental or legal action payouts - a worry that could afflict the group's other coal and tobacco concerns. ($1=.6382 Pound)
