Stagecoach Plc, the transport group which has seen its share price rocket by 138 percent in the last year, predicted the biggest future growth coming from more acquisitions being made in the rail and bus sector overseas, its chairman told Reuters.
Brian Souter, executive chairman, added that Stagecoach's underlying gearing of 197 percent, excluding securitised debt which raises it to 567 percent, was not excessive and that the group was confident it had the financial scope to remain a deal-maker.  
"We are very comfortable about our gearing levels," said Souter, adding "We would be in a position to make a major European acquisiton in the next year if needed."
Commenting on how the group could continue to maintain its pacy growth which has helped fuel the share-fever in the stock, he said that its European ambitions had been ignited by the Swebus bus acquistion last year. Stagecoach was looking to make similar acquisitons in countries "clustered in the region". "I also think there'll be overseas railways opportunities. These two will provide the biggest lump of growth in future - that's my prediction."  
Responding to some analysts' comments about the high debt levels, Souter said the company expected to have 230 million stg in free cash in two to three years and stressed that 70 percent of its  current 830 million of total debt (including securitised loans) was fixed for seven years at 7.19 percent.
"This gearing question is an important one which we want to address with the market," said the chairman.
Turning to the UK bus unit, Souter said that although the group's aim to raise its share of the national market to 25 percent from 17 percent remained, it would not buy any bus companies for now because they were overpriced.  
"We are holding back on these deals because of the prices. Once the Labour (Party) is in place and we know their policies, then we can move. But for now we have a sabbatical on acquisitions in this area because of high prices and until we see what happens with the next govt."
A UK election is due by May, with the opposition Labour Party riding high in opinion polls. Possible future takeover targets include MTL, the Liverpool bus company. "We looked at it (MTL), Taybus and other big groups to see if they have value in them - Everything's on our shopping list," said the chairman.  
He said some bus company prices did not reflect the age of their fleets and "we are not going to pay premium prices."
The cash-cow of the group Porterbrook continues to perform well, he said. The rolling stock leasing company is expected to account for 50 percent of group profits for the full year, say analysts and Stagecoach is not arguing with that prediction.
"It has exceeded our initial expectations and we continue to be very happy with it," said the chairman. "We are very comfortable with forecasts analysts are making."
Also, Porterbrook is already in the throes of bidding for an upcoming 1.6 billion stg of orders due from the rail franchises.  
"Porterbrook has a big diet of investment in new trains in the industry, with 1.6 billion stg of new investment required under (UK passenger rail) franchise agreements within a five year period."
"The industry has a stream of franchise decisions in the next six months and they (potential franchise customers) will place orders in next 12 months. The bulk of the 1.6 bln will be placed then," he said.
Stagecoach also has the South West Trains passenger rail franchise and is on the short-list for others. It said it was confident of winning at least another.
--London newsroom +44 171 5427717
