Stagecoach Plc, the star performer of Britain's transport sector whose shares soared 138 percent in a year, promised on Friday more bumper growth this year fuelled by acquisitions overseas.
Outlining its strategy for 1997, executive chairman Brian Souter said the Scottish-based buses-to-railways group had not run out of steam and still could deliver growing returns.
He also tried to dampen concern about the size of group debt, with total gearing at 567 percent, saying it still had the financial scope to remain a deal-maker.
"We are very comfortable about our gearing levels. We would be in a position to make a major European acquisition in the next year if needed," he told Reuters in an interview.
The fast-growing group is set to target rail and bus firms in the Nordic region as well as examining the Pacific Rim.
Stagecoach, which started as a brother and sister team running the local bus company in Perth, Scotland, is now Britain's biggest transport operator having acquired privatised railway operations in southwest England, a rolling stock company and bus operations in England and Sweden.
On buying market share in the British bus market -- Stagecoach has 17 percent with the aim of reaching 25 percent -- Souter said he wanted to wait until the election due by May, which the opposition Labour Party is strongly-placed to win.
"We are holding back on these deals because of the prices," he said. "Once the Labour (Party) is in place and we know their policies, then we can move. But for now we have a sabbatical on acquisitions in this area."
On debt, he said: "This gearing question is an important one which we want to address with the market."
The 567 percent gearing includes securitised debt and falls to 197 percent once securitised loans are stripped out.
Stagecoach expects to have 230 million pounds in free cash in two to three years and stressed that 70 percent of its current 830 million ($1.36 billion) of total debt, including securitised loans, was fixed for seven years at 7.19 percent.
The Porterbrook UK rolling stock unit could turn in 50 percent of group profit, say analysts, a figure the company does not argue with. "It has exceeded our initial expectations and we continue to be very happy with it," said Souter. "We are very comfortable with forecasts analysts are making."
Souter said the performance of the shares, which rocketed from 274 pence in December 1995 to the current level of 799-1/2, reflected the quality of underlying earnings.
Stagecoach said it ran all its businesses against a "worst case scenario" set of conditions: a market slump, interest rates hiked to 15 percent and an eight percent fall in passenger traffic. Souter said all businesses remained viable.
"I'm not saying our business is risk or recession free but these are great quality earnings."
"Political and regulatory uncertainty are the only worries, but we're not as uncomfortable as we were six months ago."
There are longer-term concerns about earnings once its South West Trains passenger rail franchise ends in 2003 and the termination of some Porterbrook train leasing deals around the same time. That would strip out a chunk of guaranteed earnings.
But for the nearer term, the bonanza looks set to keep running, with analysts predicting average year profits to April 30 at 98.2 million pounds, rising to 154 million thereafter.
Its last set of annual profits were 43.6 million. That growth will stem from Porterbrook and Swebus. One analyst said: "Last year it was the best stock in the transport sector, so there can't be enormous upside left.
"But Mr Souter does have quite a big fan club in the City. He has very good business judgement and he's a specialist at investing in high-growth businesses sold off by the government at the wrong price." ($1=.6119 Pound)
