Anglo-American conglomerate Hanson Plc set the date for the final stage of its ambitious four-way demerger on Tuesday with the announcement that its Energy Group division will be spun off on February 24.
Energy Group, which is mulling a string of acquisitions in Britain and America, said it had started talks with a U.S. power marketing company.
The demerger, which is subject to shareholder approval, will give shareholders one Energy share for every 10 existing Hanson shares held. Hanson shareholders will be asked to vote on the proposal at an extraordinary general meeting on February 21.
Once Energy is split off as a separate company, to be listed in London and New York, the rump Hanson group will consist of a clutch of building firms.
"We are all very enthusiastic about the future of Energy and new Hanson and are convinced that both will benefit from enhanced focus on operations, profitability and future growth prospects," chairman Lord Hanson said.
The first two demergers of Britain's Imperial Tobacco and U.S.-quoted Millennium Chemicals took place last October.
Energy, which will be large enough to rank inside Britain's top 100 blue chips and the Fortune 500 in the U.S., is the last to be split off.
Its new management team is led by Derek Bonham, executive chairman, with two joint chief executives to run operations at the main businesses -- Peabody mining and Eastern, the British electricity division.
Bonham told a press briefing the group planned to target a number of acquisitions, particularly in the U.S., and admitted entering into "exclusive and confidential" talks with a U.S. power marketing company, subject to due diligence.
It is also examining generating deals in the U.S. and Britian, it said.
Peabody chief executive Irl Engelhardt told a press briefing that the coal group could use its knowledge of the U.S. market to help Energy exploit opportunities there.
Group finance director Eric Anstee said the group would "take the cash generation of the coal and network businesses and use it where we see future growth in earnings -- the growing power sector".
Eastern generated a total of 354 million pounds ($571 million) in cash flow in the year ended September 30, he said.
Energy, which owns Eastern, Britain's fourth largest electricity generator, said that worldwide demand for energy is expected to rise 34 to 46 percent between 1993 and 2010.
According to the U.S. Department of Energy, world electricity output is expected to grow 63 percent to 2010. Coal and gas will account for 41 percent and 17 percent of that generation level by 2010.
Energy, which is being sold with 1.4 billion pounds of debt, sees this, deregulation in world markets and privatisation as the key opportunities for the group.
Investor roadshows are being planned on both sides of the Atlantic, with 35 percent of Hanson's shares held in the U.S.
The group's annual turnover in the year to September 30, 1996 was 3.6 billion pounds, with pre-exceptional profits of 446 million pounds. Total assets are 5.7 billion pounds. ($1=.6199 Pound)
