Britain was a step closer to completing the privatisation of passenger rail services on Thursday after announcing the preferred bidders for two more franchises which helped send the companies' shares soaring.
The Office of Passenger Rail Franchising (Opraf) said Great Western Holdings Ltd had been chosen as the preferred bidder for the North West Regional Railways franchise in northwest England.
Existing management and employees own 51 percent of the bid group, with FirstBus and 3i venture capital owning 24.5 percent each.
The Thameslink franchise was awarded to GOVIA which comprises of Go-Ahead Group Plc and French transport group VIA-GTI.
That leaves just three of the total 25 franchises to be awarded ahead of the deadline for the British election due by May 1997. Apart from the franchise for routes in Central England, the remaining deals are ScotRail and North East Regional Rail.
The franchise sales will completes the controversial privatisation of Britain's rail industry which began in 1995 and included the sell-off of rail infrastructure under Railtrack and the sale of the three rolling stock leasing companies.
Go-Ahead's commercial director Chris Moyes welcomed the news and told Reuters the line had huge potential because it provided a link from the financial district of London to Gatwick and Luton airports.
He said finalisation of the deal could add 100 million pounds ($162 million) of extra revenue to Go-Ahead's figures.
"We aim to capitalise on our existing commuter traffic and improve the links to the airports. There is enormous scope," he said pointing to the example of the fast-link Gatwick Express service from Victoria which serves the West London travellers.
Opraf also announced that a revised shortlist for Central Trains had been drawn up, cutting the orignal list of five to National Express Group and Straightforward Lines which contains FirstBus and the existing management team.
FirstBus chairman, Trevor Smallwood, said whoever won the Central deal, which covers routes in central England, could see revenues of around 70 million pounds.
His company must now make renewed presentations against National Express in a fight to the finish.
A final decision is expected in the next two weeks when financial details of each deal will be revealed including the service, investment and subsidy levels for the franchise term.
The latest round of winners saw their shares roar ahead in celebration, with Go-Ahead leading the pack with a 36 pence rise to 515 by the close. National Express was up 26 pence at 547 and FirstBus was up 12 1/2 pence at 241.
The sector has seen spectacular growth in share prices in the past year as more bus operators have moved into railways, taking advantage of the opportunities opened up by privatisation.
($1=.6172 Pound)
