British airports operator BAA Plc is expected to show taxable profits continuing to climb when it reports third quarter and nine-month results on Monday as the number of people travelling by air travel continues to rise.
Analysts predict that pretax profits for the nine months to December 31 will come in at between 392 million stg and 400 from 374 million pounds last time.  
Passenger traffic at its airports, which include the country's two biggest hubs of London Heathrow and Gatwick, rose 4.4 percent in the nine months to 76.62 million passengers.
But the company's prospects have been overshadowed by fears that Britain's opposition Labour Party could include BAA in its hit list for the windfall tax, which it has vowed to impose on former state-owned utilities should it win the election.
Labour says a certain number of utilities such as the water and power companies were sold off too cheaply by the Conservative government and led to "fat cat" executives overpaying themselves and their shareholders with the proceeds.  
BAA refuses to countenance the prospect, saying it has done everything the utilities should have done since it was privatised in 1987, investing in the business including plans to build a giant fifth passenger terminal at London Heathrow.
"We are not a utility, we are not a fat cat, we have not paid either special dividends or returned money to shareholders or made any mega acquisitions to get rid of our money," BAA's finance director Russell Walls said last November.
BAA reported pre-tax profits rose only 3.4 percent to 304 million stg in the six months to September 30 and earnings were up just 3.3 percent to 22.2 pence a share.  
But it said underlying pretax profits were up 10.5 percent and earnings up by 11.1 percent because it made a nine million stg exceptional gain in the comparable period a year ago.
It was also phasing out seasonal fluctuations in airport user charges, which had reduced income by 11 million stg in the first half but would be recovered in the second half.
With airport landing and passenger handling charges regulated under a five-year pricing formula, BAA is concentrating on trying to boost retail revenues from the shopping arcades it has built at most of its terminals.  
First half net retail income rose 10.7 percent to 224.5 million stg, with passengers spending an average of 4.20 stg each, 7.2 percent more than a year ago.
Total group revenue including retail was up 6.3 percent at 742 million stg. Income from airport user charges increased by 1.8 percent to 283 million stg. Revenue from property rose 7.7 percent to 112 million stg.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
