Crucial talks between the British and U.S. governments on clinching an open skies pact to free the transatlantic airline market were postponed for two weeks on Monday due to the illness of a senior British negotiator.
The talks had been due to kick off in Washington on Tuesday, with representatives from the British and U.S. governments as well as the main transatlantic carriers.
But a spokesman for the British government said: "Our lead official is in hospital so the meeting has been cancelled. The talks have been postponed for a fortnight."
News of the eleventh-hour grounding of talks came as the European Commission kicked off a separate series of private hearings in Brussels into the proposed British Airways and American Airlines alliance, which is conditional on an open skies pact being clinched.
British and U.S. carriers expressed regret that the Anglo-U.S. talks had been delayed. But sources reiterated that this round of talks had not been expected to deliver a final deal.
"It's not damaging. The two sides had been talking informally anyway and this round was never billed as the breakthrough round," one U.S. airline spokesman said. "It was meant to deal with more boring issues like ground handling."
The two sides are believed to have been inching closer, but Scott Yohe, senior vice-president of government affairs at Delta Air Lines Inc , told Reuters he believed full agreement was not possible in the current round. He said a deal is likely to emerge in subsequent talks.
But a number of other major hurdles need to be cleared. First the British government wants to try to link the open skies talks with the BA/AA alliance. The U.S. wants to keep the talks and alliance approval as two distinct issues.
Britain is still waiting for its competition watchdog, the Office of Fair Trading, to give a final verdict on the alliance after receiving responses from the airline industry.
In particular, airlines are waiting for a clarification on how BA should divest itself of 168 landing slots at London's Heathrow airport -- a condition for the BA/AA deal to be cleared by the Office of Fair Trading.
"Buying/selling of slots is fundamental to any (open skies) deal," said one U.S. airline spokesman.
Whether BA can sell them or must give them away remains a grey area. Britain says the decision lies with the government, but the European Commission says it has final jurisdiction and claims that selling slots is banned under EU law.
Another issue within the open skies framework is the argument by the British government for some protection for smaller airlines taking the full brunt of competition under an open skies regime.
Britain is trying to secure a dispute reconciliation procedure. This is believed to be for the benefit of players like Virgin Atlantic, the transatlantic carrier owned by entrepreneur Richard Branson's Virgin Group .
Another complicating factor is the chance of a British election being announced in the coming weeks, which could put the talks on the backburner.
With the opposition Labour Party riding high in opinion polls, one industry insider said that if there was a change of government "there is the possibility that Labour will want to start from scratch."
