BAA Plc, the British airports group behind Europe's biggest hub at London Heathrow, reported a 6.2 percent rise in nine month pretax profits on Monday as the group remained on a steady course of profitability for the year.
Pretax profits for the period ended December 31 were 397 million pounds ($636.5 million), with total revenue up to 1.06 billion pounds versus 987 million pounds.
In the nine months 76.6 million passengers travelled through BAA's airports which also include Gatwick and Stansted in London.
Sir John Egan, chief executive, said the figures represented "strong performance across the board".
Airport and traffic charge revenue stood at 385 million pounds, up 5.5 percent. Retailing revenue was 475 million, up 10 percent resulting in net retail income of 331 million, up 11 percent and property income rose 8.4 percent to 168 million pounds.
The solid looking set of figures failed to spark the market. Shares were down seven pence at 525 pence per share.
"It was a steady result but nothing terribly exciting," one senior dealer said. "The overall market is a bit weak this morning and the shares are just reflecting that weakness."
Commenting on the outlook, Egan welcomed the greater certainty which followed the Civil Aviation Authority's publication of its regulatory review for the coming five years.
That review said there was no need for BAA to divest any of its aiports in the UK and recommended a price control of RPI (retail price index) minus three percent.
The price control applies to its airport service charges, but around half of BAA'c sales now come from the shopping malls installed inside its airports.
BAA is also moving overseas, submitting bids to run overseas airports.
In a separate development, BAA group finance director Russell Walls said it had decided to cut back its stake in a bid group to run three Australian airports.
"We are cutting our stake in agreement with our other partners. The bid had too high a foreign content," he said. But Walls denied there was any prompt from the Australian government to reduce its dominance in the consortium, which includes Australian fund managers.
Bids have been put in for airports in Melbourne, Brisbane and Perth. ($1=.6237 Pound)
