Britain's opposition Labour Party outlined its blueprint for transport on Tuesday pledging no sell-off of the London Underground system, a partnership with the private sector on investment and a review of rail and bus regulation.
Labour leader Tony Blair kicked off the proceedings at an Industry Forum conference on transport by backing a public-private partnership to inject more investment into the cash-strapped metro system.
"It would offer Londoners a way between the status quo and dogmatic wholesale privatisation," he said.
The theme of partnership was emphasised by Blair and shadow transport secretary Andrew Smith who has shifted sharply away from the more interventionist policy approach of his predecessor Clare Short, according to transport industry figures.
Labour's revised transport vision promised tougher regulation, but no longer spoke of reversing the rail sell-off.
Instead, Smith said he envisaged using the private sector to invest in track maintenance, signalling, new trains and tunnel maintenance through long-term agreements for the underground.
On the overland rail network, Labour said it would be pushing policies which resulted in less road building and more traffic management.
This would be underscored by initiatives to tempt more passengers out of their cars and onto rail and buses. But Blair said the party did not want to "demonise" cars.
"I want to see an end to the debate couched in terms of road versus rail'. I am not interested in demonising the motor car. The focus of government policy needs to be offering people attractive alternatives to using their car. The task has to be getting a sustainable balance in car use," he told the conference.
As part of its effort to beef up the transport system as a viable alternative to cars, Labour promised a review of the regulation of buses and rail.
On rail, Smith criticised privatised infrastructure company Railtrack Plc for not meeting its investment obligations.
"As a natural monopoly whose performance is critical for the whole system, Railtrack must be held to account for the quality and effectiveness as well as the financial value of its investment programme and its property disposals. The first call on those should be for investment," said Smith.
Labour -- which leads in pinion polls ahead of a general election which must be held by May -- plans a four-point plan to move more freight onto rail and off roads.
As part of the that plan, Railtrack would be given more of a responsibility to develop freight business under a proposed code of conduct.
This would require Railtrack to provide information and introduce procedures for dealing with new freight business requests as part of a general obligaiton to promote develop freight. This would be enforced by the rail regulator, said Labour.
The freight plan also includes safeguarding of sites for depots under planning guidlines and raising safety and emission standards for road haulage. On regulation, Labour said said there was a need for a new framework for buses and the beefing up of the rail regulator's powers.
On compeititon law, Labour would launch a review to see whether changes are needed to allow co-operation between bus companies on issues like ticketing and time-tabling where it can benefit customers - an issue the industry has lobbied on.
Labour said Britain's lack of an integrated transport policy was already costing it 20 billion pounds ($32.07 billion) per annum, according to a survey from the Confederation of British Industry.
($1=.6237 Pound)
