Britain could raise between 600 million and 1.5 billion pounds ($960 million to $2.4 billion) in net proceeds from the sale of the London Underground rail network, Steven Norris, a former transport minister now working on the Conservative Party election manifesto, said on Wednesday.
Norris, who is spearheading the ruling party's election campaign for London and the south-east of England, told Reuters he also believed the government is strongly examining the option of fare and service standard controls for the tube network.
In a telephone interview, Norris, who has been involved informally with government studies into a possible sale of the network, known as the tube, said he understood the sale proceeds figure excluded the cost of funding necessary investments.
The gross proceeds figure was put at between 1.4 billion and 2.5 billion pounds, he said. In the run up to Britain's general election, which must be held by May 22, London Underground has been turned into a "political football", government sources say.
As politicians among the ruling Conservatives and also the opposition Labour party believe that Londoners' votes may ride on the tube in more ways than one, there is great pressure on the government to submit a compelling case to the public.
Norris said he believed the government was also looking at a way of safeguarding service levels, much as the Department of Transport has already done with the national rail network.
A government source also told Reuters earlier that fare controls were on the cards under sell-off plans -- a crucial tactic for commuters who are likely to fear that higher fares would otherwise follow from privatisation.
"The key selling point of (national overground) rail privatisation to consumers was provision of fare controls and the need to maintain existing levels of service," the source told Reuters. "So it is unlikely that those would not be maintained under the London Underground sale."
The government source concluded, "In a pre-election situation the government has to have reasons to do it which are presentable in the public eye."
The comments came the day after opposition Labour leader Tony Blair, ahead in electoral opinion polls, said he was committed to keeping the tube in public hands and revitalising it through private sector investment.
Norris slammed Labour's plans to encourage private sector investment into the tube to maintain track, signalling, tunnels and for new trains as inadequate.
He said private finance projects in the underground worth 1.0 billion pounds were already underway.
The sale options being looked at by the government include a full scale sale, or selling the franchises to run individual tube lines, he said.
This is seen as a feasible route because the network currently runs each line as a separate business, with its own fleet of rolling stock. But Norris said franchises would have to be long enough to allow franchisees to recoup necessary investment in the network.
The network, some of which is more than a hundred years old, built in the Victorian era, faces a government budget freeze of 500 million pounds per annum in the next financial year.
That government subsidy will be slashed to 350 million in the year after and 150 million for the year after that.
A spokesman for the Department of Transport said the shortfall should be filled by an expected increase in the system's operating surplus (or profit) which is currently at 100 million pounds and seen growing up to 300 million.
($1=.6237 Pound)
