AMEC Plc, the British building and engineering group, saw first half pretax profits double on Thursday and pledged to reward investors with final dividend growth in the second half after freezing the latest payout.
Pretax profits for the six months to June 30 rocketed to 12.1 million pounds ($18.96 million) from 6.1 million. Sales were 1.32 billion versus 1.13 billion.
AMEC chief executive Peter Mason told Reuters "We would hope to improve the dividend at the year end," after freezing the interim payout at 1.5 pence per share.
Mason explained the reason for the conservative payout:"On balance we felt it was better to have a dividend which was covered rather than try for a small increase. But we will deal with it properly at the year end."
The chief was confident that profits would be better than last year after announcing in the results statement that turnover should hit the targeted 2.75 billion pounds.
AMEC's shares were up 2 1/2 pence higher at 98 at 1104 GMT.
The AMEC chief also told Reuters that as part of his strategic review, kicked off seven months ago, he aimed to boost the group's international sales through acquisitions and partnerships.
Mason has targeted raising overseas sales to 50 percent of total turnover from the current 30 percent in the long term.
"All options are open," he said, adding that the preferred route for expansion is through partnerships and small acquisitions.
"I see no merit in acquisitions in basic building and civil engineering businesses, but I want companies offering value-added technology and design," he said. Several deals are already under discussion.
AMEC, which fought off a hostile takeover from Norway's Kvaerner which still holds 26 percent of its shares, had said earlier this year that a number of companies in South East Asia were interested in buying up this stake in bits to cement business links.
This move was seen as a route to expanding sales in the region.
Turning to the interim's divisional results - mechanical and electrical sales rose 20 percent.
Building and civil engineering sales rose 28 percent, despite severe problems in the West German market hit by low infrastructure spending and sluggish conditions.
As a result AMEC is seeking to transfer some of its resources to the brisker East German market.
Process and energy returned to profit in 1996, but Mason predicts stronger figures in 1997 once the rationalisation benefits kick in. Housing sales were up 11 percent.
($1=.6382 Pound)
