Orange Plc, Britain's youngest mobile telephone company, reported a bigger loss on Tuesday in its first full year since flotation but said subscriber numbers continued to show healthy growth.
Pretax losses in the year rose to 229.1 million pounds ($367.4 million) from 140.5 million in 1995, while turnover jumped 171 percent to 619 million pounds, including acquisitions.
Analysts, who do not expect the company to become profitable at the operating level before 1998 because of heavy investments to build its network, had pencilled in annual pretax losses of around 231.1 million pounds.
Orange, hoping to build on a reputation for innovation, which has given it a 11.5 percent market share despite its late market entrance, said its customer base now topped 850,000.
Managing director Hans Snook said the company, which plans to reach 96 percent of the British population by the end of the year and hopes to win mobile licences in Greece and the Netherlands, was "ideally positioned for further growth".
Snook said he expected 40 percent of the British to use mobile phones in the next decade, up from 11.7 percent now.
"Scandinavian countries now have about 30 percent penetration and are growing, Australia has about 25 percent, the U.S. has 17 percent and we're sitting here with 11-12 percent -- it's silly.
"A lot of people are now predicting 40 percent penetration 10 years from now and I think that looks very do-able," he told Reuters in an interview.
Orange, which was floated last March at 205 pence per share, initially saw its stock slump to 157.5 pence before recovering over the last few months to trade at 218 on Tuesday, a rise of four pence on the day.
Fears that a sharp drop in subscriber growth was pointing to a permanent slowdown hit Britain's four mobile operators last year but were eased when subscriber numbers picked up again at the end of 1996.
But some analysts still believe Orange is overvalued.
Andrew Harrington, telecommunications analyst at Salomon Brothers, questioned whether Orange's past good performance could continue in a market where overall revenue growth was slowing and there were fewer differences in the products that mobile rivals were selling.
"To get to Scandinavian-type penetration levels, presumably we are going to have to go to Scandinavian-type revenue per subscriber levels, which are about one-third below where we are now," he said.
Snook says the all important average retained revenue per Orange subscriber will rise from around 442 pounds per year, partly because dominant telecoms player British Telecommunications last month raised the price of a call to Orange phones from its fixed lines.
"Current incoming call revenues are about 60 pounds per month. If that doubles, it will add a fair chunk to average revenues for 1997," Snook said.
Orange says it has the lowest "churn rate" -- customers disconnecting or being excluded for bad debt or fraud -- in the industry.
At 18.6 percent, it has risen from 18.1 percent in 1995 but Orange's calculations still put this well below the industry average of 28 percent clocked up by rivals Vodafone Group Plc, Cellnet and One-2-One.
Snook said foreign expansion projects apart from those in the Netherlands and Greece were on the back burner.
Backed by main shareholder Hong Kong conglomerate Hutchison Whampoa, Orange is hoping to be the chosen partner to take a 30 percent stake in the cellular arm of Greek national operator OTE this month.
Orange raised 1.2 billion pounds via a debt facility in December 1995 for its British expansion plans and since then has withdrawn about 785 million pounds.
Meanwhile, Orange customers will be able to make calls in more than 50 countries by the end of the year using handsets developed by Motorola that operate at both 1800 and 900 MHz.
The new handsets should be on offer by April or May. ($ = 0.623 British Pounds)
