British cable operator Telewest Communications Plc disappointed the market on Wednesday by reporting widening annual losses and telephony and cable television margins that were below expectations.
The group also told Reuters it might delay building out its national network because of heavy investments needed to provide multi-channel digital television and because of its plans to link up its seven franchise areas with its own fibre optic network.
Annual losses before tax widened to 249.9 million pounds ($397.3 million) from 114.67 million pounds while turnover jumped to 290.27 million pounds from 144.78 million, excluding the effect of franchise aquisitions.
Telewest will lose its position as Britain's biggest cable operator after the expected completion in the next few weeks of a merger between Cable and Wireless Plc's Mercury unit and three other cable operators.
The company, which announced fourth quarter and final subscriber figures in January, saw its shares slip three pence to 117-1/2p in slim trade after the results.
Alan Lyons, telecoms analyst at brokers ABN AMRO Hoare Govett said he was disappointed that the company's telephony margins came in at 67 percent and at 42 percent for its cable television operations.
He had been looking for margins of 70 percent and 45 percent respectively. "That really bodes badly for the business and that's what I'd take as the main bear point from the results," he said.
Symptomatic of the growing competition faced by cable firms, Telewest's finance director Charles Burdick said the group might seek to raise more funds for investment plans as fierce price wars keep a lid on margins.
Telewest, which has about 900 million pounds of debt, has secured a 1.2 billion pound bank facility of which it has so far drawn about 100 million pounds.
Burdick said Telwest was considering "cherry picking" or slowing down the building of its parts of its national network, which covers 65 percent of the country, in 1998 and 1999 to concentrate on offering digital television as the services comes fully on stream.
Telewest, along with Bell Cablemedia Plc and NYNEX CableComms, has already signed a deal with General Instrument of the U.S. in an attempt to gain the advantage over satellite broadcaster BSkyB in supplying set-top boxes for digital TV and information services.
Telewest, which wants to complete the rollout of its national network by 2000, also wants to link up its regional areas by the end of this year by laying new lines or leasing lines from other operators.
In this way, it can by-pass high interconnection prices charged by dominant telecoms players such as British Telecommunications Plc and Mercury.
Capital expenditure over the year rose 31 percent to 515.6 million pounds and Burdick said Telewest expected to spend a similar amount this year. "This year will be another year of substantial build," he said.
Telewest said average monthly revenue per cable television subscriber edged up to 22.95 pounds from 21.11 pounds in 1995, although average residential telephony revenue billed per line slipped to 20.26 pounds from 20.69 pounds because of a tariff price war with BT.
In business telephony, attempts to remain competitive helped drive the average revenue per line eight percent lower to 54.5 pounds per month.
Telewest, along with other cable companies, has been placed on CreditWatch with negative implications by Standard &amp; Poor's credit rating agency because of slower than anticipated network buildouts and competitive pressures from rivals such as BT and BSkyB.
Higher-than-expected capital expenditure and debt levels and a delay in operating cash flow generation in the industry has concerned the American agency.
But Burdick said Telewest had the best credit rating of all cable companies at BB plus and had had a "very productive meeting" with S&amp;P.
"We expect to have a response as a company and industry at the end of the month," he said.
($ = 0.629 British Pounds)
