General Cable, the loss-making British cable television and telecoms group, on Thursday turned four executives of a data network group into millionaires under a "golden handcuff" deal.
General Cable is buying Imminus Ltd, a national managed-data network services company, for 33 million pounds ($53 million) -- 16 million of which will go to the network's four directors to stay with the company.
After reporting wider annual pretax losses of 29.8 million pounds, finance director David Miller told a news conference that it was the right acquisition, at the right time, at the right price.
Amid speculation that the group had held takeover talks with rivals such as Telewest Communications Plc or Comcast UK Cable Partners Ltd as consolidation sweeps the industry, General Cable said its role was to maximise shareholder value.
Although the company is keeping its options open, it said it saw no advantage in merging or being taken over in the short term.
Chairman Sir Anthony Cleaver noted that the group would continue to talk to others in the industry "because one never knows what is going to happen".
"In a room full of marriageable people, we are a very pretty girl," Miller told a news conference.
Last year, Cable and Wireless Plc announced that its British unit Mercury was merging with three other cable companies to create Cable and Wireless Communications -- Britain's biggest cable group.
General Cable, which has completed 57 percent of its regional network and plans to roll out the rest by 2001, said it had no plans to become a national operator.
It has three franchise areas, in Yorkshire, northern England, Birmingham, central England, and west of London.
Imminus, which made a pretax profit of 2.76 million pounds in 1996 and was bought at 7.5 times historic EBIDTA (earnings before interest, depreciation, tax and amortisation), comes with a national licence.
This allows General Cable, which hopes to get its own national licence at the end of this year, to offer its voice and data services to business customers outside its regional franchise areas.
Imminus offers value-added services allowing firms to link remote personal computers and terminals throughout Britain through a leased private network and will form part of General Telecommunications -- General Cable's new brand name for its telecoms services.
General Cable reported positive operating cash flow at 8.7 million pounds, 42,900 new television customers, 40,700 new residential telephone customers and 12,500 new business lines.
Penetration, when customers take up the service available in their neighbourhood, remained largely static but the company blamed price competition for a slight fall in revenues per subscriber in both residential telephony and cable television.
Churn levels -- cancelled subscriptions -- fell in cable television to 21 percent from 28 percent and remained static on the residential telephony side at 17 percent despite price wars in the industry, the group said. ($ = 0.626 British Pounds)
