M.A.I.D Plc, Britain's electronic business news and data service, said on Thursday it was poised to announce fresh deals to expand its reach while also promising profitability in 1997.
Dan Wagner, founder and chief executive, said in an interview that having tied up International Business Machines Corp, Thorn Business Communications, Nokia Ab, Oy and CompuServe Corp, M.A.I.D was in final discussions with more partners.
"You can expect more substantial, global alliances to be tied up within the next few months that we've been working on for quite some time," he said.
Wagner said new partners were likely to be telecoms groups, major publishing groups and online companies that would allow M.A.I.D, whose corporate customer base trebled to 3,800, to reach more business people.
The company sent its shares jumping in relief after fourth quarter and annual figures pointed to a turnaround of the group's fortunes.
Annual pretax losses came in at 7.03 million pounds ($11.2 million) compared to 4.05 million in the previous year, but fourth quarter losses narrowed sharply.
"All the sceptics out there are already cooking their hats," crowed Wagner.
By 1100 GMT, the shares had jumped 16p to 188-1/2.
"We have now stabilised our costs against the background of continued increasing revenues in both the core business and through alliance relationships," Chairman Michael Mander said in the results statement.
"We are well positioned for profitable growth in 1997 and beyond."
Pointing to "phenomenal" customer growth, even in the highly-competitive U.S. online market, Wagner said MAID was placing markers in all areas needed to build a long-term position in the future of electronic publishing.
M.A.I.D has already partnered with the South China Morning Post, the top English language newspaper with about 93 percent of news-stand sales in Hong Kong and with iafrica.com, the leading South African internet service provider, to expand the business in Africa and Asia.
About 70 percent of services offered by M.A.I.D are based on research data.
But the group also provides real-time news with its LiveWire services, which allows users to be alerted to pre-selected, requested headlines as they appear.
Personalised access to 27 live newswires, ranging from the British regulatory stock exchange wire to U.S. news agency Associated Press, costs 150 pounds per month for 20 desks, Wagner said.
This sharply undercuts similar services from news and information services Reuters Holdings Plc and Bloomberg, he said, although the product is aimed at individual business people rather than trading rooms.
The deal with Nokia allows clients to access share price and foreign exchange information on hand-held devises and the Thorn deal allows high-speed access to the Internet computer network from hotel rooms.
M.A.I.D says that because its electronic services are mainly research, rather than news, it is not threatened by companies providing news directly on the Internet.
"Ours is a supermarket of intelligence," Wagner said. "News is one element our of brokerage research, country and economic research, market research, company research.
"The threat of the Internet is non-existent, the opportunity is enormous."
($ = 0.626 British Pounds)
