Tumbling trade barriers are triggering huge telecoms alliances as companies struggle to straddle the world and offer lucrative services to multinational companies.
But not even the biggest telecoms companies know where the revolution will end.
U.S. giant AT&amp;T Corp's chairman Robert Allen was quoted last year as saying: "One could reasonably expect the chairman of AT&amp;T to know what his corporation will be 10 years from now. He doesn't.
"One could, within reason, expect the chairman of AT&amp;T to be able to predict how technology will transform his business a decade hence. He can't.
"At least, he should know who his major competitors will be in 2005. Stumped again.
"But here is what he does know: something startling, intriguing and profound is afoot."
A FUTURE FRAUGHT WITH DANGERS
Some telecom analysts warn that large-scale investment at a time of global expansion and competition will hit the margins and revenues of former cash-rich monopolies.
"Of the world's major telecom companies, I would not be surprised if one of them, in the next five to 10 years, becomes perceived as a high risk company," says Andrew Harrington, telecoms analyst at Salomon Brothers.
BOOM IN MERGERS FORECAST
As telecoms companies jostle to fill the gaps in the global reach of their business, analysts are predicting an unprecedented surge of B mergers and acquisitions in the $800 billion world telecoms industry.
World trade liberalisation is expected to lead to global mega-carriers that will try to capture the entire profit margin from the traffic of multinational firms with offices in the United States, Europe and the Far East.
Harrington estimates that the top 5,000 multinational corporate customers account for 15-20 percent of global telecoms revenue. To be able to service them, carriers need asset bases in all the countries where they operate.
EXPLOSIVE GROWTH MAY HELP MARGINS
While analysts agree that competition will become ferocious, some brush aside those who urge caution and argue that explosive growth will help maintain the margins of well-placed companies.
"Something like two thirds of the world's population live more than a day's walk away from the nearest telephone," says John Tysoe, telecoms analyst at brokers SocGen. "There's a whole world out there waiting to get in touch."
In the last 12 months, potential mergers have run to tens of billions of dollars as carriers such as MFS WorldCom British Telecommunications Plc and MCI Communications Corp, Bell Atlantic /NYNEX and SBC/Pacific Telesis announced plans to join forces.
MARKET FORCES BATTER TELECOM MONOPOLIES
Because the cost of making calls is expected to reflect more closely the cost of delivering them, consumers will soon no longer pay the vastly inflated prices that have helped line the pockets of bloated national carriers.
The advent of high bandwidth cable and modern switching systems also means that, according to some broker estimates, the cost of delivering a telephone call is about a thousand times cheaper than 40 years ago.
A number of firms, facing margin-shrinking competition at home and aiming to service corporations, have formed three main global partnerships.
BT and its American partner MCI have formed an alliance called Concert; Deutsche Telekom, France Telecom and America's Sprint have linked up to form Global One.
AT&amp;T, the world's second largest telecoms company, has also set up loosely-knit partnerships called Unisource and World Partners.
Telecommuncations used to be rather simple: Spend money to fix your network, cut capital expenditure and staffing levels and wait for the cash to start piling up.
The more money is spent on a network, the greater the cash flows allowed by regulators to support its renewal, and the greater the potential free cash-flow improvement, when savings are eventually enjoyed.
But a brave, new world is on the horizon, and the only telecoms stocks Harrington tips for investors are those which enjoy double-digit growth, are gaining share in their existing markets, and have assets in place to execute strategic plans -- or have a unique niche.
CABLE &amp; WIRELESS PROVIDES A RARE ASSET BASE
Such firms could include Cable and Wireless, Britain's second biggest telecoms company, which analysts say combines an attractive home asset base with rare access to booming Asian markets.
C&amp;W has a majority stake in Hong Kong Telecommunications, described as one of the best assets in Asia because it is not only majority held by non-government investors, but has potentially unique access to China and already faces competition at home.
'CONCERT' IS BANKING ON JAPAN
BT is also hoping that its planned takeover of MCI will make it more attractive as a potential partner to Asian companies such as Japan's Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corp, the world's largest telecoms titan.
But the MCI deal has led rating agency Standard &amp; Poor's to put BT on "CreditWatch with negative implications."
"The expected downgrade of BT's (AAA) ratings reflect the company's increased business risk and weakened business profile resulting from its ($22 billion) acquisition of MCI," S&amp;P said last month.
Nevertheless, most analysts welcomed the proposed merger as a strategic necessity to create a viable, competitive group with a broad geographical reach.
As the U.S. market opens further, and since Europe created its single market in 1988, around 80 percent of the global telecoms market, by revenue, will be either completely or substantially deregulated by 1998 compared with about 20 percent today.
"The next two years will see the most significant period of reform in telecommunications history," says Salomon Brothers's Harrington.
