The BBC announced "historic" plans to break into the domestic commercial television market on Monday, linking up with British satellite cable broadcaster Flextech Plc to offer up to eight new pay television channels.
Flextech, majority-owned by America's biggest cable television group Tele-Communications International Inc, is contributing 22 million pounds ($35.2 million) of equity and can make 118 million pounds in credit facilities available to the ventures.
Flextech and BBC Worldwide, the BBC's commercial arm, announced in September an agreement to form a joint venture to create a series of mainly digital subscription television channels in Britain, the Channel Islands, the Isle of Man and the Irish Republic.
After months of talks, 36 separate legal agreements and six major research programmes, the two groups said that they planned to form two joint ventures to combine the BBC's archive, scheduling and production skills with Flextech's funds and multi-channel TV management and marketing knowledge.
The principal deal will be to develop and launch  mainly digital new pay-television channels in Britain.
The second is to buy out and develop in analogue, and later in digital formats, what is currently UK Gold, one of the most successful channels transmitted by one of British Sky Broadcasting 's multi-channel packages.
"The joint ventures with the BBC represent a major opportunity for the long term development of Flextech and the consolidation of its position in the multi-channel television market in the UK," Flextech's chief executive Roger Luard said.
Dubbed Horizons, Showcase, Style, One-TV, Arena, Learnings, Catch-up TV and Sports Entertainment Network, the eight planned channels include factual programmes, comedy and drama, leisure and lifestyle, the youthful spirit of Radio 1 on TV, music and arts, education, sports news and analysis and recently-transmitted programmes on BBC1 and BBC2.
Under terms of its licence, the BBC has to show its programmes first for free to domestic British audiences who fund the corporation though television licence fees.
"These channels will have widespread appeal and will, we believe, play an important role in the future growth and development of multi-channel television," Luard said.
Flextech and BBC Worldwide will take a 50 percent stake in the two ventures for up to 30 years. The service will be rolled out towards in late 1997.
Adam Singer, the president and chief operating officer of TINTA, told a news conference he expected to see "close to $1.0 billion coming back to the BBC over the next three or four years" through its pay TV deals in Britain and North America.
BBC Worldwide is developing channels for the U.S. and other markets with Discovery Inc, a sister firm to TINTA.
"Outside the UK, the BBC is probably the last, great, under-utilised English language library in the world," Singer said.
BBC Worldwide is keen to stress that its move into commercial television will benefit both the company and its national audience -- that pays its licence fee -- by supplementing its licence income "in a meaningful way".
And the deals leave Flextech, which will receive most of the cash flow until its debt is repaid, as a serious contender to British satellite broadcaster BSkyB as a key pay television programme provider.
Flextech and the BBC confirmed that they would give the first option for the transmission of up to five of the digital channels to BkyB and its partners.
BSkyB has linked up with Carlton Communications Plc and Granada Group Plc to form British Digital Broadcasting in a bid for licences to operate up to three, domestic, multi-channel digital frequencies.
Flextech, which simultaneously reported flat annual pretax, pre-exceptional losses of 16.8 million pounds, is buying out pay-TV channels UK Gold and UK Living by issuing 34.95 million shares to owners media groups Pearson, America's Cox Communications Group and BBC Worldwide.
The deal is worth about 269.9 million pounds and values UK Gold at about 210.1 million pounds and UK Living at 104 million pounds.
In return, Cox, Pearson and BBC Worldwide will take a 13.3, 5.6 and 3.5 percent stake respectively in Flextech.
TINTA, meanwhile, says it will fulfil Flextech's financial obligations to the principal joint venture "in certain circumstances" if Flextech fails to do so. ($ = 0.624 British Pounds)
