The BBC announced "historic" plans to break into the domestic commercial television market on Monday, linking up with British satellite cable broadcaster Flextech Plc to offer up to eight new pay television channels.
Flextech, majority-owned by America's biggest cable television group Tele-Communications International Inc, is contributing 22 million pounds ($35.2 million) of equity and can make 118 million pounds in credit facilities available to the ventures.
Flextech and BBC Worldwide, the BBC's commercial arm, announced in September an agreement to form a joint venture to create a series of mainly digital subscription television channels in Britain, the Channel Islands, the Isle of Man and the Irish Republic.
After months of negotiations, the two companies announced that, subject to shareholder approval, they planned to form two joint ventures which will combine the BBC's diverse archive, scheduling and production skills with Flextech's multi-channel television management and marketing knowledge.
The principal deal will be to develop and launch, mainly in digital format, a number of new pay-television channels in Britain.
The second is to buy out and develop in analogue and, in due course, in digital formats what is currently UK Gold, one of the most successful channels transmitted by one of British Sky Broadcasting 's multi-channel packages.
"The joint ventures with the BBC represent a major opportunity for the long term development of Flextech and the consoldiation of its position in the multi-channel television market in the UK," Flextech's chief executive Roger Luard said.
Dubbed Horizons, Style, Learning, Arena, Showcase, Sports Entertainment Network, One-TV and Catch-up TV, the eight planned channels include documentaries, consumer, educational and arts programmes, drama, comedy, sport, music and high profile programmes to be aired shortly after first transmission on BBC1 and BBC2.
Under terms of its licence, the BBC has to show its programmes first for free to domestic British audiences who fund the corporation though television licences.
"These channels will have widespread appeal and will, we believe, play an important role in the future growth and development of multi-channel television," Luard said.
Flextech and the BBC confirmed that they would give the first option for the transmission of up to five of the digital channels to British satellite operator BSkyB 's consortium.
BSkyB has linked up with Carlton Communications Plc and Granada Group Plc to form British Digital Broadcasting in a bid for licences to operate up to three domestic "multiplexes", multi-channel digital frequencies.
Flextech, which simultaneously reported flat annual pretax, pre-exceptional losses of 16.8 million pounds, said that to buy out pay-TV channels UK Gold and UK Living, it would issue 34.95 million shares to media groups Pearson, America's Cox Communications Group and BBC Worldwide.
The deal is worth about 269.9 million pounds and values UK Gold at about 210.1 million pounds and UK Living at 104 million pounds.
In return, Cox, Pearson and BBC Worldwide will take a 13.3 percent, 5.6 percent and 3.5 percent stake respectively in Flextech.
After buying the 75 percent equity share capital of UK Gold and 68.75 percent UK Living, that it does not already own, Flextech will then sell on the 65 percent share capital of UK Gold for 87.75 million pounds.
On completion of the deals, Flextech will own 50 percent of the equity share capital of each joint venture and 100 percent of UK Living.
Tele-Communications International Inc (TINTA), meanwhile, has agreed to offer its financial muscle to the main deal.
The U.S. group will fulfil Flextech's financial obligations to the principal joint venture "in certain circumstances" if Flextech fails to do so.
TINTA's subsidiary UAEH owns 50.9 percent of the voting rights in Flextech, representing 46.5 percent of the group's issued share capital.
After completion of two joint ventures with BBC Worldwide and following the share issue to Cox, Pearson and BBC Worldwide, UAEH will hold 36.1 percent of Flextech's shares.
In order to preserve its majority voting rights, UAEH will be granted a special voting share.
($ = 0.624 British Pounds)
