The prospect of a multi-billion pound windfall tax on Britain's cash-rich utilities on Tuesday received a boon from a key parliamentary report saying some utility regulation had put shareholders before consumers.
Britain's opposition Labour Party, which is well ahead of Prime Minster John Major's Conservative Party in opinion polls in the run-up to a May 1 election, welcomed the all-party select committee report on the gas and electricity industries.
Labour is making much of having discovered possibly the first tax that is popular with consumers who have been enraged at tales of soaring profits, dividends and fat executive pay packages awarded to the executives of monopoly utilities.
The select committee said it agreed with energy regulators that initial price controls after privatisation around seven years ago had "unduly favoured shareholders over customers".
But it added that despite "dramatic" profit increases of gas and electricity companies, it may not be surprising that mistakes had been made because there had been little experience of utility privatisation elsewhere in the world.
Calling for more openness to allow regulators to set appropriate price limits, the committee also insisted that regulators had begun to swing the balance back to consumers.
Both electricity and gas prices have fallen since privatisation amid increasing competition. The report also endorsed the British way of setting pricing formulas by linking allowable charges to inflation.
The extraordinary profits amassed by electricity and water groups since privatisation in 1990 and 1989 took even some share and industry analysts by surprise, as savage job cuts and relatively lenient cash flow levels allowed by regulators helped fill company coffers.
Labour says it wants to fund a "welfare-to-work" programme with a minimum of 3.0 billion pounds ($4.8 billion) from a one-off profits tax, although speculation is rife that in order not to fall foul of expected legal challenges, the tax may include other companies.
Shares fell as a Labour source confirmed that its tax net, should it win the election, was likely to entangle both airports operator BAA Plc and phone giant British Telecommunications Plc.
Any other names on Labour's list remain a mystery, with Labour saying only that a tax will be "non-discriminatory" and affect all utilities that were sold off at an under-valuation and operate under "lax regulatory regimes".
BAA, which runs London's Gatwick and Heathrow airports, and BT both continue strenuously to deny that they are utilities. BAA's shares fell 14.5 pence to 506.5p.
But two of Britain's biggest electricity companies -- Southern Electric Plc and Eastern Electricity, now part of former Hanson subsidiary Energy Group -- took the opportunity to cut prices by over seven percent.
"There is growing consensus of the need to reform utility regulation to put the consumer first," said John Battle, Labour's energy minister. "The select committee's report is a welcome contribution to that debate."
The Parliamentary committee also said there was not enough competition in Britain's electricity generation market, which is still dominated by giants National Power Plc and PowerGen Plc, and suggested making the two companies sell off more of their power plants.
"The possibility of the further sale of capacity by the two main generators should not by excluded," the committee said. ($ = 0.630 British Pounds)
