Talks about Britain's Cable and Wireless Plc joining a grand telecoms alliance spanning the United States, France and Germany highlights the urgency with which companies are jostling to plug gaps in their global reach.
France Telecom said on Wednesday it was in talks with the British group about C&amp;W joining Global One, one of three main world partnerships racing to offer lucrative communications services to multinational firms.
"There are talks with Cable and Wireless and they centre on whether the company can become the British partner for Global One," chairman Michel Bon said.
The disclosure was spurred by a report that Britain's Cable and Wireless Plc was mulling a potential $15 billion bid for America's Sprint Corp that was quickly knocked down by Sprint and its partner France Telecom.
The Wall Street Journal reported that C&amp;W had held talks with France Telecom, which along with Deutsche Telekom AG owns 10 percent of Sprint, about supporting a bid.
Sprint noted that a hostile takeover by Cable and Wireless and France Telecom was impossible because of standstill agreements with its European partners under which their stakes in the U.S. group cannot be increased without its permission.
Analysts have been tipping a closer alliance between the two groups for months, although most believe a link-up will be sealed by Global One taking a stake in C&amp;W's cable venture, Cable and Wireless Communications.
U.S. telecoms giant AT &amp; T Corp has formed a loosely-knit alliance called Unisource/World Partners, and British Telecommunications Plc has formed Concert Plc with its U.S. partner MCI Communications Corp .
A record merger and acquisition boom has been predicted in the $800 billion world telecoms industry, spurred by tumbling trade barriers as the domestic revenues of telecoms firms are squeezed by increasingly tough competition.
Analysts predict that world trade liberalisation, spurred by international treaties, will lead to the formation of mega-carriers that will try to capture the entire traffic of multinational firms with offices in the U.S., Europe and the Far East.
A deal between Concert and Spain's Telefonica  to create a formidable telephone network spanning the Americas may be announced this week, industry sources said on Wednesday.
America and Britain, which have led the liberalisation of world telecom markets, are setting the pace for mergers.
In the last 12 months, mergers have run to tens of billions of dollars as carriers such as MFS WorldCom , BT and MCI, Bell Atlantic and NYNEX and SBC and Pacific Telesis announced merger plans.
But the big mergers are also starting to show the strain of coordinating global management.
Some analysts warn that although C&amp;W, with its attractive asset bases in Britain and Asia, is probably one of the most sought-after telecom partners, it is not a "natural bedfellow" with France Telecom.
"Commercially speaking, there's a huge amount of tension within Global One," said Paul Staples, head of the telecoms team at merchant bank Schroders.
Staples thinks only the political will of the French and German governments is keeping Global One together in its current form.
"I'm in the camp that says I'd be surprised if Global One was in its current form in two years time," he said.
The group has not resolved the issue of what to do in markets outside France, Germany or the U.S. and are often bumping up against each other in Asia Pacific, pursuing potentially conflicting investment strategies.
Unlike BT and MCI's Concert alliance that aims to offer seamless services to corporate customers, Global One's partners do not see their alliance as an investment vehicle to extend coverage, he noted.
"They see it as a standardised marketing agreement," he said.
France Telecom is also embroiled in a partial privatisation at home and needs a period of stability before embarking on big, new ventures.
"The market will not tolerate France Telecom senior management going off on a frolic of their own," Staples said.
Institutions are looking for the company to concentrate first on its domestic customers and running an efficient business, he said.
($ = 0.628 British Pounds)
