A huge bid by Britain's Cable and Wireless Plc (C&amp;W) for America's Sprint Corp may be possible but does not look feasible in the short term, analysts said on Wednesday.
C&amp;W, Britain's second biggest telecommunications group, declined to comment on a Wall Street Journal report that it was mulling a possible $15 billion bid for 80 percent of Sprint to create a telecoms giant spanning the United States and key European and Asian hubs.
Analysts have long tipped an alliance called Global One between Sprint, America's third long-distance telecoms group, German giant Deutsche Telekom AG and France Telecom as the "perfect partner" for C&amp;W.
But some said the report that C&amp;W was considering buying the 80 percent of Sprint not already owned by the French and Germans appeared premature.
Oliver Ehrenberg, telecommunications analyst at Robert Fleming Securities, said he thought such a bid was not feasible as Cable and Wireless was still completing a complicated cable merger with two American groups to form Cable and Wireless Communications.
With a usual bid premium of 30 percent, 80 percent of Sprint could cost around $16 billion. C&amp;W has a market capitalisation of only $18 billion, Ehrenberg noted.
"Given the high gearing levels C&amp;W will have after the Cable and Wireless Communications deal -- gearing will be about 90 percent -- I don't think that this deal is financially feasible," he said.
C&amp;W, which last month pulled out of a German alliance called Vebacom which plans to compete against Deutsche Telekom, has said it regularly talks to other players including Sprint, Deutsche Telekom, France Telecom and U.S. phone giant AT &amp; T Corp.
But some analysts said any deal between Global One and C&amp;W was more likely first to focus on Cable and Wireless Communications, C&amp;W's national cable deal with the subsidiaries of NYNEX Corp and Bell Canada International Inc.
"This makes sense. But for C&amp;W to buy Sprint is cutting out a lot of intermediary steps that would probably be necessary," said another analyst who declined to be named.
Cable and Wireless Communications is valued by analysts at between four and seven billion pounds and market talk is rife that when 15 percent of the group is floated in London and New York in about two months, one of the U.S. partners may sell out to Global One.
"Who knows, but everyone is talking to everyone in this fast moving world," said the analyst.
There has been an increasingly urgent rush to form new partnerships after international treaties were hammered out to open global telecoms markets.
Mergers over the last year, such as one planned between British Telecommunications Plc and MCI Communications Corp, have run to tens of billions of dollars.
C&amp;W, whose chief executive Richard Brown is a former Sprint executive, can offer Global One access to two key markets that the partnership lacks -- Britain and Asia, partly through its lucrative stake in Hong Kong Telecommunications Ltd.
The Wall Street Journal reported that no formal, direct offer had been made to Sprint and that so far C&amp;W had only held talks with France Telecom about supporting a bid.
While France Telecom declined to comment on specific talks, it has met C&amp;W and said Global One was looking at improving access to Asian markets.
"Cable and Wireless have been around to see us, among many others, to talk about Global One," a spokesman said in Paris.
But Ehrenberg said that although C&amp;W was probably seeking to expand its multinational operations, he did not believe the company would first talk to France Telecom before approaching Deutsche Telekom.
"For the Germans, I think that would be quite an offence if they had not been asked well in advance about whether they would be interested in Cable and Wireless joining the triumvirate of these three companies," he said.
"This (report) does not feel right," he added.
($ = 0.628 British Pounds)
