Any strategic deal between Spain's Telefonica and British Telecommunications Plc's Concert partnership would instigate a sea-change in the European telecoms alliance landscape, analysts said on Thursday.
Such an alliance would throw down the gauntlet to BT's arch-rival, America's AT &amp; T Corp, and provide the U.S. telecoms giant with the latest in a series of setbacks.
"I think it will lead AT&amp;T to seriously question its European position," says Paul Staples, head of telecoms research at merchant bank Schroders.
Telefonica's chairman Juan Villalonga said in Madrid that he did not expect any future partner to take a stake in the company's key South American subsidiary TISA. But he did not rule out a share swap between Telefonica and a foreign operator.
Speculation is mounting that Telefonica de Espana is on the brink of announcing a long-rumoured exit from AT&amp;T's Unisource alliance with Dutch, Swedish and Swiss telecoms groups.
Villalonga said the group, which has long been seeking a U.S. partner and has been in talks with major players including AT&amp;T and BT's Concert alliance partner, MCI Communications Corp, expected to announce a deal in four to six weeks.
Industry sources say Telefonica is likely to tie up with BT and MCI to create a key alliance spanning Europe and the Americas.
BT, which announced earlier that Austria's main telecoms group PTA had selected Concert as a strategic partner, declined to comment on what it called "rumour and speculation".
Telefonica's TISA dominates the booming South American markets of Peru, Argentina, Chile, Venezuela, Colombia and Puerto Rico and a link-up would be a boon for BT and MCI.
Neither of the two companies, which hope to complete a 12.5 billion pound ($20 billion) merger this year, have major, direct operations in South America to date.
But the potential loss of the flagship Spanish operator, which holds a 25 percent stake in Unisource, would be a blow to AT&amp;T which had been hoping to use Unisource as the vehicle for its European ambitions.
"Telefonica would be a useful addition to BT and a yet one more setback for AT&amp;T," said Steve Scruton, telecoms analyst at Credit Lyonnais Lang.
Analysts, who say cracks in the Unisource alliance wall have been visible for some time, were supported on Thursday by Villalonga who declined to rule out a break with the alliance.
Some analysts say Unisource, which posted a loss of $154.9 million in the first nine months of 1996, is the weakest of the three main global alliances.
It does not have a product and is more of a service guarantee club, so that a minimum quality standard is given to customers in each of the alliance partners' countries, they say.
Concert, on the other hand, has a product which is sold to clients and distributed via other telecoms players. Global One, the alliance of Deutsche Telekom, France Telecom and America's Sprint Corp has its own services and sales force.
Any deal with Telefonica would also mean that BT, which entered the Spanish market in 1993, would align itself with a former rival in a key European market.
But Oliver Ehrenberg, telecoms analyst at Robert Flemings, notes that Telefonica was enjoying a domestic EBIDTA (earnings before tax, interest, depreciation and amortisation) margin of around 62 percent -- the highest on the European continent.
"If there is any market on the continent we think BT should aggressively enter, we think it should be Spain," he said.
If Telefonica does abandon Unisource, all eyes will be on Italian telecoms holding company STET (Societa Finanziaria Telefonica per Azioni Spa), which is one of the few major European operators that remain unattached.
A falling FTSE 100 helped drag BT's shares lower. But trading at a loss of 3.5p at 458p, they were still outperforming the top 100 blue chips as the company continues its hard sell of its planned MCI merger to institutions in road shows.
($ = 0.624 British Pounds)
