Britain's new cable giant, Cable and Wireless Communications, said on Monday it might seek further acquisitions as it set the formal stage for what analysts dubbed a fearfully complicated creation and partial flotation.
The planned merger of four cable telephone and television companies, announced in October, was detailed in a hefty 800-page document.
It brings together Cable and Wireless Plc's Mercury subsidiary and the British cable TV units of NYNEX Corp and Bell Canada -- NYNEX CableComms, Bell Cablemedia Plc and Videotron.
"Here we've formed the (UK's) largest cable company. So we've taken the first step in the consolidation of the industry -- and we'll look at other acquisitions as and when they will arrive," chief executive Graham Wallace told journalists during a telephone conference call.
But he added: "We have a scale and mass here that gives us a significant advantage. We certainly don't need to be any larger."
Analysts have valued CWC, which plans to list 14.7 percent of its shares in London and New York in the next few weeks, at between four and seven billion pounds ($6.4 to $11.2 billion).
With dominant telephone giant British Telecommunications Plc restricted from offering broadcast services, CWC's main rival is cable group Telewest Communications Plc.
CWC chairman Richard Brown declined to be drawn on acquisition targets or potential alliance partners and said no talks were being held during the quiet period up to flotation.
Brown said CWC, majority owned by Cable and Wireless, was well positioned to achieve long-term growth.
"We will be customer-led, we will be market-driven," Brown told a news conference. "We will have the necessary scope to achieve real market penetration over technologically advanced networks," he added.
Ahead of the listings, the company is prevented from releasing detailed financial information about what it insists are "substantial" synergy benefits.
In the meantime, it is giving what one analyst called "tantalising hints" about savings.
CWC, which will pay no tax for two years, will close most of its seven customer support centres, some national support centres, three of four company headquarters, rationalise its 12,500 workforce and save on marketing.
It might also buy Cable and Wireless's small European unit, Cable and Wireless Europe, which provides communications services in eight western European countries.
Although Britain will be its short-term focus, the venture will also be Cable and Wireless's vehicle for European expansion.
"While one can clearly see the huge opportunities, it's very difficult to know what it all adds up to," said James Golob, analyst at Deutsche Morgan Grenfell.
"It would be nice to have a bit more quantification of what the benefits and opportunities really are."
With assets worth about 4.5 billion pounds, the new group plans to provide a broad range of local, national and international voice and data services and, in certain regions, multichannel television and internet computer services.
It hopes to complete its broadband cable and local telephony networks by investing some 110 million pounds over two years and offer services to more than six million residential customers by 2001. It also wants to serve almost all small and medium-sized businesses within its 45 cable franchise areas.
The group will spend another 180 million pounds over the same period on so-called set top boxes, with which customers can receive multi-channel television services.
Since the merger was announced, talk has mounted that a global telecoms alliance such as the Global One partnership of Deutsche Telekom, France Telecom and America's Sprint Corp might take a stake in the venture.
Newspapers have tipped Bell Canada as being a possible candidate to sell its 14.2 percent stake and end its exposure to Britain's stagnant cable market.
France Telecom confirmed last week that it was in talks with Cable and Wireless about the cable venture becoming the British partner of the Global One alliance.
But Wallace declined to comment, saying only that as far as he was aware, Bell Canada was very happy with its investment.
Cable and Wireless, which will have a 52.6 percent stake in CWC, wants to remain a majority shareholder and will consider boosting its investment if partners backed out, Wallace said.
CWC's proforma pretax profits jumped to 93 million pounds in the last nine months from 46 million in the 12 months to March 1996. Earnings per share doubled to 6.0 pence. The group does not plan to pay a dividend initially.
Around 65 percent of Bell Cablemedia (BCM) and 67 percent of NYNEX shareholders have said they would accept the share offer in the new company. ($ = 0.623 British Pounds)
