Cable and Wireless Communications, Britain's new cable giant, said on Monday it might seek further acquisitions as it set the formal stage for its complex formation and partial flotation.
Releasing 36 pages of detailed documents slightly ahead of schedule, new chief executive Graham Wallace said the merger of four cable telephone and television companies announced in October offered a unique range of products and services.
Nevertheless, the new company, which plans to list 14.7 percent of its shares in London and New York in the next few weeks, might go back on the acquisition trail.
"Here we've formed the (UK's) largest cable company, so we've taken the first step in the consolidation of the industry -- and we'll look at other acquisitions as and when they will arrive," Wallace said during a telephone conference call with journalists.
But he added: "We have a scale and mass here that gives us a significant advantage. We certainly don't need to be any larger."
Valued at between 4.0 and 7.0 billion pounds ($11.2 billion) by analysts, the merger brings together Cable and Wireless's Mercury subsidiary and the British cable television units of NYNEX Corp and Bell Canada's Bell Cablemedia Plc and Videotron.
The new company, which will serve about 1.2 million telephony and 580,000 cable TV customers, will provide a broad range of local, national and international voice and data services, and in certain regions, multichannel television and internet computer services.
It hopes to complete its broadband cable and local telephony networks by investing some 110 million pounds over two years and offer services to more than six million residential customers. It also wants to serve almost all small and medium-sized businesses within its 45 cable franchise areas.
The group will spend another 180 million pounds over the same period on so-called set top box, with which customers can receive multi channel television services.
It hopes to launch a formidable attack on the dominance of British Telecommunications Plc in telephony. Regulatory restrictions prevent BT from offering broadcasting services.
The formal offers from Cable and Wireless Communications to shareholders of the merger partners were launched on Monday as well as financial details of the company. Bell Cablemedia promptly recommended that its shareholders accept the offer.
Cable and Wireless Communications' pro forma revenues for the year to March 31, 1996, were 1.90 billion pounds with net income of 44 million pounds.
Since the merger was announced, talk has mounted that a global telecoms alliance such as the Global One partnership of Deutsche Telekom, France Telecom and America's Sprint Corp might take a stake in the venture.
With 14.7 percent of Cable and Wireless Communications (C&amp;WC) due to be floated in London and New York, the next few weeks will provide new shareholders with the opportunity to join the group -- or give old partners a chance to leave.
Newspapers have tipped Bell Canada as being a likely candidate to sell what will be a 14.2 percent stake and end its exposure to the Britain's stagnant cable market.
But Wallace declined to comment on alliance speculation or Bell Canada's (BCM) long-term strategic plans, saying only: "(BCM) is very happy with the investment that it has in C&amp;WC as far as we are aware."
France Telecom confirmed last week that it was in talks with Cable and Wireless about the cable venture becoming the British partner of the Global One alliance.
Wallace said Cable and Wireless, which will have a 52.6 percent stake in the new company, wanted to remain a majority shareholder and would consider further investment of its own if its current partners backed out.
Britain will be C&amp;WC's short-term focus, But Wallace said the group is also eyeing continental Europe.
Analysts are keenly awaiting the partial float so that the market can value the business which has assets worth 4.5 billion pounds.
The first closing date for the offers is April 25. The listings will immediately follow completion.
Under the terms of the offer, each Bell Cablemedia (BCM) ordinary share receives 0.69389 C&amp;WC ordinary shares.
The offer for NYNEX CableComms shareholders includes a deal of 0.330714 C&amp;WC ordinary shares for each NYNEX CableComms UK ordinary share.
Around 65 percent of BCM and 67 percent of NYNEX shareholders have said they would accept the offer. ($ = 0.623 British Pounds)
