USA Global Link, the U.S.-based callback group that is poised to offer cut-price worldwide phone services via the Internet, said on Thursday it was in strategic alliance talks with up to 30 international companies.
Among sought-after partners are companies such as cable television firms and power groups -- any company that can provide the U.S. group with a distribution network to reach customers, the company said.
Vice president Ginger Taylor told Reuters that talks with up to three companies in each of the 10 countries the company hopes to expand into were in the "final stages".
In the next 60-90 days, USA Global Link plans to launch what it calls the world's first telephone-to-telephone service that routes calls over the Internet, does not require computers, and will slash the cost of international calls by up to 90 percent.
Vast cost savings are assured because the group says it can circumvent the artificially inflated international accounting and settlement rates that national telecoms giants charge for beginning and ending calls.
In an attempt to shake up the "stifling control" and "smothering bureaucracy" of giant telecoms firms, the group's Global Internetwork system will be launched initially in 10 countries including the U.S., Japan, the UK, France, Germany, South Africa, Hong Kong, Indonesia and South Korea.
"This is the death of accounting rates. It also heralds the death of the PTTs (telecoms giants)," the group's president Larry Chroman told reporters and brokers in London.
USA Global Link has long been trying to use the Internet to develop a system based on inexpensive computer technology that will vastly undercut phone giants' prices and force telecoms cartels to give up their traditional stranglehold on markets.
Chroman says the firm wants to become one of the world's most powerful telecoms players by snatching market share away from telecoms giants as the price of delivering calls plunges to nearer cost prices.
USA Global Link, which amassed revenues of $240 million last year and wants to float a stake of about 10 percent in New York this year, said: "The money is there, but we need strategic partners."
Sceptics of the bullish noises emitted by companies such as USA Global Link say plans to expand worldwide could be hampered by delays because the groups need a myriad of agreements to reach the end user before it can offer its service.
But most agree that the technology to offer such a low-cost service is there.
The Iowa-based company hopes that agreements with local Internet service providers, lease line and marketing deals will allow it to offer prices of 25 cents per minute from Europe to anywhere in the world.
The company, 20 percent owned by Indonesia's state-owned PT Indonesian Satellite, wants to capture 10-15 percent of the European telecoms market within the next 18 months.
With a mere 240 employees, the four-year-old company says it is not burdened by the cash requirements of other telecoms companies and has far fewer costs. It plans to invest 300 million stg in its global network.
Calls using the service will be instantly transformed from analogue into digital signal and transmitted via the Internet anywhere in the world, the company says.
It says quality, a common problem with this type of call, will be equal to or better than current calls routed by satellite and far better than first-generation Internet telephony.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 7987
