Investors on both sides of the Atlantic are likely to approve an ambitious $23 billion merger between British Telecommunications and U.S. phone group MCI, analysts said on Wednesday.
But some analysts are growing increasingly cautious about the proposed deal -- the largest transatlantic merger.
"Sooner or later the market will realise that 30 percent is too much of a premium to pay (for control of MCI)," said Oliver Ehrenberg, telecoms analyst at Robert Fleming.
Shareholders in MCI Communications Corp, America's second biggest long-distance carrier, were voting on the merger on Wednesday, while BT investors are due to vote on April 15.
One key investment institution in London said it remained largely neutral on the deal.
"It looks as if it has some advantages but it also looks like quite a high price," the institution, which asked not to be identified, told Reuters.
Top BT executives have been meeting large institutions to discuss the rationale for buying the 80 percent of MCI that BT does not already own.
But BT, whose shares outperformed the market during a recent road show to market the deal to investors on both sides of the Atlantic, said the response from most had been "very positive".
"Obviously there is a large amount of money at stake," a BT spokesman said. "I think generally speaking people understand why we are doing it...There is a very good business case for why it is being done."
The merger between BT and entrepreneurial MCI, which the two groups expect to clear regulatory hurdles by the autumn, will create a powerhouse called Concert Plc.
The combined business will have annual revenues of more than 25 billion pounds ($41.2 billion), annual cash flow of about 7.5 billion pounds and 43 million business and residential customers.
Concert wants to provide clients around the globe with local, long distance, international and mobile phone services as well as multi-media, Internet-based services and systems integration for business clients.
BT has promised that the merger, after an initial five percent earnings dilution, will yield savings from combining overlapping services of 1.5 billion pounds over the first five years and 500 million pounds pre-tax annually after that.
The United States is the world's largest telecoms market. It is also home to 40 percent of the world's largest multinational company headquarters -- some of the most valuable customers for global telecoms alliances.
While analysts expect powerful institutional investors to back BT in its attempt to gain a firmer foothold in the U.S. telecoms market, some have questioned whether a 2.5 billion pound premium for the rest of MCI will yield the "tremendous growth prospects" promised by the two companies.
"We hear the arguments brought foward to support the deal, but we do question whether the merger will translate into enhanced returns for former BT shareholders," says Ehrenberg.
BT promises continuing dividend growth. But MCI, which plans hefty investments to grab a share of the local U.S. telecoms market, says the major attraction of the deal is BT's strong financial resources.
"With increased competition and enormous investment demands, we think investors will increasingly wonder whether Concert can really increase its dividends by six percent per annum for the forseeable future...," Ehrenerg says.
Fleming, which says the company's gearing level might surge to 150 percent in the next three years, has downgraded its recommendation on BT to "sell" because it says the group's valuation looks stretched against other European telecom groups.
BT has already raised its intitial gearing projection from around 65 percent to 80 or 90 percent since last November.
But Fleming's gearing calculation includes a 1-1.2 billion pound windfall tax if Britain's opposition Labour Party wins the May 1 election, an approximate 1.6 billion pound acquisition of the remaining 40 percent of BT's mobile phone business Cellnet as well as other investments in Europe and Asia.
SBC Warburg is less negative. The broker has recommended buying the stock, saying BT will create "substantial value" in its international investments and growth businesses.
Its official share price target is 480 pence. BT's shares climbed 4p to 431.5p on Wednesday. ($ = 0.606 British Pounds)
