U.S. Midwestern local telephone company Ameritech Corp. said Friday it was in merger or acquisition talks with several European security monitoring firms worth $200 million to $500 million each.
"There are some serious negotiations going on," Ameritech's international affairs director Dennis LaComb told Reuters.
Chicago-based Ameritech hopes to double its current $4.0 billion in European investments over the next few years, said LaComb, who said he was in London until Saturday on a "courtesy visit."
"The majority of our investment internationally is in Europe. This is a very important area for us," he said.
Over the past six years, the Midwestern "Baby Bell" has taken stakes in privatisations abroad in countries such as Hungary and New Zealand.
LaComb said that security monitoring -- using telephone lines to link customers' home alarm systems to police stations -- was a natural business direction for the $31.3 billion telecommuications company to take.
Ameritech, which is facing its first taste of competition in its local market, is the second-biggest U.S. security monitoring company and hopes to become the European market leader.
The first deals are likely to be struck in Germany and France, although the company said it was also looking at firms in Scandinavia and was considering Britain.
Unlike some of its sister Baby Bells, Ameritech has no current designs on becoming a global telecommunications player.
Instead, it wants to focus its international strategy on regional telecommunications, communications such as alarm systems and exporting its knowledge of customer services and of operating in competitive markets to telecommunications firms, such as Portugal Telecom SA, which are on the verge of privatisation.
Ameritech's foreign ventures so far include stakes in Telecom Corporation of New Zealand, a local, long distance and cellular phone and satellite television service provider, Poland's Polska Telefonia Komorkowa and Norway's NetCom GSM, two cellular telephone operators.
It has partnered with Germany's Deutsche Telekom AG to take a stake in Hungary's incumbent Matav Rt telecommunications operator and also holds a stake in Belgacom, the Belgium national operator.
International investments also include a joint venture in China's regional cellular operator ChinaCom.
