British Telecommunications and MCI Communications Corp. are sweeping into the South America market in a major move.
British Telecom announced on Monday that it has formed a strategic alliance with Portugal Telecom which would give it access to South America's biggest market, Brazil.
The Portuguese company, however, then said in a statement that Washington-based MCI had simultaneously formed a pan-American joint venture with Spain's Telefonica de Espana.
That statement sparked confusion when British Telecom declined to confirm it, Telefonica denied a deal was signed, and MCI in Lisbon said it was announced in error. The exact nature of the error remained unclear.
The announcements came one day before British Telecom's shareholders vote on its ambitious 12.3 billion pound ($20 billion) merger with MCI, America's second biggest long-distance carrier, called Concert Plc.
Speculation about an imminent deal between Telefonica's South American arm Telefonica Internacional (TISA) and Concert has been sweeping the market for weeks.
A British Telecom spokeswoman said only, "We're pleased to be announcing Portugal Telecom today. We wouldn't comment on any other rumur or speculation."
Analysts were amused at what appeared to be a gaffe by Portugal Telecom. Most expect a four-way alliance to be announced soon.
If Telefonica opts for Concert, the only major hole in the Anglo-U.S. group's geographic jigsaw remains Asia.
some analysts warned that not all investments will be successful in increasingly competitive markets.
"Overall, it is more important to look at the core business which, for Concert, is the U.S. and the UK. And there, prices will only go one way -- down," noted one analyst who declined to be identified.
To reinforce the alliance, British Telecom is taking a 1 percent and MCI a 0.5 percent stake in the $7 billion Portuguese company during its next stage of privatisation, expected later this year. A British Telecom executive will be invited to take a seat on the company's board.
Telefonica, which separately insisted that no deal with MCI had been signed yet, plans to announce a U.S. partner within the next three weeks.
Analysts say any link-up with Concert will herald a sea-change in the European telecommunications alliance landscape and be a blow to British Telecom's arch rival in Europe, AT&amp;T Corp.
