British Telecommunications Plc and America's MCI Communications Corp looked set to sweep into South America amid differing reports on Monday that they had linked up with two key Iberian telephone operators.
A statement by BT that it had formed a strategic alliance with Portugal Telecom SA was confused by the English version of a similar announcement from the Portuguese company, which added that MCI had also formed a pan American joint venture with Spain's Telefonica de Espana.
BT, whose own statement made no reference to Telefonica, declined to comment. An MCI official in Lisbon further complicated the issue by saying the deal between MCI and Tisa, Telefonica's international arm, had been announced in "error".
A BT spokeswoman said only: "We're pleased to be announcing Portgual Telecom today. We wouldn't comment on any other rumour or speculation but we are conscious that there is a lot of interest in the future of Telefonica."
The announcements of new alliances come one day before BT's shareholders vote on its ambitious 12.3 billion pound ($20 billion) merger with MCI, America's second biggest long-distance carrier, called Concert Plc.
Investors, who are expected to back the deal despite concerns about the high price BT is paying, are likely to welcome any link up with Iberian phone groups which would create a formidable telephone network spanning Europe and the Americas.
Portugal Telecom will now become the exclusive distributor of Concert Communications Services, telecoms services with which Concert hopes to link high-margin, multinational business clients around the globe.
To reinforce the alliance, BT is taking a one percent and MCI a 0.5 percent stake in the $7.0 billion Portuguese company during its next stage of privatisation, expected later this year. A BT executive will be invited to take a seat on the company's board.
Despite BT's reticence in commenting on any imminent partnership with Telefonica, the company says it does want to explore opportunities in South America, where Portugal Telecom has formed an alliance with operator Telebras in the largest telecoms market, Brazil.
Brazil accounts for nearly 40 percent of South America's booming telecoms industry and its addition to the expanding Concert geographic jigsaw complements MCI's presence in 17 South American countries.
BT added: "In addition, the companies will also seek other opportunities in the $36 billion Latin American communications market which is expected to grow to over $60 billion by the year 2000."
Tisa dominates the fast-growing South American markets of Peru, Argentina, Chile, Venezuela, Colombia and Puerto Rico.
The flagship Spanish operator has been openly seeking a U.S. partner and an announcement is expected in the next few days.
Telefonica insisted that no deal with Concert had been signed on Monday and added that it was still in talks with both Concert and AT&amp;T. Meanwhile Portugal Telecom said that it was also in negotiations with other international partners which may take a stake in the company.
Some London analysts had expected Concert to take a  five percent stake in the Portuguese operator.
Analysts say any link-up with Concert will herald a sea-change in the European telecoms alliance landscape and come as a blow to BT's arch rival in Europe, America's AT&amp;T.
Speculation has been mounting that Telefonica is on the brink of announcing a long-rumoured exit from a rival partnership to Concert -- AT&amp;T's Unisource alliance with Dutch, Swedish and Swiss telecoms groups.
Any loss of the Spanish operator, which holds a 25 percent stake in Unisource, would be the latest setback for AT&amp;T which has been hoping to use the alliance as the vehicle for its European expansion.
Analysts at SBC Warburg say an alliance between Concert and Telefonica "makes strategic sense for all involved".
"Concert would become a formidable global carrier...(while Telefonica) would not only join the leading global seamless alliance but also increase the strategic value of its Latin American investments...", the broker said in a recent report.
BT, which already has operations in more than 30 countries and employs 120,000 staff, has already formed joint ventures in the top six non-UK markets worth $135 billion, that include the key German and French markets.
Its Concert service portfolio, which it has developed with MCI, is available in 800 cities around the world.
The remaining vital gap in its global reach remains Asia, where BT has been attempting to link up with Japan's Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corp, the world's biggest telecoms firm. ($ = 0.614 British Pounds)
