Telecoms analysts in London were amused on Monday by Portugal Telecom SA's gaffe in stating that Telefonica de Espana SA had linked up with America's MCI Communications Corp.
Despite Telefonica's denials that a deal had been signed with MCI, the partner of British Telecommunications Plc, most analysts expect a four-way alliance to be announced and said such a deal was already reflected in BT's share price.
BT announced earlier that its Concert venture with MCI was forming a strategic partnership with Portugal Telecom but declined to comment on whether a similar deal had been struck with Telefonica's international arm Tisa.
"I'd say it's a bit of an 'oops' situation and someone has probably got egg on their face," laughed one analyst.
Another noted: "It looks to me a bit like a cock-up for Portugal Telecom." But he added: "It is becoming obvious that the four are going foward together. It should be good news."
Apart from winning exposure to Brazil through today's alliance with Portugal Telecom, Concert has little direct presence in other South American countries.
But a deal with Telefonica's international arm Tisa will add the rest -- the booming markets of Peru, Argentian, Chile, Venezuela, Colombia and Puerto Rico -- to its growing geographic portfolio.
John Tysoe, telecoms analyst at SocGen, said he would welcome a deal with both Iberian partners because it would "close the door" for Concert on the Americas. MCI is already the second largest carrier of international telephone traffic from the U.S. to Latin America.
Because few expect Telefonica to be able to remain in its current alliance in Europe, AT&amp;T -led Unisource, while joining arch-rival Concert in Latin America, analysts expect Telefonica to abandon Unisource.
Without Telefonica, analysts said Unisource would be severely weakened and this could force AT&amp;T to rethink its European strategy.
"The benefit for Concert of joining forces with Telefonica is that they weaken AT&amp;T while at the same time strengthening themselves," Tysoe said.
"The more people join in Concert, the less attractive AT&amp;T's option is," he added.
Another analyst noted that Telefonica had always been understood to want to be on the side of Portugal Telecom "so that they don't need to fear that Portugal Telecom will invade Spain and vice versa".
The analyst, who declined to be named, added that he had expected BT and MCI to take a five percent stake in Portugal Telecom, rather than the 1.5 percent holding they had agreed on.
"You could argue they are now spending their money more wisely and they are not going to invest that much in Portugal Telecom because they need money elsewhere," he noted.
Although few believe that Telefonica will allow a partner to buy a stake in Tisa, BT is expected to try to break into the booming Asian markets. Analysts say BT is in talks with most strong players, including the likes of Singapore Telecommunications Ltd.
While global telecoms alliances such as Concert fall over themselves trying to plug holes in their geographic portfolios and make up for the growth lost in more mature markets, some analysts warn that not all strategic investments will be successful.
"Overall, it is more important to look at the core business which, for Concert, is the U.S. and UK -- and there, prices will only go one way -- down," said the analyst. "Volumes will presumably also not continue to grow as healthily as they are growing at the moment.
"Perhaps not in the next week or two, but certainly within 1997, people will be much more sober," he warned.
BT's transatlatic roadshows should pay off on Tuesday when shareholders are expected to approve the group's planned 12.3 billion pound ($20 billion) merger with MCI.
Analysts then expect the group to stop what one called "its marketing machine" and start concentrating again on its operations.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 7987
