British Telecommunications will start talks with European regulators within the next week about its planned $20 billion merger with America's MCI after the deal was overwhelmingly backed by investors on Tuesday.
MCI shareholders approved the ambitious deal two weeks ago, leaving regulatory clearance the last hurdle to the creation of Concert Plc -- a "global supercarrier" with annual revenues of more than 25 billion pounds ($40.5 billion) and 43 million customers.
A BT spokesman said the company remained confident of winning a green light from both the European Commission, the U.S. Federal Communications Commission and the U.S. Department of Justice by autumn.
But he could not confirm speculation that Brussels might demand two minor concessions which include modifications to the two groups' dominant position in audio and video conferencing and guarantees that competition can have reasonable access to Concert's transatlantic facilities.
The EC is due to report by June 11 on BT's plans to buy the 80 percent it does not already own of MCI Communications Corp, the aggressive, U.S. long-distance operator that has become the second, long-distance carrier in the U.S. behind phone giant AT &amp; T Corp.
Ahead of expected regulatory approval, a resounding 98.5 percent of BT's 2.3 million shareholders backed the merger, sweeping aside concerns raised by some analysts that a 30 percent premium which BT is paying is a high price for control.
The deal creates the world's fourth largest telecoms group in terms of sales after Japan's Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corp (NTT), America's AT&amp;T and Germany's Deutsche Telekom.
"I have reservations about the merger," said pensioner Stella Garton-Brown, who has been a small shareholder in BT since the company was privatised in 1984. "I'm not always sure that bigger is best."
But powerful financial institutions, that own about 73 percent of BT, tend traditionally to back company boards.
Some analysts put down a surge in BT's share price during key transatlantic roadshows over the last weeks to proof of support for what will be the biggest transatlantic deal in history. Others put the share price down to index-linked buying.
Sir Iain Vallance, the chairman of BT and co-chairman designate of Concert, told shareholders that because of the development of new technology and the globalisation of the booming $650 billion telecoms market, the merger would bring benefits that BT could not deliver alone.
Concert combined the feistiness of the younger, fast-growing MCI with the stability of BT -- "the world's best market defender coupled with the world's best market attacker", he said.
BT and MCI currently hold about six percent of the global telecoms market, which is expected to top one trillion dollars by 2000. But Vallance said: "We want to go after the other 94 percent."
Concert wants to provide clients around the globe with local, long distance, international and mobile phone services as well as multi-media, Internet-based services and systems integration for business clients.
The group plans to be represented in key countries across the world so it can focus on winning high-margin, multinational clients that analysts estimate account for about 15-20 percent of global telecoms revenue.
A deal with MCI also opens up the world's largest telecoms market to BT -- the United States is home to 40 percent of the largest multinational company headquarters. BT also hopes to take a share of the lucrative local market through MCI as this is opened up to competition.
MCI shareholders will receive 5.4 Concert shares for each MCI share and $6.0 cash. BT shareholders get a 2.2 billion pound special dividend and total dividend for this year of 19.85p.
BT has promised that the merger, after an initial five percent earnings dilution, will yield savings from combining overlapping services of 1.5 billion pounds over the first five years and 500 million pounds pre-tax annually after that.
But merchant banks such as Robert Fleming are sceptical about company forecasts of a six percent annual dividend rise as increasing competition is set to dampen healthy call volumes and drive down prices nearer to the relatively marginal cost of delivering them.
Fleming says BT's gearing level might surge to 150 percent in the next three years and has downgraded its recommendation on BT to "sell" because it says the group's valuation looks stretched against other European telecom groups.
The merchant bank's gearing calculation includes a 1-1.2 billion pound windfall tax if Britain's opposition Labour Party wins the May 1 election and an approximate 1.6 billion pound acquisition of the remaining 40 percent of BT's mobile phone business Cellnet.
It also includes other investments in Europe and key Asia Pacific markets, where Concert has yet to build a large presence. ($= 0.616 British Pounds)
