The global empire of British Telecommunications Plc and MCI Communications Corp. charged into the vast Spanish-speaking world Friday, leaving them with only Asia to conquer.
In a long-expected move, BT confirmed that flagship Spanish telecoms carrier Telefonica de Espana SA would join its Concert alliance, enabling it to pursue the booming Latin American telecommunications market, which is expected to be worth $60 billion by 2000.
The deal, which was unwittingly revealed by Concert's newest parter, Portugal Telecom, earlier this week, was seen as a blow to AT&amp;T Corp., BT's arch-rival, and heralds a major change in the telecommunications landscape across the Americas and Europe.
In its new deal with Concert, Telefonica is taking a 1 percent stake in BT and BT is taking a 2 percent stake in the Spanish group. Each deal is worth about 280 million pounds ($457 million).
"This is good news although it had been expected in the market," said Jim McCafferty, an analyst at ABN AMRO Hoare Govett.
With a fiber-based network that includes a marine link between Spain and Latin America, the companies plan to establish a state-of-the-art communications portfolio offering voice, data, internet/intranet and video stretching from Alaska to South America.
In a seemingly inexorable journey across the world, Concert now offers seamless global communications services to customers in 41 countries, focusing on high-margin, multinational corporate customers.
The latest deal with Telefonica means that BT, which entered the Spanish market in 1993, aligns itself with a former rival in a key European market.
International telecommunnications groups like Concert are trying to plug holes in their coverage and make up for growth lost in home markets due to increasing competition. But some experts are also stepping up warnings that vast investments abroad might be too risky.
One such investment, which has sparked some concern among the analyst community, is BT's proposed $20 billion merger with MCI. The planned deal, which won overwhelming shareholder support Tuesday, is awaiting regulatory clearance in Brussels and the United States.
BT expects to win final approval for what will be the largest transatlantic merger in history by the fall.
BT says it is in constant talks with telecoms operators in the last, major gap in global geographic jigsaw -- the lucrative Asia-Pacific region.
Concert, which needs to service multinational firms with offices in Japan, has been trying to forge a link with Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corp., the world's biggest telecommunications group.
Concert is competing against AT&amp;T-led partnerships such as Unisource and World Partners as well as Global One, an alliance between Deutsche Telekom AG, France Telecom and America's third long-distance carrier, Sprint Corp.
The addition of Telefonica came just four days after BT clinched a strategic alliance with Portugal Telecom that opens the door on South America's biggest market, Brazil.
The Internacional SA (Tisa) subsidiary will manage a new 50-50 joint venture called Telefonica Panamerica MCI, which will dig deeper into the $36 billion South American continent.
Tisa already dominates Latin America's communications with an empire spanning Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Peru, and Argentina and is well-placed to take advantage of the continuing privatisation trend in the region.
