Japan's Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corp is in talks with France's Cie Generale des Eaux about taking a stake in its French railway venture, a CGE unit said on Tuesday.
The talks could bring the world's biggest telecoms group closer to one of its keenest suitors -- British Telecommunications Plc.
CGE's subsidiary Cegetel, in which BT is investing 1.1 billion pounds ($1.8 billion) to take a 25 percent stake, confirmed the talks after a source close to CGE told Reuters in London NTT was considering a 9.9 percent stake in CGE's railway venture, Telecom Developpement, TD.
"Generale des Eaux is in talks with NTT," a source close to the French company told Reuters.
Cegetel, which is France's second telecoms operator and majority-owned by CGE, can take a stake of up to 49.9 percent in TD. But it might limit its holding to 40 percent and seek a minority partner to take the balance, the source said.
BT, with its U.S. partner MCI Communications Corp , has been trying to gain a foothold in the lucrative Asian markets for years as has been openly courting NTT.
Asia remains the last gap in BT and MCI's global jigsaw of deals that span the globe, offering sophisticated communications services mainly to high-margin, corporate customers.
Although BT and NTT are collaborating in a bid to secure the second national licence in Singapore, BT has so far failed to clinch a closer deal with the company in Japan.
The Japanese company, which is looking to make its first foreign investment in a key European market, has been eyeing the 117 billion franc ($20 billion) French telecom market since the summer when it started talks about joining Cegetel, the source said.
Analysts say Cegetel is well-placed to launch as assault on monopoly France Telecom when the market, which is expected to grow to 187 billion francs by 2003, is eased open to competition in 1998.
But Cegetel's partners -- CGE, BT, Germany's Mannesmann AG and SBC Communications Inc of the U.S. -- were unwilling to make place for the Japanese heavyweight by selling part of their stakes in a pivotal European market.
However in February, Cegetel was selected to run a network owned by Societe Nationale des Chemins de Fer (SNCF) via the state-owned rail group's subsidiary, Telecom Developpement.
The move boosted Cegetel's position as second national operator, giving it access to 8,000 kilometres of optic fibre across the country, as well as radio links, which will be expanded to some 12,000 kilometres in the next six years.
It also opened up the possibility of a deal with NTT.
Cegetel, which already runs France's second-biggest mobile telecommunications network SFR, plans to buy at least 40 percent of the shares in TD, leaving up to 9.9 percent for the right strategic partner.
"(Cegetel) can go up to 49.9 percent in a partnership where this partner will be a minority partner," the source said, adding that talks with NTT have now centred on this venture.
He declined to divulge how much the stakes were worth.
Although NTT is not the only potential minority partner in talks with CGE, the source declined to name other parties.
"It is quite possible that nothing happens for a year," he noted.
Investment bankers expect NTT to be looking to gain a toe-hold in the top four or five European markets and say they would be surprised if efforts are being focused exclusively on France.
The company has not been short of suitors. NTT, which was in December freed by the government to pursue international business, controls virtually all of the local network in Japan as well as having a large presence in Asia.
There are three main global alliances that are eager to link up with NTT; BT and MCI's Concert, Global One; which incorporates France Telecom, Deutsche Telekom AG and America's Sprint Corp and U.S. telecoms giant AT &amp; T Corp's loosely-knit global alliance World Partners/Unisource.
($ = 5.747 French Francs)
