Cable and Wireless Communications (CWC), Britain's biggest and newest cable telephone and television group will float a 14.7 percent stake in London and New York early next week.
The flotation, which is not big enough to propel the new company into the FTSE, has been expected since CWC was formed in 1996 by merging the Mercury unit of Britain's Cable and Wireless Plc with the three British cable TV units of NYNEX Corp and Bell Canada.
The recommended offer for shares in CWC, which has been valued by analysts at an average of around 4.5 billion pounds ($7.3 billion), closed on Friday at 1330 GMT and experts expect trading to start on Monday at 1330 GMT.
No confirmation of the level of acceptances was expected before 1600 GMT, but the offer was recommended and over 65 percent of shareholders accepted the deal when CWC's complex prospectus was issued in March.
Richard Brown, the incoming chairman of CWC and chief executive of Cable and Wireless, says the company will be customer-led and market-driven and has promised a flotation immediately after the offer closes.
After the merger, there will be only one brand name  -- Cable and Wireless -- and a huge advertising campaign is planned ensure the name wins public recognition.
With assets worth about 4.5 billion pounds, CWC will provide a broad range of local, national and international voice and data services and, in some regions, multichannel TV and internet computer services.
Despite bringing together cable TV groups NYNEX CableComms, Bell Cablemedia Plc and Videotron, CWC's core business will be the telephony provided by Mercury. It will be British Telecommunications's main rival.
But with initially only 1.1 million residential telecom and 80,000 business customers compared to BT's 20.5 million residential and about seven million business clients, some analysts say the new company will only pose a serious threat to BT in the middle of the next Century.
"I don't see CWC as a threat (to BT) in the short and medium term," said Oliver Ehrenberg, telecoms anlayst at Robert Flemming.
Initially, around 91 percent of revenues will be derived from telecoms and only nine percent from TV entertainment, although this is expected to grow.
The company hopes to be the first to roll out its 200-channel service ahead of its rivals, which include satellite broadcaster BSkyB, possibly by autumn.
CWC plans to complete its broadband cable and local telephony networks by investing some 110 million pounds over two years and offer services to more than six million residential customers by 2001.
It also wants to serve almost all small and medium-sized businesses within its 45 cable franchise areas.
Another 180 million pounds will be spent over the same period on so-called set top boxes, with which customers can receive multi-channel television services.
But with 2.3 billion pounds of capital expenditure in the first two years and initial net debt of 1.3 billion pounds, Ehrenberg does not expect investors to receive a dividend before 2001 at the earliest.
Cable and Wireless, which will have a 52.6 percent stake in CWC, wants to remain a majority shareholder and has said it will consider boosting its investment if partners back out.
NYNEX and Bell Canada, which are facing increasing competition at home, have not so far seen great returns for their investments in Britain's stagnant cable market.
France Telecom says it has held talks with Cable and Wireless about CWC becoming the British partner of its Global One alliance with Deutsche Telekom AG and America's Sprint Corp.
Analysts note that if Global One wants to link up with CWC, it is more likely to convince the North Americans to sell out rather than chase a small amount of shares in the open market next week -- which could become expensive.
CWC had pro forma revenues of 1.9 billion pounds with net income of 44 million pounds in the year to March 1996.
