Cable and Wireless Communications (CWC), Britain's new cable telephone and television company, made its market debut on Monday valued at around 4.5 billion pounds ($7.3 billion), in line with analyst expectations.
A free float of 14.7 percent of the new group, which was formed last year when the Mercury subsidiary of Cable and Wireless Plc merged with the three cable TV units of NYNEX Corp and Bell Canada, started at 300 pence per share and moved up to 306p in early trade.
The dual flotation on both the London and New York stock exchanges was scheduled for 1330 GMT to coincide with the opening of the American market.
Analysts had expected CWC -- which will provide local, national and international voice, data, multi-channel TV and Internet services -- to be valued at an average of 4.5 billion pounds.
Despite bringing together cable TV groups NYNEX CableComms Group , Bell Cablemedia Plc and Videotron, CWC's core business will be the telephony provided by Mercury.
Although this makes it British Telecommunications Plc's biggest rival, some analysts believe that BT, valued at around 28 billion pounds, will have nothing to fear until at least the middle of next decade.
Before it rolls out its network, CWC will have only 1.1 million residential and 80,000 business telecom customers compared to BT's 20.5 million residential and seven million business clients.
But with 2.3 billion pounds of capital expenditure and initial debt of 1.3 billion pounds, CWC plans to complete its sophisticated broadband cable and local telephone networks and offer its services to six million customers by 2001.
BT is currently banned from using its comprehensive network for direct broadcasting services.
Nevertheless some analysts are cautious about the new company's prospects.
"On a longer-term view, any valuation becomes almost entirely dependent on your view of what the longer-term penetration rate is going to be for telephony and cable TV," noted one analyst, who declined to be named.
He said BT would move into broadcasting by 2001 at the latest, when current regulatory restrictions are lifted, and the group was likely to move into interactive services such as home shopping and home banking sooner.
"Put that alongside the impact of BT's on-going marketing muscle in basic telephony combined with the impact of digital terrestrial TV and digital satellite TV and I think that will all serve to put a break on our expectations of long-term cable TV penetration," he said.
But other analysts, such as Richard Jones at brokers Yamaichi and Andrew Harrington at Salomon Brothers, welcomed the transformation of Mercury from a typical telecoms group into a "much more exciting and dynamic" telephony and entertainment provider.
Jones is recommending buying the stock up to 350 pence per share. Harrington values the shares at 438p and the company at 6.5 billion pounds.
"Everything BT can do Cable and Wireless Communications can to better and sooner," he said.
Harrington argues that CWC's network cost structure has a competitive advantage against BT, its main rival on the telephony side, and satellite broadcaster British Sky Broadcasting Group Plc, its main rival on the multi-channel television side.
"It's got 50 percent fewer employees per line than BT," he said. "We think CWC has a unique competitive advantage in the provision of multi-channel TV and telephony. I think it's going to exceed expectations in the next year."
CWC hopes to be first to roll out its 200-television channel service, possibly by autumn.
The company will ditch the four brand names and instead use that of its majority shareholder -- Cable and Wireless. A huge marketing campaign is planned to ensure that the name wins public recognition.
Now that the partial flotation is out of the way, analysts will be eyeing Global One, a partnership of Deutsche Telekom AG, France Telecom and America's Sprint Corp, which needs access to Britain and has been in talks with Cable and Wireless about the CWC venture.
The two North American partners in CWC, which together hold a 32.7 percent stake, have not seen great returns for their investments in Britain's stagnant cable market so far and might be willing to sell all or some of their stakes, some analysts say.
But with the privatisation of France Telecom delayed, no imminent deal is expected. ($ = 0.616 British Pounds)
