London telecoms analysts are split about the prospects of Britain's Cable and Wireless Communications, the telephone and television cable company that made its market debut on Monday.
CWC started trading, as expected, at around 300 pence per share and rose to 309 pence before edging back to 299.5, valuing the group at around 4.46 billion pounds.
CWC, which was formed last year when the Mercury subsidiary of Cable and Wireless Plc merged with the three cable TV units of NYNEX Corp and Bell Canada, floated a 14.7 percent stake in London and New York.
Brokers Lehman Brothers says a 4.5 billion pound implies an enterprise value of about 6.0 billion pounds, assuming pro forma net debt at the end of 1996 at 1.5 billion stg. The valuation assumes a 700-800 million stg premium to the sum of the parts, assuming a valuation of Mercury of 2.0 billion pounds.
"The timing required to accomplish the technical integration of the various parts as well as the investments necessary to establish the new brand on a nation-wide basis suggest that at 4.5 billion stg, CWC assets are fairly valued."
With 2.3 billion pounds of capital expenditure, CWC plans to complete its sophisticated broadband cable and local telephone networks and offer its services to six million customers by 2001.
However, other analysts, such as Richard Jones at brokers Yamaichi and Andrew Harrington at Salomon Brothers, were more bullish.
Jones is recommending buying the stock up to 350 pence per share. Harrington values the shares at 438p and the company at 6.5 billion pounds.
Harrington argues that CWC's network cost structure has a competitive advantage against its main telephony and multi-channel television provider -- British Telecommunications Plc and satellite broadcaster British Sky Broadcasting Group Plc.
"It's got 50 percent fewer employees per line than BT," he said. "We think CWC has a unique competitive advantage in the provision of multi-channel TV and telephony. I think it's going to exceed expectations in the next year."
CWC's core business will be the telephony provided by Mercury. Initially, 91 percent of revenues will come from telephony and only nine percent from entertainment, but it will be the first company to be able to bundle multi-channel television and telephony.
Nevertheless, some analysts are cautious about the new company's prospects. Cable television companies have yet to make a profit in Britain's stagnant market.
"On a longer-term view, any valuation becomes almost entirely dependent on your view of what the longer-term penetration rate is going to be for telephony and cable TV," noted one analyst, who declined to be named.
He said BT would move into broadcasting by 2001 at the latest, when current regulatory restrictions are lifted, and the group was likely to move into interactive services such as home shopping and home banking sooner.
"Put that alongside the impact of BT's on-going marketing muscle in basic telephony, combined with the impact of digital terrestrial TV and digital satellite TV, and I think that will all serve to put a brake on our expectations of long-term cable TV penetration," he said.
Oliver Ehrenberg, telecoms analyst at Robert Fleming, says CWC is not worth more than 3.75 billion pounds -- and says his valuation is already stretched.
But Harrington brushed aside these concerns, noting that BT's network will need a lot of investment to upgrade its telephone lines so they can support multi-channel TV and interactive services.
"Everything BT can do Cable and Wireless Communications can to better and sooner," he said.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542
