Music companies are waiting for the world to rock to a new sound that will entice consumers back into record shops and drive up sluggish global sales, analysts said on Tuesday.
Without new global best sellers and an economic upturn, few analysts expect the global market to bask in the double digit growth seen from 1984 to 1994 when queues eager for records such as pop group R.E.M.'s "Monster" stretched from music shops.
Discounting among retailers, international piracy of cassettes and compact discs and an ageing population, whose first stop on the high street might well be a book shop rather than a record store, have all hit the more mature markets.
Global sales of pre-recorded music reached $39.8 billion in 1996, a 5.5 percent growth in retail value over 1995. Four billion compact discs, cassettes and records -- four percent more than in 1995 -- were sold.
But the rate of growth is slowing. In retail value, global growth was six percent in 1995 and a hefty 15 percent in 1994.
The figures, compiled by the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry (IFPI) which represents the world's record firms, confirm that growth in developing markets is surging. But more mature markets such as North America have been hit by static sales and falling prices.
David Chermont, media analyst at Merrill Lynch, said that investors had become used to the lack of "mind-blowing" growth, however, in an industry which is made up of a mix of growth and cyclical markets that wax and wane with economic confidence.
"Double-digit growth is not sustainable even in the healthiest markets," he said. "I feel quite comfortable."
Another analyst, who declined to be named, noted: "The whole industry can explode if a new sound suddenly arrives on the scene that starts driving sales."
Meanwhile, the main engine of growth has shifted away from the mature, developed markets, the figures show.
The IFPI said, "In 1996 around 70 percent of the world's music growth was generated in less developed markets -- in particularly from Latin America and Asia."
"This compares to only 20 percent in 1993, when global growth was at a similar level to 1996."
But the trade body brushed aside concerns that the industry was under serious threat by technology such as CD-ROMs, booming international piracy and because the babies borne during the rocking 1960s were now approaching middle age and no longer bought music.
"There is a huge potential in music," Nic Garnett, director general of IFPI, told a seminar during London Music Week, noting that the global market had surged from $27 billion to almost $40 billion in the last five years. "This is very much a thriving, global business," he said.
"No market is that mature where the exciting process of new artists coming through cannot re-ignite (it)," he added. But he called on governments to protect the intellectual property business with copyright laws that prevent "pirates" from copying and re-selling cassettes or compact discs at vastly cheaper prices.
Piracy is one of the most serious crimes threatening the $35 billion U.S. recording industry and represents losses of over $2.0 billion every year, the IFPI said.
The U.S., which together with Canada accounts for 31 percent of the global music market, saw growth fall to only two percent in value terms. The Canadian market fell by six percent.
But Europe remains the world's largest region for music sales, accounting for 34 percent of the market.
Britain, boosted by the popularity of groups such as the Spice Girls and Oasis, saw sales rise seven percent to $2.71 billion. But the Netherlands and Italy saw sales growth of only two percent, less than inflation. Germany and France clocked up eight and six percent respectively.
Latin America was the fastest-growing region, with total sales up by almost 30 percent. With an upturn of the economy, Brazil showed a 33 percent rise in sales that catapulted it into the seat of the world's sixth latest market.
In Asia, Malaysia, Thailand and Taiwan saw over 20 percent sales growth while the Japanese market remained almost static at two percent. Australia was up by 14 percent.
Five big music companies control about two thirds of the market -- PolyGram NV of the Netherlands, Japan's Sony Corp, Warner -- part of Time Warner Inc of the U.S. -- Germany's Bertelsmann AG, and EMI Group Plc of Britain.
