Privatisation, the flagship economic policy of Margaret Thatcher's Conservatives, was good to British Telecommunications.
From its menial beginnings as a Post Office appendage, the company has grown meteorically into a formidable, telecoms giant whose network of alliances span most of the globe.
The sale of BT in 1984 began what was dubbed "the long march of privatisation" under 18 years of Conservative rule which has been emulated by governments around the world.
The Conservative legacy has transformed British industry and even helped inspire the former communists of eastern Europe.
But this march could come to a shuddering halt following the Labour Party's landslide victory in Britain's May 1 election.
It is not that New Labour, created from the roots of a party that traditionally favoured state ownership, necessarily wants to protect nationalised firms from being pressed by shareholders into delivering efficiencies. It doesn't.
It's just that there is little left to privatise. As one commentator pointed out: "Most of the family silver is long gone, what remains is little more than the teaspoons."
Led by former Conservative prime minister Margaret Thatcher, the government triggered a controversial and comprehensive privatisation programme which raised more than 68 billion pounds ($110.4 billion) for the Treasury's coffers.
Industries from aerospace, airlines, buses, railways, coal, electricity, gas, steel, telecommunications and water went under the hammer.
The former Conservative chancellor (finance minister) Kenneth Clarke says privatised companies now contribute 2.6 billion pounds a year in taxes compared with 37 million when they were in state hands.
"Whether you support privatisation is a litmus test of whether you seriously support free enterprise," Clarke said.
BT, MODEL PRIVATISED TELECOMS COMPANY
BT, whose 14.2 billion pound sale 13 years ago was one of the biggest the world had seen, has created a model privatised telecoms company.
In 1984, BT was a true monopoly. It operated its network, supplied the services and telephone equipment and employed 245,000 staff. Quality of service was mixed, waiting times for new lines long and mobile telephony barely existed.
From such an unprepossessing start, a much leaner BT last year launched the biggest transatlantic merger in history, proposing to buy America's second long distance carrier MCI Communications Corp for $20 billion.
Together, BT and MCI will form Concert Plc, a powerful alliance whose empire connects 41 countries.
BT, currently valued at around 28 billion pounds, still dominates the British telecoms market. But it faces increasing competition from 150 rivals in the domestic market and 46 international carriers.
However, some observers say its success owes more to the strategic cunning of its executives and break-neck speed of new technology rather than Conservative party policy.
Others blame an over-hasty privatisation to raise cash for tax cuts for driving the company to seek its global fortune with an American carrier rather than with its British rival, Cable and Wireless Plc.
BT's planned 33 billion pound merger with C&amp;W, which would have brought with it vital access to the lucrative Asian telecoms markets, was abandoned last May -- partly because of concerns that regulators might block the deal.
George Pitcher, chief executive of management consultancy Luther Pendragon, believes corporate liberation in Britain has been simultaneously stifled by heavy-handed and ill-considered regulation.
"BT and Cable and Wireless would have been a huge force and a great opportunity for Britain," Pitcher says.
British Gas, which was privatised as a monopoly, has been regulated into break-up and may well be taken over. Eleven of 12 electricity suppliers have snapped up -- seven by U.S. groups keen on their cash-spinning powers.
TV AMBITION'S THWARTED
An unrelenting regulatory rein has also prevented BT from realising another of its ambitions -- turning into a television broadcaster.
The Conservative government banned BT from taking on the mainly American cable TV firms at their own game because it feared they might not survive such a market onslaught.
Consequently, consumers have had to wait years for cable groups to offer TV services which BT, with its established network, could have provided much sooner.
Ironically Labour, which has accused the government of short-changing consumers in its rush to sell state assets, promised to promptly lift the ban if it came to power.
Nevertheless, the early liberalisation of the telecoms industry has created one of the most competitive markets in the world -- and BT is exploiting its lead.
While British regulators might have frowned at a merger between BT and C&amp;W, it was the apparent openness of the British market that paved the way for BT's proposed merger with MCI.
U.S. regulatory clearance for the deal hinges on whether Britain is deemed to be as open to U.S. carriers as America is to British ones. Approval is widely expected by autumn.
With other European telecoms markets only due to be liberalised from next year, no other European carrier was in a position to launch such a deal. ($ = 0.616 British Pounds)
