Cable and Wireless Plc, Britain's second biggest telecommunications company, reported record annual results on Wednesday but said it was biding its time before choosing any global partners.
C&amp;W, which confirmed it was still in talks with telecoms alliances such as Global One, said pre-tax profits after exceptional items jumped 12 percent to 1.42 billion pounds ($2.3 billion) in the year ended March 31.
But stripping out one-off items, profits were only two to four percent higher than last year, analysts said.
The company, which raised its total dividend 11 percent to 11.1 pence for the year to March 31, said greater demand in its businesses around the world and a management focus on improving productivity had boosted performance.
Group turnover, including C&amp;W's share of associated undertakings, rose 13 percent to just over 7.0 billion pounds. Although underlying profits were in line with expectations, the shares fell 20p to 492.5p.
Analysts were split on why the shares were being marked down. Some cited profit taking and others blamed concerns over C&amp;W's cable venture, uncertainty over its key Hong Kong business and restlessness that the company appeared to be ignoring key European and U.S. markets in its drive for expansion -- at least in the short term.
Andrew Harrington, telecoms analyst at Salomon Brothers, remains unperturbed. "The results were pretty good across the board. There are a lot of one-offs which have to be taken out but at an underlying level, they were at the top half of the range of expectations," he said.
C&amp;W's chief executive Richard Brown promised that the company was just beginning to build long-term growth.
"We are seizing opportunities to expand our revenues in fresh, innovative ways," said chief executive Richard Brown in the results statement.
The company last month merged its British telephone subsidiary Mercury with three cable television companies to create the country's biggest cable group called Cable and Wireless Communications, which some analysts say will boost the bottom line within a couple of years.
Finance director Robert Lerwill told Reuters that the group continued to talk with suitors such as the Global One alliance of Deutsche Telekom, France Telecom and America's Sprint Corp.
But he noted: "There's nothing specific on any conversations with Global One worth commenting on.
"People have been approaching us and are interested in us, which demonstrates our global reach and the appeal we have for many of these global alliances."
Global One needs access to the British market as well as C&amp;W's key Asian business interests, which boast a nearly 60 percent stake in lucrative Hong Kong Telecommunications Ltd .
Hongkong Telecom contributed just over one billion pounds to annual operating profits and 2.67 billion pounds to group turnover.
A partnership with Global One would also allow C&amp;W to tap the key European telecoms markets, such as France and Germany, which are heading for liberalisation next year.
"If we did in some way get associated with another alliance, then (continental) Europe is the place where there is more to go for," Lerwill said.
C&amp;W, which says it will use Cable and Wireless Communications as its springboard for European expansion, has limited access to that continent since pulling out of its German alliance with VEBA AG in February.
One question mark which hangs over C&amp;W is its holding in Hongkong Telecom. With only weeks to go before the British colony reverts to Chinese control, speculation has been sparked that China may pressure C&amp;W into reducing its majority stake.
But C&amp;W insists there is no requirement for it do so. Instead, it welcomed more direct Chinese involvement in Hongkong Telecom last week, seeing it as a sign that the Chinese are likely to use the company as their principal telecoms partner in Hong Kong.
China Everbright, which reports to China's State Council (cabinet), bought a 7.7 percent stake in the Hong Kong company from CITIC Pacific, which is seen by analysts to be more independent.
Some analysts expect further Chinese investment in Hongkong Telecom, combined with new growth opportunities for the Hong Kong firm on the Chinese mainland.
But Adrian Goodall, telecoms analyst at SBC Warburg, said: "The potential for growth in China is indisputable, although the ability to make attractive returns from investment in that growth may be a tough proposition."
