Cable and Wireless Plc, Britain's second biggest telecommunications company, reported record annual profits on Wednesday but said it was biding its time before choosing any global partners.
C&amp;W, which confirmed it was still in talks with telecoms alliances such as Global One, said pre-tax profits after exceptional items jumped 12 percent to 1.42 billion pounds ($2.3 billion).
The company, which raised its total dividend 11 percent to 11.1 pence for the year to March 31, said improved demand in its businesses around the world and increased productivity had boosted performance.
Group turnover, including C&amp;W's share of associated undertakings, rose 13 percent to just over 7.0 billion pounds. Underlying profits were in line with expectations and the shares eased 6.6p to 506p at 1140 GMT.
"The results were pretty much in line with expectations after stripping out about 180 million pounds of one-offs. We won't be changing our forecasts," ABN AMRO Hoare Govett analyst James Ross said.
But C&amp;W's chief executive Richard Brown said in the results statement that the company was just beginning to build long-term growth: "We are seizing opportunities to expand our revenues in fresh, innovative ways."
The company last month merged its British telephone subsidiary Mercury with three cable television companies to create the country's biggest cable group called Cable and Wireless Communications, which some analysts say will enhance the bottom line within a couple of years.
Finance director Robert Lerwill told Reuters in an interview that the group continued to talk with suitors such as the Global One alliance of Deutsche Telekom, France Telecom and America's Sprint Corp.
But he noted: "There's nothing specific on any conversations with Global One worth commenting on.
"People have been approaching us and are interested in us -- which demonstrates our global reach and the appeal we have for many of these global alliances."
Global One is keen to gain access to the British market as well as C&amp;W's key Asian business interests including its ace card -- a near-60 percent stake in lucrative Hong Kong Telecommunications Ltd.
Hong Kong Telecom contributed just over 1.0 billion pounds to annual operating profits and 2.67 billion pounds to group turnover.
A partnership with Global One would also allow C&amp;W to tap the key European telecoms markets, such as France and Germany, which are heading for liberalisation next year.
Despite owning a small subsidiary called Cable and Wireless Europe, C&amp;W has limited access to continental Europe. "If we did in some way get associated with another alliance, then (continental) Europe is the place where there is more to go for," Lerwill said.
C&amp;W says it will use Cable and Wireless Communications as its springboard for European expansion.
One question mark which hangs over C&amp;W is its holding in Hong Kong Telecom. With only weeks to go before the British colony reverts to Chinese control, speculation has been sparked that China may pressure C&amp;W into reducing its majority stake.
But C&amp;W insists there is no requirement for it do so. It welcomed more direct Chinese involvement in Hong Kong Telecom last week, seeing it as a sign the Chinese are likely to use the company as their principal telecoms partner in Hong Kong.
China Everbright, which reports to China's State Council, bought a 7.7 percent stake in the Hong Kong company from CITIC Pacific, which is seen by analysts to be more independent.
Some analysts expect further Chinese investment in Hong Kong Telecom, combined with new growth opportunities for the Hong Kong firm on the Chinese mainland.
But Adrian Goodall, telecoms analyst at SBC Warburg, said: "The potential for growth in China is indisputable, although the ability to make attractive returns from investment in that growth may be a tough proposition."
