British Telecommunications Plc flexed its muscles on Thursday, saying it would not hesitate to launch a legal challenge to any government windfall tax on its profits.
Reporting a rise in annual pretax profits to 3.2 billion pounds ($5.3 billion) from 3.02 billion, chairman Sir Iain Vallance said the group owed it to its investors to attempt to fight any Labour plans to tax its earnings.
"If we are stung in a big way for this tax and if it can be challenged legally, we owe it to our shareholders to challenge it," Vallance told BBC radio.
But he added the company would be "very sad" to start a partnership with Labour, which swept to power on May 1 for the first time in 18 years, on such a footing.
"I would not have voted Labour had (a windfall tax on BT) been in the manifesto," Vallance told reporters.
The government says it will levy a one-off tax on what it calls the "excess profits" of privatised utilities, whose large executive salaries and surging dividend payments to shareholders have enraged consumer groups.
Labour, which wants to raise money to help get the young and long-term unemployed back to work, declines to identify the firms it plans to target and BT's comments found favour with another potential target -- BAA.
The British airports operator is taking legal advice and accused Labour of "verging on irresponsibility" by not detailing who would be hit.
Unlike water and electricity companies, which are resigned to the tax, BT's Vallance charged that it would be "perverse" to line up BT with utilities for punishment.
"We're not a monopoly, not a utility, heavily regulated, have very low call charges, an excellent customer service record, we're very important for the UK in getting jobs in the information society that we're in at the moment and therefore why tax us?" he asked.
But he said BT would not pull out of its "superhighway" agreement with Labour, whereby it will wire up for free schools and hospitals. It is hoping for an early release from a ban on using its main network for broadcasting.
While BT was in a fighting mood, it also threw a challenge to its industry regulator Oftel. BT accuses Oftel of suggesting "unduly harsh" curbs on the prices BT charges rivals for carrying calls on its network.
Oftel has published a consultation paper suggesting that a basket of so-called "interconnect" prices should fall between 6-12 percent below the rate of inflation.
But finance director Robert Brace told reporters that even the lower end of this range was too harsh -- on top of a one-off price cut of 10-20 percent -- and would harm infrastructure investment in Britain.
"In extremis, we would be prepared to challenge it (the price regime) at the Monopolies and Mergers Commission," he said, adding that interconnect charges in Britain were about one third of those in other countries.
Thursday's results from BT, which left its shares barely changed at 450.5p, are likely to be its last in its current form.
Once its ambitious $20 billion merger with its American partner MCI Communications Corp is cleared by U.S. regulators, a new company called Concert Plc, will be floated in London and New York.
BT on Wednesday won approval from European regulators for what is the biggest transatlantic merger in history.
With final approval expected in autumn, Concert will be the second biggest company in terms market value on the London stock exchange.
Andrew Harrington, analyst at Salomon Brothers, says Concert appears to be the best positioned global carrier in a rapidly consolidating telecoms industry.
But he warns that 50 percent of BT's revenues and 66 percent of its profits depend on an increasingly competitive domestic business.
BT, which raised total dividends 6.l percent to 19.85p, said despite fierce price wars it was increasing its domestic market share amid a strong growth in demand for its products and services.
But price cuts in the year came to 840 million pounds -- nearly six percent of its 14.9 billion pound turnover.
BT maintained its inland call volume growth at seven percent although annual international call volume growth slipped a touch -- also to seven percent.
A strengthening pound also hit BT's international call sales. Together with a 14 percent price cut in the year, international turnover fell 8.6 percent, BT said. ($ = 0.608 British Pounds)
