British Telecommunications Plc said on Thursday it might launch a legal challenge if a windfall tax on its profits was imposed by Britain's new Labour government.
Reporting a rise in annual pretax profits to 3.2 billion pounds ($5.3 billion) from 3.02 billion, chairman Sir Iain Vallance said the group owed it to its shareholders to try and prevent the government taxing its earnings. BT shares were up two pence at 1120 GMT to 451-1/2p.
"If we are stung in a big way for this tax and if it can be challenged legally, we owe it to our shareholders to challenge it," Vallance told BBC radio.
But he added the company would be "very sad" to start a partnership with Labour, elected on May 1, on such a footing.
The government said it would impose a one-off windfall tax on what it calls the "excess profits" of privatised utilities, whose large executive salaries and surging dividend payments to shareholders have enraged consumer groups into alleging consumers have been short-changed.
Labour has declined to identify the companies it plans to target. But some analysts said BT could be hit with a one-off tax of 1.0-1.5 billion pounds.
Vallance said it would be "perverse" to line up BT with privatised utilities, which include many electricity and water companies, for punishment. But he said BT would not pull out of its "superhighway" agreement, whereby it would provide free computer services to schools and hospitals in return for an early release from a ban on using its main network for broadcasting.
"We're not a monopoly, not a utility, heavily regulated, have very low call charges, an excellent customer service record, we're very important for the UK in getting jobs in the information society that we're in at the moment and therefore why tax us?" he asked.
From its menial beginnings as a Post Office appendage, BT has grown meteorically into a formidable telecoms giant whose network of alliances span most of the globe.
BT on Wednesday won approval from European regulators for its proposed merger with its American partner MCI Communications Corp -- the biggest transatlantic merger in history.
The $20 billion deal will create a new company called Concert Plc and only faces one more hurdle -- U.S. regulators. Approval is expected by the autumn.
Finance director Robert Brace told Reuters that BT and MCI's Concert Communications, which provides innovative global services to high-margin, multinational clients, was set to break even this financial year.
He said the business was "clearly" ahead of its two loss-making rivals, the Global One partnership between Deutsche Telekom, France Telecom and America's Sprint Corp and the Unisource/World Partners alliances headed by America's AT&amp;T Corp.
"We've got a backlog of orders of $1.5 billion, the customers love it, it's growing fast," he said. "It's the start of big improved services for multinationals around the world..."
Concert, whose last gap in its geographical coverage remains Asia, boasts business from around 3,500 customers in 41 countries with annual revenues of around $500 million.
Andrew Harrington, telecoms analyst at Salomon Brothers, said Concert appeared to be the best positioned global carrier in a rapidly consolidating global telecoms industry.
But he warned that 50 percent of BT's revenues and 66 percent of its profits depended on its domestic business.
BT, which raised total dividends 6.l percent to 19.85p, said despite fierce price competition, it was increasing its market share in Britain amid a strong growth in demand for its products and services, while keeping a tight control on prices.
But inland telephone call turnover was virtually unchanged at 4.874 billion pounds.
BT said price cuts in the year amounted to more than 800 million pounds -- nearly six percent of its 14.9 billion pound turnover.
A strengthening pound also hit BT's international call sales. Together with a 14 percent price cut in the year, international turnover fell 8.6 percent, BT said. ($ = 0.608 British Pounds)
