British broadcaster Carlton Communications Plc on Wednesday reported an 11 percent rise in half-year earnings helped by a strong growth in advertising revenue.
Carlton, which operates ITV commercial television licences for London weekday TV, the English Midlands and the west of England, raised pre-tax profits to 158.6 million pounds ($262.5 million) from 143.3 million after a one-off loss of around 4.0 million pounds.
Lifting half-year dividend by 12 percent to 4.9 pence and sending the company's shares jumping, chairman Michael Green pledged that the group would continue to invest in businesses -- and boost prospects.
"We have maintained our clear focus, built up our market leading positions and enhanced both our profitability and our prospects for future growth," he said in the results statement.
"We will continue to build on this approach and make sure Carlton makes the best of its excellent prospects."
The results helped restore some enthusiasm in Carlton's shares, which have been underperforming the market by around 15 percent in the last three months. By mid-morning, the stock leapt 18.5 pence to 517.5p.
Carlton, whose library boasts over 7,500 hours of TV programmes including almost 1,000 films, said its core broadcast business was one of the main drivers behind profits, seeing a 19 percent rise on the operating level to 72.6 million pounds.
An 11 percent rise in advertising revenues, higher programme sales and a 5.2 million pound trading contribution from newly acquired businesses such as Westcountry TV helped boost earnings.
Robert Jolliffe, media analyst at ABN AMRO Hoare Govett, is forecasting unchanged full-year pretax profits of 343 million pounds and said the performance of some of Carlton's divisions -- such as its products arm -- had been "extraordinarily strong" at the half-way stage.
"Carlton airtime sales continue to dominate ITV. They've seen good market share gains and a strong London market -- so they've done very well in the first half," he added.
Carlton's share of ITV's advertising revenue edged up to 32.58 percent from 31.75 percent while telecoms, financial services and airline groups raised advertising spend in a battle to win new clients and keep old ones.
But some brokers, such as BZW, are warning that the advertising revenue outlook over the next four to five years in Britain should be questioned against a background of increasing competition, analysts say.
Another highlight in Carlton's results was its fast-growing Quantel division, which designs and manufactures tapeless editing and broadcasting systems for the film and television industry worldwide.
Operating profits leapt 28 percent to 26.2 million pounds, fulfilling expectations of rapid growth. Some analysts expect new product launches to feed through into the bottom line in the next 12-18 months.
But Carlton's video division cast a pall over results, with operating profits slipping to 36.2 million pounds on 12 percent lower turnover of 242.4 million.
Chairman Green blamed the slow start to the year on the timing of releases and variations in the mix of the business, but added that he was optimistic about making progress in the second half.
Analysts are awaiting news on whether Carlton and its partners in British Digital Broadcasting (BDB) have been awarded key digital terrestrial TV licences in Britain.
Carlton in January joined rival TV giant Granada Group Plc and Rupert Murdoch's dominant pay-per-view broadcaster British Sky Broadcasting Group Plc to form the formidable BDB.
BDB wants to offer some 15 subscription channels. The group faces competition from Digital Television Network (DTN), owned by Nasdaq-listed NTL Inc -- but in what has been dubbed a classic case of David versus Goliath, most analysts tip BDB as the winner.
Carlton, which has a cash pile of 166 million pounds, said it expected the Independent Television Commission watchdog to award the licence by the end of June.
"Digital terrestrial television brings enormous opportunities to Carlton," Green stated.
($ = 0.604 British Pounds)
