One 2 One, the British mobile telephone company jointly-owned by Cable and Wireless Plc and U S West Inc, said on Thursday that it was not in talks about joining Cable and Wireless Communications.
Analysts have speculated that the digital cellular company may join CWC, Britain's biggest telephone and television cable company formed by the merger of C&amp;W's Mercury 'phone unit with the three British cable divisions of NYNEX Corp, Bell Cablemedia Plc.
Such a deal would involve U S West selling its 50 percent stake in One 2 One, because the U.S. company is also a major shareholder in CWC's main cable rival -- Telewest Communications Plc.
But One 2 One's managing director Jan Peters told reporters at a business briefing: "There are no plans to do that and no negotiations to do that."
Peters said both investors were "very committed" to One 2 One, adding that the cellular company could reap synergies from striking distribution, marketing and packaging deals with both CWC and Telewest, which would not involve any structural changes to the companies.
Other future joint deals might also involve CWC or Telewest buying airtime from One 2 One and using it for their own packages and brands.
"We're working with both of them, looking at the options," Peters said.
One 2 One -- which has shown marked recovery from a lack of network coverage and what critics described as poor marketing -- was unveiling four, new customer packages designed to expand its business by broadening its appeal.
Available from June 3, the new "time plan" deals -- called One 2 Weekend, One 2 30, One 2 100 and One 2 200 -- offer either up to 200 minutes of free voice, fax or data calls nationally or unlimited free weekend local calls.
Monthly service charges from 17.50 stg for One 2 Weekend to 40 stg for One 2 200 compare favourably with similar packages offered by rivals Cellnet Orange Plc and Vodafone Group Plc.
But Peters said the new launches were not part of a new price war in an increasingly competitive market, but rather a move to improve packaging to reduce customer confusion amid a myriad of different package offerings.
One 2 One, one of Britain's newest cellular operators that was launched in September 1993, has won 620,000 customers and captured around 8.8 percent of the national mobile market.
The company, which has doubled year-on-year growth and revenues, said key annualised revenues per subscriber were tracking rivals at around 420 stg compared to Orange's 442 stg, Cellnet's 474 stg and Vodafone's 542.
Total capital expenditure of 970 million stg is planned to March 1998 and national coverage should be boosted from a current 85 percent to 95 percent of the population by the end of this year.
One 2 One's losses widenden to 276 million stg last year as it rolled out its network. But the company said it was on track to break-even on the operating cash level in 1998.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 7987
