Vodafone Group, Britain's biggest mobile telephone group, raised headline annual profits by 13.5 percent on Tuesday and said it was plotting to overhaul its distribution strategy to kick-start sluggish market growth.
Vodafone, which boasts more than four million customers worldwide, lifted pre-tax profits to 539 million pounds ($880.8 million) -- the top-end of analyst expectations -- including gains from disposals.
Turnover grew 25 percent to 1.749 billion pounds and dividends rose 20 percent to 4.81p.
A maiden operating profit from its international operations of 10.5 million pounds helped boost profits and analysts expect overseas investments to take up the reins of future group earnings amid increasing competition and price cuts at home.
Vodafone's chief executive Chris Gent told Reuters in an interview that subscriber growth in Britian was likely to continue to slow this year -- and Vodafone might cut tariffs next year to help attract new customers.
Vodafone last reduced tariffs around two years ago. But since then, its biggest purely digital rival -- Orange Plc -- has rolled out its network and the smallest operator in Britain, One 2 One, will also soon have a national network.
"I can see it (price cuts) happening again in the summer or autumn of 1998," Gent said.
Vodafone also plans to unveil new distribution plans next month, including rationalising its 12 brands under one or two names and introducing a unified billing system to help win fresh subscribers, Gent told Reuters.
One 2 One, jointly owned by Britain's Cable and Wireless Plc and U S West Inc, highlighted cut-throat competition in the market by repackaging tariffs last month -- and prompted concerns that Britain is ripe for a rash of price cuts.
Mobile telephone penetration is currently stuck around 13 percent in Britain, compared to around five percent in France, 7.5 percent in Germany and the Netherlands -- and a hefty 29 percent in Sweden.
Gent, who is hoping that British penetration will rise to 15 percent next year, expects the group to win only 350,000 to 400,000 net new subscribers this year, a touch lower than last year's 415,000 level.
"I suspect this year will be similar to last year -- perhaps a little bit down but not much," he said, adding: "I believe we'll see accelerated growth in the UK once we get beyond 15 percent penetration."
Last year already saw subscriber growth levels fall  34 percent from 1995/96 levels. Analysts note that Finland, which has almost three times the British penetration levels, is growing faster in a quarter than Britain did in the whole of last year.
But broker SBC Warburg adds: "In our view, renewed growth is a question of 'when' rather than 'if'."
Gent puts down unenthusiastic growth to fewer incentives to win customers and a high level of churn -- when subscribers end contracts -- while customers migrate from its older analogue network to its digital services.
Vodafone has around 1.3 million customers on its analogue network and some 1.6 million digital subscribers.
The company saw its market share slip 1.5 percent to 40 percent and the key average revenue per subscriber figure -- the amount of profit the company makes on each of its customers -- fell to 427 pounds from 481 pounds.
Vodafone is now growing faster internationally than in Britain and Gent expects 650,000 new customers to take up its international affiliates' services this year.
Brokers Lehman Brothers expects overseas interests to contribute 279 million pounds by 1999/2000 -- and analysts expect Vodafone's shares, trading unchanged at 271.5p on Tuesday -- to start reflecting this value over the next nine months.
Although Vodafone said it was not actively seeking new licences, it will consider acquisition opportunities.
The company said it was "very likely" to exercise its option to raise its holding in SFR, France's second network operator, to 20 percent this year. ($ = 0.611 British Pounds)
