Psion Plc, the British hand-held computer company, saw its shares plummet by almost one fifth on Monday as a slowdown in sales overshadowed the launch of a key new product it said was "light years" ahead of its rivals.
The shares dived to close at to 407.5p, a loss of 97.5p or 19.2 percent, having hit an earlier low of 400p. Some analysts said the stock, which was also hit by concerns over the continued strength of sterling, could fall to as little as 350p over the next six months.
Psion, which launched the first handheld Organiser 13 years ago, said its new chequebook-sized Series 5 product was the first fully-functional, pen-orientated, portable computer that fits into a hand -- driving palmtop computing into the 21st Century.
But chairman David Potter conceded that the group's performance would be affected until the new 32-bit computers had become established.
The statement was interpreted by some analysts as a potential profit warning.
"It's not inconceivable that Psion could earn less profit this year than last year," warned Keith Woolcock, analyst at brokers Merrill Lynch.
The strength of sterling had knocked about three percentage points off gross margins and with the promise of a new product, sales of older computers had turned sluggish as customers held out for the new machines, analysts noted.
"The new machines will not be in a position to be sold in volumes before the autumn -- so Psion is going to have a big problem," Woolcock noted.
The problem Psion faces is a familiar one.
The company saw its profits fall in 1984, before it was floated, when it launched its Organiser and struggled to switch from one big selling product to another.
But Woolcock said that while over-optimism ahead of the launch may have driven shares up too high, in terms of sophistication, the new computer was not in the same "corner of the universe" as those of its competitors.
While rivals such as Microsoft Corp were introducing chaos into Psion's market, such a computer giant would only become a serious threat in one or two years, he added.
"The upside is that Psion can come through this," Woolcock said. "We know that they now have some new partners...they have a great product, a good brand name and if Psion can position itself as an antidote to the blandness which Microsoft's products seem to represent -- it's got a great future," he said.
Psion, which said it was initially selling 10,000 of the new computers each month, hopes to boost sales to nearly 40,000 by September or October.
Potter told reporters in a telephone conference call that the new computer, which is compatible with Microsoft office products, Lotus Smartsuite and Corel/Wordperfect, was expected to account for nearly 40-50 percent of annual turnover by next year.
Two models in the Series 5 range -- the 8MB and the 4MB, which are being retailed at 499.95 pounds ($817) and 439.95 pounds respectively -- will be available in 50 countries and eight languages. ($ = 0.612 British Pounds)
