A tough price review of British Gas Plc by industry regulator Clare Spottiswoode has heralded a new era for Britain's utility watchdogs as they at last show their teeth, analysts said on Wednesday.
Sector watchdogs have borne the brunt of derision and mockery over several years while lucrative utility companies' shares surged, apparently unruffled by regulatory price curbs.
Last March, electricity regulator Stephen Littlechild was even forced to reopen a price review on the 12 cash-rich electricity companies, having been embarrassed by the firms' largesse to their investors as they fended off hostile bids.
"It does look like regulators aren't going to have the wool pulled over their eyes any longer," said one analyst who declined to be named.
"They're quite astute these days and they are getting pretty wise to these companies."
Consumers, regulators say, will now feel more of the benefits of the controversial privatisation of Britain's gas, water and electricity industries.
Spottiswoode went some way on Wednesday towards meeting British Gas's objections to her earlier proposal of a maximum 28 percent cut in the prices charged by TransCo, the British Gas pipeline subsidiary, when she suggested a 20 percent one-off reduction in its charges.
But analysts said Spottiswoode had already set a new agenda with her initial proposals in May that sent gas shares plunging.
Two subsequent reviews by the power watchdog on Northern Ireland Electricity and National Grid, the power transmission network, have mirrored her unrelenting stance.
"I see May 13 as being a landmark date in terms of regulation," said Nigel Hawkins, utilities analyst at Yamaichi.
"That day we saw the first regulator being fairly savage on a company and, above all, actually saying that if you're heavily cash-negative from year to year -- so be it."
Despite British Gas's continued insistence that the planned Transco price curbs could cost the group 10,000 jobs, Spottiswoode's final proposals do show that there is scope during the consultation period to moderate positions.
Consumers will nevertheless see gas bills fall by 30 pounds ($46.44) next year, rising to 50 pounds in 2001.
There has also already been a 50 pound reduction in bills this year when electricity companies passed on to consumers the money they received from the sale of their National Grid shares.
To the outrage of British Gas, Spottiswoode initially proposed a one-off cut of 20-28 percent followed by annual price reductions at a rate of five percent below inflation per year.
She now wants Transco to cut prices by only 2.5 percent annually after the first big chop. Some analysts see the group's revenues being reined in by about 400 million pounds per year.
"She's been more lenient than some had expected, but I still think it's a very tough review," noted one analyst.
Littlechild is proposing cutting the Grid's prices by between 20 and 26 percent next year, followed by a cut in annual prices of four percentage points below inflation.
His final proposals will be published in September and until then, the company will be locked in last-minute battles with its regulator.
The Grid may see its revenues slashed by about 1.2 billion pounds over four years. But with transmission costs only accounting for seven percent of bills, electricity consumers may get between four and five pounds off annual bills.
Northern Ireland Electricity will see 60 million pounds wiped from its revenues. Average household power bills will fall by about 40 pounds in Northern Ireland.
Despite the concessions, British Gas still strongly opposes the way its regulator has written down the value of TransCo.
So the prospect of a Monopolies and Mergers Commission investigation may still loom. ($1=.6460 Pound)
