Urgent calls for a global regulatory framework to help combat the risk of crime in the borderless world of the Internet computer network were stepped up on Wednesday by a high-level think tank.
The Centre for the Study of Financial Innovation (CSFI) said that without effective regulation, the Internet could generate a wave of financial scandals, undermine national regulation of financial markets and leave consumers without effective protection.
But in what it called the most comprehensive study make on the potential impact of the Internet on the financial services industry, the Finance Ministry and Bank of England-backed CSFI said the Internet also offered vast opportunities to financial services.
The computer network offered an "intensely low-cost distribution medium" -- up to 10 times lower than others -- CSFI director Andrew Hilton told Reuters television.
The CSFI also warned against paranoia, noting that objective information about crime in cyberspace was still scarce.
The extensive use of cryptography -- encoding data, establishing its authenticity and preventing its undetected modification and unauthorised use -- also meant business in cyberspace was more secure than giving a credit card number to a store over the telephone.
The CSFI also suggested a "kitemark" to identify regulated firms on the Internet, a greater use of "firewalls" or "sheep dips" -- anti virus programmes for automatically blocking intruders and for seeking out those who have gained access to unauthorised data -- and tighter security procedures imposed on staff.
"The biggest vulnerability of all is negligence," the report said.  But without the proper infrastructure, financial services over the Internet could fizzle out.
Hilton conceded that banks, brokers and even exchanges could go out of business as new players emerged with no "legacy" costs sunk in bricks and mortar.
But he added: "It could happen. But I think it would be wrong to say it will happen because many of these institutions will also be the beneficiaries of the Internet.
"They are quick, they can adapt and effectively dominate this new medium. But they do have legacy systems and these are costs they are carrying that a new entrant might not have," he said.
But with the prospect of a global market, the concepts of local regulation might also quickly become outmoded -- as might the notion of a service being provided from one place.
"The movement towards a global marketplace would logically point to a movement to global regulation," said Andrew Large, the chairman of Britain's top financial watchdog the Securities and Investment Board, in a foreword to the report.
"Whether, or how quickly, this might happen is not clear," he added.
Regulators could attempt the difficult task of  maintaining local jurisdictional control by imposing requirements focing firms to limit access to Web sites.
They could also recognise standards of regulation which allow authorised financial services firms to offer services in any other jurisdiction, Large suggested.
The report, the product of eight working groups of over 120 people from 70 institutions, said that traditional financial service providers, particularly banks, could play a major role in promoting consumer confidence in the Internet.
Insitutions are the service providers and are in a position to supply the payments infrastructure for electronic commerce and underpin its credibility.
"For financial service companies, the Internet poses a threat, but also a major new business opportunity," the CSFI said.
