A plan by disgruntled French luxury goods group LVMH to spin off the brewing, food and burger businesses in a planned merger between Guinness Plc and Grand Metropolitan Plc is winning some analysts' sympathy.
But Bernard Arnault, the chairman of LVMH Moet Hennessy Louis Vuitton, smarting from having been sidelined in a proposed 23.8 billion pound ($39.2 billion) merger despite his 14.2 percent Guinness stake, has taken the market by surprise.
In two share raids he has snapped up a 6.29 percent stake in GrandMet and spent around 800 million pounds in an effort to leverage a better negotiating position, analysts said on Friday.
He is now the largest shareholder in both of the hopeful merger partners.
A merger between the two British giants to form a new group called GMG Brands brings together an empire stretching from Johnnie Walker and Bell's whisky, Gordon's Gin, Smirnoff Vodka, and Guinness' traditional stount to the Burger King fast food chain, Haagen Dazs ice-cream and Green giant canned vegetables.
Despite some concerns that a hurried sale of unrelated businesses might not get the best or prices, most analysts expect GMG Brands to eventually spin off at least Burger King -- which one said stuck out like a "sore thumb".
"The fact is GrandMet has a spirits and food business together and there isn't any clear logical fit," noted one analyst, who declined to be named. "So perhaps on that basis it would seem sensible to spin it off."
Analysts said the added value in the planned merger, which is awaiting European and U.S. regulatory clearance, was clearly in the spirits division.
But the food businesses are also more than mere chicken feed. Excluding Burger King, they could be worth 5.0-6.0 billion pounds -- on conservative estimates, some said. And that cash could be spent in emerging markets in an earnings enhancing way.
"I think there is added value putting the sprits divisions together," noted another analyst. "By spinning off the other pieces, LVMH...wants to capture as much of that extra value for its own shareholders as it possibly can."
Separately, credit rating agency Standard &amp; Poor's  on Friday placed its 'A-1'-plus commercial paper rating of LVMH Moet Hennessy Louis Vuitton (LVMH) on CreditWatch with negative implications following announcement of LVMH's increased stake in GrandMet and its intention to exercise its option to purchase the 34 percent stake in Moet Hennessy owned by Guinness PLC.
S&amp;P said the acquisitions would place further pressure on the French company's existing financial profile, which had already been stretched in 1996 by the purchase of a 61 percent stake in Duty Free Shopping.
It said the move also reflected uncertainties regarding the possibility that LVMH may further increase its stake in GrandMet to obtain a blocking position regarding the proposed Guinness merger.
While Arnault piles up his bargaining chips amid mounting speculation that he may raise his GrandMet stake to 10 percent, U.S. competition authorities requested more information on the planned merger.
The European Commission, which has until 2200 GMT to decide whether to conduct a second-stage probe, is expected to follow suit.
In the meantime, Arnault can convene an extraordinary general meeting if he raises his stake to 10 percent, and put his views to shareholders and the board.
But in order to block the bid, he needs more than 24 percent of GrandMet shares.
While analysts and the companies are braced for LVMH's next move, few believe it realistic to expect the French company to buy such a large stake despite its threats. Such a move would push the price up too high, only to fall back significantly once the bid was blocked, they said.
"I don't think that's a viable strategy," noted one.
While GrandMet was holed up in a meeting and unavailable to comment, Guinness said only that as far as it was concerned, it was pressing ahead with the merger.
"We are confident it will go through at the end of the year and we're watching the developments with interest," a company spokesman said.
By 1210 GMT, GrandMet shares were trading at 598p, a loss of 5-1/2p, while Guinness stock slipped 6-1/2p to 598-1/2p.
--London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717 ($ = 0.607 British Pounds)
