B.A.T Industries Plc said on Monday that its U.S. subsidiary would pay $1.7 billion as its share of a downpayment on a landmark deal between the tobacco industry, legislators and public health authorities.
Amid concern that thorough scrutiny awaits a  controversial U.S. proposal under which tobacco groups could pay $358 billion over 25 years, B.A.T said it might withdraw its support for the deal if it were significantly changed during the legislative process.
B.A.T, whose Brown &amp; Williamson (B&amp;W) unit is the third largest cigarette-maker in the U.S. with brands such as Kent and Lucky Strike, saw its shares slump to close 22.5p weaker at 566.5p.
But most analysts said the deal was broadly positive, and some said the shares could eventually climb to 670p.
Under the agreement, the tobacco industry has accepted tougher regulation on both their products and advertising in return for immunity from big legal claims.
However individual claims can still be brought, albeit under significant restrictions including no claim for punitive damages.
Tobacco companies have also been forced to concede that tobacco is addictive and the money raised by the levy will be used to pay for treating smoking-related illnesses.
Although few analysts said they were surprised at the broad details of the deal, Mark Duffy, tobacco analyst at SBC Warburg, said the settlement was tougher than the market had been originally expecting.
"The share price is valuing (B.A.T's) U.S. tobacco business at nil -- and given that most future cash flows of that business will be going to the U.S. government, then that's how it should be valued," he said.
The deal has so far only been struck with U.S. state attorneys, plaintiff's lawyers and public health representatives and still needs to win the approval of the U.S. Congress.
B.A.T welcomed an end to financial uncertainty which has been dogging the industry amid the threat of escalating legal claims by victims of smoking-related diseases such as lung cancer.
"Although B&amp;W remains confident that it would ultimately win these cases, B.A.T's shareholders and B&amp;W's employees should benefit from the removal of financial uncertainty and its replacement with a greater degree of financial predictability," the group stated.
The irony of the settlement, according to Duffy, is that the tobacco industry had agreed to a settlement at a time when its recent track record in court was good.
But other analysts welcomed the settlement, saying that although cigarette prices would have to be raised significantly to pass the costs onto consumers, chunky payments by the industry to ward off its foes had been expected.
"Obviously volumes will go down, but that's what we're used to seeing in the UK...but the industry's profits still go up -- although by not very much," noted Nick Bunker, analyst at HSBC James Capel.
"I think fair value (for B.A.Ts shares) is somewhere around 650-670p.
But he warned: "It'll take time. There will be a lot of uncertainty as we go through the whole Congressional process and lots of days when people will panic a bit when it looks like things are going badly."
Some analysts said they expected B.A.T to turn its attention now to a demerger of its tobacco and insurance businesses in an effort to boost shareholder value.
Simon Willis, analyst at Charterhouse Tilney, said he thought a demerger more likely when B.A.T was trading nearer five pounds rather than six.
Shares in Britain's biggest cigarette manufacturers Imperial Tobacco Group Plc and Gallaher Group, which are facing a string of law suits by lung cancer victims, were also sharply lower on Monday.
Imperial closed at 393.5p, a loss of 13.5p, and shares in Gallaher Group Plc, Britain's biggest cigarette maker, ended 19.5p weaker at 280.5p.
