Shares in Carlton Communications and Granada surged on Tuesday after Britain's two biggest commercial television groups were awarded three key licences to operate multi- channel digital terrestrial TV in the country.
Pay television giant BSkyB, which had been the third member of the consortium called British Digital Broadcasting, was told by the industry regulator to sell its 33 percent stake because of competition concerns.
Carlton and Granada, whose shares rose 10p to 526.5p and 13p to 848.5p respectively, will buy out BSkyB's one-third stake and become joint owners of the new company.
BSkyB, whose largest shareholder is media tycoon Rupert Murdoch's News Corp Ltd, wields effective control over pay TV. It will still provide programmes such as its top movie and sports channels for the group for 75 million pounds ($125.1 million).
However, telecoms watchdog Oftel said it had warned  the Independent Television Commission (ITC) regulator, which awarded the new licences, against allowing BSkyB to provide programmes.
"According to (our) analysis, the participation of BSkyB either as a consortium member or as a long term supplier of certain pay TV services, in particular sports programming, raised substantial competition concerns in the pay TV network and conditional access market," it said.
British Digital Broadcasting, which beat a rival bid  to operate the licences from Digital Television Network, owned by America's cable and broadcast group NTL Inc, said it was a great day for British television.
"For British television, going digital ranks alongside the change from black-and-white to colour," said Michael Green, the chairman of British Digital Broadcasting (BDB).
"Digital means more choice for viewers. You will be able to receive extra free and subscription television channels through your existing aerial and television. No dish. No cable."
As both bidders for digital terrestrial licences had made it "abundantly clear" that they had wanted all three, the ITC said it had awarded them all to BDB because it had given more assurances than its rival that proposed services could be established and maintained.
BDB, which hopes to be profitable in around five years, plans to pump 300 million pounds into the venture to build the infrastructure, get its technology in place and its programmes organised.
Some analysts say BSkyB stands to gain more from providing the programmes for BDB than being an equity partner. The move into digital broadcasting is the next step in the development of BSkyB, which has grown into one of Britain's most successful companies.
But the group has seen its shares dive over the last week on reports that it would be forced to sell its BDB stake and by the loss of top executives.
On Tuesday, the shares hit a new year low of 452p after a report that soccer clubs were mulling their own TV service when their deal with the pay-tv giant ends in 2001.
The Financial Times said a consultants' report had advised the soccer Premier League that its 670 million pound, four-year deal with BSkyB, which has been crucial in attracting customers to BSkyB's satellite services, represents only half the value of the TV rights.
BSkyB plans to launch 200-channel digital satellite TV in Britain next year.
In comparison, digital terrestrial television, which Britain is pioneering and which involves transmitting digital signals from land-based transmitters to standard roof-top aerials, offers only up to 30 channels.
BDB says that although only 25 percent of homes in Britain pay for extra TV channels, it has research which shows that a "very large number" of homes would like extra choice, would be prepared to pay for it and would like to receive a service without having to install a dish or lay a cable.
With a pocket calculator-sized decoder which plugs into TV sets, viewers will receive current terrestrial channels -- BBC1, BBC2, ITV, Channel 4 and Channel 5 -- as well as additional channels such as a free 24-hour news service from the BBC.
A joint venture between the BBC and cable group Flextech Plc will also initially provide four new subscription channels. ($ = 0.599 British Pounds)
