Diversified British leisure company First Leisure Corp Plc said on Tuesday first half profits slipped five percent and warned that early second half trading was not as good as expected.
The group, which operates nightclubs, fitness centres and bingo clubs, said pre-tax profits in the six months to end-April fell to 17.2 million pounds ($28.7 million) on turnover of 88.8 million pounds.
Although profits were at the top-end of expectations, a negative trading statement which noted that its ailing bingo hall division was still not improving, sent the group's shares falling 17.5 pence to 318.5p as some analysts scaled back full year profit forecasts.
An interim dividend of 2.64p per share was also below expectations of 2.7-2.75p.
"The results were a bit disappointing," said one leisure analyst at a leading brokerage. "We will have to look at our estimates again."
First Leisure, which blamed some good weather in May for keeping customers out of its indoor leisure businesses, said its bingo hall division remained its top priority and it pledged innovations to win back consumers in the next year.
Chairman Michael Grade admitted that the group had made operational mistakes in the past. But he told reporters that, with a new management team at the division, the group should be able to turn it around.
Grade joined the company in January after quitting as chief executive at Channel 4.
"I don't believe there is any evidence to suggest that the British public has given up playing Bingo," he said. "Bingo is the second biggest leisure activity after angling in the country. We're not getting our share of it...we got it wrong operationally."
First Leisure, which has a 100 million pound development programme in place, says there is plenty of growth in its dancing and sports divisions -- both in the family entertainment centres and health and fitness operation.
But the group said it had underestimated its competitors' response when it came into the bingo market. Amid little evidence of a consumer boom, Grade noted lottery scratch cards had also taken their toll on market share.
Although Grade declined to be specific, he said the group had to give the restructuring time to effect a turn-around.
"I don't want to put a time frame on it," he told a telephone conference call. "All I would say is that I am not known for having unlimited patience and I'm watching the situation very carefully indeed."
The group's bingo halls saw comparable sales in the first half fall 25 percent as fewer people were attracted, and traded at a loss of 1.3 million pounds after pre-opening costs and administration charges.
At current trading levels, the business is expected to report a flat result for the second half. First Leisure plans to complete an initial development programme of 20 new generation bingo halls in 1997/98.
Grade declined to comment on market talk that First Leisure might be taken over by a company such as leisure company Rank Group Plc.
"This is a very independent business. It thrives on being independent and I intend to keep it that way," he said. "I'm here for the long term."
