Britain's Independent Television Commission (ITC) watchdog said on Wednesday it had every confidence in its decision to award three key licences to run digital terrestrial television despite a possible legal challenge.
Digital Television Network (DTN), which is owned by American cable and broadcasting group NTL Inc, says it might seek legal redress and challenge the ITC's decision on Tuesday to award the licences to its rival British Digital Broadcasting (BDB) consortium.
But an ITC spokeswoman said: "We are always ready to defend our decisions in a judicial review. But this is really a matter for DTN to decide."
BDB is jointly owned by Britain's biggest commercial television groups, Carlton Communications Plc and Granada Group Plc. Pay-TV giant British Sky Broadcasting Group Plc will be the main programme supplier.
The ITC conceded that DTN's programme plans for the digital era were more innovative than those of BDB. But they tended to appeal more to a niche audience than BDB's suggested diet of mainly popular Sky movies and sport.
The ITC emphasised that there were other criteria in choosing a winner, such as ensuring the success and promotion of digital terrestrial TV.
"Taking all the criteria as a whole, BDB had the stronger package," a spokeswoman said.
Digital terrestrial television, which is likely to be launched in Britain next year, will allow customers to receive up to 30 channels broadcast from conventional transmitters to domestic aerials.
BSkyB, which has enjoyed a near-monopoly position in the British subscription television market, supplies popular sports and movies to both cable and satellite services. It also plans to launch 200-channel digital satellite services next year.
Analysts and lawyers contacted on Wednesday thought  any attempt to seek legal redress would have at best a slim chance of success.
"I think on balance I wouldn't expect this to succeed," said one corporate lawyer. "But any litigation is pretty unpredictable. The weakness in any case is that the ITC has clearly appreciated the difficulty and taken steps as they have seen it to meet that."
The ITC has asked BSkyB to drop its plans to take a 33 percent BDB stake -- which Carlton and Granada are now buying for 75 million pounds ($125.1 million) -- on competition grounds.
DTN, meanwhile, is still seeking legal advice.
"We're still considering our options ranging from doing nothing at all to...either a judicial review or discussions with other bodies. We haven't come down in any way on any decision," a spokesman said.
But he welcomed the advice given to the ITC by the telecommunications watchdog, Oftel, that awarding the licences to BDB might be anti-competitive.
Oftel director general Don Cruickshank had warned the ITC that allowing BSkyB to be either an equity partner or a long-term supplier of pay-TV programmes raised "substantial competition concerns".
In the meantime, Oftel is inviting views from all interest parties on its general competition analysis so it can use the comments in other cases.
"The way we are analysing the effects of one adjacent market on another is of extreme relevance to the markets we regulate," a spokeswoman said.
She added that the decision to award the licences to BDB despite Oftel's advice was a matter for the ITC.
"We're bound to look at competition issues but they look at much wider issues," she said. "We can give our advice -- but that's as far as we go." ($ = 0.599 British Pounds)
