British commercial TV giant Granada Group on Wednesday tabled a formal 711 million pound ($1.2 billion) agreed bid for its neighbour Yorkshire-Tyne Tees Television although some shareholders remained opposed the price.
(corrects dollar conversion).
Yorkshire Tyne-Tees Chairman Ward Thomas called on institutional investor Mercury Asset Management to rethink its opposition to the 11.75 pound per share bid, which he said was a good price.
"I hope on reflection they will come into line," he told Reuters in an interview, adding that any speculation that a counter bidder may offer a higher price might well be "just poppycock".
MAM, who Thomas said had been the most vocal opponent of the takeover price, declined to comment amid speculation that it had bought some of its five percent Yorkshire stake at 13 pounds a share.
Thomas said he had received no indication from United News &amp; Media Plc about how the company would vote its 14 percent Yorkshire stake amid talk that managing director Clive Hollick may launch a counter bid.
"I've no idea whether Clive Hollick will or not," said Ward. "But I would have thought his target is much more likely to be HTV Group Plc.
"But if he does, well the shareholders will be happy and MAM will be right and I will be wrong."
Granada, which already owns 27 percent of Yorkshire, is offering two new Granada shares and 1,825.32 pence in cash for every three Yorkshire shares -- an offer Thomas said he had agreed to by telephone while on a holiday in the South of France just over two weeks ago.
The companies said that Yorkshire would pay an interim dividend of 7.5 pence.
Thomas said in the offer statement that although Yorkshire had fully recovered from problems that beset it in 1993 -- when it plunged into the red and its share price collapsed to around 1.20 pounds -- it was operating in an increasingly competitive market.
"As a result, your board now believes that a combination with the Granada broadcasting business is in the best interest of shareholders and will safeguard the future of Yorkshire and Tyne Tees Television and their ability to provide for the areas they serve," he said.
Shares in Yorkshire-Tyne Tees traded were slightly firmer after a sobering trading statement limited gains, rising 2.5p to 1,157.5p having earlier scaled to a high of 11.70 pounds.
"What's hurting the (Yorkshire) shares is its trading statement...It's a pretty damning indictment of what's happening," said one analyst who asked not to be named.
Yorkshire said it expected a disappointing second quarter, citing lower-than-expected growth in ITV advertising revenue and a failure to increase market share.
The statement also said the company believed total advertising revenue growing for commercial television ITV would show only minimal growth during the first half of 1997. It blamed the slowdown on the launch of a new channel and industry-wide weakness.
Granada chairman Gerry Robinson remained unperturbed, and said the two companies' existing airtime and international programme sales arrangements provided a solid foundation for a merger.
"We believe that the strategic arguments in favour of the combination are both powerful and widely accepted," he said.
Granada, whose interests span broadcasting, leisure, hotels and catering, owns the independent television (ITV) franchise for north-west England, which is adjacent to Yorkshire's area.
The deal will need regulatory approval, and Robinson said earlier this month he believed it would take some two months to complete even if everything went smoothly. ($ = 0.599 British Pounds)
