Imperial Tobacco Group will split from conglomerate Hanson Plc on Oct. 1 as one of the most efficient players in its sector, but while its new chief talks of export-led growth, the outlook is clouded by the threat of litigation against tobacco firms.
Imperial is Britain's second-biggest tobacco firm after B.A.T Industries. Its brands include Embassy, John Player Special and Superkings cigarettes as well as Panama and Castella cigars.
It is one of four arms of the mighty Hanson conglomerate being spun off into separate companies.
In the 10 years since Hanson took over Imperial, it has slashed costs, cut its brands to 33 from 150 and raised productivity by 195 percent. Its 1995 profits were 348 million pounds ($538.9 million) on 3.6 billion ($5.6 billion) of sales.
But analysts fear that despite Imperial's impressive track record, its shares could face a rough ride once listed in London.
This week saw tobacco stocks hit by a backlash in the United States, with fresh litigation plus tough new curbs from President Clinton to regulate the industry.
So far, BAT Industries has borne the brunt. But some analysts believe it is only a matter of time before the U.S. scenario widens its impact and is repeated across the Atlantic.
"If it happens in the United States, it's subsequently followed in other countries," said Zafar Khan, analyst at Societe Generale Strauss Turnbull.
"Imperial could have been a ripe international takeover candidate. But the litigation threat means a group buying a tobacco company would have a tough time selling the idea to shareholders now," he said.
UBS analysts agree that the threat of legal action is enough to dampen the company's outlook.
But they warn of another possible dampener on the stock when Imperial starts trading -- its heavy reliance on Britain, largely seen as a mature market. Britain accounts for 87 percent of profits, say analysts.
Imperial has already committed itself to overseas expansion, but there are fears it will have a tough time muscling in on the U.S. giants, which have already made inroads into the markets of tomorrow - India, China and the Far East.
Gareth Davis, Imperial's chief executive, told the London-based Evening Standard newspaper earlier this week that he believed the group would continue to build up exports to Europe and the Asia-Pacific region.
"Worldwide this industry is buoyant," he said.
