Two of the biggest names in the British motor industry, Rover and Vauxhall, kicked off the British International Motor Show on Tuesday by unveiling big new investments to fuel their drive for more exports.
Rover, owned by Germany's BMW, said it planned to launch a new four-wheel drive "baby Land Rover" to take on Japanese rivals in Britain and world export markets.
The new vehicle, due to go on sale in 1998, is part of Rover's rolling 3.0 billion pound ($4.75 billion) investment programme.
Rover will in addition inject 3.5 billion pounds of new business into the components industry. This will go mainly to British firms and safeguard tens of thousands of jobs at Rover and its supplier firms.
Vauxhall, owned by General Motors of the United States.S., also guaranteed 4,200 existing jobs at its Ellesmere Port complex in northwest England with the announcement of a 300 million pound investment to modernise the plant.
Efforts by both companies to gear up to expand foreign sales come as the British market is witnessing sluggish sales, with most growth stemming from sales to company car fleets.
The Birmingham-based motor show, following the recent Paris showcase, saw motor companies banging the sales drum, seeking to gloss over their problems with glitz and new gizmos to tempt customers into buying. But exports remain key.
Rover's new chief executive, Dr Walter Hasselkus, said: "The baby Land Rover is very much an export product," adding that he hoped its export sales would account for 70 percent of production and boost sales in 1998.
Vauxhall Motors chairman and managing director Nick Reilly said while the British and European markets remained difficult, he saw opportunities for sales of the five-year old Astra model to grow quite significantly in Asia Pacific and Latin America.
Most industry leaders agree that Europe is likely to remain a cut-throat place to do business, with over-capacity squeezing margins.
Ian McAllister, head of Ford Motors in Britain, told Reuters that the six percent growth levels seen in Europe was distorted by factors like discounting and the French government offering incentives for customers to buy new cars.
Some analysts put underlying European growth as low as two percent, after stripping out factors like those cited by Ford.
McAllister blamed poor consumer interest in Britain on the "feeling-not-so-good" factor and predicted no turnaround until consumers were cured of their recessionary hangover.
The Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders industry group admitted that a turnaround depended on persuading "Joe Public to visit showrooms" again and the first test is tomorrow when the show opens to consumers. ($1=.6317 Pound)
