Wickes Plc, the British Do-It-Yourself retailer rocked by accounting irregularities this summer, said on Wednesday the first cost was a 51 million pounds ($80.84 million) write-off for which its ex-chairman accepted responsibility.
The retailer said the problems had resulted in profits being overstated by 51 million pounds ($80.8 million) over recent years and that amount will be wiped off shareholder funds.
The restatement of the accounts will result in a reduction of 26 million pounds in operating profit for 1995, 14 million pounds for 1994 and 11 million pounds for earlier years.
Profits for 1995 will also be hit by a two million pounds charge against shareholder funds relating to European businesses and a 10 million pounds charge stemming from property interests.
But the cost does not end there. Finance director Bill Hoskins, brought in after the purge which saw former chairman and chief executive Henry Sweetbaum resign, told Reuters he expected another one-off charge against 1996 results.
This relates to restructuring and the costs of the investigation into the accounting problems uncovered in June. Hoskins told Reuters: "Taking the two together, the cost won't be tens of millions, but around 10 million."
The company will now undergo a refinancing rights issue. Hoskin said 30 million pounds would be "a good starting point" and be used to cut gearing (the debt-to-equity ratio) which remains "pretty horrid."
The new chairman Michael von Brentano said in a letter to shareholders his predecessor Sweetbaum accepted "ultimate responsibility" and would repay his 1.2 million pounds in bonus payments including tax.
Former finance director Trefor Llewellyn has agreed to repay his 485,000 pounds bonus for 1995.
The group is seeking a new chief executive and said it also intends to strengthen non-executive representation on its board.
Disciplinary action has been taken against two Wickes directors with responsibility for the buying department, both of whom have resigned. Further action against other middle ranking executives and more junior employees will be taken in due course, the company said.
Wickes will replace auditors Arthur Andersen once the work is completed on revisions, but it reserved the right to take action against it.
"I appreciate that much of what I have written will be very disappointing to you," von Brentano's letter said. "But now my principal concern is to secure the company's future, define the appropriate cost base and reassert the group's market strengths," he said.
Hoskins also spoke of a new start, telling Reuters "We want to make a clear distinction between the past and the future. It is essential that we draw a line in the sand."
But the path to profitability still looks rocky. Nick Bubb, analyst at MeesPierson said there were two disappointments: "The company is losing money this year, admittedly partly because of large exceptional items, and the fact that the debt is as high as it is at 65 million pounds - that is a big increase and I can see why a rights issue is needed."
But he added that 30 million pounds was seen as the bare minimum. This would cut gearing to just 70 percent. "It may need to raise as much as 40 or 50 million and that won't be easy," said Bubb.
Wickes shares remain suspended at 69 pence, frozen at that level since the problems were uncovered in June. They will not resume trading until early 1997. ($1=.6309 Pound)
