Wickes Plc, the British Do-It-Yourself retailer hit by accounting irregularities that led to an overstating of profits, said on Wednesday its ex-chairman had accepted responsibility and the cost would be a 51 million pounds write-off.
The retailer said the problems had resulted in profits being overstated by 51 million pounds ($80.8 million) over recent years and that amount would be written off shareholder funds.
Restatement of the accounts will result in a reduction of 26 million pounds in operating profit for 1995, 14 million pounds for 1994 and 11 million pounds for earlier years.
Profits for 1995 will also be hit by a two million pounds charge against shareholder funds relating to European businesses and a 10 million pounds charge stemming from property interests.
In a letter to shareholders, new chairman Michael von Brentano said the group had recorded an operating loss for the nine months so far this year but pledged that its objective was a return to profits in 1997.
"A new business plan...will be finalised once the negotiations with suppliers are substantially complete. This provides for a substantial reduction in costs, improved marketing initiatives and efficient administrative procedures," he said.
Wickes also plans a refinancing involving a rights issue of new shares to restore its gearing to a "more suitable level". Group net debt averaged 65 million in the second half of the year.
Wickes said it would not seek a relisting of its shares, which were suspended in June, until the new rights shares were issued. A prospectus in connection with the issue was expected to be issued in December, with the new shares being issued following shareholder approval in early 1997.
"I appreciate that much of what I have written will be very disappointing to you," he said. "But now my principal concern is to secure the company's future, define the appropriate cost base and reassert the group's market strengths."
Von Brentano said his predecessor, Henry Sweetbaum, who resigned in June, had now accepted "ultimate responsibility" for overstating profits.
Sweetbaum will repay 1.2 million pounds in bonus payments, including tax, and former finance director Trefor Llewellyn has agreed to repay his 485,000 pounds bonus for 1995.
The group is seeking a new chief executive and said it also intended to strengthen non-executive representation on its board.
Disciplinary action has been taken against two Wickes directors with responsibility for the buying department, both of whom have resigned. Further action will be taken against other middle ranking executives and more junior employees.
The news ends months of waiting for shareholders which saw the shares in limbo at 69 pence after suspension, compared with a year high of 142.
The chairman said it was now important to look to the future and offered some good news, saying that sales in the Wickes stores had been up 8.9 percent on a comparable-store basis in the third quarter, recovering from a 9.7 percent slump seen in the first three months of the year. ($1=.6309 Pound)
