Wickes Plc, the Do-It-Yourself retailer hit by accounting discrepencies dating back five years, told Reuters on Wednesday it planned another one-off charge against 1996 results of around 10 million stg.
The charge will relate to restructuring and the costs of the investigation into the accounting problems revealed in June. Finance director Bill Hoskins told Reuters in an interview: "Taking the two together, the cost won't be tens of millions, but around 10 million." He also said that under plans for a rights issue 30 million stg would be "a good starting point."  
The charge cited by the finance chief will be in addition to charges announced by the chairman Michael von Brentano earlier on Wednesday.
Von Brentano had said there would be a 51 million stg write-off against shareholder funds to cover the profit overstatements for recent years, due to misleading accounting.
There is also a separate 10 million stg charge relating to property interests.
Wickes said it planned to explore all avenues to boost its finances before going to shareholders, with a 30 million cash call seen as possible.  
Details of the refinancing are due in December, said Wickes, when it will reveal more about how it plans to turn the group round to profitability by 1997.
Hoskins described the current level of gearing as "pretty horrid." Net debt has averaged at 65 million in the second half.
Talking about the timetable for change, he said "Hopefully the plans will be approved in January and the share relisting will be in early 1997."
Shares are currently suspended, frozen at 69 pence.
The company aims to cut costs and "establish a proper cost base" to make its accounting transparent in the future.
Hoskins concluded that the company wanted to make a clean break from its past troubles. "We want to make a clear distinction between the past and the future. It is essential that we draw a line in the sand and where we have to face up to our responsibilities we will."
The chairman told Reuters "We're in negotiations with all our suppliers and we hope our negotiations will be concluded by the end of the month."
He added that next year would start with a clean slate, with no more charges expected.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
