Japanese car giant Nissan Motor Co is expected to make a decision on whether to go ahead with building a new medium-sized vehicle for the European market in spring 1997, according to the head of its UK operations.
Ian Gibson, managing director of Nissan Motor UK and vice-president of Nissan Europe, said in an interview with Reuters he would be presenting his plan to the Nissan board in Tokyo next spring.
But he added that the investment size, design details and production were yet to be thrashed out. Gibson said it was still an open verdict on whether the plan would go ahead.
Speaking from the British Internaitonal Motor Show in Birmingham, he said the new car would be between its small Micra and larger Primera, based on the Almeira model which is currently manufactured in Japan and shipped to Europe.
"If we build the car in Europe, the design and develoment is purely for a model destined for Europe, not one that has to include a number of viewpoints for world export."
"We will do it from scratch if it goes ahead," said Gibson.
But he added that if the decision is given the go-ahead next year it would mean moving up to 100,000 units of capacity from Japan into Europe.
"The question is what opportunities are there for Japan to use that excess capacity for something else?"
Gibson said this was part of the equation in the decision but refused to outline what options the Japan headquarters were looking at in terms of "new models and new markets."
If Nissan does decide to build the new model in Europe it would be manufactured in the UK or Spain.
Gibson was circumspect about the cost of developing and putting the new model on sale, saying "I can't see it happening for less than 200 million (stg). But that's the absolute minimum.
He refused to cite a top end figure, but separately spoke of the general industry cost of building and marketing a new vehicle, estimating it at between one and three billion stg.
On Nissan's European sales for 1996, Gibson said there would be a modest rise, predicting three percent sales growth for 1997.
