UK building bosses and health insiders have warned of dying confidence in privately financed health projects, unless there is rapid acceleration in the number of contracts awarded in the next few months.
This industry crisis of confidence comes ahead of Monday's annual Private Finance Panel conference on Monday, which will be addressed by the Chancellor of the Exchequer Kenneth Clarke and health secretary Stephen Dorrell.  
This week the government provided a glimmer of hope, however, giving the go-ahead to a 280 million pounds east London hospital project won by a venture led by AMEC Plc.
But of all the problems in the Conservative government's flagship private finance initiative (PFI) -- aimed at attracting private sector cash for public infrastructure projects -- health has proved to be the biggest headache of all.
The Treasury set Health Secretary Stephen Dorrell a target of 500 million pounds of projects by April.  
The likelihood of that target being reached looked slim until this week, when the government sought to temporarily silence its critics with its announcement of the first major private finance health project -- the east London hospital.
Before that, building firms and National Health Service (NHS) leaders had been apportioning blame for delays on each other and the government as it tried to referee both sides.
British junior health minister John Horam defended his department's record in a recent interview with Reuters.  
"We are confident of getting 500 million pounds by April. If we are able to bring in a 170 million project and a 30 million one in the next few months then we are almost there," he said.
But some construction industry leaders remain downbeat, privately hinting the biggest players in the business will shun future projects for fear of tying up further millions in a sector which is taking too long to deliver the goods.
"I've heard that around 20 companies are not going to go forward with new bids," one industry leader said.
Also, some leading National Health Service (NHS) figures have questioned the value of the policy itself.  
Gordon Best, a leading adviser to chief executives of NHS Trusts told Reuters the policy was "a dead duck" in health and said the government would have to push one or two schemes through just to "save face." He said PFI had resulted in projects which the NHS could not afford and failed its needs.
Another construction industry leader summed up the crisis of confidence among builders: "Companies are frustrated with the whole negotiating approach -- I wouldn't say it should be abandoned but the whole process needs radical surgery."
Graham Watts, chief executive of the Construction Industry Council was also pessimistic.  
"The big companies have basically had enough. They've spent a lot of money so far and there is resentment that they're being used to pioneer a system which is not working at a time when an industry is still locked in recession."
PFI has been very slow getting off the ground, both due to red tape and having the Treasury as an "out-of-the-room negotiator' for many of the projects, industry sources said.
Business has been feeding through in other sectors like roads and prisons, but health has proved slow to take off.  
One positive factor is that PFI does have the backing of the opposition Labour Party, so industry figures are talking to Labour about their problems. A general election is due by May 1997, with Labour currently leading in opinion polls.
In the meantime, the health sector problems remain. Another issue dogging confidence in the building sector is the fear that building firms could be saddled with liabilities if an NHS Trust defaults on repayments over the 30-year term.
But minister Horam told Reuters the government had changed the law to underwrite that risk. "This is one reason why these projects have taken so long. We got Royal Assent on this in June and it makes that commitment inescapable."
He dimissed claims of disillusion: "The big boys are competing in PFI. No single project has been left without a bidder."
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
