British building group AMEC Plc said on Friday it was exploring a possible investment in France's Spie Batignolle's electrical and construction businesses with the aim of widening its international exposure.
AMEC said it had been in talks with Spie management about taking an unquantified minority stake which could be raised to a majority stake from the current parent group Schneider SA.
If clinched, the deal would create a major European player with around five billion pounds ($7.9 billion) in sales, with 40 percent exposure in Britain, 30 percent in France and the rest worldwide.
Peter Mason, AMEC's chief executive, told Reuters: "One important concept is that there is little overlap between the two groups."
He admitted that AMEC's possible greater exposure to France came as the market was suffering from very tough conditions but he said that AMEC was "buying at the bottom, not at the top" and foresaw a turnaround.
The new deal could act as a springboard for AMEC into new markets including oil and gas and pharmaceuticals and new regions including Indonesia, Latin America and South Africa, Mason said.
At present 70 percent of its sales are in Britain.
Mason told Reuters that the two parties were at the due diligence stage and expected more details by November, with completion in December.
The initial stake will be funded from AMEC's existing cash reserves and will give it access to Spie's international network of regional bases offering partnership opportunities on a cost-efficient basis.
The decision to raise the stake to a majority holding would be taken in "a number of years' time and I'm not talking one or two years".
AMEC and Spie management envisage a possible flotation of the French operation.
"There will be negotiations between the management and us on how much we will retain and what to float. It will also depend on the state of the (stock) market at the time," the AMEC chief said.
"I have been most impressed with Spie's management team and the progress they have made in revitalising Spie," he added.
Spie has 28,000 employees and operates in 290 locations. In its 1995 results after restructuring it reported turnover of 17 billion francs ($3.26 billion) and an operating profit of 34 million francs. ($1=.6298 Pound) ($1=5.211 French Franc)
