British building materials company Wolseley Plc reported a one percent slip in year pretax profits on Tuesday, but despite topping analysts' forecasts in a tough market shares slid on the poor outlook for mainland Europe.
Pretax profits for the year ended July 31 fell to 242.9 million pounds ($387 million) from 245.4 million. But sales rose to 4.31 billion from 3.78 billion pounds and the dividend was raised to 10.35 pence from 9.80 last year.
The fallback in profits had been flagged in a profit warning earlier this year.
But Wolseley survived the difficult conditions better than others partly thanks to its lower European exposure. The group has 50 percent of its sales in the U.S.
Chairman Richard Ireland reported organic sales growth across all three divisions blaming the lower profits on "poor economic conditions in mainland Europe and volatile lumber prices in the U.S."
"The results for 1996 should be set against the background of economic difficulties in France and Austria and a flat home (UK) market," he said.
But in an interview with Reuters chief financial controller Stephen Webster said "I do not see an upturn in the next 12 months in France, Austria or Germany."
He denied it would seriously dampen profits this coming year, explaining that conditions remain stable.
The UK market showed a glimmer of recovery, with spending on repair and maintenance of homes moving ahead.
But Webster said the housebuilding sector had seen companies using up existing stock so there has been little feed-through to companies like Wolseley. He predicted it would be spring before the industry felt the benefits.
The finance chief also expressed concern about the threat of an interest rate hike in the U.S. "A half a percent would not be a big deal but one percent could damage confidence."
The caution in all its markets was enough to push shares lower. By 1045 GMT they were down 13 pence at 494.
The new chief executive John Young did not signal any departure from the group's existing strategy.
But Webster signalled the possibility of some change "We are keen to keep the good things. If anything it may mean a change of style. "But there are no sacred cows in Wolseley. We will take difficult decisions if needed."
Young said in the interim statement he wanted to look to expansion into new regions and products. With gearing at a low 7.7 percent, there is scope to raise it to around 30 percent if a big acquisition comes along, said Webster.
$1=.6270 Pound)
