Britain's second biggest bus company Cowie Group said on Thursday it had been approached by a defence vehicle manufacturer about forming a leasing joint venture targeting clients including the Ministry of Defence.
Cowie told Reuters that the tentative approach was made this year and added it was open to considering new options for business.
But the bus and vehicle leasing giant played down a report by The Times newspaper which said the firm was pitching specifically to buy and lease battle tanks, saying such a move was "highly speculative at this stage."
Cowie conceded, however, that it had received an approach to form a leasing venture for military transportation equipment.
Robert Blower, a Cowie spokesman, told Reuters: "A UK defence equipment supplier has approached us. Their idea was for Cowie to come in as player in the consortium, with our leasing expertise. We will assess each new idea on its merit."
He said any move into military vehicles would have to be cleared with shareholders first, "...for ethical as well as commercial reasons," he said.
On the subject of leasing out frontline tanks, Cowie was more cautious, admitting that there had been "No talks with the MOD. But it has said that under PFI (private finance initiative) there aren't any no-go areas," said Blower.
The PFI scheme, applied across all government departments, aims to bring private cash into public spending projects including the option of the government leasing equipment. But an MOD spokesman was highly sceptical. Asked whether the MOD would put out a PFI project for tank leasing, he said
"Emphatically not. In broad terms the PFI rules nothing out and nothing in. Cowie has won a contract (with us) for forklift trucks and that is not. There is nothing else on the cards, let alone tanks."
Cowie announced on Wednesday it had won a material handling equipment leasing contract with the MOD.
Tank and transportation equipment manufacturers like Vickers Plc were sceptical about reports of expanding leasing to military vehicles.
A Vickers spokeswoman told Reuters it did not approach Cowie and described the idea of leasing battle tanks as "fairly off the wall. Leasing trucks is one things, but a battle tank is quite another," she said.
But GKN was more circumspect. Asked whether it had approached anyone about the idea of forming a leasing venture to supply the MOD or other markets, a spokeswoman said "There are no discussions at this stage."
U.S. giants have already caught onto the concept, with world leaders like Lockheed Martin and McDonald Douglas exploring the possibility of leasing military aircraft to Eastern European countries.
At 1159 GMT Cowie shares were down nearly two pence at 372-3/4p in a generally weaker British stock market.
