Millennium Chemicals, to be spun off from the mighty Hanson conglomerate in an October flotation, has already had to rebuff would-be suitors, chief executive of the soon-to-be independent company said on Tuesday.
William Landuyt, who is also chairman of Millennium, also unveiled his strategic blueprint in an interview with Reuters, including plans for a share buyback by 2000 after cutting debt and implementing post-demerger investment plans.
Millennium had 1995 sales of two billion pounds ($3.12 billion) and profits of 588 million pounds.
"We are not a dividend yield stock. We are a growth company," Landuyt said, warning investors of a tight dividend policy.
The demerger of Hanson Plc will create four companies - Millennium, Imperial Tobacco, Energy Group and the rump building firm which will retain the famous Hanson name.
As investors await details of the float of the first two divisions - Millennium and Imperial - Landuyt said there had been takeover interest in all four companies including his own empire.
"We've had interest for every business in Hanson." He said "expressions of interest" included those for whole divisions as well as individual companies within each of the four divisions to be floated off.
Millennium itself received approaches for all three of its units - Quantum, SCM and Glidco. All approaches were rebuffed.
Hanson's chemicals arm had been widely tipped as a takeover candidate by analysts in recent months, but Hanson's group share price recently took a hit after it was revealed that Millennium had built in a "poison pill" to deter predators.
The move led to a downgrading in the Hanson break-up value by analysts including BZW which pared back to 193 from 207 pence per share. The market valuation range spreads from 150 pence to 200 pence per share. Hanson's shares stand at 162 1/4, up 2 3/4 pence.
One analyst said of the poison pill episode "It was quite disgusting. Here is a predatory company which has spoken out against such tactics and has installed a poison pill itself."
But Landuyt said it was vital to prevent a predator buying up shares on the cheap and launching an undervalued bid.
"We do expect selling pressure (for Millennium shares) for at least the first six months. We don't want a temporary drop in the share price to allow someone to get a commanding position and launch a bid which does not offer full value."
Under law in the U.S. state of Delaware, a company gaining a 15 percent stake in Millennium would see those shares become worthless. They would carry no vote or liquidation value unless the board had been approached first.
But the poison pill clause ends after one year, said the chemicals company chief, freeing the way for a possible bid.
Another factor which has damped Millennium's core valuation has been poor trading which has dogged the chemicals market leading to plant closures and asset writedowns of $60 million at SCM. Landuyt said that a further $15 million charge still had to be levied.
He said the impact on trading profits would be neutral and also said signs of an uptick remain.
He expected SCM to be able to make its October price increases stick after heavy destocking by customers.
Quantum's recently reported improvement in pricing and demand also continues, he said.
($1=.6415 Pound)
