All four Hanson companies - due to be spun off as part of the demerger process - had received takeover approaches for part or all of the units in the chemicals, tobacco, building and energy sectors.
William Landuyt, chairman and chief executive of Millennium Chemicals and a Hanson group board member, told Reuters in an interview on Tuesday "We've had interest for every business in Hanson." He said the "expressions of interest" included possible offers for whole divisions as well as individual companies within each of the four divisions to be floated separately.  
Landuyt, who will head up the U.S. chemicals giant Millennium which had 1995 sales of more than two billion stg and 588 million stg in operating profit, told Reuters his own empire had received approaches for all three of its units - Quantum, SCM and Glidco.
But he said that the board had decided against pursuing any of the approaches.
Landuyt also defended Millennium's decision to incorporate a so-called "poison pill" clause to protect it from a hostile takeover. He said it was necessary to prevent a predator buying up shares on the cheap and launching an undervalued bid.  
"We do expect selling pressure (for Millennium shares) for at least the first six months," said Landuyt who predicted selling pressure from UK investors.
"We don't want a temporary drop in the shareprice to allow someone to get a commanding position and launch a bid which does not offer full value."
He said the poison-pill arrangement, which under law in the U.S. state of Delaware means that a company gaining a 15 percent stake in Millennium would see those shares become worthless. They would carry no vote or liquidation value unless the board had been approached first.  
However, the poison pill clause ends after one year, said the chemicals company chief, freeing the way for a possible bid.
He said if a full-value bid was launched before then, the board would be under a duty to examine it.
-- London newsroom +44 171 5427717
