Imperial Tobacco Group Plc, fresh from its demerger from Hanson Plc in October, said on Monday it was capable of cutting back debt levels and investing in further export growth as a dual policy.
Gareth Davis, chief executive, told Reuters in an interview that the two could be achieved "in parallel" because of the group's strong cash generation. In particular, Davis revealed Imperial was in talks with a Japanese company about entering the market for the first time. He also said the group would keep open the option of a share buyback in the future.  
Imperial inherited around 1.1 billion stg of debt as its legacy from the Hanson family break-up. But Davis said this did not hamper the group's plans to seek distribution deals or joint ventures in the overseas cigarette markets and possibly examine small acquisition deals in the fragmented cigar market.
He added that if an important larger-sized acquisition opportunity came up he would be prepared to raise debt levels, but for the moment "the priority is to get it down. Our situation, our ability to generate cash means we can do things in parallel - pay down debt and pay for acquisitions...Bolt-on acquisitions are more likely in the cigar area," he added.  
On the Japanese market in particular, Davis told Reuters "We are looking to do something in Japan. We are actively considering this. In one way or another we will establish a presence in that market," admitting that talks were underway with one party.
But he sought to reassure shareholders that Imperial would not squander its sound financial inheritance in its bid to catch up in the overseas field. "In our international expansion plans I would not dream of being a balance sheet wrecker," he said. If Imperial failed to find the right deals, it would be prepared to conside other options to return value, he said.  
If a possible acquisition fails to offer sufficient rates of return "we would say: what would a share buyback do to enhance shareholder value, rather than a potential acquisition?"
"A buyback is something we'd never rule out. Given our cash flow characteristics people tend to say "What are you going to do with all that cash.'"
Imperial reports its first set of results since the Hanson demerger on December 5 when it will give a trading update of the first few months since its split.
Davis said he expected the UK market to continue to decline at around 2 percent next year.  
But the international business, accounting for 17 percent of profits in the first eight months of the year, s expected to show continued rapid growth.
"I would be very disappointed if it wasn't 25 percent by 2,000." The last two years have seen overseas sales double, but Davis drew the line at hitting his target by 1997.
"That would be overstating it (our confidence). But the signs are the business is showing strong growth."
Despite his caution, Davis has said that the company has already clinched a deal with unions to add a third shift from May 1997 which has the potential to raise capacity at its Nottingham factory  by one third.
Imperial says if a number of overseas deals start feeding through it will be ready to meet the surge in demand.
The third shift could, in theory, raise Imperial's total cigarette production to 53 billion from the existing 37 billion mark.
--London newsroom +44 171 5427717
