Environmental warfare has broken out across the British construction industry, striking some of the biggest corporations as activists give up peaceful protests and seek to hit builders where it hurts -- in their profit margins.
Described by one British company as "eco-terrorism," it is seen as the new business risk of the 1990s.
Famous names like Tarmac Plc, Costain Group Plc and ARC, a unit of the conglomerate Hanson Plc, have all been targeted.
Activist groups are no longer seen by British companies as harmless, badly organised groups of students and hippies.
"You only have to see them in action at protests," said David Harding, a spokesman for ARC, a unit of Hanson which supplies construction materials.
"They walk around with mobile phones and camera equipment, they communicate and gather support for demos via the Internet -- we're talking about a highly sophisticated organisation."
One road protester, using the code name Steady Eddie, told the construction journal Building earlier this year: "If it comes down to full-scale economic warfare, we will aim to drive them out of business."
In addition to financial threats, companies say that "terror" tactics are used by the activists.
Costain's contract to build the controversial Newbury bypass, which runs through a conservation area, has led to violent protests delaying building. There have also been bomb threats, staff intimidation and picketing of Chief Executive Alan Lovell's home.
A Costain spokesman told Reuters: "We've had all sorts of protests at the head office and the chief executive's house. But it's when it gets to the (employee) families -- that it goes across the line."
Tactics used by some underground groups, including the cryptic Berkshire Wood Elves, which distributes leaflets with instructions on homemade explosives, are now the subject of a police investigation.
Larger activist groups include Earth First, The Land is Ours, Alarm UK and Road Alert.
The groups have targeted specific projects like the Newbury bypass and the M3 highway through Twyford Down in the southern county of Hampshire.
But they are also campaigning on broader issue such as stopping the government road-building programme and stopping out-of-town superstores, which they say create more traffic and pollution and damage local communities.
The government has slashed its road-building spending, but it has been seen primarily as economic rather than environmental, although protests may have contributed to the decision.
Graham Watts, chief executive of the Construction Industry Council, said, "I don't think many firms involved in tendering (bidding) for sensitive projects realise the impact environmental activity has on the cost of running a project.
"But they are more alert than they were three-four years ago. There's no doubt it's a big issue now."
He says the damage comes in two forms: "Tangible -- in the form of extra costs, additional security, threats to staff and the more intangible -- damage caused by negative publicity."
Watts said the cost of protesting can be heavy once the company is locked into a contract.
"I do often hear on the industry circuit of tales where the company tenders at low margins and the demonstrations which follow means they are running the project at a loss."
ARC says it's not just contractors in the front line that are affected but also suppliers like itself.
Its own quarries came under attack after it emerged that it may be a supplier for the Newbury bypass.
"It was called the 'First Battle of the Newbury bypass'," said ARC's Harding.
"We had 300 Earth First protestors invade and occupy our site. Hundreds of thousands of pounds (dollars) of damage was done in one day. Plus, there was the knock-on cost of lost production and extra security in future."
Simon Brown, analyst at investment bank UBS, said this new phenomenon has led to a change in the way the industry evaluates project risk.
"When talking to Tarmac about the M3 link (through Twyford Down) they made it fairly clear that their risk assessment methods have been changed and now involve a very clear environmental risk analysis."
Harding says others have done the same. "As a result of eco-terrorism, we are looking at controversial jobs more closely to see if the profit margins are wide enough to cover things like extra security."
For an industry already suffering from razor-thin margins, overcapacity and stagnant demand, eco-terrorism is the latest bizarre twist in the construction sector's tale of woe.
