Imperial Tobacco Plc spelled out its blueprint for export growth this week, seeking to silence critics of its strategy who have contributed to driving down the shareprice by 17 percent since its Oct 1 demerger from Hanson Plc.
Imperial's chain-smoking chief executive, Gareth Davis, who joined the company after graduating from Sheffield University in 1972, told Reuters in an interview that investors should not under-estimate his determination to expand exports fast.
"Admittedly we were a late entrant to international markets. But that's because we had to get our costs licked," he said.
Getting costs licked helped make Imperial one of the most efficient players in its sector in the 10 years under Hanson's ownership, with productivity raised by 195 percent in a decade.
Davis sees it continuing to grow by eight to nine percent over the next four years, he said.
But recently Imperial has seen its shares slide, partly due to concerns that most of its profits (85 percent) stem from a shrinking British market. Analysts are asking how Imperial can invest in export growth while cutting back its sizable 1.1 billion pounds ($1.8 billion) in debt.
Natwest Markets and Credit Lyonnais issued sell notes on Imperial this month. But SBC Warburg said it was undervalued, citing its efficiency and greater attraction as a bid target over Gallaher, the American Brands UK unit due to be demerged.
Davis sought to answer the critics this week. "The priority is to get it (debt) down. Our situation, our ability to generate cash means we can do things in parallel -- pay down debt and pay for acquisitions." Bolt-on acquisitions are likely in cigars.
Expanding on his growth plans, he said "We have already grown profits with little dilution of margins. Our strategy to grow is very much a multi-pronged route.
"We roll out our American brand success in France to Germany and Spain as well. We continue to follow the Brits into key holiday and work markets abroad. Keep developing the hand rolling product, seek bolt-on acquisitions and develop in selected emerging markets."
He said these key markets in Asia and China already had a preference for the Virginia style of cigarette, a plain unflavoured tobacco variety which is Imperial's strength.
"We're not a Philip Morris or B.A.T(BATS.L. We're not a major global player and we don't see this as a head-on collision. These markets are so massive that even developing a small part of it will have a big impact on our profits."
The company has already set up a base in Hong Kong, with a senior marketing recruit from Marlboro cigarettes. It is establishing four bases in China and has a technical co-operation agreement with China's state tobacco company.
It is focused on developing in Taiwan, South Korea, Malaysia and Indonesia. "More specifically, the group is in talks with one party in Japan about entering that market for the first time. This deal is likely to be a distribution agreement."
The group said it will seek joint ventures and distribution deals in these emerging markets.
Imperial is already gearing up to cope with a possible surge in production at its Nottingham plant in Britain.
Company bosses clinched a deal with unions to add a third shift from May onwards, which could allow capacity to be raised by one third to 53 billion cigarettes from 37 billion.
Davis has pledged shareholder value through expansion. But if cash builds up and there are no buying opportunities the company will consider a share buy back.
Imperial's boss is sanguine about the roller coaster ride for its shareprice since demerger. Its strong debut lit up the tobacco sector, taking Imperial to a high of 438 pence per share. But it has since fallen back to 361 1/2 pence.
He cited "overheating in the first days, with rumours of a dawn raid (on shares) that never happened." He also cited some selling of shares by U.S. retail investors, but said the holdings were eventually soaked up by US institutions.
"There'll be a wee bit of volatility for a while longer," said Davis who sees a truer value at between 390 pence and 410.
($1=.6050 Pound)
