The story of Sea Launch sounds like the daring fiction of a Bond movie -- with corporate giants from Russia, the U.S., Norway and Ukraine joining forces to build the ultimate in space technology, firing satellite rockets into space from the Pacific Ocean.
The cost is 350 million pounds ($583.2 million), funded by a consortium of four firms, joining the East and West in a deal which claims it can undercut the cost of land-based launchers including the French-led Ariane, recently embarrassed by a rocket explosion, and Nasa of the U.S..
The lead Sea Launch investor is Boeing Commercial Space Co of the U.S., holding 40 percent, with  RSC-Energia of Russia taking a 25 percent slice, Norway's Kvaerner with 20 percent and  NPO-Yuzhnoye of the Ukraine holding 15 percent.
At a sneak preview in Norway on Thursday, Svein Johnsen, Sea Launch project manager from Kvaerner joked with Russian reporters that countries which had once built technology with the conflict in mind, were now united in their quest for profit.
"In the name of detente," he said.
Norway's Kvaerner is the prime contractor, building the mobile sea-borne rocket launch platform and the command ship.
It rescued the Ocean Odyssey oil rig which exploded in a fireball just after the 1988 Piper Alpha rig disaster.
Odyssey has since been stripped and reconstructed to become the floating rocket launcher which will operate under remote control from a specially built command ship.
The platform is nearing completion at Stavanger in Norway, with the command ship under construction and ready for launch next month at Govan in Scotland.
The first rocket launch will happen in June 1998. The rig and command ship will travel from the base in Long Island, California and travel to a site in the Pacific Ocean for blast off.
Satellites and rockets will be assembled on the ship for transfer to the platform which will be evacuated before lift-off.
The command ship will press the control button for firing the rocket at a distance of two or three miles. The 10,600 ton ship has the added protection of blast-proof safety glass at a cost of 2,000 pounds a pane.
The Russians will provide the Zenit rockets, chosen because they can be assembled horizontally on board the command ship.
Boeing will provide project management, marketing services and run the operation for lift-off.
Asked about the risk of explosion Johnsen says "The risk of explosion is very much related to this business. But we think that risk is very low. There are in-built safety features and it's a very sound operation from an insurance point of view."
Ignition to release of the rocket takes 4.6 seconds, with emissions from the rocket on take-off channelled sideways.
"If the emissions didn't go sideways, the pressure could shift the platform," he said, which weighs 23,000 tons.
Confidence in the system, a world-first, has been demonstrated by a rash of early contracts.
Hughes Space and Communications International Inc of Los Angeles, California has 10 launches signed. Space Systems/Lorel, also from California has five booked.
The groups involved have refused to comment on how much they will charge per launch or on potential profits, with Kvaerner's Johnson only stating that its slice will be "A good return on our investment."
It will be able to fire six to eight rockets a year. The idea was originally conceived by Boeing which had intended to fire satellites from a supertanker.
But the danger involved made the platform idea more appealing, allowing evacuation before blast off. ($ = 0.600 British Pounds)
