Britain's biggest builder Taylor Woodrow has finally got something to celebrate in 1996, its 75th anniversary year, reversing 1995's share slide to outpace the market and assuring investors that year results remain on track.
Colin Parsons, Taylor's chairman, told Reuters in an interview that the second half performance so far has been "exactly as we indicated in the half year statement," when he described the outlook as "encouraging."
Taylor's shares hit a high of 183 pence in September after those results, with profits up 81 percent at 25.4 million pounds ($42.37 million).
The shares have since edged off that five-year peak to 156 pence, but are still outperforming the Financial Times All Share index by 30 percent and the building and construction sector by 18 percent, according to Reuters Securities 3000 data.
The group has clawed its way back from a share price nadir of 53 pence in July 1991, in the depths of the building recession when the group's results slumped to a 66 million pounds loss.
Taylor Woodrow is probably most famous for its international contracting activities, with involvement in high-profile projects from the Channel Tunnel to the building of a light railway in Malaysia.
But contracting offers the lowest growth potential in future. Instead revenue growth will stem from housing and land development, property and the Greenham Trading unit in that order, with contracting lagging last.
Commenting on current trading,, Parsons said contracting remained very tough, citing in particular the expense of operating in the British Private Finance Initiative (PFI) market - aiming to get private money into public infrastructure projects.
"PFI remains a very expensive business - too expensive for an industry operating on a zero percent margin basis," he said.
The industry has often complained about the high bidding costs - sometimes running to millions of pounds and delays from red-tape adding to costs further. Parsons also says "It's not a question of allocating capital but whether we want to carry the risks associated with it."
Parsons says that does not mean Taylor Woodrow will bail out, but it will be selective. He adds that "overseas business is encouraging," however, offering higher-margin business.
Taylor Woodrow remains committed to its four-business strategy, with Parsons comparing it to "sitting on a chair instead of relying on the uncomfortable shooting stick of having one business. When the wind blows you know where you are on a chair."
He has refuted suggestions that it may bail out of constracting. But admits that money for acquisitions will be targeted at the other businesses.
Commenting on trading since the first half, Parsons said the UK housing market recovery "...has now spread into the new home market and is doing well in the second half. The first half was much slower."
"In Canada housing had a dreadful year in the worst market for 40 years, I believe."
"Australia seems to be one of the worst markets in living memory. It shows no improvement but it's happening at the same time as a relatively strong Australian economy.
He added "It will be well into next year before we see any improvement." The California and Florida markets were reported to be doing well, however.
The outlook for the group's results have brightened, with analysts' forecasts for pretax profits in the year ending 31 December 1996 seen at between 63 and 67 million, a rise of 41 percent on 1995 figures. For the year ending 1997, the forecasts range from 70 to 80 million, a rise of 16 percent.
Simon Brown, analyst at UBS said Taylor's performance turnaround was partly down to "swift and aggressive action to downsize contracting activities" into a single operation spanning Africa, Asia Pacific, Middle East and Europe.
"It's closed non-profit making areas and is now investing in areas where it can get a good return," he said. The residual contracting business remained a sound business.
UBS has the shares on hold. "It will move ahead but it will not outperform sharply," he said. ($1=.5994 Pound)
