Eurotunnel Plc, the Anglo-French Channel Tunnel operator, said on Tuesday that its traffic will be cut to one third of normal levels after a fire swept through one of its main tunnels on Monday night, injuring eight people.
Services have been terminated until the tunnel affected is cleared. A Eurotunnel spokesman in London said there was no fixed time for when services would resume or how long reduced capacity will operate once the tunnel is opened.
News of the fire and worries about the extent of damage and a resultant safety review hit Eurotunnel's shares in both London and Paris.
The fire is the latest issue to dog Eurotunnel's performance which has been plagued by negotiations to rejig nine billion pounds ($15 billion) in debt.
In London, Eurotunnel shares fell 3-1/2 pence to 88 pence while in Paris the stock was down around two percent at 7.68 francs per share. But trading in its debt was barely changed.
Commenting on the initial impact on traffic, a Eurotunnel spokesman in London said, "We will operate at one third of normal capacity and we will give priority to Eurostar (passenger) trains. But there will still be space for shuttle trains as well."
He did not say how many Eurostar or Le Shuttle trains would be cancelled as a result.
The Tunnel's operations were closed after a fire engulfed part of one of two tunnels, near to Calais where parties from France and Britain had been holding a safety conference.
The Eurotunnel spokesman said it did not yet know the full extent of damage to rolling stock or the tunnel itself or how much it could cost, but admitted it was a "very ferocious fire."
"It's quite messy down there. There will be damage to the overhead powerline cables, the heat will have buckled the steel rails and the carriages involved would be very badly damaged and may need to be replaced," he said.
The cost of a new train is 25 million pounds, but Eurotunnel did not think an entire train would need replacing. But Eurotunnel faces costs in repairing tunnel and rolling stock damage and may face compensation costs, possibly involving paying for customers to travel by ferry or air.
The company said at this stage that it does not know the cause of the fire. But unconfirmed media reports say the fire began in a truck carrying inflammable polystyrene.
The heavy goods vehicle shuttles are known to have partially open sides -- the safety of which had been questioned by the British fire brigade some years before.
Mike Frattini, fire officer and spokesman for the Kent Fire Brigade which helped put out the tunnel fire, said earlier: "Our chief officer warned the safety committee (for the tunnel) five years ago."
Fire fighters could raise this objection again as part of the investigation which will go to the Anglo-French Channel Tunnel Safety Authority.
If the current goods carriages are deemed to be hazardous in light of the accident there could be a call for changes, incurring further costs to Eurotunnel.
Eurotunnel's spokesman refused to comment on whether changes will need to be made to carriages, adding that "It is a key question."
The fire comes just before Christmas when the tunnel was expected to see a surge in holiday sales. But pre-holiday publicity now consists of media reports of choking people emerging from smoke and "blow-torch"-like heat.
Asked whether this would dampen customer demand, Eurotunnel said "We hope not. But what's happened has happened and how the fire was handled should renew confidence in our safety procedures," said the press officer.
One analyst at Natwest Securities said there should be little further impact on shares or consumer confidence.
Shares in cross-channel ferry operator P&amp;O were five pence higher at 602-1/2p.
($1=.5970 Pound)
