The British government on Tuesday said the design of Eurotunnel's freight trains would have to be scrutinised after a massive fire swept through one of its main tunnels, injuring eight people and causing wide damage.
British transport secretary Sir George Young told parliament he was sure the Anglo-French Channel Tunnel Safety Authority would look at the design aspects after warnings from British fire chiefs about the safety of the trains.
Any changes to the design of Eurotunnel carriages would be another costly blow to the Channel Tunnel operator which recently came back from the brink of bankruptcy after restructuring its nine billion pounds ($15 billion) in debt.
The fire, the first serious incident since the tunnel opened two years ago, halted services on Tuesday. Even if limited services resume on Wednesday, Eurotunnel warned that traffic capacity would be cut to one third of normal levels for an indefinite period.
The fire and worries about the extent of damage and a resultant safety review hit Eurotunnel shares.
In London, they closed down 4-1/2 pence at 87 pence while in Paris the stock dropped 1.28 percent to 7.65 francs per share. But trading in its debt was barely changed.
One freight customer TNT Express Worldwide said it would be relying more on ferries as a result of the fire.
Eurotunnel confirmed in a statement that 15 heavy goods vehicles and the rear locomotive had suffered "severe" damage.
The fire was reported to have started in a goods carriage carrying a truck holding flammable polystyrene but Eurotunnel said the cause had not yet been determined.
The goods vehicle shuttles have partially open sides - the safety of which had been questioned by the British fire brigade some years before.
Mike Frattini, fire officer and spokesman for the Kent Fire Brigade which helped put out the fire, told Reuters earlier: "Our chief officer warned the safety committee (for the tunnel) five years ago."
He suggested that fire fighters could raise this issue once again with the Channel Tunnel Safety Authority.
Eurotunnel's spokesman refused to comment on whether changes will need to be made to carriages, adding that: "It is a key question."
A spokesman for the Department of Transport told Reuters that past concerns about the safety of these carriages had led to Eurotunnel carrying out safety tests two years ago. "They were then approved in May 1994," he said.
Apart from possible safety changes, Eurotunnel faces other heavy costs.
The first is lost revenue due to reduced traffic. A Eurotunnel spokesman in London told Reuters "We will operate at one third of normal capacity and we will give priority to Eurostar (passenger) trains. But there will still be space for shuttle trains as well." He did not say how many Eurostar or Le Shuttle trains would be cancelled as a result of the fire.
Eurotunnel confirmed in a statement that 15 heavy goods vehicles and the rear locomotive had suffered "severe" damage. "It is a serious accident," chairman Patrick Ponsolle said.
A Eurotunnel spokesman said the cost of repairs was not yet known. "It's quite messy down there. There will be damage to the overhead powerline cables, the heat will have buckled the steel rails and the carriages involved would be very badly damaged and may need to be replaced," he said.
The cost of a new goods train is 25 million pounds, but Eurotunnel said it did not think an entire train would need replacing. It faces costs in repairing tunnel and rolling stock damage and may face compensation costs, possibly involving paying for customers to travel by ferry or air, although the company said it is heavily insured.
The fire comes just before Christmas when the tunnel was expecting a surge in holiday sales. But pre-holiday publicity now consists of media reports of choking people emerging from smoke and "blow-torch"-like heat.
Asked whether this would dampen customer demand, Eurotunnel said "We hope not. But what's happened has happened and how the fire was handled should renew confidence in our safety procedures," said the press officer. ($1=.5970 Pound)
