The story of Sea Launch sounds like the daring fiction of a James Bond movie -- with corporate giants from Russia, the United States, Norway and Ukraine joining forces to build the ultimate in space technology, firing satellite rockets into space from the Pacific Ocean.
The cost is 350 million pounds ($583.2 million), funded by a consortium of four companies, joining the East and West in a deal that claims it can undercut the cost of land-based launchers including the French-led Ariane, recently embarrassed by a rocket explosion, and NASA.
The lead Sea Launch investor is Boeing Co.'s Commercial Space division, holding 40 percent, with RSC-Energia of Russia taking a 25 percent slice, Norway's Kvaerner with 20 percent and NPO-Yuzhnoye of Ukraine holding 15 percent.
At a sneak preview in Norway recently, Svein Johnsen, Sea Launch project manager from Kvaerner, joked with Russian reporters that countries that had once built technology with conflict in mind were now united in their quest for profit.
"In the name of detente," he said.
Norway's Kvaerner is the prime contractor, building the mobile seaborne rocket launch platform and the command ship.
It rescued an off-shore oil rig, which had been severely damaged in a 1988 explosion, and rebuilt it to become a floating rocket launcher that will operate under remote control from a specially built command ship.
The platform is nearing completion at Stavanger in Norway, with the command ship under construction and ready for launch next month at Govan in Scotland.
The first rocket launch is scheduled for June 1998 from a site in the Pacific Ocean.
Satellites and rockets will be assembled on the ship for transfer to the platform, which will be evacuated before liftoff.
The command ship will press the control button for firing the rocket at a distance of two or three miles. The 10,600-ton ship has the added protection of blastproof safety glass.
The Russians will provide the Zenit rockets, chosen because they can be assembled horizontally on board the command ship.
Boeing will provide project management, marketing services and run the operation for liftoff.
Asked about the risk of explosion Johnsen said, "The risk of explosion is very much related to this business. But we think that risk is very low. There are built-in safety features and it's a very sound operation from an insurance point of view."
Ignition to release of the rocket takes 4.6 seconds, with emissions from the rocket on takeoff channelled sideways.
"If the emissions didn't go sideways, the pressure could shift the platform," he said, which weighs 23,000 tons.
Confidence in the system, a world-first, has been demonstrated by a rash of early contracts.
Hughes Space and Communications International Inc. of Los Angeles has 10 launches signed. Space Systems/Loral, also from California has five booked.
The groups involved have refused to comment on how much they will charge per launch or on potential profits, with Kvaerner's Johnson only stating that its slice will be "a good return on our investment."
It will be able to fire six to eight rockets a year. The idea was originally conceived by Boeing, which had intended to fire satellites from a supertanker.
But the danger involved made the platform idea more appealing, allowing evacuation before blastoff.
