Debt-laden Eurotunnel faced fresh financial pressure on Wednesday in the wake of the fire which swept through a main tunnel leaving a trail of damage, no running services and shaken consumer confidence.
Just one month after coming back from the brink of bankruptcy with a restructuring of nine billion pounds ($15 billion) of debt, the company faced uncertainy once again as one of its two rail tunnels remained shut pending a safety review.
Analysts said the modest fall in Eurotunnel shares since Monday's fire was about right, however, and few believed there would be long-term damage to customer confidence.
Eurotunnel has warned of reduced services for weeks ahead as repair work goes ahead and eats into revenues.
And one source close to Eurotunnel told Reuters that the cost of repairs may be heavier than first thought. "The cost will be millions (of pounds) and could get into double figures, it you consider the damage to the 15 wagons and a locomotive, plus severe tunnel damage."
He added that track sections may also need replacing after buckling in the intense heat.
While the tunnel remains shut, Eurotunnel is losing revenues at the rate of one million pounds a day. It also faces the cost of compensating passengers and tranferring them by air or ferry.
A Eurotunnel spokesman said all these costs should be covered by insurance, however.
"It will have very little impact," said one analyst. "Transport disasters are always newsworthy but the bad publicity will soon fade away. Eurotunnel will be financially damaged, but you have to look at it in relation to the nine billion of debt."
The ferries have been scooping up extra business from big freight customers like TNT, which said it would be using the ferries more as a result of the tunnel fire.
Andrew Darke, analyst at Williams de Broe, said "There's clearly going to be some emotional reaction, but I expect it to be short-lived. After all passenger numbers rose after the Herald of Free Enterprise (ferry) disaster nine years ago.
"Disasters don't stop people travelling. People still go shopping in London despite IRA bombs," he said.
Eurotunnel had around 45 percent of the cross-Channel ferry market before the fire -- a share won partly by waging a cut-throat price-war with the ferries, which have since proposed linking up to battle against their tunnel rival.
Swedish ferry giant Stena Line and P&amp;O agreed to merge in October and are awaiting clearance from competition bodies.
Darke said P&amp;O's chances of clearance had been boosted by the tunnel disaster. The verdict is due later this month.
"The government wants a viable alternative to the tunnel for emergencies like this. That means the ferry business has to be economically viable. So the fire has probably improved the chances of the merger being approved."
Last month Eurotunnel agreed a debt deal with its banks, giving them 45.5 percent of the company in return for wiping out one billion pounds of debt. The deal fixed and capped interest payments and the company said it would be unable to pay a dividend for 10 years as it uses cash flow to service its debt.
Some analysts, such as UBS, remain sceptical, pointing out that the tunnel's present cash flow of 150-200 million pounds per annum over its remaining 52-year concession to operate the tunnel comes in at six billion pounds, still well short of the total remaining debt.
Eurotunnel shares on Tuesday were at 86-1/2pence, down 1-1/2, compared to the 544 pence high touched on December 31 1993. In Paris, the shares were down 20 centimes at 7.5 francs.
($1=.5950 Pound)
