Drugs giant Glaxo Wellcome Plc bought the remaining 50 percent of its Japanese joint venture Nippon Glaxo for 354 million pounds ($596 million) on Thursday in its quest for growth in the world's second biggest market.
Analysts in London said they had long expected the buy-out of Japanese partner Shin Nihon Jitsugyo Co Ltd, which will also get a 7.7 million pounds (1.38 billion) payout in lieu of the 1996 dividend.
Nippon Glaxo develops, produces and markets prescription medicines across Japan and has net assets of 30.7 billion yen ($275.3 million), as valued on June 30. Its post-tax profit for the six months to June 30 was 2.5 billion yen.
After setting up a series of Japanese joint ventures since the early 1980s, Glaxo has moved to take them over in a bid to carve a share in Japan's lucrative marketplace, second only to the U.S. in terms of profitability and sales to the group.
Seven percent of Glaxo Wellcome's profits stem from Japan, which represents 20 percent of the world market itself.
One London-based pharmaceuticals analyst said: "The deal will be slightly earnings enhancing as it's financed by debt and Japanese interest rates are low at half a percent."
The move to take over ventures in Japan would allow the group to accelerate growth plans by launching new products there, including its new respiratory treatments for asthma and the new herpes treatment Valtrex which replaces Zovirax.
Another analyst agreed that Japan offered a notable expansion opportunity, saying: "It's obviously one of the leading growth markets for Glaxo."
But shares in Glaxo showed little response, falling a modest 3.5 pence to 950 in London.
Under the deal, Hiroshi Konishi, president of Nippon Glaxo, and Akira Konishi, vice-president and general manager, will give up these positions but remain members of Nippon Glaxo's board, Glaxo Wellcome said.
Nippon Glaxo had net assets at June 30 of 30.7 billion yen, or 180 million pounds. Its profits after tax for the six months ended June 30 were 2.5 billion yen.
($1=.5940 Pound)
($1=111.5 Yen)
