The UK construction industry expects to get the cold shoulder from the Chancellor of the Exchequer (Finance Minister)again this year, with industry leaders predicting continued cutbacks in infrastructure spending in next Tuesday's budget.
Building industry leaders say they expect no more than a few crumbs from Chancellor Kenneth Clarke next week and are forecasting even more pressure on roads spending, with some rumours that Clarke will take a further slice off the road budget this year.
"If ever there was going to be a budget with severe cuts, it's this one, which needs to make room for pre-election tax cuts," said Graham Watts, chief executive of industry lobby group the Construction Industry Council.
As far as the housing market goes, builders are unanimous in their call for no sharp shocks to disturb the market's equilibrium. That means steady inflation and interest rates, plus no more reduction in mortgage interest tax relief, groups like the Building Employers Federation say.
On the spending side, The British Road Federation, embracing builders, motor groups and oil companies, said the road budget had been cut by 25 percent in the last two years.
"We expect to see a further contraction by 200 million pounds ($337 million)," said Federation spokesman Mark Glover "It's already been cut for the last four years."
Spending on new roads and maintenance by government offshoot the Highways Agency was 2.04 billion pounds in 1994/95, falling to 1.75 billion pounds in 1995/96 and is expected to be down to 1.5 billion this financial year.
The forecast for the year 1997/98 is seen dipping again.
These cutbacks, plus reduced state investment in rail since privatisation, and the fact that hospitals are now under constrained regional budgets, have resulted in the building industry remaining in recession years after the rest of the economy moved into recovery, lobbyists claim.
Few industry leaders hope for a spending increase, but they would like to see a spending freeze at best.
The other issue on the construction industry's wish-list is for the Chancellor to break the log-jam holding up the private finance initiative (PFI) -- which aims to get private capital flowing into public sector projects.
The PFI has replaced a lot of fresh government spending, but the frequent hold-ups to project awards due to red-tape have
