Christian Salvesen moved to silence critics on Monday with plans to demerge its Aggreko business and make a 150 million pound ($253 million) special payout just months after shunning a 1.1 billion hostile bid.
Chris Masters, chief executive of the transport to services group, said his plans offered much better shareholder value than a rejected cash and paper bid from Hays Plc in the summer.
Masters said the demerger of its Aggreko equipment hire business was the culmination of a six year restructuring process which was now boosting the Edinburgh-based company's results.
Earnings unveiled on Monday showed first-half pretax profits unveiled surged to 51.6 million pounds from 45.0 million. Sales rose to 383.1 million pounds from 345.9 million.
"The board intends to pay special dividends totalling 150 million pounds, to continue the process of realising non-core assets and to demerge Aggreko within the next financial year," the company said in a statement.
In addition to an ordinary dividend of 3.8 pence per share for the half year, the group intends to pay an enhanced dividend of 17 pence now at a cost of about 50 million pounds.
"A foreign income dividend of approximately 100 million pounds will be paid before the end of March 1997," it said.
"The special dividends... represent the amount which the board considers the company should prudently pay, from both a borrowing capacity and tax perspective," Salvesen concluded.
Masters said in an interview the 150 million pound special dividend and demerger plan for the Aggreko hire business compared favourably with the 390 pence a share bid from business support company Hays that was dropped in August.
Plans for the demerger and special payout had been long rumoured, although earlier estimates said the special dividend had been expected to be worth 200 million.
Press reports put the value of the Aggreko demerger at around 400 million pounds.
Salvesen is due to brief institutional investors about its plans over the next two weeks. Some investors expressed disappointment earlier this year that the Hays offer was rejected, complaining about the severe underperformance of Salvesen's shares in the run-up to the bid.
By mid-afternoon Salvesen's shares were trading at 327-1/2 pence per share, up three and a half pence but off their highs for the day of 332.
In the months to August the shares underperformed the sector by 30 percent from the start of 1996 and by 10 percent against the FT-All Share index.
Since Salvesen rejected the bid, the shares have improved significantly and are currently outperforming the sector by 34 percent and the FT-All Share by 22 percent. ($1=.5941 Pound)
