Debt-laden Eurotunnel is awaiting the outcome of insurer investigations into the costs of the major fire aboard a freight train last week.
Lead insurer Union des Assurances De Paris (UAP) said on Tuesday it was "impossible to quantify yet the cost of the damage."
"Up to now, there is no reliable estimate of the amount of damage caused by the fire on November 18 in the south tunnel," it said, adding its maximum residual risk was 75 million francs ($14.4 million).
Eurotunnel said in a statement earlier that it will hold a press conference to update the situation on Wednesday.
The beleaguered tunnel operator also said the investigating judge had finished his inspection of the scene of the blaze, but insurers and company engineers were continuing to investigate.
The latest statements were made amid rife speculation on the cost of the fire, including unconfirmed reports of total insured costs of as much as 200 million pounds ($334 million).
Current restrictions caused by fire damage are costing the group a million pounds in lost revenue every day.
Eurotunnel was also hit this week by reports of possible claims from companies operating the Eurostar high-speed train service which runs through the tunnel.
Eurostar's British owners, the London and Continental Railways consortium, said there were provisions in its contract with Eurotunnel for reduced access charges if the tunnel was partially or fully closed.
Eurotunnel's spokeswoman said reduced access meant Eurostar (and possibly its French and Belgian counterparts) could see "a reduction to their payment."
She reiterated that Eurotunnel is fully insured.
"The insurance should cover loss of business, the rolling stock, damage to the tunnel, compensation," she said.
The company declined to comment further at this stage.
One source close to Eurotunnel said last week that the cost of fire damage alone to freight and to the tunnel could run to tens of millions of pounds.
"The cost will be millions (of pounds) and could get into double figures, if you consider the damage to the 15 wagons and a locomotive, plus severe tunnel damage," said the source.
The cost of replacing a whole train was estimated at around 25 million pounds.
A senior source close to Eurotunnel insurers told Reuters on Tuesday that the cost of replacing rolling stock could be "in the range of mid- to late-teens (of millions of pounds)."
Adding to uncertainty surrounding insurance cover was the possibility that any payout could be affected by suggestions that the train was on fire before entering the tunnel.
However, analysts seem confident the costs would be covered.
But some said the level of losses caused by the fire were belittled by the scale of Eurotunnel's total debts.
"In relation to Eurotunnel's other financial problem of 8.8 billion (pounds) in debt anything else is incidental, even if the fire cost is 200 million at worst," one analyst said.
Since the fire, Eurotunnel's shares have fallen from a close of 91-1/2 pence on November 18 before the fire broke out to 77-1/2 by the close on Tuesday. ($1=5.190 French Franc) ($1=.5990 Pound)
