Britain's fraud watchdog, the Serious Fraud Office (SFO) on Wednesday launched an investigation into former bosses of Wickes Plc, the do-it-yourself retailer rocked by accounting irregularities worth tens of millions of pounds.
"The SFO has launched an investigation into the former senior management of Wickes," an SFO spokesman told Reuters.
It said the probe was being carried out jointly with the British police fraud squad in London.
Investigators are now expected to interview the ex-chairman and chief executive Henry Sweetbaum who resigned from the group in the summer, former finance director Trefor Llewellyn who is now at Caradon Plc, and the former buying and commercial directors.
"No-one has been arrested or charged and we have not executed any search warrants," the SFO spokesman said, adding that it had taken on the case on November 20 but had not announced its involvement "for operational reasons".
Wickes uncovered the accounting scam in June. The discrepencies date back five years and led to a 51 million pound ($85.62 million) overstatement of profits which will be wiped off shareholder funds.
The news led to a boardroom shake-up last summer and a three and a half month internal inquiry by accountants Price Waterhouse and law firm Linklaters &amp; Paine.
"These investigations have led to the SFO having the reasonable grounds it requires to be able to launch a criminal investigation," said the SFO spokesman.
Meanwhile, Wickes is trying to salvage its business which was shaken by the summer's events.
Its shares remain frozen at 69 pence per share and it is planning to restate profits next month and launch details of a refinancing rights issue of between 30 and 40 million pounds.
A Wickes spokesman told Reuters those plans were "well advanced." It is also close to deciding on a new chief executive, with two to three candidates shortlisted including an internal candidate.
The former chief Sweetbaum said last month that he accepted "ultimate responsibility" for what happened under his regime.
He has agreed to repay his 1.2 million pounds in bonuses including tax. former finance chief Llewellyn has also agreed to repay his bonus of 485,000 pounds for 1995.
Moves to refinance the group will help cut gearing to around 70 percent said analysts, who believe it will be far from easy to raise the rights issue cash needed to put the company back on the road to recovery.
Shares are not expected to resume trading until early 1997.
($1=.5956 Pound)
