The British government on Thursday referred a proposed merger of key cross-Channel ferry services provided by Britain's P&amp;O and Sweden's Stena Line to its main competition watchdog for investigation.
Ian Lang, president of the Board of Trade, said he had asked the Monopolies and Mergers Commission (MMC) to study competition effects of the deal -- hatched to help the ferry giants counter the impact on the market of Eurotunnel's Channel Tunnel.
Most Eurotunnel services, including its own passenger and freight shuttles and intercity rail trains run by Eurostar, were suspended following a serious fire last week.
Although the government gave no explanation of its motives for the review, both P&amp;O and share analysts said it seemed to be partly motivated by Eurotunnel's suspension of services.
P&amp;O immediately slammed the move, calling it "totally unnecessary". Its shares dipped on the news, and were down 6-1/2 pence at 589 1/2 pence by 1300 GMT.
P&amp;O chairman Lord Sterling said the two ferry companies' plans had now been "kicked into touch for three months," as the MMC has been given until March 6, 1997 to review the deal.
The two old shipping rivals unveiled plans in October to join forces on three routes across the English Channel, in response to the swift progress made by the tunnel in grabbing a 40 percent market share on the route two years after opening.
The tunnel opted for an aggressive pricing policy as it built up its market presence, cutting deep into the ferry lines' profits as firms led by P&amp;O European Ferries and Stena Sealink responded with parallel price-cuts and expensive extra ships.
The ferry duo's planned merger was designed to rationalise their capacity on the key short-sea section where the Channel is at its narrowest, crossing times are short and competition for millions of passengers and freight units a year is most fierce.
The ferry giants said the link-up would allow them to slash 75 million pounds ($126 million) off a combined fixed cost base of 280 million pounds, as well as building up cash generation.
P&amp;O's Sterling argued on Thursday that Eurotunnel's fire had done nothing to change the economic arguments for a ferry link-up to remove excess capacity.
"Although the tunnel is temporarily out of action due to the unfortunate fire, I cannot see how the MMC reference will change the underlying situation," the statement quoted him as saying.
With Eurotunnel taking 45 percent of the market, P&amp;O added, "it is difficult to see that there is any competition concern that requires investigation."
James Halstead, analyst at Credit Lyonnais Laing in London, said the referral decision was slightly unexpected and disappointing for the market.
"They were effectively given the green light in the summer by the government when the injunction on a merger was removed, and the government saw the impact on business after the Channel Tunnel opened. We thought there would be no problem," he said.
In Sweden, Stena Line's shares dipped 0.80 crowns to 28.50 after the news.
($1=.5956 Pound)
