British entrepreneur Richard Branson's Virgin Group Friday clinched a British rail franchise and said it planned to spend an extra 250 million pounds ($420 million) on new trains and increased services.
He won control of the CrossCountry service, which covers more than 130 stations and is based in the central British city of Birmingham.
The company, with 842 employees and passenger revenues worth 108 million pounds ($181.3 million) in the year to March, is part of the national rail network that is in the process of being privatised.
"Virgin believes that it can be built into one of the prime rail franchises serving several markets... Exciting times are ahead," Branson told a London news briefing.
The Virgin empire, which spans everything from its airline, music and financial services to its own-label cola, already has a major rail business.
It is a partner in the London and Continental Railways (LCR) consortium which owns the Eurostar passenger service that links London with Paris and Brussels through the Channel Tunnel.
Will Whitehorn, director of Virgin Rail, told Reuters, "Our key plan is to buy a new fleet, spending 250 million pounds ($419.7 million) on new rolling stock, agreed as part of the bid."
The order will be placed next year, with the first deliveries due in 2002. Under financial terms, the government subsidy in the first year of the 15-year franchise will be 112.9 million pounds ($189.6 million).
That subsidy has been cut from the 1996/97 level of 127 million pounds ($213.2 million) and will average 36.4 million ($61.1 million) over the life of the franchise term.
Whitehorn said the subsidy will be eroded over the 15-year term and in the final year Virgin Rail will make a 10 million pound ($16.9 million) payment to the government.
Sir George Young, transport secretary said, "This deal is final proof of the renaissance which is sweeping through Britain's railway industry... Virgin will take a loss-making nationalised company and transform it within 15 years into a profitable enterprise."
Virgin will refurbish the company's HST 125 diesel trains and has pledged to increase train miles by 14 percent between May 1998 and 2002.
The services will be rebranded under the Virgin name and cover destinations across England, Scotland and Wales.
This is the first rail franchise to be awarded to Virgin Rail which also bid unsuccessfully for the Gatwick Express route.
But Virgin is on the shortlist for the West Coast rail franchise and has a bid in for the Thameslink service in London.
Of 25 rail franchises covering passenger services across Britain, the government has sold 14 to the private sector as part of its privatisation of the network.
