British entrepreneur Richard Branson's Virgin Group said on Friday it had clinched the CrossCountry passenger rail franchise and planned to spend an extra 250 million pounds ($420 million) on new trains and increased services.
CrossCountry, which covers more than 100 stations and is based in the central British city of Birmingham, is one of the last few passenger rail franchises to be awarded under Britain's rail priavatisation programme.
The company has 842 staff and in the year to March 30 passenger revenues were 108 million pounds.
"Our key plan is to buy a new fleet, spending 250 million on new rolling stock, agreed as part of the bid," Will Whitehorn, director of Virgin Rail, said in an interview.
Train orders will be placed next year, with the first deliveries due to be made in 2002. Under Virgin's financial terms with the government, it will get a subsidy in the first year of the 15 year franchise of 115 million pounds. This is 12 million pounds less than in 1996/97.
Whitehorn said the subsidy will be eroded over the 15 year term and in the final year Virgin Rail will make a 10 million payment to the government.
It will refurbish existing HST 125 diesel trains and has pledged to increase train miles by 14 percent. "We will grow the service, we will not cut them." he said.
The services will be rebranded under the Virgin name and cover destinations across England, Scotland and Wales.
This is the first rail franchise to be awarded to Virgin Rail which also bid unsuccessfully for the Gatwick Express route which went to National Express buses.
But Virgin is on the shortlist for the West Coast rail franchise and has a bid in for the Thameslink service in London. There are 25 rail franchises in all, covering passenger services across Britain.
So far the government has sold 14 franchises to the private sector as part of its privatisation of the entire network.
The Virgin empire, which spans everything from its airline, music and financial services to its own-label cola, already has a major rail business.
It is a partner in the London and Continental Railways consortium which owns the Eurostar passenger service linking London with Paris and Brussels through the Channel Tunnel.
Service through the Channel Tunnel were suspended last week after a serious fire.
Whitehorn refused to comment on the financial impact of the closure of Eurotunnel's tunnel.
LCR has said that it needs to raise Eurostar's passenger traffic to fund construction of the Channel Tunnel Rail Link between the tunnel and London. ($1=.5956 Pound)
