Anglo-U.S. autocomponents giant LucasVarity unveiled a major corporate shake-up on Tuesday planning 13 non-core disposals and a speeded-up rationalisation which will axe 3,000 jobs worldwide over two years.
LucasVarity, created by a merger earlier this year of Britain's Lucas Industries and Varity Corp of the U.S., said it had identified a range of additional restructuring plans that meant it now saw operating savings of 120 million pounds ($200.2 million) -- double the level anticipated after the merger.
The market initially welcomed the news and the company's shares jumped to a new 12-month high of 263 pence. But downbeat company comments about the auto industry during a telephone conference call to analysts sent the stock slumping to close a sharp 16.5 pence lower at 234p.
"They said that things were relatively tough in France and in the heavy truck market, particularly in Europe, and that they weren't immune to the trends we are seeing in the (competitive) market," said one analyst, who declined to be named.
LucasVarity expects to take an extra one-off charge of 130 million pounds, mainly in non-cash items, which will be levied along with 120 million pounds of costs already planned for current year accounts.
Worldwide headcount will be cut by 3,000 over the next two years as a result of the moves, the company said.
Thirteen companies have been marked up for sale after the three-month review which came in the wake of the multi-billion pounds merger between Britain's Lucas Industries and Varity Corp of the U.S. which became effective in September this year.
Commenting on the speed of disposals, Victor Rice, chief executive, told Reuters the group was "sifting through some offers" and expected to be in "active negotiations" on the sale of some of the 13 quite soon.
Only eight of the 13 businesses marked for sale were named in the restructuring statement released earlier. Rice said that major businesses like aerospace and electronics were not among the unnamed five.
The eight named so far are small niche businesses and include starter and alternator firms in Britain, Argentina and South Africa. The 13 disposal targets have combined sales of 270 million pounds.
The criteria for divestment were those firms which "neither fitted into the core strategy of the company or contributed economic added value," said Rice.
Commenting on the rationalisation moves, Rice, who came from the Varity side of the merger, said "the combination of cost savings and anticipated revenue growth identified by these teams will help the company achieve the aggressive performance targets it has set for itself."
He said the post-demerger savings were "virtually double" original expectations. The process of cost cutting would continue he added, concluding that he was "pretty excited for the future" of the merged business.
LucasVarity is involved in the design, manufacture and supply of systems, products and services in international automotive, diesel engine, aftermarket and aerospace industries.
Both parties in the merger specialised in braking systems and industry sources expected that many of the rationalisation measures would affect production and employment in these units. ($1=.5995 Pound)
