China confirmed on Tuesday that veteran dissident Wang Xizhe had fled the country, accused him of crossing the border illegally and said Chinese authorities were pursuing those who helped him.
"Concerning the question of Wang Xizhe, this is a case of illegally and secretly crossing the border," Foreign Ministry spokesman Shen Guofang told a regular news briefing.
"The judicial authorities are currently pursuing the legal responsibilities of Wang Xizhe and the plotters," Shen said, apparently implying that Wang had help when he fled to Hong Kong last week.
Wang, 46, one of China's most vocal advocates of democracy for more than two decades, escaped to Hong Kong just days after a fellow activist in Beijing was condemned to a labour camp for three years.
"We hope that countries concerned will not have the slightest ambiguity in cracking down on illegal and secret immigration," Shen said.
Wang has been missing from his home in the southern Chinese province of Guangdong that abuts Hong Kong since fellow pro-democracy activist Liu Xiaobo was arrested in Beijing last Tuesday and ordered to serve three years in a labour camp.
He is reported to be seeking asylum in the United States but Shen said China had received no official confirmation that Wang had sought refuge there.
"We have not yet seen any action by the United States," Shen said, adding that Beijing would watch Wang's case closely.
"The governments of some countries, including the United States, should carry out what they have always stressed, namely their stand to crack down on illegal immigration," he said.
Wang and Liu penned a daring statement last month accusing the ruling Communist Party of reneging on a 1945 pledge to grant freedom of the press and to allow people to form political parties and stage demonstrations.
The two urged the impeachment of Communist Party chief Jiang Zemin for violating the constitution by saying the army should answer only to the party rather than to the state.
Wang would be the second Chinese dissident to flee to the United States via Hong Kong this year. Activist Liu Gang fled to Hong Kong last May and has since found asylum in the United States.
Wang was first jailed in 1974 on charges of sedition for putting up a wall poster advocating democracy in China. He was paroled in 1993 after serving 12 years of a 14-year sentence and stripped of his civil rights for five years.
The report of Wang's flight abroad comes amid a renewed crackdown on China's tiny, struggling democracy movement.
Liu Gang, who spent six years in prison as a leader of the 1989 student-led demonstrations for more democracy, fled to the United States last May after months of police harassment at his home in the northeastern province of Liaoning.
Detained dissident and former leader of the 1989 protests Wang Dan faces the capital charge in Beijing of plotting to subvert the government based on evidence such as writings critical of the state and accepting funds from abroad.
Wang Dan, detained since May 1995, has been charged with plotting to overthrow the government -- a crime that carries a maximum penalty of death and a minimum of 10 years in prison.
Wang Dan had defied persistent police surveillance and harassment to take part in a bold appeal in May 1995 to Beijing for the release of all those still in prison for their part in the 1989 student protests.
