Chinese President Jiang Zemin on Thursday used the 60th anniversary of a communist military ordeal to try to strengthen his grip on the army by exhorting soldiers to toe the party line.
Western diplomats have said that whether Jiang will be able to fill the shoes of his mentor, paramount leader Deng Xiaoping, now 92 and in fragile health, depends to a large extent on his ability to win the military to his side.
"The Long March victory fully illustrates that the party's absolute leadership over the army is...the core and spirit of our army's fine tradition," Jiang said in reference to the communist army's epic, 9,650-km (6,000 mile) trek across the mountains of China in 1934-1936.
"Every comrade in the army must firmly note this basic principle and at any time and under any circumstances must not waver, even in the slightest," the Xinhua news agency quoted Jiang as saying in a speech to army leaders and veterans.
Officers and soldiers should heed the direction of communist rulers and strive to enforce the party line, Jiang advised his audience of mostly ageing People's Liberation Army (PLA) veterans.
The PLA owed its survival of the gruelling journey as well as its subsequent victory over the Nationalist forces in 1949 to the firm leadership of the Communist Party, Jiang said.
Jiang exhorted the army to be "forever be loyal to the party, loyal to socialism, loyal to the motherland and loyal to the people".
In a rare deviation from his usual dark, western-style suit and red tie, Jiang sent the army a visual signal by donning a military green Mao suit during his address to the military elders that was broadcast on state television.
Other party and army leaders used the occasion to voice their support for Jiang, who already holds the three most powerful jobs in China -- state president, Communist Party chief and head of the powerful Central Military Commission -- but has yet to accumulate full power as Deng's anointed successor.
Vice-chairman of the Central Military Commission Liu Huaqing urged the military to unite under the banner of Jiang as leader of the party.
"We must...uphold the party's basic theory and basic line and resolutely protect the collective authority of the third generation of leaders with Comrade Jiang Zemin as the core," Liu said.
Western analysts have said Jiang, who has no military experience and is not a veteran of the Long March that honed most of China's previous top leaders, still needs to shore up his position with the army after Deng's death.
Jiang, fearful that two decades of economic reform has undermined the communist's grip on power, has made repeated calls for officials to be politically correct and toe the party line.
Two prominent Chinese dissidents recently penned a bold statement calling for Jiang's impeachment for violating the constitution by saying the army should be under control of the party instead of the state.
One of the authors, Liu Xiaobo, was detained last week and sentenced to three years in a labour camp. Co-author Wang Xizhe has since fled to the United States.
