China tried to backtrack on Thursday from a warning to Hong Kong people on limits to their freedom of expression after the territory reverts to Beijing rule in 1997, saying liberties would remain but within the law.
"Hong Kong people will have full freedom of expression, but all freedoms must be within the limits allowed by law," Foreign Ministry spokesman Shen Guofang told a news briefing.
His remarks followed an interview with Foreign Minister Qian Qichen by the Asian Wall Street Journal in which Qian hinted that Hong Kong would no longer be able to mark the anniversary of Beijing's June 4, 1989, crackdown on student-led protests.
Qian's interview stirred an outcry in Hong Kong, where China has pledged a high degree of political freedoms for 50 years after the handover on July 1, 1997, and not to change its current capitalist system.
"China has obviously inflicted a fair amount of political damage in Hong Kong, it is now trying to undo some of that damage," said one China analyst.
Shen said Hong Kong residents would have freedom of the press and freedom of speech but such liberties would have to operate within the boundaries of the law.
"Any activities held in Hong Kong must be in accordance with legal regulations," Shen said.
"Hong Kong should not interfere in mainland China's affairs by organising some political activities to attack the mainland's internal affairs," he said.
Shen said the territory, a British colony for a century and a half, would maintain its capitalist system after it returns to mainland control at midnight on June 30, 1997.
"After July 1, 1997, there will be no changes to our one nation, two systems policy, the Hong Kong people will rule Hong Kong," he said. "In our words, well water does not intrude into the river water."
Hong Kong newspaper reports that interpreted Qian's remarks as a ban on activities in the territory to commemorate the 1989 crackdown were wrong, Shen said.
"Hong Kong opinion has misinterpreted Qian's remarks," Shen said, adding that Beijing had not altered its pledge to maintain Hong Kong's current political and economic system unchanged under Chinese sovereignty.
A transcript of Qian's interview showed he was specifically asked to say what activities would not be allowed and whether the 1989 commemoration was among them. Qian replied that he was referring to just such activities.
Shen said people would be free to criticise Beijing but said they should be careful in commenting on Chinese leaders.
"If some media make personal attacks on other people or on our leaders, this touches on news ethics," Shen said without elaborating.
"Except for national defence and foreign affairs, the central government will not interfere (in) any activities of the Hong Kong special administrative region's government, and Hong Kong should not interfere in mainland internal affairs," Shen said.
Shen said dissidents in Hong Kong would be free to travel outside the territory but should respect local laws while in Hong Kong.
"Hong Kong dissidents in Hong Kong will have the freedoms to go and stay, but if they stay there, they must act in accordance with local laws," Shen said.
