A prominent exiled Chinese human rights activist has said his contacts with detained dissident Wang Dan do not justify the capital charge against the former student leader, who is expected to go on trial soon.
Wang Juntao, who now lives in the United States, has prepared written testimony rejecting charges that Wang Dan conspired with him to subvert the government, according to a U.S.-based human rights group.
"Wang Juntao has already ... prepared testimonial materials and turned them over to Wang Dan's relatives," said a statement from Human Rights in China received in Beijing on Thursday.
Wang Dan played a key role in pro-democracy demonstrations crushed by the army in 1989.
The charges against him included "collaborating with Wang Juntao and acting as director of the 'China Research Centre' established by Wang Juntao in the United States with the aim of subverting the Chinese government", the statement said.
Court officials have confirmed that Wang Dan, detained since May 1995, has been charged with plotting to overthrow the government -- a crime that carries a maximum penalty of death and a minimum of 10 years in prison.
Wang Juntao, condemned by Beijing as one of the "black hands" behind the student-led movement, was freed from prison on medical parole in 1994 and allowed to leave China for the United States.
He said his research centre was dedicated to studying the problems of China's modernisation drive and that Wang Dan had played but a nominal role in it.
"Wang Dan...acted as an honorary director and never published opinions in connection with the research centre's work and never participated in any of its activities," the statement quoted Wang Juntao as saying.
Other evidence against Wang Dan included taking part in home studies offered by a U.S. university and accepting donations and economic aid from overseas groups.
U.S.-based Chinese democracy activist Cheng Zhen said a group she headed had assisted Chinese student activists in enrolling in home study classes at foreign universities by helping them pay tuition and book fees but had no other dealings with them, the statement said.
"Wang Dan was helped in this way by them in selecting a correspondence course with the history department of the University of California, Berkeley," it quoted Cheng as saying.
The statement quoted Wang Dan's mother as saying her son's health had deteriorated while in confinement.
Family members could not be reached for comment.
Wang Dan's trial was expected to be held behind closed doors soon, relatives said earlier, adding that the family had not yet been advised of a trial date.
Wang Dan had already served four years in prison for counter-revolutionary crimes, or subversion, for his role in the 1989 demonstrations in Beijing which were crushed by the army with heavy loss of life.
He had been active since his parole in 1993, defying police harassment to join in a daring appeal to communist leaders for the release of all those still in prison for their part in the 1989 protests.
