Visiting Colombian Foreign Minister Maria Emma Mejia said on Monday she hoped to boost cooperation with Beijing to help both nations crack down on a flourishing narcotics trade.
Colombian officials said they hoped to sign an agreement with China that would increase information exchanges and strengthen police training in the fight against drugs.
"The Chinese were very clear that they very much wanted to seek cooperation in the matter of drugs," said Mejia, who is accompanying Colombian President Ernesto Samper on a three-day visit to China.
"We want to exchange knowledge in the field of fighting heroin trafficking," Mejia told reporters, adding that the rise of the heroin trade in Colombia -- infamous for its cocaine cartels -- was a relatively new development.
"Colombia knows very little about narcotics trafficking in Asia, and we have to know more, and China has to know more about narco-trafficking in South America, otherwise it will be very difficult to have a multilateral policy," Mejia said.
She did not say when she expected the proposed accord to be signed.
Samper told a news briefing Beijing had expressed support for Colombia's anti-drug efforts, but did not elaborate.
Beijing had expressed an interest in pursuing a policy not only of cracking down on drug traffickers but of preventing and treating drug addiction, Mejia said.
China's official Xinhua news agency quoted Chinese Foreign Minister Qian Qichen as urging major drug-consuming nations to bolster their efforts to reduce domestic drug use.
"Drug-consuming countries should also shoulder heavy responsibility because the great market demand for drugs would result in widespread drug production and trafficking," Qian was quoted as saying.
Colombia's top anti-drug policeman General Rosso Jose Serrano told the briefing he did not think Colombian and Chinese drug cartels were working together to distribute heroin throughout North America.
"The Chinese mafia is the most difficult to penetrate, but as far as we know, there is no connection between Colombian and Chinese (drug traffickers)," said Serrano, who is widely credited with smashing Colombia's notorious Cali cocaine cartel.
A report by the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration last month said Colombia had edged out southeast Asia's Golden Triangle region as the top supplier of high-grade heroin to the United States.
The report said 62 percent of all heroin confiscated in the United States came from Colombia.
China faces a growing problem with drug trafficking, much of it through the southwestern province of Yunnan which borders on the Golden Triangle drug production region that includes parts of Burma, Thailand and Laos.
China frequently executes people convicted of narcotics crimes and sentences many drug users to strict rehabilitation programmes.
