China's listed companies must work to increase transparency and improve asset valuation if the country's fledgling markets are to gain global prominence, a top U.S. securities official said in Beijing on Tuesday.
Arthur Levitt, chairman of the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, said he stressed in meetings with Chinese officials the need for frank disclosure of company data as a crucial step in boosting investor confidence in Chinese firms.
"I mentioned in every meeting over and over and over again the importance of transparency," Levitt told reporters.
"That's something that we can't emphasise enough: transparency, transparency, transparency," said Levitt, who is on a seven-day visit to China.
Officials in Chinese listed firms often saw the need for transparency but many were reluctant to disclose company data out of fears that such frankness would profit the competition, Levitt said.
Chinese public firms needed to think of shareholders as owners of the company rather than as impediments to progress, he said.
Levitt said he had urged the Chinese to swallow the bitter medicine of improved disclosure, effective regulation and cracking down on corruption to bolster investor confidence in what many businessmen were eyeing as a promising market.
"Their markets, just like every other market in the world, will be no better than public confidence is in that market," Levitt said.
Levitt said one of Beijing's most pressing tasks would be to draft a securities law that would serve as a guidepost for companies as well as regulatory agencies.
"The thing that business abhors more than anything else is uncertainty, or a lack of clarity," Levitt said.
The lacklustre performance of Chinese companies that had listed on the New York Stock Exchange reflected a lack of investor confidence in Chinese accounting methods and asset valuation systems, he said.
"The process of evaluating assets in China is an uncertain process that concerns many investors," Levitt said.
Many Chinese officials had been deeply disappointed by the slack overseas performance of Chinese firms, prompting a two-year pause in the process of nurturing of Chinese financial markets, he said.
"The Chinese over the past 12 to 18 months have been inner-directed, looking at the system, looking at the process and asking themselves what went wrong," he said, adding that reform had to continue.
"I tried to encourage everyone I talked to to stay the course, that the stakes were too high to turn around," Levitt said.
"This is a road that, once started on, there really is no turning back."
