China said on Wednesday it would empower Hong Kong's courts to put on trial off-duty Chinese soldiers after Beijing resumes control over the British colony in 1997.
The standing committee of the National People's Congress (parliament), which is in session in Beijing, was expected to pass a law spelling out how to handle criminal or civil cases involving troops to be garrisoned in Hong Kong, the official Xinhua news agency said.
"Crimes committed by off-duty personnel... will be handled by the courts of the Hong Kong SAR (Special Adminstrative Region)," the agency said.
Criminal cases involving on-duty soldiers would be handled by military courts, it said.
Civil rights offences committed by off-duty members of the Chinese garrison, which will be responsible for Hong Kong's security after the colony returns to Beijing's rule on July 1, 1997, would be dealt with by Hong Kong courts, it said.
Civil rights offences committed by soldiers while on duty would be referred to China's Supreme People's Court, the nation's highest judicial body, it said.
Chinese lawmakers had used British army practices in Hong Kong as a reference in drafting the measures, Xinhua quoted Fu Quanyou, general chief of staff of China's People's Liberation Army (PLA), as saying.
Defence operations of the PLA would not be subject to Hong Kong courts, Xinhua said but did not elaborate.
"Troops stationed in Hong Kong will notify the Hong Kong SAR government in advance of any military drills and exercises to be conducted that involve the public interest," it said.
The Hong Kong government said in a statement it was "not able to provide a detailed response to the garrison law just relying on the reports".
"We hope that we and the people of Hong Kong can have an early opportunity to study the draft law itself," it added.
Xinhua said Hong Kong would be required to provide facilities for the carrying out of defence duties and would have to consult the military when drafting policies that concern them.
Military personnel would be forbidden from participating in political or religious organisations in the territory, it said.
Beijing has eagerly sought to allay fears among Hong Kong's 6.3 million people over the posting of Chinese troops in the territory. State media has said soldiers destined for Hong Kong have been studying local songs and customs.
Many Hong Kong people view with trepidation the arrival of Chinese troops, remembering the PLA's bloody 1989 crackdown on student-led demonstrations for more democracy in Beijing.
"Sending the People's Liberation Army troops to Hong Kong on July 1, 1997, has become a matter of concern among Hong Kong residents," Xinhua said.
"Troops stationed in Hong Kong will not interfere in the SAR's local affairs," it pledged.
China has not revealed how large a force it will post in Hong Kong but says it will send no more than the 10,000 troops Britian stationed there at its peak level.
