Leading Chinese activist Wang Dan will go on trial on Wednesday, charged with the capital crime of plotting to overthrow the government, a family member said.
The Beijing Number One Intermediate People's Court had told Wang's family that his trial would begin on Wednesday morning, his mother Wang Lingyun said by telephone on Friday.
Court officials could not be reached for comment.
Wang's mother, a 61-year old museum researcher who has no background in law, said she would be in court to help defend her son against some of the charges.
Wang's family earlier found a lawyer willing to defend the former student leader on most of the charges after being given just one day in which to do so.
"As for family members, only Wang Dan's father and his sister will be able to attend," she said, adding she hoped the court would judge her son based on the facts of the case.
"I'm hoping the trial outcome will go according to the facts and the law, and that Wang Dan will be found not guilty," she said. "We'll have to see at the end."
She said she was doubtful court officials would let her talk to her son before the trial.
"I don't think they'll make such arrangements," she said, adding that court officials had given her no further details about the trial.
Court officials have confirmed that Wang, who vanished into detention in May 1995, has been charged with plotting to overthrow the government -- a crime that carries a maximum penalty of death and a minimum of 10 years in prison.
The court has not given further details of the trial but one official has said that Wang could appeal to the Higher People's Court if convicted.
Wang's court appearance would likely be held out of the public eye, as was last year's trial of Wei Jingsheng, the father of China's democracy movement, a political activist said.
In December Wei was sentenced to 14 years in prison for subversion and funding democracy activists.
The court is widely expected to fill the limited number of courtroom seats at Wang's trial with carefully selected people to keep away foreign reporters and fellow dissidents.
Dissidents and foreign reporters were barred from Wei's trial but the cases of both Wei and Wang have drawn worldwide attention and are regularly raised by visiting western politicians.
Wang, 26, has already served four years in prison for counter-revolutionary crimes, or subversion, for his role in pro-democracy demonstrations in Beijing's Tiananmen Square that were crushed by the army in June 1989 with heavy loss of life.
Wang Lingyun has said the dissident has been very calm and was mentally prepared for a harsh sentence, though she has said his health has deteriorated during his detention.
Wang Dan had been active after his parole in 1993, defying persistent police surveillance to join in a daring appeal to communist leaders for the release of all those still in prison for their part in the 1989 protests.
China has in recent months cracked down on its tiny band of remaining dissidents who have not yet fled into exile or been imprisoned.
