U.S. Vice-President Al Gore could visit China in early 1997 if he was re-elected next month, a senior U.S. official said in Beijing on Saturday.
"We have sent a proposal here and it's been reviewed and I don't think there's any real disagreement," U.S. Assistant Secretary of State for Oceans and International Environmental and Scientific Affairs Eileen Claussen said when asked if Gore had any plans to visit China.
"The vice-president is very interested in trying to establish...a sustainable development forum here between (Chinese Premier) Li Peng and the vice-president," she told a news conference.
No specific date has been set for Gore's visit.
"We are now discussing terms of reference for that and there's every expectation that if those terms of reference are worked out, the vice-president will make a visit in the spring," she said.
Asked to elaborate on the terms of reference, Claussen said: "We just have to have sort of a set of operating rules and subjects we're going to talk about."
A visit by Gore could improve often stormy Sino-U.S. ties, which plunged to their lowest ebb in more than two decades after Washington enraged Beijing by allowing Taiwan's President Lee Teng-hui to make a landmark, private visit in June 1995.
Beijing and Taipei have been diplomatic rivals since Mao Zedong's Red Army defeated and drove Chiang Kai-shek's Nationalist troops into exile in Taiwan at the end of the Chinese civil war in 1949.
China regards Taiwan as a rebel province and has sought to push the island into diplomatic isolation.
U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher is due to visit Beijing in November and Chinese Defence Minister Chi Haotian plans to make a long-delayed trip to Washington before the end of the year.
China postponed Chi's visit to Washington in March, infuriated by a U.S. decision to order two aircraft carriers into seas near Taiwan as the island inched towards democracy -- holding its first direct presidential elections -- in the face of missile tests and live-fire war games.
Beijing and Washington have also wrangled over alleged sales of nuclear technology by China, human rights abuses in China and trade issues.
China has bitterly accused the United States of blocking its bid to gain admission to the World Trade Organisation.
Beijing and Washington narrowly avoided a trade war in June and February 1995 over widespread copyright piracy.
