U.S. Undersecretary of State Lynn Davis has arrived in Beijing for talks next week with Chinese officials on arms proliferation, a spokesman at the U.S. Embassy in Beijing said on Friday.
Davis would lay the groundwork for a visit by U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher later this month, his first to China since a 1994 trip that ended in disaster because of wrangling over human rights issues.
Deputy Assistant Secretary of State Robert Einhorn flew into Beijing earlier this week for expert talks ahead of Davis' visit, nthe spokesman said.
"Expert talks are going on today and she (Davis) will have her main talks on the 4th and the 5th on security issues and on proliferation issues," the spokesman said.
"She'll be going back to the United States to report to the Secretary of State," the spokesman said, adding that arms control would be just one of many issues Christopher would bring up with his Chinese hosts.
"He (Christopher) has a lot of things on his agenda," the spokesman said.
Sino-U.S. ties have long been strained by disputes over human rights, Taiwan, copyright theft in China and Beijing's terms of entry to the World Trade Organisation.
Washington has expressed deep concern over the Beijing court sentencing of prominent Chinese pro-democracy activist Wang Dan on Wednesday to 11 years in prison for plotting to overthrow the government.
Officials in Washington have said Davis also would discuss how the two countries might implement a decade-old peaceful nuclear cooperation pact that could allow sales of U.S. nuclear power reactors to China.
The accord, signed in 1985, has not been put into effect because of U.S. suspicions that Beijing is peddling nuclear technology to unsafeguarded nuclear facilities abroad, most notably to Pakistan. Both China and Pakistan deny the charges.
China agreed last May not to provide aid such as ring magnets and other devices used in making nuclear arms to unsafeguarded nuclear facilities.
U.S. officials have insisted they have no evidence China has violated the May agreement and say a reported nuclear-related deal between Beijing and Islamabad was struck before the accord was drawn up.
Beijing has tried to lure foreign technology, some of it with potential military value, with promises of lucrative business contracts.
Davis would also renew U.S. concerns over Chinese sales of conventional arms to Iran, which Washington has blacklisted as a sponsor of terrorism.
Washington is investigating reports that Indonesia and China are close to a deal to sell Iran five French helicopters that could be armed with air-launched missiles.
