U.S. Undersecretary of State Lynn Davis has begun talks with Chinese officials in Beijing on arms proliferation issues, a U.S. Embassy official said on Monday.
"She has arrived and started talks," the official said by telephone. Davis arrived in Beijing last Thursday and was due to hold talks on Monday and Tuesday.
"She is the undersecretary for arms control issues... She has a whole range of issues that she'll be bringing up with the Chinese," the official said when asked what Davis would discuss with her hosts.
Deputy Assistant Secretary of State Robert Einhorn flew into Beijing last week for talks before Davis's visit.
John Holum, director of the U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, also visited the Chinese capital recently.
Officials have said Davis would discuss how the two countries might implement a decade-old, peaceful nuclear cooperation accord that would let U.S. firms sell nuclear power reactors to China.
Beijing has tried to lure foreign technology, some of it with potential military value, with promises of lucrative business contracts.
China's official Xinhua news agency said on Monday that U.S. firms stood to win billions of dollars of nuclear energy contracts if the 1985 agreement were put into effect.
"Sino-U.S. cooperation in nuclear energy development has yet to enter a substantial stage," Xinhua quoted Li Donghui as saying.
"Negotiations on the agreement are still under way," added Li, the deputy-general director of the China National Nuclear Corp's international cooperation bureau.
The pact has not been implemented because of Washington's concern that Beijing has sold nuclear technology to unsafeguarded nuclear facilities in other nations, most notably to Pakistan.
Both China and Pakistan deny the charges.
China agreed last May not to provide aid such as ring magnets and other devices used in making nuclear weapons to unsafeguarded nuclear facilities.
U.S. officials say a reported nuclear-related deal between Beijing and Islamabad was struck before the May accord was drawn up and that they have no evidence China has violated the pact.
Davis would also renew U.S. concerns over Chinese sales of conventional arms to Iran, who Washington has blacklisted as a sponsor of terrorism, officials have said.
Washington is investigating reports that Indonesia and China are close to a deal to sell Iran five French helicopters that could be armed with air-launched missiles.
Davis's talks were expected to pave the way for a visit by U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher later this month, his first to China in two years.
Christopher's 1994 visit ended in bitter wrangling over human rights issues.
Sino-U.S. relations have been battered in recent months by disputes over human rights, China's rampant copyright abuse and Beijing's terms of entry into the World Trade Organisation.
The White House said last week it was deeply concerned over a Chinese court verdict sentencing prominent pro-democracy activist Wang Dan to 11 years in prison for plotting to overthrow the government.
