China on Tuesday blasted U.S. penalties against its textiles ahead of a visit next week by U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher, but said the two sides had more in common than differences.
Beijing accused Washington of not having produced enough evidence to support textile sanctions and said it opposed strong-arm tactics to settle trade disputes.
"We are opposed to one side imposing its will on another in trade disputes," Foreign Ministry spokesman Cui Tiankai told a regular news briefing.
"The United States has not fully consulted with China and has not provided clear supporting evidence," Cui said.
But Cui declined to comment on whether the dispute would overshadow a visit by Christopher to China next week. Christopher's last visit to China two years ago ended in wrangling over human rights issues.
"This is an important bilateral meeting," Cui said of Christopher's trip, scheduled for November 19-21.
Christopher's visit would help lay the groundwork for bilateral relations in the 21st century, Cui said, adding there was no reason for China and the United States not to develop a healthy and stable relationship.
"The state of relations between the two countries will...have major effects on the peace, stability and prosperity of the Asia-Pacific region and the world as a whole," Cui said.
"We will discover that the common interests of China and the United States are far greater than the differences," Cui said.
Beijing and Washington both say ties have warmed after a series of spats over Taiwan, human rights, arms proliferation and trade over the past year.
In the most recent clash, Beijing said on Sunday it would temporarily ban imports of selected U.S. textiles, farm goods, fruits and alcoholic drinks from December 10 in retaliation for U.S. sanctions taken against Chinese textiles.
Washington announced penalties against imports of Chinese textiles in September, accusing China of using shipments through third countries to avoid quotas agreed upon in a bilateral textile accord.
U.S. trade officials said on Monday that Chinese violations of the textile accord were well documented. The sanctions were expected to cost China about $19 million a year.
The spokesman sidestepped a question about whether the textile dispute would be part of discussions during Christopher's visit but said China hoped for a solution beneficial to both sides.
"We have always been devoted to developing bilateral trade on the basis of equality and mutual benefit," Cui said.
"We hope again that the United States will be able to adopt a stance helpful to the development of Sino-U.S. trade," Cui said.
