This month's Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) summit could see conflicting views between regional powers eager to boost free trade and a Chinese delegation more interested in soft loans, diplomats said.
While Pacific heavyweights such as the United States, Japan and Canada aimed to lower trade barriers between the region's markets, China was hoping to squeeze easy credit out of richer APEC members at the summit in the Philippines, they said.
"There's a fundamental tension between China on the one hand and most other APEC states on the other," said a Western diplomat in Beijing.
"Should (APEC) be directed toward the trade-investment liberalisation framework or should it be directed toward economic and technical cooperation?" asked the diplomat.
Analysts say the Subic summit would also give Chinese president Jiang Zemin a key opportunity to put his personal seal on a recent upturn in cross-Pacific ties at the first Sino-U.S. presidential meeting since 1995.
While the forum would provide the Chinese delegation with a welcome venue for private talks with the United States -- and possibly rival Taiwan -- Beijing would be less keen on the summit's avowed free trade agenda, the diplomats said.
China feared throwing open its doors to foreign competitors could devastate China's struggling state sector, raising the spectre of social unrest, the Western diplomat said.
"There is a fundamental contradiction between the imperatives of China's domestic situation and the free trade agenda," he said.
Access to its potentially vast markets would be the juicy carrot China dangled in front of other APEC members in exchange for promises of soft loans and technical assistance, he said.
"China... is hinting that APEC members should make a 'down payment'... on economic and technical cooperation, i.e. fork out some money," he said.
Beijing could be looking for the creation of a special APEC fund to assist the region's developing countries, he said.
The economic summit would also provide China's Jiang with a rare chance to rub shoulders with other world leaders and to boost the recent warming in Sino-U.S. ties long battered by disputes over trade, human rights and arms proliferation.
"The Chinese like to talk about the 'APEC style'...you shelve sensitive agendas and sensitive questions and you talk about them behind closed doors," the diplomat said.
Beijing could also use the meeting to quietly resume talks with its island arch-foe Taiwan, he said.
"It's an ideal opportunity for them to get together in circumstances where they've got a fairly good chance of...keeping news of it hush-hush," he said.
Other analysts said there was little chance of backroom talks between Beijing and Taipei officials because China was unlikely to soften its stance towards the island, which it has viewed as a rebel province since the end of civil war in 1949.
"I don't expect any breakthrough in Taiwan-China relations at the APEC meeting because the two sides set their own conditions, and very different ones, for resuming talks," said Chiu Chao-ling, a research fellow at Taiwan's Academia Sinica.
While other APEC members send heads of state to attend the forum, Taiwan, at the insistence of Beijing, has been allowed to send only low-ranking officials to lead its delegation.
Taipei wanted to crack open its diplomatic isolation at this year's summit by sending President Lee Teng-hui or vice-president Lien Chan, but host Manila rejected the move.
"It looks like Taiwan puts too much focus on its APEC representative, but not on what it can do as an APEC member," said Taiwan's Chiu. "We should play a more active role instead of asking only who can go to the meeting."
