A decade ago, Chinese publishers were still putting type in place by hand, painstakingly selecting one character at a time from thousands of inky stereotypes.
Then in 1986, Wang Xuan, a professor of computer science at Beijing University, created a software programme to represent Chinese fonts on a computer.
Today, nearly all of China's newspapers are printed using Wang's Electronic Publishing System, a product of the Founder Group Corp that he helped the university launch.
"Our Chinese word processing software was far ahead of foreign products, that's why we took the leading market position at a stroke," Wang told Reuters in an interview.
From Founder's modest origins as a college department offshoot employing 20 workers, the firm now has 36 subsidiaries employing more than 1,000 people. It also has a listing on the Hong Kong stock exchange.
Founder's net assets totalled HK$494.9 million at the end of 1995 and the company posted net profit of HK$109 million last year on sales turnover of HK$1.1 billion.
Wang, the 59-year-old chairman of what has perhaps become one of China's most successful computer companies, predicted the firm would continue its strong performance as the domestic market expands and it finds new opportunities abroad.
The company's net profit in the first six months of this year rose a year-on-year 7.0 percent to HK$55.8 million and turnover shot up 27 percent to HK$590 million.
"I can confidently say that we will see an increase in both turnover and profit in 1996," Wang said.
Founder is China's fourth biggest manufacturer of personal computers but Wang says he plans to focus his energies on the more interesting -- and lucrative -- software business.
"Selling personal computers is all about sales technique," Wang said. "I get very excited about high-tech stuff, much more than business."
Founder had snared 78 percent of China's publishing software market as of August, up from 70 percent at the end of 1995, Wang said.
The company also boasted clients among Chinese newspapers in Hong Kong, Taiwan, Malaysia and North America, he said.
Founder's office automation products were gaining popularity among Chinese banks, government agencies and advertising firms, he said.
Wang has visited numerous companies abroad and said he was confident Founder would crack the Japanese market in two years and be a strong player in the international market within five years.
As part of Wang's drive to boost Founder's role overseas, the firm signed a pact last May to develop publishing solutions based on products and technology of U.S.-based Apple Computer Inc
Wang listed Founder in Hong Kong in December 1995. Beijing University still holds 56 percent of the company.
Initially offered at HK$1.98 a share, Founder's stock shot up to a high of HK$4.0 a share earlier this year though it has since fallen back. It ended at HK$3.15 on Friday.
Wang's market success has earned the slender, bespectacled entrepreneur comparisons at home to Microsoft's Bill Gates, a likeness Wang is happy to embrace.
But Wang insists similarities to the American software guru are limited.
"The difference is huge. Bill Gates is 40, I am almost 60. I am past my creative peak," Wang said.
The entrepreneur notes other differences.
Like many Chinese his age, Wang lived through the tumultuous early years after the communist revolution in 1949.
That included the disastrous Great Leap Forward  -- launched by Chairman Mao Zedong in the late 1950s to spur rapid development. Instead, it set China back for years and triggered famine that killed as many as 30 million people.
Wang was persecuted for listening to English radio broadcasts during the Cultural Revolution, a decade of political turmoil that began in 1966 to infuse the young communist state with renewed ideological vigour.
While the Microsoft mogul has amassed a personal fortune of billions of dollars, Wang receives a salary of about 10,000 yuan a month and holds no shares in the firm he heads.
"I'm easily satisfied," he said.
($1 = 8.3 yuan) ($1 = HK$7.8)
