North Korea expects a shortfall of two million tonnes of grain next year -- equal to 40 percent of the nation's needs and significantly worse than expected, a Red Cross official said on Monday.
Only a few months ago, aid workers had estimated the food shortage would be 1.5 million tonnes.
"Their shortages are serious...they (North Korean officials) have not been able to meet the daily food ration," said Ole Gronning, representative of the International Federation of the Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies in North Korea's capital of Pyongyang.
"This is bad news, really bad news in a country that already doesn't have much now," Gronning said by telephone.
He said farmers whose crops had been wiped out by devastating floods in July had eaten about 400,000 tonnes of grain before it came to maturity, adding this would worsen the food shortage this winter.
North Korea has faced the spectre of famine since July after the floods destroyed about 373,000 tonnes of grain, compounding damage from widespread floods in 1995.
Official figures showed North Korea would need 5.5 million tonnes of grain next year, but this year's harvest had yielded just 3.5 million tonnes, Gronning said.
The federation was trying to raise $10.5 million for a new programme to buy grain to stave off hunger for some 140,000 North Koreans badly hit by the floods, he said.
"In some of the villages and the valleys we are now going into, they were working on repairing the damage from the 1995 floods and then they got hit once again," he said.
"They have lost everything, including houses, livestock and so on," he said.
The summer floods had submerged large tracts of arable land for more than 10 days. Some of that land was now covered in sand and mud and could not be farmed again.
"The second floods left people in a really bad situation," Gronning said. "People will be running out of food in the second half of December."
The federation would work with the North Korean Red Cross Society to distribute a daily ration of 450 grams (15.75 ounces) of grain and a helping of supplementary foods such as soybeans to each person, he said.
Aid workers would try to provide stricken residents with winter clothes and blankets to brace against winter temperatures that could drop as low as minus 20 degrees Celsius, he said.
"Without enough food and without proper heating, these people are really badly off," he said.
North Korea, despite its philosophy of self-reliance, cracked open the door to foreign aid last year in the face of looming food shortages.
Gronning said the federation had appealed to member societies in Europe, North America and Japan to donate money urgently needed to start buying grain and clothes.
"Hopefully, we will have the first pledges very, very soon so we can start purchasing," he said.
