Chinese President Jiang Zemin will travel to Moscow in spring for a summit with Russian leader Boris Yeltsin, the official Xinhua news agency said on Tuesday.
The two sides are expected to sign agreements on arms reductions along the 4,300-km (2,580-mile) Sino-Russian border in the near future, Xinhua said.
Chinese Premier Li Peng is scheduled to visit Moscow next month, state television said.
The forthcoming trips by Jiang and Li to Moscow were announced during a three-day visit to China by Russian Foreign Minister Yevgeny Primakov.
Primakov met both Jiang and Li on Tuesday, the television said.
Jiang told Primakov that China's long-term policy towards Russia was "good neighbourly friendship, equality, trust, mutually beneficial cooperation and joint development", state television said.
"No matter what changes occur in the situation, this guiding principle will not change," Jiang said of a pledge by China and Russia in April to establish a strategic partnership.
Jiang and Yeltsin last met during the Russian president's tour of China in April in a visit that both sides hailed as instrumental in forging a new, strategic partnership.
"We have a common objective of making our border a bond of peace, stability, cooperation and prosperity," Chinese Foreign Minister Qian Qichen said. He did not elaborate on the specifics of the arms reduction agreements or when they might be signed.
Border disputes between China and Russia have been longstanding, although the two states reached basic agreement on border demarcation in 1991.
During Yeltsin's visit, China and Russia -- along with the former Soviet states of Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan -- signed a treaty calling for all parties to inform each other of the scope of their military exercises and agreeing not to attack each other.
The Russian foreign minister came to China from Japan, where he scored a major improvement in relations with Tokyo.
Japan released $500 million in long-delayed aid to Russia, while Moscow offered the joint development of a group of disputed islands in the biggest step forward in their ties since the end of the Cold War.
