Jailed Chinese dissident Wang Dan is suffering from severe throat and back problems in a cold northeast China prison that does not have the facilities to treat him, his mother said on Friday.
Wang, who is serving an 11-year sentence for plotting to overthrow the government, was suffering from throat inflammation, back ailments and a prostate problem, his mother said after visiting the Jinzhou prison in Liaoning province.
"According to what one doctor said, just one look at his throat infection was enough to know it is very serious," his mother, Wang Lingyun, said by telephone.
The mother quoted Wang as saying prison authorities had called in outside medical specialists to examine him.
Doctors told the 27-year-old former student leader that the prison did not have the facilities to treat him and his condition could deteriorate with the onset of winter, she said.
"It appears they have no way to cure his sickness there," she said. "The place he's in is pretty cold and very dry and not very suitable for people with throat infections."
Wang Lingyun said the family would continue to petition the courts to review her son's case and that she was looking into the possibility of getting him released on medical parole.
"The law gives us this right, and if we have this right, we want to use it," she said of the petitions.
Such petitions are symbolic gestures and would not involve any court hearings.
"As for medical parole, I'm still looking up the relevant laws," she said.
A Chinese court last week took 10 minutes to reject Wang's appeal and upheld his prison sentence for subversion for publishing articles in foreign publications and receiving funds from hostile overseas organisations.
China earlier this month released leading dissident Chen Ziming from prison to allow him to receive medical treatment.
Wang Lingyun said her son, dressed in prison clothes, had appeared in good spirits and said he was being treated well.
"He said...they had put him in a small compound and he can go outside and move around whenever he wants," she said.
Wang Lingyun said prison authorities had handed over to her son a stack of books she had brought him.
"They gave him a bookshelf -- something they've never done before -- and a desk," she said. "You can say he's getting relatively special treatment."
Wang, a former history major at Beijing University, has already served four years in prison for his role in student demonstrations for democracy that were crushed by the army in June 1989 with heavy loss of life.
The jailing of Wang was the latest in a series of crushing blows to China's struggling democracy movement. Most dissidents have been forced into exile or are serving long sentences in prison or labour camps.
