China's inefficient coal sector needs foreign funds and technology to modernise but must do more to create a better investment environment, industry officials and foreign businessmen said on Tuesday.
"There are opportunities for literally billions of dollars in coal investments here," said David Klingner, group executive of Australian mining group CRA Ltd.
Development of the sector's small and inefficient mines and antiquated power plants would be vital for China to meet ambitious production goals and sustain economic growth in the next century, Klingner told an energy conference in Beijing.
"The government is coming to realise that a way to ensure that the energy resources for future development are available is by getting foreign companies in with their expertise and capital capacity," Klingner said.
China relies on coal to meet about 75 percent of its energy needs and production accounted for about one-third of world output, Klingner said.
However, Beijing needed to create a sound investment environment to woo foreign cash and technology to the backward sector, said Rong Geng, director of the coal and oil department of China's State Development Bank.
"The coal industry... is characterised by long periods of construction, huge demands for funds, long repayment periods, low profits and certain risks," Rong said.
About 10 percent of funding for large and medium-scale coal projects came from overseas, Rong said, adding that his bank would try to raise more foreign capital for coal projects in China.
"We need to foster a sound investment environment for foreign investors so as to enhance their confidence," Rong told the conference.
Klingner said Beijing had made large strides in opening its doors to the once-sensitive power sector but foreign firms would require stronger legal guarantees before taking the plunge into the Chinese market.
"Foreign companies see the regulatory framework for mining investments, especially insofar as it relates to resources title, as critical to the success of any long-term commercial venture," he said.
Better risk assessment, long-term contracts and assurances of continued profits are also vital to entice foreign firms to China's coal sector, he said.
"The international financial community will want these issues settled prior to the funding of large-scale mining projects," he said.
China, with more than 80,000 small-scale mines, needed to form large-scale production to improve efficiency and cut down on waste and pollution, he said, adding that streamlining was now being balanced against the politically-charged concerns of mass unemployment.
Large-scale mining could also greatly reduce China's high rate of mining deaths and accidents, he said. About 10,000 workers are killed in China's mines every year.
China has said it would open at least 300 coal projects to foreign investors with priority to foreign investment in pit-head power plants, coal transport facilities and coal-bed methane. It has not said whether investors would be allowed to export output.
