Xujiachong village in central China's Hubei province is nestled in a lush, narrow valley dotted with whitewashed concrete houses, small cabbage patches and freshwater fish ponds.
Ruddy-cheeked children peer out of ill-lit doorways while farmers steer belching tractors along dirt roads lined with orange trees, their verdant branches heavy with the bright, tart fruit.
Xujiachong is much like any other village in China, except that it is scheduled to be wiped off the map by the end of next year.
The village of 2,480 people is just one of hundreds of towns and hamlets that will be flooded by the silt-laden waters of the Yangtze river when the mighty waterway is diverted in November 1997 as part of the giant Three Gorges dam project.
"The total number of people to be relocated under the Three Gorges project, those in submerged areas, is now 840,000," said Wang Jiazhu, deputy general manager of the China Yangtze Three Gorges Project Development Co that is building the mammoth dam.
"We are estimating there could be a million or 1.2 million at most, taking into account the population increase during the 17 years of construction," Wang said.
In Yichang county, site of the future dam, more than 12,300 people have been resettled from the sprawling construction site that flanks the broad, snaking river, said Wang Jiangyi, deputy director of the Yichang Resettlement Bureau.
Evacuation of the giant reservoir area -- to cover more than 600 square km (230 square miles) -- began in 1994 and will involve moving about 100,000 people from Yichang county alone, Wang Jiangyi said.
LEAVING ANCESTRAL HOMELANDS
The fates of hundreds of thousands of households in Hubei and neighbouring Sichuan province were sealed in 1992 when Beijing ended seven decades of debate to give the green light to start work on the gargantuan dam that is to harness the power of the world's third longest river.
Beijing hopes the project, to be completed in the year 2009, will help to power China's economic charge in the 21st century and bring an end to disastrous flooding that has claimed the lives of more than 300,000 people in this century alone.
Officials say they have run into opposition from many local residents unwilling to abandon their ancestral homes and traditional lifestyles.
"There are residents who aren't willing to move," said Wang Kaidong, village chief of Xujiachong, which is just two km (1.2 miles) from the dam site.
"It is understandable that they don't want to leave the homes their families have occupied for generations," she said.
IDEOLOGICAL WEAPONS AND CASH CARROTS
Communist Party officials have tried to combat anti-relocation sentiment by preaching traditional communist values of self-sacrifice while holding out cash and material incentives.
"The magic weapon of our party is ideological work," said Wang Kaidong. "We talk face to face with residents about the resettlement policies and compensation standards."
Of the project's estimated 204 billion yuan ($24.6 billion) cost, about 40 billion yuan has been earmarked to finance the resettlement, said He Gong, a deputy general manager of the Three Gorges Development Co.
Government work teams have fanned out through the countryside offering compensation to residents based on the size and quality of their houses and farms that will be committed to the watery mass grave.
Total compensation for each family ranges from 30,000 to 80,000 yuan and those being resettled to rural areas are to receive parcels of land to build new houses on, Wang Jiangyi of the resettlement bureau said.
Blocks of apartment buildings have sprung up to house those moving into urban areas to be employed in factories or tertiary industries, Wang Jiangyi said.
Relocated families will also enjoy preferential charges for electricity, water and road use and will be allowed to make two moving trips free of charge, Wang Jiangyi said.
If ethical campaigns and cash rewards failed to convince the stubborn to pack up, authorities could still resort to the force of law, Wang said.
"In the resettlement process, if there is any case of... disrupting the public order that prevents the process from proceeding smoothly...it will be dealt with in accordance with punitive public security regulations," he said.
($1 = 8.3 yuan)
