To dam or not to dam the mighty Yangtze river has been a question that has teased China for much of this century.
Electrical engineer-turned-premier Li Peng finally took the decision to dam, and four years later officials charged with the giant project are confident neither funding shortfalls nor environmental activists will stand in their way.
Officials of the China Three Gorges Project Development Corp say the dam in the central province of Hubei faces a funding shortfall of one-sixth of its multi-billion dollar price tag.
But they vow to complete it even if foreign funding now being sought fails to materialise.
The price tag of the world's biggest water control project, harnessing the power of Asia's longest river, is expected to be at least 240 billion yuan ($29 billion), officials told reporters at a recent visit.
That however could rise as high as 300 billion yuan ($36 billion), depending on such variables as inflation and interest rates, they said.
Costs were estimated to be 90 billion yuan at 1993 levels while interest and inflation would add at least 150 billion yuan by the time the dam was completed in 2009 after 17 years of construction, said Three Gorges Corp vice-president Yuan Guolin.
"Our capital shortfall, as a proportion of the total funding needed, is about 20 percent," Yuan said.
The central government will directly pick up 50 percent of the projected minimum 240 billion yuan tab while loans from state banks would account for another 20 percent, said He Gong, deputy general manager for the Three Gorges Corp.
ABOUT 30 BILLION IN LOANS
Of this, the State Development Bank would provide about 30 billion yuan in loans while revenue allocated from the Gezhouba dam downstream on the Yangtze would bring in an additional 15-18 billion yuan, He said.
The project would start generating money itself when some of the dam's 26 turbines whir into life in 2003, financing about another 10 percent of the cost.
The dam will eventually fire out 84.7 million megawatt-hours of electricity a year, transmitting power to nearly every major city in China.
Asked how the company would make up a shortfall of at least 40 billion yuan, officials coupled rosy predictions about overseas bond issues and export credits with steely defiance against foreign jitters over the project.
"The overall trend is that we need to develop towards international channels," Yuan said. He hailed a deal with Canada for $30 million in export credits for the project's computer network.
The company was eyeing a long-delayed foreign bond issue in the near future and could look to a stock issue further down the road, said deputy general manager Wang Jiazhu.
"When we will issue bonds and stocks remains to be seen. When the time comes, we will make an announcement," Wang said.
EXIMBANK SHORT-SIGHTED, SAYS YUAN
Vice-president Yuan dismissed the U.S. Export-Import Bank's refusal to finance the dam because of environmental worries as short-sighted folly, saying the decision would only hurt U.S. firms and workers.
"We would welcome a change in attitude by the United States toward the Three Gorges," Yuan said. "It would not only be good for the project, it would bring numerous benefits to American companies."
The dam, which will create a 600-square km (230-square mile) reservoir, has drawn heavy fire from environmental and human rights groups abroad, who fear damage to the river ecology and fret over the resettlement of 1.2 million local residents.
Chief engineer Gan Weiyi vowed China would find the funding at home if cash failed to materialise from abroad.
"If you don't want to lend to me, I can overcome that," Gan said.
Faced with the job of moving 102.6 million cubic metres (3.6 trillion cubic feet) of soil and stone, the company has bought construction equipment from Caterpillar Inc of the United States, Japan's Komatsu Construction Co and other foreign firms.
"Our purchases of foreign equipment now total more than $100 million," vice-president Yuan said.
BIG PRIZE
The big prize will be landed in the middle of 1997.
It is then that China is to sign a 10 billion yuan contract with foreign suppliers for the 14 700-megawatt generators that will be part of the heart of the riparian behemoth.
Consortia involving Germany's Siemens, GE Canada, and Hitachi and Toshiba of Japan -- among others -- are expected to participate in the bidding, scheduled to open on December 18.
The numbers are on a giant scale. More than 27 million cubic metres (953 million cubic feet) of concrete will be poured into the dam, shiplocks and navigation channels. About 354,000 tonnes of rebar and nearly 281,000 tonnes of metal will be used.
To carry out the herculean task, China has mobilised tens of thousands of workers to build the project.
A steady stream of dumptrucks with tires twice as tall as a man rumble to and from the sprawling construction site. Mountains of sand, gravel and steel bars line the roads.
Proud officials voiced conviction that the decision taken after seven decades of vacillation was the correct one.
"We are confident we have the capability to finish the construction," He said.
($1 = 8.3 yuan)
