China on Thursday warned the United States to stop selling arms to Taiwan, saying the issue could ruin relations despite the friendly smiles shown on Defence Minister Chi Haotian's current U.S. visit.
Washington's arms sales to Beijing's island rival would destroy the warming Sino-U.S. relationship that was vital for maintaining regional and world peace, the official China Daily said in a commentary.
"To continue to sell weapons to Taiwan will upset Washington's apple cart and eventually ruin Sino-U.S. relations," the commentary said.
Although Chi Haotian's long-delayed visit to the United States could help renew bilateral ties, Washington's policy towards Taiwan would continue to be a sore point in relations between the two Pacific giants, the commentary said.
"A friendly smile cannot ignore or wipe away the underlying embarrassment that exists bewteen the two countries," it said.
"The ties can be broken if the U.S. continues to sell advanced weapons and military equipment to Taiwan."
Chi is on a two-week fence-mending visit that was postponed twice by wrangling over Taiwan.
Taiwan's procurement of U.S. weapons would only undermine peaceful reunification with mainland China by fanning sentiment for independence on the island, the commentary said.
"The sale of weapons to Taiwan will whip up whatever dreams of independence some people are harbouring on the island," it said, adding that Beijing would seek reunification at any cost.
"The Chinese government will not stand idly by and ignore any challenge to that goal," the commentary said, echoing a blunt speech Chi delivered to U.S. military officers on Tuesday.
Chi held talks with President Bill Clinton and Defence Secretary William Perry on Monday, pointedly refusing to renounce Beijing's right to retake Taiwan by force if necessary.
Beijing and Taipei split at the end of the Chinese civil war in 1949 when the Nationalist army fled into exile on the island off the mainland's southeastern coast.
Sino-U.S. relations were strained in March when Washington sent two aircraft carriers to waters near Taiwan in the wake of missile tests and military exercises held by Beijing to intimidate the island in the run-up to its first direct presidential elections.
Washington recognises communist Beijing as the sole legal representative of all China but maintains the right to arm and even defend the island that Beijing regards as a renegade province.
Taiwan's Defence Minister Chiang Chung-ling said on Wednesday he was not worried that the thaw in U.S.-China military ties would harm the island's ability to procure advanced weapons from the United States.
Two days before Chi arrived in the United States, the U.S. Army announced it had awarded a $63 million contract to a Boeing Co unit to produce 74 high-tech Avenger anti-aircraft missile systems for Taiwan.
Taiwan has also been allowed to buy Patriot anti-missile missile batteries from U.S. defence giant Raytheon Co.
The Avengers and Patriots are to enter service by 1999, boosting the island's defences against China's People's Liberation Army.
