China's defence sector and state-owned heavy industries are the country's biggest loss-makers but reform of the lumbering state sector is proceeding at a snail's pace, analysts said on Friday.
More than 45 percent of China's 68,800 state industrial firms posted losses from January to September, a rise of 17.6 percent from the same period last year, according to the latest data from the State Statistical Bureau.
"Those most in need of help would be the military industries and traditional industries," said Zheng Haihang, a professor of industrial economics at the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences.
Traditional industries included the coal and oil sectors as well as heavy industry, Zheng said by telephone.
"To put it simply, it's mostly these traditional industries, which have a very backward structure," Zheng said of the state sector's mounting losses.
Many of China's state-run enterprises are overstaffed and unable to compete in domestic or overseas markets. They also carry the heavy burden of providing cradle-to-grave welfare services for their employees.
The combined losses of state firms reached 65.12 billion yuan ($7.8 billion) during the first nine months of the year, a rise of 45.7 percent from a year ago, official figures show.
Compounding the problem is interest on unpaid debts -- a substantial burden even after two interest rate cuts this year.
"The debt burden of state-owned enterprises is very heavy, so of course this affects their profitability," Zheng said.
The January-September net profits of China's state industries fell to 11.28 billion yuan, down 75.8 percent from the same period last year, the statistics show.
Reform of defence industries -- many based in remote and backward inland regions and fitted with ageing technology -- had proceeded slowly, the economist said.
"Military industries are trying to transform into civilian industries, but the transition is extremely difficult -- there's no capital," he said.
Officials have said more than 200 state firms have been declared insolvent to date but Beijing has been wary of pushing ahead with bankruptcies.
Beijing fears that reform of state enterprises will lead to mass unemployment and eventually spark social unrest, said one Western analyst reached by telephone.
"That's one major reason why reform is going so slowly," said the analyst, who declined to be identified.
China's trade unions had set up a special fund this year to help workers in ailing state firms, the China Daily newspaper said on Friday.
"The relief fund...is designed to help employees from money-losing state-owned enterprises maintain decent living standards," the newspaper said.
Unions had raised 1.2 billion yuan so far this year to help about seven million impoverished workers in state enterprises and disaster-stricken areas, it said.
($1 = 8.3 yuan)
