China has sentenced two veteran democracy activists to hard labour for up to three years, a fellow dissident said on Saturday.
Authorities in Taiyuan in central China's Shanxi province sentenced Fu Guoyong to three years of re-education through labour, the dissident told Reuters by telephone.
Fellow activist Chen Ping, who had worked with Fu on pro-democracy tracts, had been sentenced to one year of labour reform, said the dissident who asked not to be identified.
"The reason was because they published articles abroad about democracy," said the dissident. "They just wrote some articles. There really was no reason for this."
Authorities had branded the essays counter-revolutionary, said a statement by the Information Centre of Human Rights and Democratic Movement in China.
Taiyuan police detained Fu, 29, in late July for what they said were illegal political activities.
Chen, 45, had been arrested in Taiyuan in August and was sentenced together with Fu, the source said, adding he did not know when the sentences had been passed.
Police in Taiyuan contacted by telephone declined to comment on the cases. Family members were not available.
Fu moved to Taiyuan in late June, complaining of repeated harassment by police in Hangzhou city in the eastern province of Zhejiang, where he had been living with his wife.
Fu previously served two years in a labour camp for his role in the student-led demonstrations in Beijing's Tiananmen Square that were crushed by the military with heavy loss of life on June 4, 1989.
Police detained Fu for more than a month in December 1995 after he, along with dissidents Wang Donghai and Chen Longde, wrote a letter calling for the release of Wei Jingsheng, widely regarded as the father of China's modern democracy movement.
Fu also joined in an appeal with Wang and Chen Longde to China's parliament before the 1996 anniversary of the bloody June 4 crackdown, demanding the release of those jailed for their involvement in the movement.
Fu and Chen Ping's sentences come amid a widening crackdown on dissent by Beijing. Most dissidents are already serving lengthy sentences in prisons or labour camps or have been forced into exile.
China drew international condemnation when a Beijing court sentenced former student leader Wang Dan to 11 years in prison in October for conspiring to subvert the government.
Beijing dismisses criticism of its human rights record as interference in its internal affairs.
A Chinese court last week sentenced dissident Zhang Zong'ai to five years in prison for counter-revolutionary incitement.
Three pro-democracy activists are currently standing trial on charges of counter-revolutionary propaganda and incitement in Hefei, capital of the central province of Anhui.
In the southern boomtown of Shenzhen that borders Hong Kong, two labour activists are standing trial for conspiring to subvert the government.
