Chinese President Jiang Zemin, in a new overture to rival Taiwan, on Tuesday called on Taiwanese from all walks of life to offer their views and suggestions on ways to reunify the mainland and the island.
"We welcome Taiwanese people of all circles to raise beneficial ideas and suggestions on peaceful reunification," Jiang said in a New Year's address broadcast on state television.
Jiang's proposal was seen by some Chinese analysts as a possible step away from paramount leader Deng Xiaoping's formula of "one country, two systems", long rejected by Taiwan's leadership.
Under the formula the two sides would reunify, with Taiwan enjoying autonomy and maintaining its own army.
"Jiang is trying to be flexible and open-minded on the Taiwan issue," said one China watcher who declined to be identified.
Jiang is eager to secure a place in modern China's history alongside Mao Zedong, who established the People's Republic, and Deng, who cemented the return of the British colony of Hong Kong to Chinese rule.
"This is the carrot following the stick that China wielded this year," the analyst said.
Ties plunged last March when Beijing conducted war games and missile tests in waters close to Taiwan in the run-up to the island's first direct presidential elections.
Jiang, who doubles as the Communist Party chief, told Taiwan's leadership to work to repair strained ties and said reunification was the common wish of all Chinese people.
Achieving reunification at the earliest possible date was in the interests of mainlanders and residents of Taiwan, he said.
"The Taiwanese authorities would be well advised to put the interests of the nation first and to stop all activities of splitting the motherland," Jiang added.
Beijing has viewed Taiwan as a rebel province since the end of the Chinese civil war in 1949 and suspects the island is covertly seeking independence. Taipei says it wants reunification, but on different terms.
Jiang said China would continue to push for direct transport and trade links with Taiwan, which have been banned for almost five decades.
China warned Taiwan earlier on Tuesday that its tight controls on trade with the mainland were harming economic ties but said links could be helped by the return of Hong Kong to Beijing's rule next year.
"If the Taiwan authorities continue to pursue a policy of tight controls, circumstances will not be good for trade contacts," the official Xinhua news agency said.
This was "something that we do not want to see", the agency quoted Wang Hui, an official of the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation, as saying.
But Wang said he believed the return of Hong Kong to Chinese rule on July 1, 1997, and the possible entry of Beijing into the World Trade Organisation (WTO) would "provide good opportunities for developing economic and trade exchanges" between China and Taiwan.
Indirect trade between Taiwan and China was worth $17.76 billion in the first 10 months of 1996, up 2.6 percent compared with the same period of last year, the island's Board of Foreign Trade said at the weekend.
