China is singing the praises of paramount leader Deng Xiaoping in a primetime television series but the paean to the ageing patriarch is getting mixed reviews from the man in the street.
Beijing residents viewed the first few episodes of the 12-part documentary on the 92-year-old leader with a mixture of adulation, scepticism and indifference.
"I think it's great. I've seen all of the episodes so far and I'm going to watch the rest, too," said a 35-year-old journalist on Sunday.
"Deng should be honoured for China's economic development," he told Reuters. "The show is just great."
Deng, whose pragmatic policies helped transform China from a backward Stalinist state into an economic powerhouse, has not been seen in public in nearly two years. In his last appearance he looked frail and faltering.
Speculation abounds about his health, ranging from rumours he was admitted to hospital in recent days to reports he remains at home with little change in health but with fading lucidity.
But he has been lionised in the television series.
Analysts have said the documentary would help define Deng's legacy to the current party leadership and set the tone for a crucial Communist Party congress due later this year.
Saturday's episode dealt with the period just after the 1949 Communist revolution and strove to show how Deng began forming his market-oriented economic policies.
While the television series has so far avoided measuring Deng's more open policies against the disastrous radicalism of revolutionary leader Mao Zedong, the contrast was not lost on some viewers.
"Mao liberated the country but he made mistakes like the Cultural Revolution," said the journalist in a reference to the decade of ultra-leftism that Mao inspired in 1966.
Some viewers said the programme was carefully crafted by China's propaganda tsars and may not have given the whole story.
"Of course they have to censor a few things," said one 27-year-old musician who declined to be identified.
The series has not mentioned Deng's second wife who left him for another Communist official in 1932 when he fell from political grace for the first of three times in his long career.
But many people said they had not watched any of the episodes, while others who saw it were less than enthusiastic.
"I saw some of it but there were too many commercials," said a middle-aged woman who was selling peanuts and sunflower seeds at a roadside market.
A soldier who was sweeping snow from a Beijing street, asked for his thoughts on the man responsible for China's opening up to the outside world, said; "I don't know anything about that. And why do you ask?"
