China has revived a call by Communist Party chief Jiang Zemin to wipe out poverty before the end of the century in a bid to placate its backward hinterland, analysts said.
The text of a speech Jiang made in September calling for more funds to fight poverty was splashed across front pages of major newspapers on Monday.
The coverage was aimed partly at bolstering the Communist Party's standing in impoverished but politically sensitive regions, one Beijing-based Western diplomat said.
"It shows that the party leadership has not forgotten the poor," said the diplomat, who asked not to be identified.
The reports were also timed to show concern ahead of the Lunar New Year, China's most important holiday, analysts said.
Chinese leaders traditionally make highly publicised trips to poor areas to hand out gifts before the holiday which this year begins on February 7.
"The poor can have a happy Lunar New Year, but after the holidays, life will still be difficult," one Chinese analyst said.
"The gap between the rich and poor is becoming wider and there's more bitterness."
China's eastern coastal provinces have boomed under nearly two decades of economic reform that have allowed some areas to get rich faster than others. Provinces in central and western China have lagged badly.
Beijing fears that the widening gap between rich and poor could spark social unrest and undermine its grip on power.
Analysts said that was a major concern ahead of a crucial Communist Party congress scheduled for later this year and expected to set the course of national policy over the medium term.
"The scale of poverty relief will be bigger this year," the Chinese analyst said.
More people were in need of aid after being laid off from loss-making or insolvent state enterprises, he said.
"They're playing up a 1996 speech to show the government is earnestly concerned about the problem and trying to do something about it," the analyst said.
In the speech, Jiang urged the nation to "gnaw the hard bone" of poverty by pouring more funds into eliminating the problem by the end of the century.
China says it reduced the number of people living in poverty by five million in 1995 but about 65 million people are still struggling to get by with incomes under the official poverty line of 530 yuan ($64) a year.
The central government currently spends 10.8 billion yuan a year on poverty relief and Beijing has pledged a further 1.5 billion yuan to build roads and water facilities in impoverished areas.
During an inspection tour of some of China's poorest regions last September, Jiang tried to resurrect communist revolutionary fervour to fight poverty.
He exhorted villagers and officials to resurrect the "glorious tradition" of the revolution that won the civil war for the communists in 1949.
($1 = 8.3 yuan)
