China said on Tuesday the health of its 92-year-old paramount leader Deng Xiaoping was relatively good and had not changed dramatically.
"For an old man, he is doing relatively well," Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Shen Guofang told a news briefing when asked about Deng's health.
"There has been no big change," Shen said. He declined to comment further.
Deng, whose market-oriented policies helped transform China from a backward Stalinist state into one of the world's most dynamic economies, has not been seen in public since early 1994. In his last appearance he looked frail and faltering.
Speculation abounds about his health, ranging from rumours he was admitted to hospital in recent days to reports he remains at home though no longer mentally alert.
Deng has vowed to visit Hong Kong to witness the return of the British colony to Chinese rule at midnight on June 30 but a Beijing vice-mayor believed to be close to the Deng family said recently this would be difficult.
Deng oversaw the negotiations that led to an agreement for Britain to hand back the territory it has held for 150 years. He has said repeatedly he hoped to be able to witness the transfer of sovereignty.
He has spent his twilight years cloistered off from the public eye, creating opportunities for power-hungry, would-be heirs fighting for his title to use his name to strengthen their hand, analysts say.
China Central Television is broadcasting a 12-part documentary series about Deng's life that shows a vigourous leader portrayed against a background of golden clouds.
The man who launched China's economic reforms no longer holds public office but remains highly influential.
Deng's health has long been the subject of intense speculation both in China and elsewhere because his death is expected to trigger a power struggle among those eager to succeed him as the de facto emperor of the world's most populous nation.
Analysts have said the series was carefully crafted by those who would benefit most from polishing up Deng's image.
President Jiang Zemin is in line to succeed Deng as China's most powerful man but it is widely believed that Jiang still needs to shore up his position as the heir to Deng's political mantle.
Jiang, Deng's own anointed heir-apparent, will need to call on the clout of his sponsor to consolidate his position at a crucial party meeting later this year, analysts have said.
The television paean to Deng, who always openly shunned the personality cult surrounding Mao Zedong, has been seen as evidence of his waning control over the affairs of the government.
