A U.S. forensics team has arrived in China to recover the remains of crew members from a crashed World War Two bomber recently discovered in south-western China, U.S. officials said on Sunday.
The team from the U.S. Department of Defence would focus on recovering and identifying the remains of the doomed bomber's crew, a U.S. official told reporters at a briefing.
"Our purpose is to recover all human remains and make the fullest possible identification of the 10 crew members on that plane," said the official, who asked not to be identified.
Officials of south-western China's Guangxi region would hand over the remains of the 10 men, aged from 19 to 26, who died when the B-24 bomber slammed into a cliff near scenic Guilin on August 31, 1944 while returning from a bombing raid on Japanese ships around Taiwan, the official said.
Local villagers looking for wild mountain herbs had stumbled across the scattered remnants of the bomber in a remote ravine last October, he said.
U.S. officials first learned of the wreckage when Chinese President Jiang Zemin handed over a video and photographs of the crash site to U.S. President Bill Clinton when the two met in Manila last November at the summit of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum.
Chinese Defence Minister Chi Haotian gave U.S. Secretary of Defence William Perry two dogtags recovered from the site during a meeting in Washington last month.
China's claim that the wreckage was found last October appeared to be true, the official said.
"There's no indication that it is anything other than what they said it was," the official said, adding that the Chinese government had given them full cooperation in arranging the repatriation of the remains.
Some analysts have said Beijing may have known of the wreck for some time but has made it public only at a time when it is eager to improve strained ties with Washington.
"The Chinese see this as a humanitarian issue," the official said.
U.S. forces lost contact with the bomber after it was forced to change course to Guilin because of a Japanese assault against its original base in Liuzhou, also in Guangxi region, he said.
The cause of the crash was still unknown and the forensic team would not seek to discover what brought the plane down on this trip, he said.
Video footage of the site seen by reporters showed five sets of dog tags, eight pistols, machineguns and other pieces of equipment recovered from the destroyed aircraft.
Chinese authorities had sealed off the crash site and the video and photographs suggested the wreckage had been untouched for more than 52 years, the official said.
"The recovery of small items, usually the first things to go, would indicate there has been no scavenging," he said.
The remains would be flown back to Hawaii next Friday for analysis and identification, he said, adding that it could take weeks to years to identify the remains.
U.S. officials had made contact with representatives of all 10 families including at least one son, he said.
A U.S. team trekked to a Himalayan site in remote Tibet in 1994 to recover remains from another U.S. aircraft that crashed in 1945, another U.S. official said.
From 500-1,000 U.S. airmen remained unaccounted for after disappearing during World War Two flights over China, where U.S. aviators for years supported attempts by the then Nationalist government to resist Japanese invaders.
