A U.S. defence team found human remains and parts of an American bomber on Tuesday after making its way up a steep mountain slope in southwestern China to inspect a recently found World War Two crash site.
The officials clawed their way up the slippery, granite face of Maoer mountain in Guangxi province and pronounced the mission a success despite the injury in a fall of a U.S. reporter accompanying them.
"We consider this a very successful mission," said Alan Liotta, deputy director of the MIA/POW (Missing in Action/Prisoner of War) office under the Department of Defence.
Speaking to reporters in the town of Xingan after returning from the site late on Tuesday, he said findings confirmed information about the fatal crash that occurred on August 31, 1944.
The B-24 bomber with its 10-man crew never returned from a raid on Japanese ships around Taiwan.
"Any step that we can take to bring a case closer to resolution and to provide a family some answers ...indeed gives us some satisfaction," Liotta told reporters.
The six-man forensic team from the Department of Defence flew into the Guangxi region on Monday to try to recover remains and learn more about the crash.
Local residents, searching for wild herbs in the region's thick forest, discovered the crash site last October.
U.S. officials first learned of the find when Chinese President Jiang Zemin handed over a video and photographs of the crash site to President Bill Clinton when the two met in Manila last November at the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum.
Chinese Defence Minister Chi Haotian gave U.S. Secretary of Defence William Perry two dogtags recovered from the site during a meeting in Washington last month.
Chinese authorities will turn over some of the remains later on Wednesday and a formal ceremony is to be held in Beijing on Friday.
The human remains would be taken back to the United States for identification, Liotta said.
The U.S. team's elation at reaching what was left of the bomber was dulled by an injury to Voice of America journalist Stephanie Ho who was knocked unconscious briefly after she slipped 75 metres (yards) down a slope returning from the site.
Ho lost her footing as she made her way across the moss-covered face of the mountain. A doctor at the scene said her injury was not serious but she was taken by ambulance to a hospital in the city of Guilin.
"This was extremely treacherous terrain and a very difficult climb," said Liotta.
Journalists who made the trek to the site saw a pile of charred and twisted metal wedged into a narrow crevass on the mountain side. Higher up the slope was a chunk of the plane's fuselage along with part of an engine, also wedged into rock.
"We had a total destruction of the aircraft," Liotta said.
Two farmers hunting for wild herbs found the crash site and alerted officials. They will receive 50,000 yuan ($6,000) each as a reward from the state, local authorities said.
U.S. officials said they had made contact with all 10 families of the crewmen aboard the plane.
They also said the site appeared to have been untouched for more than half a century.
"It's no wonder it took 50 years to discover the site," said David Rankin, a forensic anthropologist with the Defence Department's Central Identification Laboratory in Hawaii.
"We are truly talking about an extremely remote, isolated area."
