China on Wednesday handed over to U.S. military officers the remains of U.S. airmen who died 52 years ago when their bomber crashed into a remote southwestern Chinese mountain during World War Two.
"No matter where we must go or how much time it takes, America does not forget its warriors and we will endeavour to bring each and every one home," said Alan Liotta, deputy director of the MIA/POW (Missing In Action/Prisoner of War) office under the Department of Defence.
A senior Chinese military officer handed over two wooden chests containing remains and a third filled with personal effects to uniformed U.S. officers in a brief ceremony in the southwestern Guangxi region.
Four U.S. soldiers in full military uniform took the boxes, exchanged salutes with the Chinese officer and placed a folded U.S. flag on each of the three boxes. A formal ceremony is to be held in Beijing on Friday.
"Fifty years ago these brave young men scattered their blood over this beautiful region," said Liang Ziwei, director of foreign affairs in the town of Xingan.
A six-man forensic team from the U.S. Department of Defence clawed its way up the steep, slippery face of Maoer mountain on Tuesday to inspect the crash site and found human remains and parts of an American bomber.
The officials said findings confirmed information about the fatal crash that occurred on August 31, 1944. The human remains would be taken back to the United States for identification.
Local residents searching for wild herbs discovered the crash site last October. The B-24 bomber with its 10-man crew never returned from a raid on Japanese ships around Taiwan.
"I like the idea... that even if it is 52 years later that we discovered the remains that we make the effort to bring them back and show the honour and respect they deserve," U.S. Lieutenant Colonel Paul Phillips said after the ceremony.
People's Liberation Army Colonel Fu Jianping voiced China's gratitude for U.S. help in fighting Japan in World War Two.
"As a military man, I have a great respect for their spirit, especially the airmen who met with disaster here," he told Reuters.
U.S. officials first learned of the find when Chinese President Jiang Zemin handed over a video and photographs of the crash site to President Bill Clinton when the two met in Manila last November at the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum.
Jiang revealed the find at a time when Sino-U.S. ties, which plunged early last year, were recovering significantly.
"This demonstrates a spirit of cooperation and a longing for future peace and renewed relationships," U.S. Major Mark Keene said after the ceremony.
Chinese Defence Minister Chi Haotian gave U.S. Secretary of Defence William Perry two dogtags recovered from the site during a meeting in Washington last month.
Journalists who made the trek to the site saw a pile of charred and twisted metal wedged into a narrow crevasse on the mountain side. Higher up the slope was a chunk of the plane's fuselage along with part of an engine, also wedged into rock.
U.S. officials said they had made contact with all 10 families of the crewmen aboard the plane. They said the site appeared to have been untouched for more than half a century.
