A U.S. military honour guard on Friday formally took back the remains of U.S. airmen killed in World War Two and sent them on their final journey home.
Chinese officials handed over to U.S. Ambassador James Sasser three black cases containing the remains of the B-24 bomber's crew, who died when their plane hit a steep mountain slope in China's southwestern Guangxi region 52 years ago.
Under a crisp blue winter sky, uniformed men and women from the U.S. Army, Marine Corps and Navy placed the remains in three body-length aluminium cases and covered each with an American flag in a ceremony at Beijing's Capital Airport.
"This ceremony is dedicated to the American servicemen who made contributions and sacrificed their lives to resist fascist aggression," said Mei Ping, director of the North American and Oceanian Affairs Office of China's Foreign Ministry.
"The remains of these airmen will now be repatriated to their homeland where they can finally rest in peace," Mei said at the ceremony.
The oblong cases were loaded onto a U.S. C-141 Starlifter transport aircraft that was to fly the remains to the Department of Defence's Central Identification Laboratory in Hawaii for identification.
The remains represented more than one person but it was still unknown how many individuals they belonged to, said Alan Liotta of the MIA/POW (Missing in Action/Prisoner of War) Office under the Department of Defence.
Chinese and U.S. officials and soldiers saluted the dead airmen as a military dirge drifted across the airport tarmac.
U.S. officials said the mission to recover the remains was part of an ongoing effort by the U.S. and Chinese governments to provide a full accounting of American soldiers lost in regional conflicts.
"After 50 years, we have every reason, between the United States and China, to live in peace and work for peace, security and prosperity of mankind," Mei told reporters.
U.S. officials first learned of the find when Chinese President Jiang Zemin handed over a video and photographs of the crash site to President Bill Clinton when the two met in Manila last November at the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum.
Jiang revealed the find at a time when both Washington and Beijing say ties are improving after plunging early last year.
Two local farmers discovered the wreckage of the aircraft last October after becoming lost while looking for wild herbs.
The B-24 bomber with its 10-man crew never returned to its base in Guangxi after completing a raid on Japanese ships around Taiwan on August 31, 1944.
A six-man forensic team from the Department of Defence that clawed its way up the steep, slippery face of Mao'er mountain on Tuesday to inspect the crash site found more human remains and parts of the bomber.
U.S. officials said they had made contact with all 10 families of the crewmen aboard the plane. They said the site appeared to have been untouched for more than half a century.
