China said on Monday it would support Hong Kong's efforts to expand foreign trade relations after the territory returns to Beijing's control in mid-1997 provided such ties did not undermine China's sovereignty.
"We stand ready to support Hong Kong in its efforts to expand foreign economic and trade relations... provided the state's sovereignty and interests are not undermined," the Xinhua news agency quoted An Min, vice-minister of foreign trade, as saying.
Hong Kong would pursue a free trade policy to allow the free flow of commodities and capital after China resumes control of the British colony at midnight on June 30, An said.
"We will fully support a high degree of freedom and openness in Hong Kong's status as an ideal arena for concentration and flow of international capital," he said.
Hong Kong would be allowed to formulate its own economic and trade regulations as long as such policies conformed with the Basic Law, the territory's 1990 mini-constitution promulgated by Beijing, An said.
"All the existing laws will remain in force, except those provisions that contradict the Basic Law or those requiring amendments by the Hong Kong SAR (Special Administrative Region) legislature," An said.
A separate report in the China Taxation News said Hong Kong businessmen would retain preferential tax status for investments on the Chinese mainland.
"After 1997, China's tax laws will not apply to the Special Administrative Region and Hong Kong compatriots will be able to continue to receive the preferential treatment given to foreign investors," the newspaper said.
China gives foreign investors lower tax rates than Chinese companies and treats businessmen from Hong Kong as foreigners.
Foreign businessmen, however, are made to pay a whole range of fees that are not required from local businessmen. They also must hire employees through special government agencies, boosting their operating costs.
The newspaper did not say whether these fees would still apply to Hong Kong businesses after the transfer of power.
Chinese firms would not enjoy any priveleges when investing in Hong Kong after the handover, An said, adding that mainland companies would be treated as overseas investors.
"Chinese enterprises shall follow internationally prevailing economic and trade rules and local 'rules of the game'," An said.
"The principles we are pursuing are fair competition, vigorous development, operation guided by law and enriching Hong Kong," he said.
China hit a raw nerve in Hong Kong on Monday when it announced proposals to abolish a series of laws on democratic elections and civil liberties when it resumes sovereignty.
Beijing has tried to reassure Hong Kong's people they will enjoy considerable autonomy in running their affairs and maintain their free-wheeling capitalist way of life under the doctrine "one country, two systems".
China has said it will dismantle the territory's elected legislature and has appointed a provisional one to take its place on July 1.
