China has launched its first survey of its hundreds of millions of rural residents to gauge the impact of nearly two decades of economic reforms on the country's agricultural sector, officials said on Monday.
Since January 1, an army of six million officials and interviewers has been mobilised to canvass an estimated 230 million households in towns and villages throughout China's countryside, Shao Jianmin, deputy leader of the Beijing Rural Survey Team, said in an interview.
The survey is intended to gather more detailed data on rural areas, which have been radically transformed by the sweeping market-oriented agricultural and economic reforms launched by paramount leader Deng Xiaoping in the late 1970s, he said.
In Nankou township to the north of Beijing, a band of women interviewers visited the homes of local residents on Monday to ask about the size of their families, educational levels, what crops they grew and the occupations of family members.
Deng's reforms have encouraged private enterprise and rural industry, creating huge changes in the countryside, officials said.
"We don't know how people in the agricultural sector are making money," said interviewer Xie Fang.
Official statistics show 75 percent of China's 1.2 billion people are farmers but officials say this figure is misleading because it includes many former farmers who have since become migrant labourers or rural factory hands.
China's farmers have increasingly abandoned their ploughs to take up more lucrative jobs in small-scale township industries or to seek their fortunes in cities.
"After this survey the country will have an overall understanding of how many households are engaged in farming, how many are in township enterprises and how many have gone into business for themselves," Xie said.
"This is the first national rural census to be held since Liberation (the 1949 communist takeover)," Shao said.
"We will be going to every single household," he said.
The survey would take about one month to complete, he said, adding that the findings would be published at the end of this year and throughout next year.
The survey would cover the numbers and types of farming and non-farming rural firms as well as details of land use.
It would also gather data on infrastructure in villages, towns and counties, Shao said.
"The census will better serve national macro-economic policy and provide more accurate statistics for rural management," he said.
China must feed one-fifth of the world's people on just seven percent of its arable land but Beijing says a lack of accurate data about cropland has hindered efforts to stop the misuse and erosion of land and boost grain production.
The survey may clear up confusion over how much arable land China has. Last December, officials said the amount had been miscalculated, and they raised the estimated total to 147 million hectares (363 million acres) compared with 133.4 million (328 million acres) just six months earlier.
China has forecast a record grain output of 480 million tonnes last year, up from 1995's 466 million tonnes, a record at the time.
Survey authorities have launched a propaganda blitz to urge farmers to cooperate for the good of the nation, Shao said.
"They started broadcasts about it in December 1996," said Shen Jiucai, a 59-year-old gatekeeper and part-time farmer in Nankou. "This will be of great use and spur on agricultural development."
