China said on Tuesday it had drawn a pledge from Guatemala not to support Taiwan's bid to enter the United Nations, winning a round in its campaign to isolate the island on the world stage.
Guatemala had promised to abide by a U.N. resolution stating there was only one China and that Beijing was the sole legal representative of China, Foreign Ministry spokesman Shen Guofang told a regular news briefing.
"They pledged to respect the provisions of Resolution 2758 of the General Assembly and to use it as a guide to relevant actions in the United Nations," Shen said.
"According to this resolution, Guatemala cannot support Taiwan's actions to regain entry to the United Nations," Shen told reporters.
With China voting in favour, the U.N. Security Council on Monday approved the dispatch of 155 U.N. military observers to monitor peace accords in Guatemala that ended three decades of civil war in the Central American nation.
China had vetoed a similar resolution on January 10 because of Guatemala's ties to Taiwan, which Beijing views as a rebel province not entitled to diplomatic relations.
The 14 other Security Council members all supported sending the peacekeepers to Guatemala but a negative vote by China, one of five permanent council members with veto power, killed the three-month mission.
China and Guatemala had held several rounds of negotiations at the United Nations to seek a solution to the impasse, Shen said.
"Guatemala indicated it realised the gravity and sensitivity of the Taiwan issue and showed a willingness to take a positive approach," Shen said.
"This has borne great fruit for us," Shen said in a reference to Beijing's diplomatic coup in eroding some of the support Taiwan can muster for its U.N. bid from among its few remaining diplomatic allies.
Guatemala is among some 30 nations, mostly from Africa and Central America, that officially recognise Taipei instead of Beijing. Taiwan has doled out generous amounts of aid to these countries.
Taiwan's allies have co-sponsored an annual, unsuccessful resolution aimed at regaining U.N. membership for the island, which lost its seat in the world body to the People's Republic of China in 1971. Taiwan's campaign sends Beijing into a fury.
Taiwan and China have been arch rivals since the end of the Chinese civil war in 1949.
Taiwan says it is committed to eventual reunification but Beijing accuses Taipei of secretly working for independence and has moved to block the island's drive to gain more international recognition.
Guatemalan officials say they have not broken off diplomatic relations with Taiwan, although China had never requested they do so.
Diplomats said Beijing had also demanded a public apology from Guatemala for inviting Taiwan's foreign minister to the December 29 peace signing ceremonies. Guatemala has refused.
The U.N. mission will send 155 military observers to Guatemala for three months to monitor U.N.-brokered peace accords aimed at cutting the numbers of government troops and disarming guerrillas.
The peace process was to have begun later this week and be monitored by the military observers, who will now take weeks longer to arrive.
