China's top graft-buster on Monday lauded the country's success in battling corruption in 1996 but urged greater efforts this year to fight abuses of power by government officials.
Vigilant residents and rules requiring officials to report their incomes had helped uncover hundreds of thousands of graft cases in 1996, Xinhua news agency quoted Wei Jianxing, chairman of the Communist Party's Central Disciplinary Inspection Committee, as saying.
Authorities had also cracked several cases involving major officials such as Tie Ying, a member of the standing committee of the Beijing Municipal People's Congress, Wei told a meeting of the committee in Beijing that opened on Monday.
Several officials were dismissed during the investigation of those cases, Wei said but gave no further details.
More work was needed to fight corruption in 1997, Wei said.
"While affirming the achievements of 1996 we must address the serious situation and problems facing the anti-corruption drive," Wei said.
President and Communist Party chief Jiang Zemin launched a crackdown on corruption in 1995, saying that graft was a virus that threatened to topple the party.
Wei said China should place priority on fighting random and illegal fees on public roads, students in primary and middle schools and on farmers.
"The leaders and cadres of some localities and departments still do not have sufficient understanding of the seriousness and importance of the anti-corruption struggle," he said.
The party should step up internal scrutiny and encourage supervision of officials by the public, he said.
Residents made more than 1.45 million telephone calls to anti-graft hotlines in January-November last year, 16.8 percent more than the same period in 1995, he said.
The calls had resulted in more than 135,000 cases, including 5,643 involving officials at the county level or above, he said. The total number of cases in the period had risen 10.9 percent from the same time in 1995.
Disciplinary authorities had punished more than 116,000 people, up 14.3 percent from the year before. Of those, 3,695 were from the county level or above while 321 were provincial level officials, he said.
Investigators had found more than 21,000 cars used by party or government officials that exceeded standards set for officials, he said.
More than 72,000 officials had admitted using their positions to obtain better housing, with 74 percent handing over a total of 94 million yuan ($11.3 million) to pay for the housing, he said.
Some 85,000 officials, 95 percent of whom ranked above the county level, had handed over cash and gifts worth more than 51 million yuan ($6.1 million), he said.
Government agencies and state-owned enterprises had reduced entertainment expenses by 1.6 billion yuan ($193 million) after being forced to make full accountings of such items, he said.
"The use of public funds to engage in the unhealthy trend of 'eat, drink and be merry' has been contained somewhat," he said.
($1 = 8.3 yuan)
