China defended on Wednesday a proposal to roll back civil liberties in Hong Kong after the British colony reverts to Chinese rule this year, saying all rights and freedoms had limits.
Recent British reforms to Hong Kong's civil liberties laws had violated the Basic Law, the future mini-constitution of Hong Kong promulgated by Beijing, said Zhou Bingxin, an official with the Hong Kong and Macau Affairs Office under the State Council, China's cabinet.
"Hong Kong's original laws are in line with international human rights conventions and there is no need to unilaterally draft more laws," Zhou told a news conference.
Zhou's comments came amid criticism from Britain and the United States over a plan by the China-appointed body in charge of the handover to roll back laws protecting some civil rights in the colony.
A panel of the Preparatory Committee earlier this month listed 25 laws and articles, some the product of recent reforms and others the trappings of the colonial era, for repeal or amendment when Beijing resumes control of the territory.
The 1990 Basic Law and a 1984 Sino-British handover treaty promises Hong Kong's 6.3 million people a high degree of autonomy and permits them to retain their freewheeling capitalist system.
Zhou said the right to hold mass public gatherings and demonstrations in Hong Kong would be guaranteed by law after the handover on midnight on June 30 but said all countries had legal restrictions on such activities.
"No rights or freedoms are absolute, all of them have limits," Zhou said.
"For example, everyone has the freedom of speech, but must respect the rights and life of others and guarantee the safety of the state and public order," Zhou said.
"Limiting some rights and freedoms of the minority is to guarantee more rights and freedoms for the majority," Zhou said.
Britain last week voiced concern to China over the proposed changes as legally unsound and has protested against plans to scrap Hong Kong's elected legislature and replace it with a provisional body when it takes over.
U.S. President Bill Clinton said on Tuesday that Hong Kong's value to China might fall if liberties in the colony were lost after it returned to Beijing's rule.
Zhou dismissed international concerns over Hong Kong's post-handover liberties, saying he was optimistic about the colony's future.
"The Basic Law...explicitly states that Hong Kong residents enjoy the freedoms of speech, the press, publication and the freedoms of forming organisations, assembly and demonstration," Zhou said.
The 60-member provisional legislature held its first formal meeting last week in Shenzhen, across the border from Hong Kong, to avoid legal challenges to its legitimacy in the territory, where opponents have branded it as illegal.
Britain has challenged China to allow the world court in The Hague to rule on whether the existence of the provisional legislature violates the treaty governing the handover.
Beijing on Tuesday dismissed as irresponsible a proposal by U.S. Foreign Relations Committee Chairman Jesse Helms to bar members of Hong Kong's provisional legislature from visiting the United States.
