China warned Taiwan on Wednesday not to seek independence from the communist mainland, hinting the island would meet disaster if Taipei insisted on splitting from the motherland.
Taipei had failed to answer a 1995 call by Chinese President Jiang Zemin for reconciliation and had instead actively sought to split Taiwan from mainland China, the official Xinhua news agency said.
"We urge the Taiwan authorities to rein themselves in at the precipice so that they can see clearly that the status of Taiwan being part of China cannot be changed and that the trend of Taiwan's reunion with the motherland cannot be resisted," the agency said in a commentary.
Beijing, which views Taiwan as a rebel province, refuses to rule out the use of force to recover the island if Taipei declares independence.
However, the tough commentary by China's state news agency held out the possibility of a resumption of quasi-official talks if Taiwan's authorities showed they sincerely wanted the eventual unification they say is their goal.
The commentary was issued to mark the second anniversary of a conciliatory speech by Jiang, who urged an end to hostilities between the bitter political rivals and the opening of direct trade links.
Taiwan officials had shrugged off Jiang's olive branch and were actively working to divide China and further block economic and trade links, Xinhua said.
"The Taiwan authorities advocate 'splitting the country and ruling under separate regimes' and 'two equal political entities', which are in fact aimed at tearing apart China's sovereignty and territory," the agency said.
It said people gifted with insight and who had at heart the fundamental interests of Taiwan's people should unite and remove obstacles preventing talks.
"The Taiwan authorities, under pressure both from within and without, have to respond to the important speech of President Jiang Zemin and at least gesture to make strategic readjustments regarding some questions in the cross-straits relations," Xinhua said. It did not specify what adjustments were needed.
Taiwan has barred direct trade and transport links with the mainland since the two were separated at the end of the Chinese civil war in 1949. Taipei has clung to its ban as a last bargaining chip in talks on reunification with Beijing.
China's resumption of sovereignty over Hong Kong this year is expected to give Beijing more leverage in any talks.
"With the return of Hong Kong and that of Macau in 1999, the solution of the Taiwan question and the motherland's reunification will become more prominent issues for all Chinese people," Xinhua said.
Analysts have said Jiang is eager to bring Taiwan into the mainland's communist fold to etch his name in history alongside the late Chairman Mao Zedong and current paramount leader Deng Xiaoping, who negotiated the return of Hong Kong from Britain.
China would continue to promote economic exchanges between the two sides while keeping a vigilant watch over any movement toward independence for Taiwan, the Xinhua commentary said.
"The fight against separatism and Taiwan independence has illustrated the Chinese people's strong determination and ability...to strike hard against separatist activities and Taiwan-independence forces in Taiwan," the agency said.
