China issued an anti-corruption communique to the Communist Party on Thursday, warning members of the party that swept to power in 1949 on a platform of integrity not to exploit official power for personal profit.
The communique, issued by the ruling party's Central Commission for Discipline Inspection, also warned officials and the 57 million party members not to hold political views that differ from the party line.
Beijing had scored great successes in battling graft in 1996 but further efforts were needed to combat official corruption this year, said the communique, published by the People's Daily, mouthpiece of the ruling party. "We must see with a clear head that the phenomenon of corruption still exists and in some places is spreading rapidly," the communique said.
"Some unhealthy tendencies still have not been effectively contained and officials in some places and departments still do not have a sufficient understanding of the seriousness of the anti-corruption drive," it said. The communique followed a speech on Wednesday by President Jiang Zemin, who has staked much of his political credibility on fighting graft and who said the anti-corruption battle was a struggle upon which the fate of the nation and party depended.
It reminded government officials that they were forbidden from exploiting their political clout to secure loans, goods or business contracts for their spouses or children.
Beijing would also punish officials in loss-making state-owned firms who used company funds for personal use or who caused huge business losses through mismanagement, it said.
Disciplinary watchdogs would maintain a vigilant eye for officials who failed to toe the party line and be good communists, it said.
"Officials at every level...must strictly observe political discipline and maintain agreement with the central government in politics, ideology and action," it said.
"Party members, leaders and officials must...be honest in performing their duties, be staunch in their faith in communism and diligently uphold communist values," it said.
Those who violated political discipline would be strictly punished, it said without elaborating.
Corruption, virtually unknown in China under the strict Stalinist rule of the late party Chairman Mao Zedong, who led the communists to power in 1949, has boomed during nearly two decades of market-oriented economic reform.
Disciplinary authorities punished more than 116,000 officials for exploiting their positions for personal gain in 1996, up 14.3 percent from the year before, discipline committee chairman Wei Jianxing said this week.
More than 72,000 officials had owned up to using their power to obtain better housing, with 74 percent handing over a total of 94 million yuan ($11.3 million) to pay for the housing.
Analysts say Jiang, who in 1989 was plucked from his post as Shanghai party secretary to become anointed successor to paramount leader Deng Xiaoping, is anxious to win popular loyalty with his high-profile anti-graft campaign.
While the president and party chief has won some credit from the netting of corrupt senior officials such as former Beijing party chief and Politburo member Chen Xitong, many Chinese say results of the corruption crackdown have been patchy at best.
