The Commmonwealth Bank of Australia (CBA) warned again on Tuesday of a subdued profit outlook for the current 1996/97 year and beyond, citing a competitive housing market, falling margins and higher wage costs.
CBA chairman Tim Besley told shareholders at the bank's annual meeting that nothing in the first three months of the year had changed earlier forecasts of flat profits in the current year to June 30, 1997.  
"We are now three months into the financial year and nothing has changed to prompt the bank to revise this assessment," Besley said in his chairman's address.
"1996/97 is shaping up to be every bit as challenging as we envisaged," he said.
"The home loan market remains intensely competitive."
Commonwealth Bank reported a net profit of A$1.12 billion in 1995/96, up from A$983 million in 1994/95, and said when it released its results in August that it expected earnings to be flat in 1996/97.  
Besley said CBA's directors aimed to maintain the ratio of dividends per share to earnings per share at around 80 percent in 1996/97.
However, Besley also said later at the meeting that banking industry profits could fall over the long run and that CBA would have to work hard to ensure its profit falls were less than those of other banks.
"We have to be sure that ours (profits) come down by as little as any of the others," Besley said in answer to a shareholder's question.  
Besley later told reporters banking industry profits would be under pressure in the future.
"The industry will be under pressure of falling profits unless, just like in any other industry, it pays great attention to its costs and gets very efficient," he said.
"There's no suggestion that (the CBA's) profits would fall off this year," he said, adding that it was the bank's objective to increase profits in 1997/98.
CBA Managing Director David Murray also played down Besley's earlier comments. "I read that comment to mean a fall in the growth rate in profits," he said.  
When asked if he too aimed for a rebound from the flat 1996/97 to profit growth in 1997/98, Murray said: "Yes. It means marketing better and containing our costs."
But he said it was too early to be specific about a possible profit rise in 1997/98. Murray however also told the annual meeting that cost control would be difficult.
He said CBA had restricted wages growth to four percent in the two years before the most recently negotiated enterprise bargaining agreements.  
"That (four percent over two years) is clearly not sustainable with the inflation rate and wage expectations where they are but we continue to bargain hard on that front."
CBA's share price closed down 11 cents at A$11.90, having earlier fallen to A$11.80 on the bearish comments from the annual meeting. "It's all on this talk of no earnings growth and wages pressure," one Melbourne broker said before the late session bounce.
Murray and Besley also repeated their view that official interest rates were more likely to be cut than raised before the end of the year.  
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 373-1800
