Rupert Murdoch predicted he would win his legal battle with Ted Turner and Time Warner Inc. and said his global media company, News Corp. Ltd., was on track to boost profits 20 percent this year.
In remarks published in News Corp.'s Courier Mail newspaper in Brisbane, Murdoch also was quoted as saying that he did not want to buy out Australia's other major newspaper publisher, John Fairfax Holdings Ltd.
News Corp. publishes major tabloid newspapers in Sydney and Melbourne, the Courier Mail and The Australian, also owns about 5 percent of Fairfax.
Discussing his recent feud with CNN founder Ted Turner and Time Warner, Murdoch said he was confident News Corp. would win its lawsuit against the $6.7 billion merger of Turner Broadcasting System Inc. and New York-based Time Warner, which was completed on Thursday after shareholders of both companies approved the deal.
"We've got a good stoush (fight) there," Murdoch said. "We'll win through there. How or where I don't know but we'll just keep the pressure on," he said.
Turner said on Thursday that Murdoch's lawsuit to block the merger of Turner Broadcasting and Time Warner, which creates the world's biggest media company, was a "frivolous piece of junk."
Murdoch and Turner have fought a pitched battle in recent months over the merger. At issue is whether Time Warner, the United States' second-largest cable operator, will carry Murdoch's new all-news channel that will compete with CNN.
News Corp. is seeking $1 billion in damages from Time Warner and Turner, saying their decision not to carry News Corp.'s 24-hour Fox News Service showed they were stifling competition.
"They promised me very firmly we'd have 9 million subscribers and when the day came to sign the document, they weren't there," Murdoch said in the interview, referring to Time Warner's decision not to carry the new channel.
Turner was forced to apologise last week for comparing Murdoch to Adolf Hitler, while Murdoch has described CNN as liberal and his executives have said Turner was monopolistic.
Murdoch also confirmed his bullish outlook for News Corp.'s profits.
"If the American economy holds where it is and the British one does, yes certainly," a 20 percent rise in profits is attainable, he told the Courier Mail. "But it is still early days to be saying that."
News Corp. said after releasing its results in late August that a 20 percent profit rise in the year to June 30, 1997 was attainable. News earned A$1.02 billion ($790 million) net profit in fiscal 1996.
Murdoch also said he had no plans to buy out John Fairfax Holdings, which publishes broadsheet newspapers in Sydney and Melbourne and is News Corp.'s major competitor in newspaper market.
He said Australian-based rival media owner Kerry Packer was also unlikely to bid for Fairfax any time soon.
"I don't want to buy Fairfax. I don't believe Mr. (Kerry) Packer wants to buy Fairfax," he was quoted as saying.
"To my knowledge he (Packer) has three times tried to sell his shares within the last 12 months. He'd like to influence and have the power of Fairfax but he's too shrewd to be paying for Fairfax at today's price."
Canada's Conrad Black, whose Hollinger International Inc. owns 25 percent of Fairfax and who has expressed a desire to take control of the group, expressed surprise at Murdoch's comments.
"(Murdoch's statement) is fairly humorous. It's a bit rich given the fact that he never stops telling me how much he would like to own Fairfax," Black said by telephone Friday.
"I cannot obviously comment on what the others are doing or what Rupert's motives are. The fact is that he regularly expresses to me considerable hypothetical interest in Fairfax," he said.
Hollinger International owns the Chicago Sun-Times, daily and weekly publications in the United States and the Jerusalem Post.
