Rupert Murdoch predicted in a newspaper interview on Friday that his global media group News Corp Ltd was on track to boost profits 20 percent this year and would win its legal battle with Ted Turner and Time Warner.
Murdoch, visiting Australia for News' annual meeting next Tuesday, also told News' Courier Mail newspaper in Brisbane that he did not want to buy out Australia's other major newspaper publisher, John Fairfax Holdings Ltd.
News, which publishes the major tabloid newspapers in Sydney and Melbourne as well as the Courier Mail and The Australian, also owns about five percent of Fairfax.
Rejoining his recent feud with CNN owner Ted Turner and Time Warner, Murdoch said he was confident News would win its law suit launched last week against Turner and Time Warner over their proposed merger.
"We've got a good stoush (fight) there," Murdoch said.
"We'll win through there. How or where I don't know but we'll just keep the pressure on," he said.
Turner said on Thursday that Murdoch's lawsuit to block the merger of Turner Broadcasting System Inc and Time Warner was a "frivolous piece of junk."
Murdoch and Turner have fought a pitched business battle in recent months over Turner's plans to merge his Cable News Network (CNN) with Time Warner, creating the world's largest media group.
At issue is whether Time Warner, the United States' second largest cable operator, will carry Murdoch's soon-to-be launched competitor to CNN.
News Corp is claiming US$1 billion in damages from Time Warner and Turner, saying their decision not to carry News' 24-hour Fox News Service showed they were stifling competition.
"They promised me very firmly we'd have nine million subscribers and when the day came to sign the document, they weren't there," Murdoch said of the Time Warner decision.
Turner was forced to apologise last week for comparing Murdoch to Adolf Hitler, while Murdoch has described CNN as liberal and his executives have said Turner was monopolistic.
Murdoch also reaffirmed News' bullish outlook for profits.
"If the American economy holds where it is and the British one does, yes certainly (the 20 percent rise is attainable)," he told the Courier Mail.
"But it is still early days to be saying that," the newspaper quoted Murdoch as saying.
News said after its 1995/96 results in late August that a 20-percent profit rise in the year to June 30, 1997 was very attainable. News posted a A$1.02 billion (US$790 million) net profit in 1995/96.
But it did not repeat the 20-percent forecast in its annual report last month, creating some doubt about the outlook.
Murdoch also said he had no plans to buy out John Fairfax Holdings, which publishes the major broadsheet newspapers in Sydney and Melbourne and is News' major competitor in newspapers.
But he said Australian-based rival mogul Kerry Packer was also unlikely to bid for Fairfax any time soon if current goverment restrictions were lifted.
"I don't want to buy Fairfax. I don't believe Mr (Kerry) Packer wants to buy Fairfax," he said.
"To my knowledge he (Packer) has three times tried to sell his shares within the last 12 months. He'd like to influence and have the power of Fairfax but he's too shrewd to be paying for Fairfax at today's price."
Murdoch also criticised the conservative government of Australian prime minister John Howard for not implementing radical economic reforms immediately.
(A$1 = US$0.79)
