News Corp Ltd chairman and chief executive Rupert Murdoch, visiting Australia for News' annual meeting next week, says his global media group remains on track to boost profits by 20 percent in 1996/97.
Murdoch, in a newspaper interview published on Friday, also ruled out any potential News Corp bid for Australian newspaper publisher John Fairfax Holdings Ltd and said Kerry Packer's Publishing and Broadcasting Ltd had repeatedly tried to sell its 15 percent Fairfax stake in the last year.
News Corp owns about five percent of Fairfax.  
Rejoining his recent feud with CNN owner Ted Turner and Time Warner, Murdoch also said he was confident his law suit against the two would succeed.
Turner said on Thursday that Murdoch's lawsuit to block the merger of Turner Broadcasting System Inc and Time Warner was a "frivolous piece of junk."
Murdoch said he was confident he would win the legal action launched last week to block the Turner merger with Time Warner.
"We've got a good stoush (fight) there," Murdoch said.
"We'll win through there. How or where I don't know but we'll just keep the pressure on," he said.  
Murdoch repeated News' bullish outlook for profits.
"If the American economy holds where it is and the British one does, yes certainly (the 20 percent rise is attainable)," he told News Corp's Courier Mail newspaper in Brisbane.
"But it is still early days to be saying that," the newspaper quoted Murdoch as saying.
News Corp said after its 1995/96 results in late August that a 20 percent profit rise in the year to June 30, 1997 was very attainable. News posted a A$1.02 billion net profit in 1995/96.  
Murdoch then said the government's investigation of the current cross-media rules, which stop the dual ownership of newspapers and television stations in the same city, would benefit Packer. Murdoch predicted the cross-media restrictions would be removed, but that foreign ownership rules would stay.
"So it will leave things open for him (Packer) and not for us," Murdoch said.
The rules currently stop Packer's Publishing and Broadcasting Ltd from increasing its 15 percent holding in Fairfax while it owns the top-rating Nine Network.  
They also stop Murdoch's News from increasing its 15 percent stake in the Seven Network Ltd while it owns News Ltd newspaper publishing change. Foreign ownership rules stop News from increasing its five percent stake in Fairfax.
Asked what he expected to emerge from the government's investigation into the cross-media rules, Murdoch said: "I think whatever Mr Packer wants. He seems to have very close influence with certain ministers in this government."
Murdoch would not name the ministers.
However Packer was unlikely to push for a higher Fairfax stake at the moment, Murdoch said.  
"I don't want to buy Fairfax. I don't believe Mr (Kerry) Packer wants to buy Fairfax," he said.
"To my knowledge he (Packer) has three times tried to sell his shares within the last 12 months. He'd like to influence and have the power of Fairfax but he's too shrewd to be paying for Fairfax at today's price."
Fairfax is 25 percent owned by Conrad Black's Hollinger International Inc, which is majority owned by Hollinger Inc.  
Murdoch also criticised the conservative government of Australian prime minister John Howard for not implementing decisive changes to boost the economy.
"If you're going to make radical changes, you'd better make them in the first year," Murdoch said of the government, which defeated the Labor government in the election on March 2.
"I think they've been slow to do that and not appearing as radical a government as I would have hoped," he said.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 373-1800
