News Corp Ltd's unveiling on Tuesday of plans to run its finances more conservatively were welcomed by analysts who have sometimes been critical of News' previous big debt and equity issues.
Rupert Murdoch, the chief executive and chairman of the global media group, told the company's annual meeting in Adelaide that News now had over US$2.5 billion of cash in the bank after a bond issue last week and planned to keep it there.
"We know that we have to be not only viable and profitable, but also that we should stay strong and liquid," Murdoch said.  
Murdoch then said News Corp's multi-billion dollar plans to create huge pay television networks in the United States, Asia, Japan, Latin America and Australia would be financed from cash flow. He also said News Corp needed to keep its liquidity up to finance new acquisitions.
"We have outlined these plans to show you where we are and where we plan to go. As far as possible, we will finance them out of current cash flow to maintain liquidity so that we will be ready to take new opportunities as they arise," he said.  
Analysts said the comments indicated a more conservative financial strategy, constrasting with the big acquisitions, investments and big debt and equity issues of the past.
The analysts said the market, which has sometimes been critical of the big deals and the big calls on the market, would welcome the comments.
News Corp's issue of preference shares earlier this year to fund the US$2.48 billion buy out of New World Communications upset many and triggered a slump in the price of the preference shares.  
"It's slightly more conservative and the market will like it," said Macquarie Equities media analyst Alex Pollak of Murdoch's latest approach.
"The market is absolutely paranoid that they'll go out and spend A$1.5 billion on something that they will not like," Pollak said.
"Anything with more money spent on the big picture stuff, they're not going to like much," he said, adding the market wanted News to concentrate on ploughing money into its existing pay television networks in the United States.  
Analysts said Murdoch's comments about keeping the US$2.5 billion in the bank and financing projects from cashflows indicated any acquisitions would be small by Murdoch standards.
"That imposes a huge financial discipline on the company which would hearten the market immensely," said a Sydney media analyst. "If he can keep to those comments then it's most certainly a big plus," he said.
News Corp shares closed 14 cents or 1.9 percent lower at A$7.20 after Murdoch said the first quarter was not up to earlier expectations of a 20 percent profit rise in 1996/97. But he said News remained on track for that 20 percent rise.  
"If they can't meet their expectations in the first quarter when the strong revenues from 'Independence Day' are coming, then what hope do they have for the full year," one analyst said.
The hit movie was made by News Corp's Twentieth Century Fox subsidiary.
"His comments about the first quarter were weaker than what people were anticipating and it looks like U.S. television was one are of disappointment," another analyst said.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 373-1800
