Media magnate Rupert Murdoch said on Tuesday the first quarter performance of his global media group, The News Corp Ltd, had been below expectations, but that he was still confident of a 20 percent profit rise in 1996/97.
"I am on record as saying that we expect a 20 percent increase in profit for the year," Murdoch told a packed News Corp annual meeting in Adelaide.  
"We still expect that and are still aiming for that during the coming year. However, I should say that the first quarter may not be quite up to those expectatations, but we will certainly be striving to make up any shortfall," he said.
In the 1995/96 year ended June 30, News Corp's net profit slipped to A$1.02 billion from A$1.37 billion in 1994/95.
He said revenues at the Fox U.S. television business had begun 1996/97 slowly because of of the Atlanta Olympic Games, the rights to which were held by a rival network.
Australian newspaper revenues would be flat in 1996/97, he said.  
However, News Corp's British newspapers were doing extremely well, with circulation at The Sunday Times climbing with little promotion while advertising in Britain was booming.
Murdoch, News Corp's chief executive and chairman, also announced the group now had US$2.5 billion in cash in the bank after recent U.S. bond issues and would leave it there.
He also said that News now planned to fund future expansion from cash flow where possible.
"We know that we have to be not only viable and profitable, but also that we should stay strong and liquid," Murdoch said.  
"As far as possible, we will finance them (News' expansion plans) out of current cash flow to maintain liquidity so that we will be ready to take new opportunities as they arise," he said.
News has often funded its aggressive growth in pay television and other media through either hefty debt or equity issues, which have sometimes met shareholder resistance.
Murdoch also announced that News planned to float its British based digital media technology company, Digital Media Services, within the next two to three weeks and would sell 20 percent of the company.  
Digital Media Services, a combination of News Data Comm and Digi-Media Vision Ltd, would operate in Britain and Israel and produce technology for digital television.
He also later said News' Asian satellite pay television operation, STAR TV, was performing well.
-- Sydney newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
