Rupert Murdoch on Tuesday reported that News Corp Ltd had performed below expectations in the first quarter, but he said the global media group was still on track for a 20-percent profit rise this year.
Murdoch, the chairman and chief executive of News Corp, also unveiled a more conservative approach to financing new acquisitions.
"I am on record as saying that we expect a 20-percent increase in profit for the year," Murdoch told a packed News Corp annual meeting in Adelaide.
"We still expect that and are still aiming for that during the coming year. However, I should say that the first quarter may not be quite up to those expectatations, but we will certainly be striving to make up any shortfall," Murdoch said.
Analysts viewed the comments as disappointing and said they were now more sceptical about the 20-percent profit pledge.
"If they can't meet expectations in the first quarter, when they have those strong revenues from Independence Day, then what hope do they have of getting 20 percent in the full year?" asked one Sydney-based media analyst referring to a hit Hollywood movie made by News Corp's Fox studio.
Traders on the Australian share market did not like the first quarter comment either, selling the shares 14 cents or almost two percent lower to close at A$7.20, while the broader Australian equity market closed at a new record high.
In the 1995/96 year ended June 30, News Corp's net profit slipped to A$1.02 billion ($806 million) from A$1.37 billion in 1994/95.
Murdoch said revenues at the Fox U.S. television business had begun 1996/97 slowly because of of the Atlanta Olympic Games, the rights to which were held by a rival network.
Australian newspaper revenues would be flat in 1996/97, said Murdoch.
But he remained buoyant about News' British operations, saying the advertising market there was booming and the partly-owned BSkyB pay television operators was growing strongly.
Murdoch then unveiled a more cautious strategy for financing future expansion.
"As far as possible, we will finance them (News' expansion plans) out of current cash flow to maintain liquidity so that we will be ready to take new opportunities as they arise," he said.
News has often funded its aggressive growth in pay television and other media through either hefty debt or equity issues, which have sometimes met shareholder resistance. It almost collapsed under a debt mountain in the early 1990s.
Analysts said the comments indicated a more conservative approach towards acquisitions and their financing and would be welcomed by the market.
"It imposes a huge financial discipline on the company which would hearten people immensely," said another analyst.
Murdoch also announced that News planned to float its British-based digital media technology company, Digital Media Services, within the next two to three weeks and would sell 20 percent of the company.
Digital Media Services, a combination of News Data Comm and Digi-Media Vision Ltd, would operate in Britain and Israel and produce technology for digital television.
News Corp traditionally holds its annual meetings here in Adelaide, the South Australia city where Rupert Murdoch's father Keith founded the beginnings of the News Corp empire.
(A$1 = $0.79)
