Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd (ANZ) took the unusual step on Monday of categorically denying a newspaper report which said it was investigating a A$24 billion merger with Britain's Standard Chartered Plc.
"ANZ advises that it is not investigating or discussing a merger with Standard Chartered Bank," ANZ said in a statement to the Australian Stock Exchange just before the start of trade.
"Whilst we do not normally comment on rumours and speculation regarding mergers and acquisitions the very specific nature of the article requires this definite denial," the ANZ said in a statement.
Earlier, an ANZ spokesman had told Reuters that the report was in the category of market speculation and would not be commented on.
In its Monday edition, the Australian Financial Review reported that the two banks had engaged Goldman Sachs and Swiss Bank Corp to conduct a feasibility study into a merger "along the lines of the RTZ-CRA stock stapling".  
RTZ Corp Plc and CRA Ltd merged to become a dual-listed company and the world's biggest mining group in December last year.
"Such an alliance would make ANZ almost takeover-proof in Australia, preserving the relative independence of one of the two major banks considered most likely takeover targets after the Wallis inquiry into the financial system," the Financial Review said.  
"There are no cross-shareholdings between ANZ and Standard Chartered and the issue of 'senior partner' in a stock stapling would be expected to be significant as would government and regulatory approval of the deal," the paper said, adding that KPMG had been employed to carry out due diligence on the deal.
The bank's surprisingly specific denial came after analysts said ANZ's share price could drop sharply on the report.
The analysts said the merger as outlined in the report was unlikely to include much if any takeover premium for shareholders, meaning the premium of up to 10 percent built into the current share price would be stripped out.  
"People are saying 'What's in it for shareholders?'," BNP Equities banking analyst Linda Lyon said.
"If a merger like that looks like coming off, then the price will come off," Lyon said.
"The sort of deal we're talking about doesn't include any sort of takeover premium for shareholders," said a senior Sydney banking analyst.
"People have been buying ANZ above its true value in expectation NAB (National Australia Bank Ltd ) will launch a takeover post-Wallis," the analyst said.  
"My guess is that the immediate reaction would be negative," he said, adding he saw ANZ's true price at around A$6.50.
But after the denial, ANZ's share price rose with the rest of the market. It was up two cents at A$7.18 at 12.50 p.m. (0150 GMT).
Analysts said such a merger could however also bring out a potential rival takeover bidder such as HSBC Holdings Plc.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1812
