Australian-based insurer QBE Insurance Group Ltd said on Tuesday that profit growth was likely to surge into the high teens for the full 1996/97 year after only a slight increase in its first quarter profit.
"I'm confident that it will be in the teens, and with a bit of luck it will probably be in the high teens," QBE managing director John Cloney told reporters after the group's annual meeting when asked about profit growth for the full year.
Earlier QBE reported a first quarter net profit of A$28.5 million, up just slightly from A$28.0 million a year earlier.  
QBE's full year net profit rose 15.1 percent to A$123.3 million in 1995/96 ended June 30.
Analysts said the first quarter result may have been disappointing, partly due to costs linked to the installation of a new computer system, but the bullish comments were a welcome tonic.
"We're still very happy to see around 15 percent profit growth per annum," said First Pacific insurance analyst Greg Galton.
QBE's share price responded in kind, rising 15 cents to A$6.70 in early Tuesday afternoon trade after Cloney's comments.  
Cloney also said that QBE expected reduced expense ratios over 1996/97 because of improved productivity linked to the new computer systems.
QBE should also achieve its target of double digit premium growth from existing lines and lower acquisition costs, he said.
He also said he saw a continuation of the trend of previous years of increased dividends, but that the franking rate was likely to be reduced to about 50 percent as previously foreshadowed.  
Cloney said QBE's A$70 million acquisition of the British reinsurance assets of Allstate Insurance Co announced in September would also boost profits in 1996/97.
"That will give us in excess of 15 percent return (on equity invested) in this fiscal year," he said.
Referring to this strong rate of return from this latest acquisition, Cloney said QBE continued to be on the look-out for similarly profitable acquisitions.
"We are on the lookout all the time, and there are a couple of things that may come to pass," Cloney said, adding however that he could not be more specific.  
But he said Australia was less likely to be a happy hunting ground for QBE because other competitors and banks were prepared to bid high prices and push down rates of return.
"They're the sort of hurdle rates we set," he said, referring to the 15 percent-plus return likely from Allstate.
"Because we're already earning 17 percent (return on shareholders funds) we're not in the position to spend up large and say we'll get a pay back in three or four years, because it will dilute our overall earnings," he said.  
"So far as Australia is concerned, to acquire at the sort of hurdle rates of return we're looking for is a little difficult because I think there are more people interested in what's available here than overseas."
Cloney also ruled out any bank acquisitions.
"QBE ought to be allowed to buy a bank if it wishes to do so but it is my own personal view and, I believe the view of the board, that we will not be doing that," he said.
-- Bernard Hickey -- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1812
