Stock-feed producer Ridley Corp Ltd forecast on Wednesday that slow demand and margin pressures would produce a flat first half year profit, but that a grain price slump would help boost profits for the full 1996/97 year.
"All things considered we expect overall company after tax earnings to be in line with those of last year for the first half," Ridley Chairman John Keniry told the group's annual meeting.  
Strong pasture growth in some areas which had significantly cut demand for stockfeed, along with margin pressures from high wheat prices earlier the year had combined to push Australian stockfood earnings lower in the first quarter of the year to June 30, 1997.
First quarter earnings from Ridley's AgriProducts division had been below both budget forecast and last year's results, Keniry said.
Keniry said Ridley expected another good result from its Canadian stock food supplier, Feed-rite, to offset the falls from Australia's AgriProducts in the first half.  
"For the first quarter Feed-Rite's earnings before interest and tax have exceeded by a comfortable margin both budget and last year," Keniry said.
But he said a sharp slump in grain prices, one of Ridley's key inputs, could boost margins again in Australia later in the year if prices stayed down.
"When we look to the full year, we must recognise a very rapid decline in the past month or so in grain prices, and the somewhat unpredicatble impact on both us and our customers of these changes," Keniry said.  
"Nevertheless on a full year basis, a cautious approach would be to say that we presently expect to come in slightly ahead of last year," he said.
Ridley said last month it expected continued profit growth and was optimistic of achieving another record performance in the 1996/97 year to June 30.
It reported an operating profit of A$36.27 million million in 1995/96, up 14.3 percent on the previous year and hard on the heels of three to four years of significant profit rises.  
Later, Ridley managing director Gary Busenshut reiterated the flat immediate outlook but more buoyant longer term prospects for the year.
"As we harvest between October and January, we're going to see some improvement in margins," he said.
Busenshut said Ridley also continued to focus on further acquisitions both in Australia and in North America, particularly now that its A$98 million takeover bid for Australian malster Joe White Maltings Ltd looked unlikely to succeed.  
The A$5.44 per share offer was rejected by Joe White and Ridley has said it would not increase the offer before it closes on November 8. Ridley now has about 18 percent of Joe White.
Ridley would continue to look at potential malting acquisitions in Australia and stock-feed milling operations in North America, Busenshuts said.
He said Ridley had had discussions with potential feed-milling targets in North America and could carry out an acquisition worth about A$100 million by the end of the March quarter of 1997 if it decided to. Ridley's shares closed up one cent at A$1.70.  -- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1812
