Water filtration company Memtec Ltd is confident the failure of its planned US$280 million takeover bid for U.S. medical filtration company Gelman Sciences Inc will not affect earnings or its U.S. expansion plans.
Memtec chairman Denis Hanley told Reuters in a telephone interview from the United States that a compensation clause in the original takeover deal negotiated with Gelman meant it would not affect Memtec's earnings in the year to June 30, 1997.  
"There were clauses in the contract that compensated us for our effort," Hanley said.
"It will have no impact on our normal earnings," he said.
In July, Gelman said it had agreed to be taken over by the NASDAQ-listed Memtec, which offered 1.05 Memtec American Depositary Receipts (ADRS) for each Gelman share.
The offer than valued each Gelman share at about US$35 a share, but Memtec's share price fell after the July announcement and the agreement included a clause allowing Gelman to renegotiate or terminate the deal if Memtec's share price fell below US$30.  
On Monday, Gelman agreed to a takeover bid by fellow filtration company Pall Corp, which valued Gelman's shares at US$33 per share and effectively trumped Memtec's bid.
Memtec then said on Tuesday it would not increase its bid and that the original merger agreement had been terminated.
Hanley said he and Memtec's management had spent months preparing for the Gelman takeover and organising a roadshow promoting the bid, but that Memtec had been compensated for the costs involved.
He said Memtec's likely growth in the United States this year would not be affected by failure of the deal.  
"This year the growth we'll probably see will still be better than 50 percent without this deal," he said.
Memtec remained on the lookout for expansion opportunities in the United States, particularly in the medical filtration sector.
"We see many ways of getting into the medical market there," he said, adding however that he could not be specific about how Memtec would increase its presence.
Gelman makes microfiltration products for laboratories, healthcare, environmental monitoring, high-technology process industries and other uses.  
The end of the Gelman deal has pleased shareholders however, with Memtec's shares jumping A$3.50 to A$41.50 by Wednesday's close from its A$35 level on Monday.
Memtec had been around A$42.50 in mid-July.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1812
