Appliance and building products manufacturer Email Ltd reported a lower half year net profit and dividend on Monday but forecast that recent restructuring and a seasonal lift would boost profits in the second half.
Email said the environment for industrial activities remained difficult and recent economic forecasts had deferred the timing of an upturn in building sector.  
"Nevertheless, the significant improvements in the company's pre-tax operating profits flowing from restructuring across the past 12 months, are expected to continue in the second half," the company said in a statement accompanying half year results.
"As well there should be the normal seasonal lift in sales and margins, leading to a second half profit well ahead of the first half," it said.
Earlier Email reported a pre-abnormal net profit of A$27.26 million for the first half to September 30, up from A$24.83 million the previous corresponding half a year earlier.  
Net profit however fell to A$23.85 million from A$26.61 million the previous year, due largely to abnormal losses of A$3.41 million incurred in restructuring and reducing overheads. Email also cut its interim dividend to eight cents from 11.5 a year earlier, saying it had realigned dividends to reflect the stronger second half year in the light of continuing uncertainty about the economy.
Email Managing Director John Hanna later told Reuters Email expected pre-tax profits for the second half of the 1996/97 year would also be above those in the second half of 1995/96.  
"We are expecting in the second half that we would have pre-tax operating profits higher than last year," Hanna said.
"We should also have the second half seasonal lift."
He said Email was pleased that it achieved profit growth in its building products and major appliances divisions despite lower sales.
Analysts said the result was within expectations and was largely unsurprising, even with the dividend cut.
"It's still a high payout ratio," said one Sydney analyst said of the dividend, noting that the final dividend was likely to be maintained.  
Email's share price was unchanged at A$3.55 at 1.10 p.m. (0210 GMT) on light volumes.
Hanna said there could begin to be an upturn in the housing industry at the beginning of 1997, but that this would take some time to flow through to Email's business because its products were installed late in the building process.
"If it (the upturn) was early 1997, then it (the resulting flow-on) would be in mid-1997," he said.
But this flow-on effect would then have an immediate effect on Email's bottom line because of the recent restructuring which had reduced overheads.  
"As there's an upturn, we should get that immediately and a lot of that will go to the bottom line immediately," Hanna said.
He also said Email may increase its 20 percent stake in British electricity meter maker Ampy Automation Digilog Ltd.
"There may be an opportunity to lift that stake in the future," Hanna said. He said Email remained on the lookout for further acquisitions.
"They (any further acquisitions) would have to be in existing core areas ... but I don't think we have anything directly in line at the moment," he said.
-- Bernard Hickey 61-2 9373-1812
