Rupert Murdoch's News Corp Ltd is likely to benefit from the planned US$20 billion merger of MCI Communications Corp and British Telecommunications Plc , Australian media analysts said on Monday.
They said News, which already has a wide-ranging partnership with MCI, would strengthen its global media interests on the coat-tails of the creation of the world's second largest telecommunications group.
"It means they'll be in bed with a bigger more powerful global telephony group," one senior Sydney media analyst said.  
Analysts also said the BT-MCI merger would stabilise New Corp's partnership with MCI, which had seemed increasingly strained in recent months. "It seems that MCI and News haven't been getting on lately, whereas News and BT have been getting on a lot better," said the senior Sydney analyst.
The prospect of MCI selling its nine percent stake in News Corp over the next year had suppressed News Corp's shares in the last month. "There was a view that MCI wasn't real happy with it (the partership) and may sell out, but now nothing's going to happen for 12 months at least," said another Sydney analyst.  
"The implications for News are quite positive," the analyst said.
A Melbourne analyst said some in the market were a bit worried that MCI was preparing to  to sell down their stake over the next 12 months. "The fact that BT may combine with MCI reduces that risk for now at least," the analyst said.
MCI and News Corp announced a broad alliance in May 1995, under which MCI bought a nine percent stake in News for US$1.35 billion and acquired an option to increase that stake up to 13.5 percent. They agreed, amoug other things, to jointly set up an American satelite television operation -- ASkyB.  
But progress with ASkyB has been slow and other smaller joint ventures have failed to fire.
However, the Australian analysts said they would remain somewhat cautious given bearish comments on Sunday by MCI.
MCI announced that it would cut its stake in ASkyB to 20 percent from 50 percent.
Analysts said this was not surprising as News Corp and MCI had said recently they wanted new partners in the venture.  
But MCI Chief Executive Bert Roberts also told Reuters on Sunday that no major new launches were expected from the venture with News Corp and that MCI would sell to News a US$700 million satellite license if it could.
He also said MCI was unlikely to take up its option to increase its stake in News, a comment seen by analysts as symptomatic of Roberts' increasing unhappiness with the deal.
Analysts also said there was the potential for a regulatory block to links between News, its 40 percent owned BSkyB Plc and BT.  
"There's an outside risk that British regulatory bodies could try and block the News-BSkyB-BT side of it," said another BT analyst.
Other analysts said the dilution involved, with BT owning nine percent of a 40 percent stake in BSkyB, would assuage regulatory concerns. The likely election of a British Labour government also reduced that risk.
"They're banking on (Labour leader) Tony Blair winning government and deregulating cross media rules in the United Kingdom," said another Sydney analyst.  
However another analyst pointed to the recent banning by British regulator Oftel of a joint marketing campaign between BT and BSkyB as a sign of the rocky road ahead for News and BT.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1812
