Australian-based metals recycler Simsmetal Ltd on Friday painted a bleak picture for world scrap metal prices over the year ahead and said this meant the group's net profit for 1996/97 would be lower than in 1995/96.
But it said it remained confident it could take advantage of a recovery in world markets when it came and was currently in talks to buy a large British scrap metal business.
Simsmetal managing director John Crabb told the annual meeting that scrap prices had softened dramatically to their lowest levels in almost four years over the last two months.  
"Until there is an improvement in the major economies of Europe and Asia and the resulting increase in demand for metals, we expect trading conditions to remain very difficult with volumes, margins and earnings below our expectations," Crabb said.
He later told reporters profits for the year to June 30, 1997 would be below the A$46.7 million posted in 1995/96 -- a result that was itself 23 percent down on a year ago.
"It will be lower for the full year," Crabb said.  
Simsmetal had previously only said it saw difficult conditions prevalent in the first quarter of 1996/97 continuing into the second quarter, with second quarter profits falling.
In mid-October, Simsmetal announced its net profit for the first quarter of 1996/97 fell 34 percent to A$8.28 million.
Crabb said the world construction markets which used the long steel produced by electric furnaces supplied by Simsmetal remained weak and had no immediate prospect of improvement.
"Our view is that we should start to see some improvement (in ferrous metals prices) towards the end of calendar 1997, we may see it in the middle (of calendar 1997)," he said.  
"We can't see too much on the horizon at this time," he said.
Crabb also said Simsmetal was in talks to buy a large British business in the same area as Simsmetal, but he said he could not give any more details as he was bound by confidentiality agreements.
"It's in the U.K. For us it will be quite large," he said.
"We still need to balance our portfolio there, so that we've got a good broad coverage," he said.
"We'll use either some cash or our unusued borrowing lines. We've got no problems funding it."  
He said Simsmetal had ended the first quarter with about A$62 million cash on hand.
"I guess we'd only be using 55-60 percent of our borrowing capacity at the moment."
Simsmetal had total non-current borrowings of A$54.11 million as at June 30, 1996, giving a total warchest for possible acquisitions of about A$115 million.
Earlier in the annual meeting, Crabb said that any closure of the Broken Hill Pty Co Pty Ltd's Newcastle steel plant would not affect Simsmetals operations.  
Crabb said Simsmetal supplies most of its products to BHP's Sydney mini-mill and its Port Kembla plant, south of Sydney.
"Maybe it will make life easier for us because we will be able to buy more scrap," Crabb said, responding to a shareholders question.
Simsmetal's shares were up one cent at A$6.89 at 2.40 p.m. (0340 GMT).
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1812
