World yeast and spices giant Burns Philp &amp; Co Ltd announced a hefty loss for the 1995/96 year on Wednesday after taking some heavy hits in a vicious U.S. price war and Asian expansion.
Burns Philp, the western world's largest fresh bakers' yeast maker and second largest spice maker, posted a net loss of A$61.8 million (US$48.8 million) for the year to June 30.
This came after abnormal losses of A$136.6 million, due largely to rationalisation of its U.S. operations and other costs linked to a spice price war with the world's largest spice maker, McCormick &amp; Co Inc of the United States.
Burns Philp managing director Ian Clack said the tussle for market share in the United States appeared to have abated, but the cost of paying supermarkets for premium shelf space during the two-year war had to be written off.
The writing off of these costs, known as slotting contracts, made up A$33.9 million of the abnormal losses.
"Recent slotting contracts have been negotiated with improved margins, indicating that market conditions are returning to a more acceptable level," Clack said.
He said Burns Philp had increased its U.S. spices market share by one percentage point to 16 percent after the war while McCormick's share had risen 1.5 points to 34 percent. Other U.S. spice makers lost market share, he said.
Burns Philp has 16 percent of the western world's yeast market and seven percent of its spice market.
Costs incurred during an Asian expansion also boosted Burns Philp's losses.
"The result was also affected by the cost of expanding our presence in Asia together with plant upgrade costs in China and India," Clack said.
The result surprised brokers and analysts, who had expected large abnormal losses but were disappointed by a lower pre-abnormals net profit as well.
Net profit before abnormal items fell to A$74.8 million, down from the A$104.1 million posted in 1994/95 and down on most analysts' forecasts of about A$80 million.
Burns Philp's decision not to post a final dividend also upset investors.
"A woeful result and passing their dividend hasn't helped," said Jim Tredenick, senior dealer at broking house Nevitts Ltd.
Burns Philp's share price closed down 10 cents at A$1.95.
Analysts also said there may be more abnormal losses to come, particularly in the value of intangibles like goodwill.
"It was a bad result...the issue is whether or not they've completely taken the knife to intangible valuations, that's the area where there could be some further writedowns," one Sydney analyst said.
"They didn't take much off the intangibles. That (the A$30.7 million of intangible writedowns) hardly made a dent in it," another Sydney analyst said.
Clack said the company had taken the most conservative measure of intangible values it could and did not expect any more abnormal losses in the current year.
He said an earnings turnaround was possible in 1996/97. "In most markets we are seeing some improvement in the first two months of the year. There's been an improvement in demand, particularly in the North American markets." (A$1 = 79 U.S. cents)
