Australia's second-largest bank, Westpac Banking Corp Ltd, announced a 19.5 percent rise in net profit for the 1995/96 year on Tuesday, but warned that fierce competition would flatten profits in the year ahead.
"Everywhere you look and in every market we're in there's a lot of margin pressure," Westpac managing director Bob Joss told a news conference after the profit announcement.
"It will be tough to make a rise," he said when asked if profits for the year to September 30, 1997, would be flat.
Westpac reported net profit of A$1.132 billion (US$890 million) for the year to September 30, 1996, up 19.5 percent on 1994/95.
But this disguised a flat profit in the second half of the year and was boosted by a sharp drop in bad debt charges.
Joss said competition from non-bank mortgage originators in the housing loan sector was a key factor pressuring margins.
Mortgage originators such as Aussie Home Loans and RAMS Home Loans, who have snared 10 percent of the mortgage market from big banks like Westpac over the last two years by offering cut price home loans.
Their entry into the market has dragged the big banks' home loan margins down from over 300 basis points last year to just over 200 points now.
Joss said Westpac would look to boost its own mortgage origination programme to help compete against the non-banks and support its margins.
Westpac has already launched one issue of securitised mortgages worth A$340 million, the first of the major banks to do so.
Joss said Westpac planned to multiply the size of such issues in the current year.
"The real key for us will be to try to manage our balance sheet, have more assets off balance sheets, more securitising of lower margin assets," he said.
"We just did one near the tail end of the (1995/96) year, A$340 million, so we would expect to see quite a bit more in the year ahead," Joss said.
Even then, Westpac would struggle to maintain its margins and would have to cut costs and increase efficiency to compensate.
The bearish earnings comments and the detail of the result saw Westpac's share price close down 15 cents at A$7.05, despite the result being almost exactly the average of analysts' forecasts.
Westpac is the second major bank to forecast flat profits in the year ahead because of increased competition. The Commonwealth Bank of Australia since May has been forecasting flat profits over the next year.
These more sober forecasts signify the end of two to three years of sharp profit rises for the major banks as they recovered from hefty loan losses in the early 1990s and capitalised on a strong economy.
A smaller New South Wales-based bank, St George Bank Ltd, echoed this new more subdued outlook for profits in its annual results also announced on Tuesday.
St George reported net profit of A$148.3 million for the 1995/96 year, a rise of 9.4 percent.
St George managing director Jim Sweeney said margin pressure meant it would be a challenge to improve profits in the first half of the current year. (A$1 = US$0.7880)
