Airline giant British Airways Plc (BA) is unlikely to hike its airfares by the full three percent agreed to last week by the world's airlines, BA chairman Sir Colin Marshall said on Monday.
The world's airlines, desperate to hold up their profits in the face of a 40-percent surge in fuel prices this year, said in Geneva last week through the International Air Transport Association (IATA) that they proposed to raise passenger fares by three percent.
Marshall told reporters after a luncheon address in Sydney that BA was not as badly affected as some other airlines because of the strength of sterling against the U.S. dollar.
"You also have to bear in mind that the impact for individual carriers does depend on exchange rates in that all aviation fuel is priced in U.S. dollar terms," he said.
"So one has to watch what is happening to your own currency versus the U.S. dollar to see what the overall impact will be for a company," he said.
When asked if the recent strength in sterling meant BA would therefore not pass on the full three percent agreed to in Geneva, he said: "I think that's quite likely."
He said BA had increased its prices by only about one percent before the Geneva resolution because of the strong currency.
"The pound has been relatively strong against the dollar and that's why we only applied about a one-percent increase in price."
IATA, which has 251 member airlines, said in Geneva the proposed increase, which is subject to government approvals, would apply to fares from December 15.
Marshall said the extent to which the three percent increase was applied depended on each individual carrier and how fuel prices changed through the northern hemisphere's winter.
Many European carriers are pushing for a concerted move to lift ticket prices by up to three per cent, but Asian and North American carriers were believed to be reluctant to do so.
BA reported earlier this month that despite strong traffic growth and greater productivity its first half operating profits were down 2.1 per cent compared with last year.
Part of the drop, it said, was due to the extra US$84 million it had had to pay for fuel.
Meanwhile, Marshall said he was confident the European Union would not thwart BA's plan to form an alliance with American Airlines, although he acknowleged it would take the two a long time to jump the various regulatory hurdles in front of them.
"I'm not worried about it because I don't think that that is likely to happen," Marshall said of a possible EU block.
On Friday the European Commission (EC) said it had formally asked BA for details of the planned alliance.
A report that the EC had said the alliance did not appear to be in the best interests of consumers pushed BA's shares lower earlier on Friday.
"There are so many precedents for similar events that have been allowed to go into effect, that to me it would be quite wrong if the European Union reached that conclusion," he said.
"I think things are all moving in the right direction, but it's just very slow," Marshall said of the regulatory process.
