The Brunei Investment Agency (BIA) on Tuesday bought a 13.4 percent stake in Macquarie Bank Ltd, removing the links between one of Australia's top four investment banks and its British founder.
Macquarie said in a stock exchange statement just after the start of morning trading that the Brunei government-owned agency paid Lloyds TSB Plc A$151.7 million (US$122.8 million) for the stake.
The purchase by the agency's Brunei Investment and Commercial Bank (BICB) from Lloyds' Hill Samuel &amp; Co unit makes it the largest individual shareholder in Macquarie.
Macquarie Bank managing director Allan Moss said the bank had developed a good relationship with BIA and its senior management over the months it had taken to arrange the deal.
"We are delighted that they have become associated with the bank as a major shareholder, and we are confident that BICB will prove to be a constructive and long term investor in Macquarie," Moss said.
The purchase ends Hill Samuel's 27-year direct involvement in the Australian investment banking sector.
Hill Samuel set up what is now known as Macquarie Bank in 1969 before selling down its stake to 30 percent in 1985 and then down to 15 percent in 1993.
Since then Macquarie, which now has 1,800 staff, has listed on the Australian Stock Exchange and is now one of Australia's top 100 companies.
It has offices throughout Australasia and in China, Singapore, Malaysia, London, Munich, New York, Hong Kong, Indonesia and South Africa. Its asset base stood at A$5.17 billion on March 31, the end of its financial year.
Macquarie also has more than A$20 billion in assets under management and has operations in corporate finance, sharebroking and in commodities, debt and foreign exchange trading.
It posted net profits of A$93.2 million in 1995/96.
Macquarie Equities ranks amoung the top four brokers in terms of turnover on the Australian Stock Exchange and had the biggest inflow of retail funds for management in the year to June 30, 1996.
Macquarie chairman David Clarke told a news conference he was confident that BICB was a stable shareholder.
"By and large you only read announcements of them buying things and investing in things you don't read about them selling out of things," Clarke said.
The sale of the Hill Samuel stake appears to remove from the market a convenient bridgehead for a takeover bid from another Australian bank.
Australia's conservative government is currently reconsidering financial regulations governing bank takeovers.
A report by the government-sponsored Wallis inquiry due in March next year is widely expected to trigger a series of bank takeovers.
($A = US0.81 cents)
