An official inquiry into Australia's financial system said on Thursday it would look at recommending a relaxation of rules that currently stop big bank mergers and local bank takeovers by foreign banks.
The inquiry, which was established by the conservative government after its March election, outlined various options for reform in a wide-ranging discussion paper and was careful not to state its own preferences.
But it noted majority industry support for abolishing the rules stopping mergers and foreign bank takeovers and said it preferred an anti-monopolies system which treated the banking sector the same way as every other sector.
Until now the government has had the final say on bank mergers, rather than just the anti-monopolies watchdog.
Analysts said the tone of the discussion paper reinforced widespread expectations that the inquiry's final report would recommend allowing bank mergers and new foreign investment.
"It hasn't changed perceptions that ultimately the inquiry will make recommendations that allow the ACCC (Australian Competition and Consumer Commission) to permit bank mergers which haven't been permitted before," said ABN AMRO Hoare Govett Banking analyst Michael Pulman.
Shares in the big banks seen vulnerable to takeover have rallied since the beginning of the year in expectation that a conservative Australian government would allow the mergers.
Those seen as possible takeover targets include the Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd and Westpac Banking Corp Ltd.
The National Australia Bank Ltd, Australia's largest and most profitable bank, is seen as the main predator.
A policy set by the former Labor government and known as the "six pillars" policy has stopped mergers or foreign takeovers of Australia's four largest banks and its two largest insurance and superannuation groups.
The current conservative Liberal-National coalition government has said this policy would remain in place until it has considered the Wallis inquiry's recommendations, due to be delivered by the end of March 1997.
The inquiry, headed by prominent businessman Stan Wallis, said in its 415-page paper that any reforms should increase the efficiency of Australia's banks to compete globally.
It also said new technology would transform the sector.
Big banks such as the National Australia Bank have used the same reasoning when lobbying for relaxed merger rules.
These banks have said big bank mergers are necessary to compete globally and new technology such as the Internet and global competition meant such mergers would not cut competition.
"The inquiry sees as its key goal the identification of means to increase the efficiency of the Australian financial system, without compromising its safety and peformance," the paper said.
Increased efficiency was needed to compete globally, to obtain the benefits of new technology and to increase investment returns, the paper said.
It said it would consider, "better accomodating financial conglomerates" and "relaxing some of the ownership restrictions on financial institutuions?"
The inquiry said it also wanted any reforms to increase competition and asked in that context "whether there are any public policy grounds for restrictions on foreign acquisitions in the banking or insurance industries?"
