The Reserve Bank of Australia's (RBA) rate cut on Wednesday is expected to further squeeze bank margins as competition has forced them to pass this cut on to their mortgage customers sooner than usual.
The major banks have previously delayed passing on the effect of official rate cuts to their variable rate home loan customers by around seven weeks.
They would, however, often begin lowering variable and fixed deposit rates immediately, providing a temporary widening of their margins.  
Wednesday's rate cut has seen the major banks shorten this delay in passing on the rate cut to about five and half weeks.
Analysts and some of the banks said increasing competition from non-bank mortgage lenders and the regional banks had been the major factor in this contraction.
They also said they expected this gap to narrow further when further official rate cuts are made next year.
"The implication is a bit more pressure on margins," said ABN AMRO Hoare Govett banking analyst Michael Pulman.
"This all about competition," he said.  
"These competitive forces will end up contracting it down further, possibly down to 30 days," said Aussie Home Loans managing director John Symond.
Aussie, the biggest of the non-bank lenders funded by mortgage origination, said on Wednesday it would cut its variable rate to 7.49 percent from 7.99 percent from January 28 for existing customers, a gap of 48 days after December 11.
At the time of the last official rate cut on November 6, Aussie planned a gap of 46 days, which was lower than most of the banks.  
In response to Aussie and competition from regional banks like St George Bank Ltd, the large banks have cut back this delay.
National Australia Bank Ltd said it would cut its variable mortgage rate to 8.25 percent from 8.75 percent from January 23 for existing borrowers, a gap of 43 days.
After the last official rate cut NAB's gap was 54 days.
In line with this trend, Westpac Banking Corp's gap has dropped to 37 days from 41 days and Commonwealth Bank of Australia's gap has dropped to 48 days from 54.  
The Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd has yet to announce any cut in variable mortage rates in response to the RBA's cut in the official cash rate to 6.0 percent from 6.5 percent.
The biggest move in the gap came from St George, which reduced the time it would pass on the rate cut for its major variable rate product to 20 days from 55 days.
St George has even said existing customers of its no frills variable rate product would receive the cut from December 18, a week away. This product provides 20 percent of its portfolio.  
Overall the average gap for the banks who have cut their mortgage rates has dropped to 40 days after this rate cut from 49 after the November 6 cut, which was also by 50 basis points.
There may, however,be a limit to how much further this gap can fall, analysts and the banks said.
A new regulatory code on credit specifies customers must be given 30 days notice whenever their interest rates are changed, creating an artificial barrier both up and down.
"I think 30 days will about see it out," said Aussie's Symond.  
Analysts said the banks may try other tactics to cushion the effect of this reduction in the gap, but that it would still further reduce already-bruised margins.
"It will have an effect on margins," said BNP Equities' banking analyst Linda Lyon.
"They'll do all sorts of other things to cushion the effect. They'll be trying to reduce their deposit rates as far and as fast as they can," said ABN AMRO's Mike Pulman.
"But there's obviously a bit of a squeeze there, particularly for those banks most exposed to the housing sector," Pulman said.  
CBA is seen as the most exposed with about 34 percent of its assets in home loans, with Westpac next on 25 percent and NAB and ANZ on about 17 percent.
The big bank's margins on home loans have already declined this year from about three percent in June to about 2.25 percent now.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1812
