Australia-based transport, logistics and security group Brambles Industries Ltd said it was actively considering acquisitions in United States, Europe and Asia in the current year.
Brambles chief executive John Fletcher told Reuters in an interview that Brambles would only look at acquisitions in areas where it had Australian experience.
"You should anticipate some acquisition work in the Northern Hemisphere, but in businesses we already operate in here," he said.  
"Anything new we'll do on home turf," he said.
Fletcher repeated that Brambles was looking at participating in the privatisation of Australia's airports being carried out before June next year.
Fletcher said the vehicle for airport investment would be Bramble's joint venture company, Australian Airport Services, formed with property and financial services company, Lend Lease Corp Ltd.
Brambles would look at acquisitions in the Northern Hemisphere in the industrial services, waste management, equipment rentals and records management areas.  
Earlier Brambles reported a 120.2 percent jump in net profit to A$215.1 million for the year to June 30, 1996. Before abnormals, the net profit rose 15.8 percent to A$214.8 million, at the upper end of analysts' expectations of A$208 million to A$214 million.
Fletcher said the result would have been a bit ahead of brokers' expectations.
"It's a marginally pleasant result rather than a huge shock," he said.
Strong growth in earnings from Brambles CHEP pallet business in the United States helped boost the results.  
Fletcher said the Australian economy, which provides the bulk of Bramble's earnings, remained flat and was expected to remain so for some time.
"We haven't got an expectation that we will get too much help from this economy ... for at least another six months," he said.
The U.S. economy remained strong while Europe and Britain were flat, he said.
"But all in all we've got enough things going to see another (profit) increase for this year," he said.  
Profits from Brambles overseas operations grew at twice the rate of those from local economies and this trend was likely to continue.
This continued overseas growth would however affect the allocation of franking credits on dividends.
"The continuing growth expected in overseas earnings meant that the company would need to reduce moderately the level of franking of dividends declared on 1996/97 earnings," Fletcher said in an earlier statement.
Recipients of franked dividends receive tax credits for Australian company tax already paid by the companies involved.  
Brambles posted a 35 cents per share fully franked final dividend for 1995/96, up from a 33 cents per share final dividend in 1994/95.
The total dividend rose to 69 cents per share from 65 cents.
Earnings per share rose to 97.6 cents from 84.8 cents.
Brambles' shares were down five cents at A$18.80 at 3.40 p.m. (0540 GMT).
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 373-1800
