Almost 300 students and workers from the islands of Kiribati were adrift in the central Pacific on Wednesday aboard a crowded charter ship crippled by a fire, officials said.
The 1,000-tonne MV Maasmond appealed for help on Tuesday night after losing power through the fire in the engine room.
It was found by a Royal New Zealand Airforce Orion rescue plane drifting about 800 kms (500 miles) east of the Kiribati island of Tarawa with 290 passengers on board.
"The Orion located it this afternoon and was told via radio that it's in no immediate distress and has enough food and water for five days," Airforce Squadron Leader Ron Irons told Reuters from the RNZAF's base in Nandi, Fiji.
"It has partially restored its electric power, but it has no wasy to start its engine," Irons said.
An electrical fire in a switchboard in the engine room shut down the ship's electrical systems late on Tuesday, leaving the converted freighter without power and still two days sailing from the nearest land.
The ship's charterer, Kiribati businessman Waysang Kumkee, said the MV Maasmond's insurers would pay for another ship to tow it back to Tarawa.
The 64.5-metre (210 foot) Maasmond was chartered to carry 290 passengers, mostly Kiribati students and workers, and 400 tonnes of cargo to Christmas Island from Tarawa, Kumkee said.
A tugboat was likely to take two days to reach the stricken ship and another two days to tow it back to Tarawa, he said, adding the passengers had plenty of food and water to last the four days.
"It's not a problem. If they run out they can easily borrow some of the cargo," Kumkee told Reuters by telephone from Tarawa, one of a group of coral atolls about 5,000 kms (3,000 miles) north-east of Sydney.
The cargo included rice and tinned food.
None of the passengers or crew had been injured in the fire and the only problem on board was likely to be boredom given the ship's video players were out of action. "With no videos, they'll be a bit bored," Kumkee said.
Most of the passengers were sitting or sleeping under canvas on blankets on the deck, he said.
They would be reduced to playing cards and their guitars until their rescue, he added.
The MV Maasmond is registered in Kingstown in St Vincent and Grenadines, according to the Lloyds List, and has had engine trouble in the past.
In 1992, it underwent engine repairs for ten weeks after encountering cyclones on a cruise through the Pacific.
