Gaming and electronics group AWA Ltd said on Wednesday it wanted to buy up to 75 percent of the New South Wales government-owned betting agency, the Totalisator Agency Board (TAB), later this year.
AWA managing director John Rouse told Reuters in an interview that the company was looking at the option of a major recapitalisation to fund such an acquisition, which has been estimated to be worth around A$750 million.
"It's clear that AWA has a strong interest in participating in the privatisation of the TAB," Rouse said.  
He said the racing industry and AWA were looking closely at the model used to privatise the Victorian TAB, where the industry bought a 25 percent stake and 75 percent was privatised through Tabcorp Holdings Ltd.
AWA was considering the option of a major capital raising to fund the outright purchase of a 75 percent stake through a government trade sale, with an offer of a portion of the stake to the public later on.  
"You could have a situation where initially the capital raising is funded by financial institutions and maybe AWA's existing shareholder base, but within a period a portion of what has been acquired would be floated on a broader basis to the public," Rouse said.
The Labor government in New South Wales has yet to say publicly whether it would privatise the TAB, but is expected to announce within several months a plan to sell it either through a public float or a trade sale.  
Bidders however wanted the government to give some concrete assurances about the tax and licensing regime a privatisated TAB would face.
"It's important that the parameters in terms of tax and licensing are cast in concrete for some reasonable time," Rouse said.
AWA was aware of a desire within government and the wider public that the public be offered shares in any privatised NSW TAB at some stage, he added.
"We would be prepared to make commitments to the government that we would float it later on," he said.  
Rouse said there was a feeling within government and the racing industry that a trade sale would be preferable to a float.
"There are those that are close to this issue in government saying if New South Wales wants to deal with this matter quickly, if the racing industry wants to establish its financial arrangements sooner rather than later and the government doesn't want the costs of a public float, than a tender needs to be the preferred approach," he said.  
AWA's share price closed down two cents at 91 cents on Wednesday.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 373-1800
