Dairy and fruit juice group National Foods Ltd said on Tuesday its reforms announced in July were now almost fully completed and the group was poised for above-budget profit growth in the next six to nine months.
"It's almost fully implemented," outgoing National Foods managing director Graham Reaney told Reuters in an interview.
"The real benefits start to emerge as people become more familiar with the new structures and clearly there'll be gains over the next six to nine months," Reaney said.  
Earlier on Tuesday National Foods posted a 17.3 percent higher operating profit before tax of A$37.6 million for the year to June 30.
Its net profit rose to A$15.05 million from A$10.77 million after an abnormal loss of A$7.89 million.
Net profit before abnormals rose to A$22.7 million from A$19.2 million, against analysts' expectations of about A$23 million.
National Foods said in announcing its results, earnings for July and August were ahead of budget and comfortably ahead of last year.  
Reaney repeated that this meant that 1996/97 profits were likely to be higher than in 1995/96, but he would not say how much higher. "But its clearly going in the right direction."
The reforms had created a more efficient distribution system for chilled foods, increasing sales coverage for National Foods' products, Reaney said.
"It's a combination of cost reduction and enhanced distribution, and looking at our beverage division, our flavoured milks are performing particularly strongly," he said.
"There are a number of areas that starting to perform a lot better for us."  
Reaney said the sale of non-core assets had also been completed and the company was now focused on extracting profit growth from existing assets.
"We would consider all businesses that we have today as core businesses," he said, adding, however, that he could not rule out future acquisitions.
"But the first objective to make those assets that we currently own work better, produce more profit, more cash flow."
Singapore's Camerlin Pte Ltd has about eight percent of National Foods and Hong Kong's Mingly Corp has about 10.4 percent of the company.  
Reaney said he would not comment on shareholders' intentions or actions or whether either of the Asian-based investors planned any takeover or had brought on any board room reshuffle.
He said he had resigned the managing director's position having worked for the company for five years. "Five to seven years is a normal period for a chief executive and quite genuinely I do have other things to do," he said.
"I'm quite relaxed and if it wasn't an amicable arrangement I wouldn't be staying on as a non-executive director," he said on his last day in the job.  
Reaney's replacement, Max Ould, was chief executive of Peters Foods until April and presided over the transfer of operations from Pacific Dunlop Ltd to Nestle Australia.
National Foods' shares closed up three cents at A$1.41.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 373-1800
