World-wide Australian transport group TNT Ltd reported another annual profit slump on Wednesday, but promised the sale of its troubled airline and other reforms would produce strong profit growth in current year.
"We haven't got any numbers, but it should be quite strong relative to the position we're starting from," TNT managing director David Mortimer said of prospective profit growth, in an interview with Reuters.  
TNT's net profit for the year to June 30 fell to A$9.84 million (US$7.79 million) from A$40.01 million in 1994/95 and A$105.05 million in 1993/94.
Mortimer said a sharp drop profits from Australia's Ansett Airlines, 50 percent owned by TNT, and losses from its Brazilian operations and local general freight business offset good revenue growth in TNT's core operations.
He said profits from these core activities of domestic and international time sensitive freight and logistics had grown 48.7 percent to A$165.3 million in 1995/96.  
TNT had moved to excise these loss-making units and focus on profitable core activities, he said.
"We've dealt with the (Australian) LCL (Less Than Container Load) business -- that's been closed, and we've sold Brazil," he said.
"What's the saying ... when in doubt shoot it or fix it."
TNT would also look to sell other unprofitable non-core businesses, Mortimer said.
"We've got other non-core activities and to the extent that they don't perform then they will be vulnerable to sale," he said.  
"The inconsistency in our results has come from these fringe activities ... it's that volatility around the earnings base that says we have to concentrate on core activities and get out of the non-core 'riff-raff' if you like," he said.
TNT announced earlier this week the finalisation of plans to sell its stake in Ansett to Air New Zealand Ltd for cash receipts of A$325 million. The other 50 percent of Ansett is owned by Rupert Murdoch's News Corp Ltd.  
TNT's remaining non-core activities include an airline leasing company jointly owned with News Corp, some shipping operations between New Zealand and Australia, a mono-rail in Sydney and some information technology assets.
Mortimer would not single out any as potential immediate sale prospects, but said they were vulnerable while they were not making profits.
He said the airline leasing firm, Ansett Worldwide, needed to have its capital base restructured before it could be sold.  
Shareholders however took the profit slump in their stride, having actually forecast a slight loss, rather than a slight profit.
Net profit before abnormals, but after preference dividends, fell to A$0.6 million from A$38.48 million in 1994/95.
Analysts had expected a pre-abnormal, post preferences loss of between A$4 million and A$22 million.
TNT's shares closed up three cents at A$1.47.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 373-1800
