Australian investment and property group Lend Lease Corp and Thailand's Modern Home Co announced on Tuesday they would build a markets complex in Northern Bangkok that would be Asia's largest.
"The 160 hectare, A$1 billion (US$778 million) project aims to create a new industrial commercial and residential hub in northern Bangkok, anchored around what is currently being established as Asia's largest single agricultural produce and export market," Lend Lease and Modern Home said in a joint venture announcement.
"The joint venture brings together the local experience of Modern Home and Lend Lease's international resources and financial strength," they said.
Stage one of the project, which was 60 percent complete and projected to cost A$700 million, was already processing 15,000 tonnes of produce a day and had parking for 25,000 vehicles.
The complex, known as the Thai Markets project, would be located on the main northern road from Bangkok and be about 20 km from the airport.
"Located in a key location in North Bangkok, the Thai Market has been conceived to tap into the high growth agricultural and industrial sectors as Thailand emerges as the 'food bowl of Asia'," the said.
The complex would eventually include food processing facilities so produce from surrounding areas could be packaged and processed for export.
The second and third stages, which would cost A$300 million, would include factories, retail outlets and homes to service the complex.
"There will also be a major discount retail and wholesale distribution facilities and shophouses," they said.
Lend Lease's Asian unit, based in Singapore, would contribute up to A$100 million to the joint venture for a 10 percent stake initially, with that percentage changing as the stages progressed.
The project is expected to take four years to complete.
A Lend Lease spokeswoman said she could not say how the percentage would change.
Modern Home chief executive Thanom Angkanawatana said the joint venture was a key step for his company.
"Lend Lease brings extensive experience, management skills and capital. Their international perspective will significantly strengthen the project and position future stages for the next upturn in the economy," Angkanawatana said in the joint statement.
"Completion of the adjacent Thammasart University and Asian Games complexes as well as continuing infrastructure investment in the area by the Thai government is expected to further benefit the project," the two partners said.
The state-owned Bank for Agriculture and Agricultural Cooperatives (BAAC) is backing the project and the Thai Ministry of Commerce also supports it, the Lend Lease spokeswoman said.
"The current success of the market project show, that it has strong fundamentals and makes it a good opportunity for Lend Lease," Lend Lease Asia managing director Richard Clarke said.
The announcement of the Thai joint venture is part of Lend Lease's widespread push into Asian property development.
Lend Lease announced on Monday it had formed a 50/50 joint venture with privately-owned U.S. firm Oakwood International Ltd to manage about 10,000 serviced apartments around Asia, including in Bangkok.
Lend Lease said it would initially contribute US$15 million for the management entity and would then seek additional capital.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
