Electronic payment systems company Intellect Holdings Ltd said on Tuesday its bid for Internet software firm Techway Ltd would allow it to launch a product for making secure payments on the Internet.
Intellect, which helped pioneer EFTPOS (Electronic Funds Transfer Point of Sale) technology and systems in Australia, wanted to export Techway's software in conjunction with its own secure electronic payments systems, Intellect executive chairman Ross Leighton told Reuters.  
Intellect already sold its EFTPOS hardware and software to 20 banks outside Australia and to five or six large banks in Europe, all of whom were investigating its use with the Internet.
"All banks are looking for greater service and lower costs and the internet is the way to do that," Leighton said in an interview.
Finding a user-friendly and secure way of making payments and money transfers on the internet has become something of a holy grail for programmers.  
Secure payments systems are seen dramatically increasing the volume of financial transactions made on the net, which are already growing strongly.
Techway's Web Australia unit built the software currently being used for internet banking by Advance Bank Ltd, which is merging with St George Bank Ltd.
Intellect announced late on Monday it would make a takeover offer for Techway Ltd in a counter-bid to a previous offer by Nova Pacific Capital Ltd.
Intellect said it will offer one of its shares for every 2-1/2 Techway shares. The bid values Techway at A$4.9 million.  
Techway, who had already signed a distribution agreement with Intellect, has recommended shareholders accept the bid.
Leighton said the success of Techway's software on the Advance Bank site was a key factor in Intellect's decision to launch a takeover bid.
Advance's Internet banking site is Australia's most successful and has been consistently rated amoung the world's top ten internet banking sites by The Money Pages, an Internet magazine that rates internet sites.  
Advance Bank spokesman David Brown said the Techway-designed site had 10,000 regular customers who used the site for about 10,000 transactions a week.
The site was picking up 150 new customers a week and each internet transaction cost the bank less than 10 cents, while an over the counter transaction cost about A$2.50, he said.
"The collaboration between Techway and Advance was a key for Advance getting the jump on our competitors," Brown said.
Intellect's Leighton said Techway's headstart in Australia meant it had a good chance of becoming the industry standard for Internet transactions in Australia.  
"It has the ability to become a defacto standard in Australia," Leighton said.
The marriage of Techway's secure transaction software and Intellect's EFTPOS hardware and systems would help accelerate the trend of convergence evident in recent years between debit cards, credit cards and EFTPOS, he said.
"As these different payments come together, you'll then see they'll be able to be more economically utilised over the Internet."  
Intellect's share price closed down three cents at 95 cents on Tuesday, giving it a market capitalisation of A$48.19 million.
Techway's shares closed up 5.5 cents at 37 cents.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
