Transport and logistics group TNT Ltd said on Wednesday it was well placed for quite strong profit growth in the current 1996/97 year, but would continue to look at selling its currently unprofitable non-core assets.
"We haven't got any numbers, but it should be quite strong relative to the position we're starting from," TNT Managing Director David Mortimer said of prospective profit growth, in an interview with Reuters.  
Mortimer said the non-core activities that slowed down TNT's earnings in 1995/96 were its general freight business in Australia and its Brazilian operations.
"We've dealt with the LCL (Less Than Container Load) business -- that's been closed and we've sold Brazil," he said.
"What's the saying...when in doubt shoot it or fix it."
TNT would also look to sell other unprofitable non-core businesses, Mortimer said.
"We've got other non-core activities and to the extent that they don't perform then they will be vulnerable to sale," he said.  
One of those non core activities is TNT's 50 percent interest in airliner leasing firm, Ansett Worldwide. News Corp Ltd owns the other half.
Mortimer said he had consistently said that Ansett Worldwide's capital base needed to be restructured to give it cheaper access to capital so it could compete properly.
"In its present structure, it's difficult for it to be optimised for News and TNT ownership because it needs access to capital at an effective rate," he said.
News and TNT continued to look at ways of restructuring Ansett Worldwide's capital base before selling it, he said.  
Ansett's GD Express operation based in Europe had turned around in the last year and was now going well, Mortimer said.
He said the just completed sale plans for Ansett Airlines
Mortimer said in the longer term, TNT aimed to get double digit revenue and earnings growth.
"Overall we'd like to do good double digit (revenue and earnings) growth, but we can't guarantee any of that," he said.
TNT's share price closed up three cents at A$1.47.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 373-1800
