Global media group News Corp Ltd must report a sharply higher second quarter profit on Thursday or it will fail to achieve its 20 percent growth target for the 1996/97 year, analysts said.
News Corp is expected to report a second quarter net profit before abnormals of between A$450 million (US$344.25 million) and A$490 million, taking first half net profits to between A$735 million and A$775 million.
This compares with A$285 million in the first quarter and would be up 17 percent from the A$663 million posted in the first half of 1995/96.
Analysts said strong receipts from the box-office hit alien movie "Independence Day" and firm U.S. television revenue would be the driving factors in the stronger result.
They said the market was demanding News put out a strong second quarter figure after a series of below-expectation results.
The analysts said the extent of any fall in the price of News Corp shares would depend on how far earnings fell short of expectations but they did not quantify any expected drop.  
News' first half must be around 15 to 20 percent better if Rupert Murdoch's group is to achieve its August 1996 forecast of a 20 percent improvement in profits in 1996/97 from the A$1.26 billion achieved in 1995/96.
"They are going to have to get a move on in this quarter if they're going to achieve that 20 percent," said one senior analyst on Tuesday.
"If they can't get a decent rise for the quarter, people are going to panic," the analyst told Reuters.
Analysts said they expected revenues from Australian newspapers and magazines and the Ansett airline operation to remain weak in the second quarter.
First Pacific analyst Lachlan Drummond said he expected "Independence Day" revenues to be the major factor in the stronger result.
"Television is also one area where there's room for some upside," Drummond said. He is forecasting A$474 million for the second quarter.
Analysts also said a good result was likely because News was due to give a big presentation to analysts and investors on February 24 in Los Angeles and would be reluctant to disappoint them before that.  
"That's got everyone believing that they won't have a bad result," Drummond said.
The market would also watch the results commentary closely for a repeat of the 20 percent growth forecast.
Executive chairman and founder Rupert Murdoch repeated the forecast in October last year at the group's annual meeting in Adelaide. But analysts said company officials had been reluctant to repeat the forecast since then.  
News Corp shares ended one cent higher at A$6.75 on Tuesday
(A$1=US$0.76)
