Rupert Murdoch's News Corp on Thursday reported a lower than expected profit for the first half of 1996/97, but later told analysts it remained confident of a 20 percent profit boost for the full year.
Strong earnings from the hit movie Independence Day and buoyant British newspaper sales helped drive net profits before abnormals 10.3 percent higher to A$731 million (US$555 million).
But the result was below analyst forecasts of a pre-abnormals profit of A$735 million to A$775 million.
"Everyone's a bit disappointed," said a Sydney analyst.
Andrew Sekely, the head of equities at broker Intersuisse, said: "It certainly wasn't a startingly good result. The market has made its judgement". News' shares fell 16 cents to A$6.60 after the result, but closed in Australia at A$6.76.
"It's about A$20 million less than what the market would have liked and to still reach that (20 percent profit growth) outlook, it's got to make up the difference in the second half," the Sydney analyst said.
News Corp had said in August last year when it posted a A$1.26 billion net profit for the year to June 30, 1996 that it expected strong movie and television revenues to increase profits by at least 20 percent in 1996/97.
News Corp told analysts in a teleconference briefing on Thursday after the first half result that it still expected 20 percent profit growth for 1996/97.
"They did say that they're still on track for the 20 percent growth," another Sydney media analyst said after the briefing between company officials and U.S. and Australian analysts.
Analysts said News Corp officials were bullish about catching up in the second half and had pointed to a strong outlook for movies and U.S. television and newspapers.
Operating income from News' Fox Filmed Entertainment unit surged to A$202 million for the first half of 1996/97 from A$84 million a year earlier, due largely to Independence Day.
Analysts said the re-release of Star Wars and other films would help further boost movie revenues in the second half.
British newspaper profits rose 18 percent in the first half, with gains in circulation revenues at The Sun, The Times and The Sunday Times, News Corp said.
"All of the company's newspapers have maintained their dominant position in each of their respective markets, despite cover price increases instituted during the quarter at both The Sun and The Times," the company said. Analysts said British newspapers would again perform well in the second half.
In contrast, Australian newspapers posted only a slight increase in profit in the first half reflecting a slow economy.
While News Corp said losses at its burgeoning Asian satellite broadcaster Star TV in the first half were in line with expectations. (A$=US$0.76)
