Rupert Murdoch's global media group News Corp Ltd reported a lower than expected first half profit on Thursday, but later told analysts it remained confident of a 20 percent profit boost for the full year.
News said strong earnings from the hit alien movie Independence Day and buoyant U.K. newspaper sales helped drive up net profits before abnormals 10.3 percent to A$731 million.
But this was below analysts' expectations of a pre-abnormals net profit for the half of A$735 million to A$775 million.  
"Everyone's a bit disappointed," said one senior Sydney analyst who asked not to be named.
Andrew Sekely, the head of equities at broker Intersuisse, described the result as moderate.
"It certainly wasn't a startingly good result. The market has made its judgment," he said. News' shares fell 16 cents to A$6.60 in the hours after the result.
"It's about A$20 million less than what the market would have liked and to still reach that (20 percent profit growth) outlook, it's got to make up the difference in the second half," the Sydney analyst said.  
News had said in August last year when it posted a A$1.26 billion net profit for the year to June 30, 1996 that it expected strong movie and television revenues to increase profits by at least 20 percent in 1996/97.
Murdoch repeated the forecast in October, but the group has been publicly tight-lipped about it since then and its first quarter results were also lower than expected.
However News reassured the analysts in a teleconference briefing after the first half result, saying that it was still on track for the 20 percent profit growth.
The profit forecast was not in the formal release.  
"They did say that they're still on track for the 20 percent growth," another Sydney media analyst said after the morning teleconference briefing between company officials and U.S. and Australian analysts.
Analysts said News Corp officials were bullish about catching up in the second half and had pointed to the continued strong outlook for movies, U.S. television and newspapers.
Operating income from News' Fox Filmed Entertainment unit surged to A$202 million for the first half from A$84 million a year earlier, due largely to Independence Day.  
"U.S. results were led by Fox Filmed Entertainment which posted a 154 percent gain in operating profits reflecting the continued success of Independence Day," News Corp said.
Analysts said the re-release of Star Wars, among others, would help further boost movie revenues in the second half.
"It's pure profit in the second half, whereas they had costs to write off in the first half," said another analyst.
Strong revenues from News' Fox television network and its Fox stations would also help second half profits.
"They did very well over the Super Bowl and they've got a new hit with King of the Hill," said an analyst.  
U.K. newspapers would again perform well in the second half, analysts said. British newspaper profits rose 18 percent in the first half, with gains in circulation revenues at The Sun, the Times and The Sunday Times.
"All of the company's newspapers have maintained their dominant position in each of their respective markets, despite cover price increases instituted during the quarter at both The Sun and The Times," News said.
News said losses at its burgeoning Asian satellite broadcaster Star TV were in line with expectations but no figures were released. -- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 373-1800
