British utilities could find share buybacks and takeovers more costly as the government ruled out tax credits on buybacks and some special dividends on Tuesday, analysts said, but they are unlikely to stop such moves.
"It should not stop companies doing buybacks or special dividends," said Michael Cohen, utilities analyst at Salomon Brothers, "those should still go ahead if justified."
Chancellor Kenneth Clarke said shareholders would no longer be able to claim tax credits on share buybacks or special dividends associated with share consolidations or takeovers.  
The move is a means of giving the UK Treasury more room for a cut in income tax in its November budget, analysts said.
Shares in the utility sector, which has seen a steady flow of buybacks and special dividends both within and outside the context of takeovers, initially slumped on the news but later showed some recovery.
"It was a knee-jerk reaction, slightly overdone," said Kevin Lapwood, utilities analyst at Merrill Lynch.  
Shares in Anglian Water slid 31-1/2 to a low of 525 pence before edging back to 544-1/2 pence at 1300 GMT while Yorkshire Water was down 17-1/2 pence at 622-1/2 pence after slumping to a low of 613 pence.
In the electricity sector, London Electric stumbled to a low of 598 pence before recovering to be down 20-1/2 pence at 608-1/2 pence while generator PowerGen was off 10-1/2 pence at 479 pence from a low of 460 pence earlier.
"The market was of the view that release of value from the balance sheets was less likely, but I think that was overdone," Lapwood said.  
Water and electricity companies report half-year results in a flood between November and December and several had been tipped as likely to offer a buyback or special dividend.
Analysts said the upshot of the government's decision would be to make buybacks more expensive, but the impetus for such moves will not change.
"The logic of a buyback has not changed, it will just be at a premium. And the move on special dividends could make takeovers more expensive, but if it is a good acquisition, it will go ahead," said one analyst who asked not to be identified.  
Companies are generally reticent about specific plans and several contacted declined to comment on the new tax rules or share strategies.
Analysts suggested that of the water companies, Yorkshire Water might consider a buyback while Anglian and Thames might consider restructuring the balance sheet.
East Midlands Electricity, Yorkshire Electricity and London Electric were singled out as potentially considering special dividends, while the market is still waiting to see such a move from PowerGen, analysts said.
"It does not really affect the companies, just a group of investors," Cohen said.
Those funds affected by the move are likely to change investments to try to avoid any impact, analysts said.
"At the end of the day it will probably end up roughly equal," the analyst said.
"Gross funds will restructure and companies will come out with cleverer mechanisms," he added.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
