Britain's nuclear generator British Energy Plc said on Tuesday it would announce job cuts and cost savings on October 9 which were largely expected by the market but criticised by opposition politicians.
"It is clear that British Energy has not performed as they promised they would," Labour's energy and industry spokesman John Battle said in a statement.
A British Energy spokesman confirmed Wednesday's announcement would cover job cuts and cost savings but declined to give further details.
Analysts said they were expecting the company to outline a cut of some 20 percent in its workforce of over 6,500 by the year 2000.
"That's what we have based our valuation on, it was the figure given to the analysts' briefing over privatisation," said one analyst who asked not to be identified.
Newspaper reports this week have said the company could cut between 1,300-1,500 posts in an effort to make cost savings of around 100 million pounds ($156.4 million).
Battle called on British Energy to confirm the dividend policy outlined in the company's privatisation prospectus, which warned that it was vulnerable to underperformance by nuclear power stations.
At privatisation, the company said its initial interim dividend would be 4.6 pence per share and forecasts for final dividend are at 9.1 pence for 1996/97.
But Labour's Battle said the job cuts could damage performance and see the company falling below targets. "Performance targets anticipated in the prospectus have never previously been consistently achieved and the loss of a reported 1,300...staff is expected to further undermine chances of reaching them," Battle said.
British Energy, which runs eight nuclear power stations in England and Scotland, was one of the ruling Conservative party's most unpopular privatisations when it was sold off in July.
It had a first instalment price of 100 pence for small investors and 105 pence for institutions but slid below these levels at its debut and has rarely moved above since.
Its launch was overshadowed by concerns over its future profitability when it closed two of its eight reactors after finding cracks just days before shares started trading. Analysts said the job cuts had largely been outlined at the time of privatisation.
"All that has been absorbed into forecasts," said Kevin Lapwood of Merrill Lynch.
British Energy shares were down half a penny at 105 pence by 1109 GMT, which analysts said reflected market nonchalance over job cuts. ($1=.6393 Pound)
