Privatised nuclear power generator British Energy Plc sparked criticism on Wednesday when it announced job cuts that failed to impress the stock market and angered unions.
"I don't think this move transforms (British Energy's) prospects at all," said Philip Hollobone, utilities analyst at Williams de Broe.
British Energy said in a statement it aimed to cut 1,460 jobs in Scotland and Wales to make savings in staff costs of 50 million pounds ($78 million) within three years.
It said it would have a one-off restructuring charge of 100 million pounds which was already provided for.
Chief executive Robert Hawley said there could be more savings to come as cuts in office costs came through.
Union representatives slammed the move in a statement as "a high risk strategy," warning that job cuts could "reduce training, lower standards and threaten safety."
The Nuclear Installations Inspectorate (NII), part of Britain's Health and Safety Executive, said it would review the plans and take action if it felt safety would suffer.
"If we think (the plans) are adverse (for safety), we will use regulatory powers to stop (British Energy) doing them," a spokesman for the NII said.
But Hawley maintained that "safety is our bottom line, not profit."
British Energy's debut on the stock exchange in July was overshadowed by temporary closures of two of its eight reactors after cracks were discovered.
Shares kicked off below the partly-paid issue price of 105 pence to institutions and 100 pence to small investors and have rarely moved above those levels, mangaging just a half penny rise on the day on Wednesday to stand at 108 pence at 1130 GMT.
The ruling Conservative government pressed ahead with its privatisation despite the deep unpopularity of the deal and has been left with a stake of around 12 percent.
The opposition Labour Party also criticised the job cuts, which energy and industry spokesman John Battle said showed British Energy "has not performed as they promised they would."
He called on the company to confirm its dividend policy which it has said is vulnerable to underperformance by nuclear power stations.
Although Hawley maintained the company's plans were aimed at making "absolutely sure we are competitive in the market place," analysts expressed concern it faced stiff challenges and remained an unattractive investment.
"They are under pressure," said Marshall Whiting of Societe Generale Strauss Turnbull (SGST).
Whiting said the crucial factor for British Energy was price of electricity in the so-called "pool," or wholesale market.
"Pressure on electricity prices is downward in the medium to long term. (British Energy) has to address operating costs to get profits to stand still," he said.
Hollobone said the cost cuts should make predictions for dividend growth more secure but added that these were still below market averages.
"Dividend growth is one of the lowest in the sector and there is no sign of a special dividend," he said.
British Energy said at its privatisation that the first interim dividend would be 4.6 pence a share and forecasts for final dividend are for 9.1 pence in 1996/97.
"You can get better value elsewhere. Why invest in British Energy?" Hollobone said. ($1=.6393 Pound)
