ASDA Plc may not be Britain's biggest supermarket chain but new chief executive Allan Leighton is determined to make it the best.
ASDA is currently one of Britain's top four supermarkets with around 13.1 percent of the market, behind Tesco's leading 22.7 percent and its arch-rival J. Sainsbury's 19.3 percent, according to industry figures for September.
"I don't want particularly to be the biggest but what I want to be is the best," Leighton told Reuters in an interview.
Leighton took over on August 27 from his close colleague Archie Norman, the dynamic former chief executive who stepped up to chairman and who has just embarked on a political career as a prospective parliamentary candidate for the Conservative Party.
Norman is credited with turning ASDA around from a debt-laden, downbeat chain when he took over five years ago to its current position as value-for-money with cheeky, high-profile marketing campaigns and a lively image.
But Leighton feels there is still more to do.
"We've still got less than half the store base that we're really satisfied with...a lot of the gain in terms of productivity...and supply chain that our competitors have, we have not yet got and have been slow in getting," he said.
CLOTHING MARGINS HIGHER THAN FOOD
Leighton wants to boost the chain's George clothing range to second place in the market behind own-brand high street name Marks &amp; Spencer. "I'd like it to be...close towards 10 percent (of total sales) in the chain...about a 600 million pound (a year) business," he said, adding that he thought that could be done in "the next couple of years".
Clothing margins are around twice those of groceries for ASDA, Leighton said.
The George clothing brand, exclusive to ASDA, is headed by George Davies who founded the Next chain of fashion stores.
Leighton sees the handover from Norman as an "evolution", valuing continuity but seeing clear areas for change.
"I think continuity in management succession is very important," he said. He added: "There will be some changes, that goes with the territory."
He said the pace of innovation could be speeded up. "We've got a bit more comfortable and I don't like that and so we're just going to hot (innovation) up a bit," he said.
Leighton, a graduate of Harvard business school, sees improvements in technology as a way of achieving greater profitability for the stores.
ASDA needs to make "another quantum (leap)" in using technology, Leighton said, primarily to speed up distribution and product roll-out.
He admitted that in technology "I'm not satisfied with what we are doing...We're not leaping, we're catching up."
Leighton also wants to see a quarter of ASDA's business unique to its outlets, mostly 40-50,000 square feet, in three years' time.
"One of our objectives (is that) in three years, 25 percent of what we do in our stores you would not be able to do in a competitor superstore of up to 30,000 square feet," he said.
DRIVE A JAGUAR FOR ONE MONTH
ASDA's renowned innovative management style, where everyone from checkout staff to chairman is a colleague and employees are encouraged to "Tell Archie" of ideas, has looked largely to Norman and Leighton to carry the company image.
Now, Leighton feels it needs to become "less dependent on two individuals. Now it's time for the team to deliver".
Employees work in an atmosphere where weekly and monthly sector targets are posted in staff areas while A,B,C,D awards are made for action "Above and Beyond the Call of Duty."
Sales competitions reward the winner with use of the company's red Jaguar for a month and there is strong participation in the employee share scheme.
"People want to work in successful businesses and the measure of our success will be in our profitability, earnings per share, and our sales performance and market share," he said.
Leighton feels the confidence in employees engendered by the management style accounts for "a third of our success".
And he sees it in tune with opposition Labour Party leader Tony Blair's concept of a "stakeholder society".
"That's exactly what it is. People should be involved in what they do and there's no reason why they shouldn't be," he said.
Leighton remains committed to ASDA's aim to be the cheapest across a basket of goods and vowed to respond to market leader Tesco's latest challenge of "Unbeatable Value" price offers.
ASDA VOWS TO KEEP MARKET SHARE
"ASDA is very determined we will hold our position. It is very important for us to do that and we will hold it," he said.
"If we are under pressure in some areas, we will and have and are responding," he added.
He said food retailing was currently very competitive and likely to stay that way for "six to nine months".
Own brand goods, which generally give higher margins to retailers, currently account for 35 percent or so of ASDA's sales and Leighton would like to push that up to around 40 percent, but cautioned that "five percent is a lot".
Healthcare, where ASDA has battled against Retail Price Maintenance (RPM), could be an area of opportunity for own brand, he suggested.
But one area where ASDA seems in no hurry is in launching loyalty cards in its stores nationwide, to match moves from Tesco and the other big supermarkets, Sainsbury and Safeway.
ASDA is trying out a loyalty card -- which rewards customers and also provides information about what they buy -- in selected stores but Leighton is unwilling to roll it out until he can see real value for the company in such a move.
"I only feel the need for the database (but) people have still not really worked out how to mine the database," he said.
Leighton suggested that if ASDA had to chose between investing in a decrease in margins through lower prices or loyalty, price would still win out.
"If 0.75 percentage point were the cost, well I could do quite a lot with 0.75 percent in terms of pricing," he said.
