British industry watchdog Ofwat said on Tuesday it would review water company price limits in 1999, five years ahead of schedule, in a move which commentators said was not unexpected and possibly with political undertones.
The opposition Labour party, currently standing ahead of the ruling Conservative party in opinion polls with a general election due by May 1997, welcomed the move as "long overdue".
Ofwat set the current price limits in 1994 for a 10-year period with an option to review in five years at the request either of Ofwat director general Ian Byatt or the companies.
In a statement, Byatt said "a gap of ten years between reviews is too long even given the long term nature of the water industry."
"The regulator's decision to have a review in 1999 comes as no surprise," Janet Langdon, director of the Water Services Association which represents water firms, said in a statement.
Labour environment spokesman Frank Dobson said in a statement the review was an admission by Ofwat that Labour "has been right to argue that the water companies have been allowed to rip off their customers since privatisation."
Byatt said he was announcing the review now "to remove speculation and regulatory uncertainty...to give sufficient time for consultation with all those involved."
Water company shares dipped on the news with Anglian Water down six pence to 547-1/2 pence while Severn Trent shed four pence to 600 pence and Thames Water was down four pence to 548-1/2 pence.
Multi-utilities Hyder and United Utilities also suffered, sliding 12-1/2 pence to 700 pence and four pence to 585 pence respectively.
Byatt said major consideration would be given during the review to the need for balancing supply and demand and to pay more attention to leakage control, factors highlighted in last year's drought when many firms banned non-essential water use.
Labour criticised the industry at the time for allowing some 826 million gallons of water a day to seep out through pipes while paying large dividends and hefty salaries to directors.
Ofwat has already flexed its muscles against Yorkshire Water's inadequate handling of the drought which saw the company forced to tanker in supplies, by imposing price cuts for next year and singling it out at the time for a review in 1999.
The company, which has since had a change of management, said on Tuesday it would finally lift all restrictions imposed in the summer of 1995 on November 1.
Labour, which has utility companies in its sights for a proposed "windfall" profits tax, said Ofwat's planned price review would "have to play its part in (a) better deal for customers."
Byatt, by announcing an early review and stressing the need to pass savings on to customers, is "moving to assuage the politicians," said one analyst who declined to be named.
"There is lots of jockeying for position ahead of an election. The companies want to be seen to be doing the right thing," said Chris Perry, analyst at Charterhouse Tilney.
Later this year, companies will have an opportunity to go some way to pre-empting a harsh review when they announce interim results at the end of November.
Several of the water companies have used the announcement of past results to share out benefits of cost savings between customers and shareholders, giving rebates to the former and generous dividend payouts to the latter. "Companies may well consider there is a value now in laying out their plans for benefit sharing ahead of the next election," one analyst said.
