Britain's decision to take legal action to ban Resale Price Maintenance (RPM) on non-prescription medicines is likely to boost competition and could benefit some stores in terms of market share, analysts said on Friday.
"Anything that actually causes prices to fall is not good news (for retailers), but for those wanting to increase market share it will mean more people coming through the stores," said one share analyst who asked not to be identified.
Office of Fair Trading head John Bridgeman said in a statement earlier that he would seek to remove RPM from over-the-counter (OTC) medicines, because "there are good reasons for believing that it is time to end price-fixing."
RPM allows manufacturers to set minimum levels for sale of certain over-the-counter medicines. The Community Pharmacy Action Group, which lobbies on behalf of pharmacies, said its removal could mean the closure of one in four local outlets.
The OFT's request goes to the Restrictive Practices Court which is unlikely to be able to consider the issue before late 1997, Bridgeman told a press conference.
Retailers therefore did not appear to be about to start an immediate round of price cuts.
Chemist and beauty products store chain Boots said it was disappointed at the decision and believed that RPM "operates in the public interest."
Boots has not reduced prices of such medicines during a long-running inquiry into price-fixing and industry sources said it was unlikely to take that route in the near future.
UniChem, a pharmaceuticals wholesaler and retailer, said removal of RPM would be "immaterial to...profitability," while Superdrug, the high street chemist chain owned by Kingfisher, welcomed the move but ruled out immediate price cuts.
Supermarket retailer ASDA, which has led the campaign over the last year to have RPM removed after successfully lobbying for it to be withdrawn from books, also welcomed the OFT's decision, saying it could save consumers 300 million pounds ($476 million) on everday healthcare products.
But it said its stance on prices would not change.
"RPM is still in place, we are still in the same situation we were in yesterday and we will still be in it tomorrow," a spokesman said.
ASDA is currently refusing to sell Anadin Paracetamol, a painkiller produced by Whitehall Laboratories, and large packs of indigestion treatment Alka Seltzer, after it baulked at manufacturers' price increases.
It has launched a range of some 40 own-brand OTC medicines and vitamins selling for as little as half the price of branded equivalents, and says they have helped it extend market share.
Also on Friday, ASDA said it was launching an initiative to help support local pharmacies, shops which chief executive Allan Leighton told BBC television he had no wish to see put out of business.
Share analysts said that removal of RPM on non-prescription medicines could see specialists such as Boots increasing market share, reflecting events after RPM was taken off books when specialist retailer W H Smith increased market share.
"Smiths got stronger, increasing market share through promotions and using muscle with suppliers. I expect the same will happen to Boots - it'll get bigger and stronger," said Nick Bubb of MeesPierson.
Boots shares dipped on the news and stood at 638-1/2p, down 5p, by 1440 GMT. ASDA was up a penny to 114-1/2 pence while Kingfisher was down 1-1/2 pence at 654 pence. ($1=.6298 Pound)
