The stock of media group Pearson closed sharply higher Monday as takeover speculation swirled on a report, which was later denied, that broadcaster BSkyB might be planning a bid in the wake of announced management changes.
Pearson shares closed 34-1/2 pence (55 cents) higher at 731p ($11.60) after earlier touching a high for the year of 745p ($11.82), as 6.7 million shares changed hands.
"The price was boosted last week by the management change but now it reflects revived bid speculation," said one analyst, referring to last week's naming of a new Pearson chief executive and chairman.
A report in the Independent newspaper said BSkyB, in which Rupert Murdoch's News Corp. has a 40 percent stake, was in the early stages of planning a bid worth more than 4 billion British pounds ($6.4 billion) in cooperation with a U.S.-based media group.
But BSkyB's chief executive, Sam Chisholm, was quoted in later editions of Murdoch's Times newspaper saying there were "no talks taking place between News Corp, BSkyB or any associated company about a bid for Pearson."
A BSkyB spokesman confirmed Chisholm had denied any such talks.
Pearson, which owns Britain's main business newspaper, the Financial Times, Penguin Books and a number of television production companies, said it did not comment on speculation.
Analysts said that although BSkyB appeared to have ruled itself out of a bid, observers felt any move on Pearson was likely to be made before new management takes control next year.
Last week Pearson appointed Marjorie Scardino to be chief executive from Jan. 1 -- the first female head of a company represented in the key FTSE 100 share index. It also named Dennis Stevenson its new chairman.
"If someone is thinking seriously about a bid, now is the time to do it. The new management hasn't arrived yet and so it would be harder to mount a defence," said one media analyst, who asked not to be identified.
But analysts said Pearson shares were now approaching the top end of their price target range for full valuation of the business and the price tag attached to speculation around BSkyB was high.
"It is touching the stratosphere at these levels," said Anthony De Larrinaga of Panmure Gordon.
The media analyst said it was difficult to put a price tag on Pearson because its diversified nature meant it could have specific attractions for a variety of bidders.
Speculation of a bid for the company last surfaced in August, when Anglo-Dutch publisher Reed-Elsevier was rumoured as a possible buyer.
After initial stock market disappointment, Scardino's appointment at Pearson was greeted with a 12 pence (19 cents) jump in the stock price on Friday as hopes emerged that she might reorganize the sprawling media company.
So far, Scardino appears to be keeping her options open, analysts said. "There is no real evidence yet that she would consider any demergers (spin-offs) and it is open to question whether such a move would bring shareholder benefit," one said.
