Shares in media group Pearson rose sharply on Monday as takeover speculation swirled on a report, later denied, that broadcaster BSkyB might be planning a bid, just days after new management was appointed.
"The price was boosted last week by the management change but now it reflects revived bid speculation," said one sector analyst who declined to be named.
Pearson shares were up 25 pence at 721-1/2 pence by 1115 GMT after touching a peak of 745 pence, a high for the year.
A report in Monday's Independent newspaper said BSkyB, in which Rupert Murdoch's News Corp has a 40 percent stake, was in the early stages of planning a bid worth more than four billion pounds ($6.4 billion) in cooperation with a U.S.-based media group.
But BSkyB's chief executive, Sam Chisholm, was quoted in later editions of Murdoch's Times newspaper saying there were "no talks taking place between News Corp, BSkyB or any associated company about a bid for Pearson."
BSkyB was not immediately available for comment on Monday.
Pearson, which owns the Financial Times newspaper, Penguin Books and a number of television production companies, said it did not comment on speculation.
Analysts said although BSkyB appeared to have ruled itself out of a bid, observers felt any move on Pearson was likely to be made before new management takes control next year.
Last week, Pearson appointed Marjorie Scardino to be chief executive from January 1 -- the first female head of a company represented in the key FT-SE 100 share index -- and Dennis Stevenson chairman.
"If someone is thinking seriously about a bid, now is the time to do it. The new management hasn't arrived yet and so it would be harder to mount a defence," said one media analyst who asked not to be identified.
But analysts said Pearson shares were now approaching the top end of their price target range for full valuation of the business and the price tag attached to speculation around BSkyB was high.
"It is touching the stratosphere at these levels," said Anthony De Larrinaga of Panmure Gordon.
The media analyst said it was difficult to put a price tag on Pearson because its diversified nature meant it could have specific attractions for a variety of bidders.
Speculation of a bid for the company last surfaced in August when Anglo-Dutch publisher Reed-Elsevier was rumoured as a possible buyer.
After initial stock market disappointment, Scardino's appointment at Pearson was greeted with a 12 pence jump in shares on Friday as hopes emerged that she might reorganise the sprawling media company.
The Sunday Times newspaper reported that a sale of its television interests, which include soap opera and games show producer Grundy, might be on the cards.
"It may be that BSkyB want to acquire Grundy or Thames Television but whether they would want the entire group is another matter," said Anthony De Larrinaga of Panmure Gordon.
So far, Scardino appears to be keeping her options open, analysts said.
"There is no real evidence yet that she would consider any demergers and it is open to question whether such a move would bring shareholder benefit," the sector analyst said.
"We have the stock on a hold at the moment. Let's see what the new management comes up with and let's see if there is anything concrete behind this bid speculation," he added. ($1=.6298 Pound)
