Cable &amp; Wireless Communications, a major new British cable operator formed on Tuesday from a group led by Cable &amp; Wireless Plc, has the potential to be competitive and focuses attention on the fast-growing area, analysts said.
"The logic is irrefutable...the advantages of scope and size are undoubtedly there," said Societe Generale Strauss Turnbull analyst John Tysoe.
Cable &amp; Wireless, NYNEX Corp of the U.S. and Bell Canada International announced they would merge the operations of their British subsidiaries in a complex deal, culminating in a float of 15 percent of the new company.
"That creates an integrated second force, which will give BT a run for its money," Tysoe said, referring to telecommunications giant British Telecommunications.
Shares in Cable &amp; Wireless closed up 25.5 pence to 466.5, after touching a high of 476.5 pence, while NYNEX Cable Communications gained 23.5 pence to 119.5 pence.
"It's a jolly bold and impressive move," said one sector analyst.
The merger should result in quite significant cost savings, said Chris McFadden of Merrill Lynch, including tax offsets, refinancing of high-yield cable television funding and possibly through staff cuts.
"The new company can offer the complete range of services and it will be competing with BT in the franchises which it operates," the sector analyst said.
Analysts added that the deal was expected to dilute earnings slightly in the first year but enhance them from year two.
BT's shares edged down four pence to 354 pence as the market weighed the emergence of a new competitor.
But BT welcomed the consolidation in the sector, saying it would create a market "where competition can become the natural regulator."
Analysts said BT's calls to be allowed to provide cable television, which the Conservative government has so far rebuffed, could gain impetus from the emergence of Cable &amp; Wireless Communications.
For other cable companies, the move has focused market attention, which had been flagging, back on the fast-growing sector, with stock market valuations now looking a little low.
"People are reassessing the value (of cable companies). There could be more consolidation. They have to respond," McFadden said, adding that calculations suggested a 2.9 billion pounds ($3.6 billion) tag for C&amp;W's Mercury unit after the deal.
Telewest Communications shares jumped 12 pence to 135, while General Cable gained 18 to 197 pence.
The British cable market is growing fast, with around 7.5 million homes now within striking distance of connections, as around six billion pounds has already been invested in building cable networks and a further six billion is planned.
The new company will eclipse its rivals in terms of market share, with 2.47 million homes within reach, compared with its nearest rival, Telewest, with around two million.
But analysts said it would not be in direct competition with other cable network companies as they mainly operated in different franchises.
Cable &amp; Wireless Communications may flex its muscles in securing more favourable terms for programming from BSkyB, the satellite broadcaster in which Rupert Murdoch's News Corp has a 40 percent stake, analysts said.
BSkyB shares were down 16-1/2p to 680p, after touching a low of 678p.
"I think that is why BSkyB has come under pressure. People think the merged company might secure more attractive rates," the sector analyst said. ($1=.7986 Pound)
