The birth of a cable giant led by British Telecom's rival Cable &amp; Wireless should enliven competition and ease pressure on BT by regulators long worried by its dominance of the UK market, analysts said on Wednesday.
In its latest rebuff, telecommunications watchdog Oftel on Wednesday banned a promotion by BT, Britain's biggest telephone company, with satellite broadcaster BSkyB, due to a ban on BT's use of its network for entertainment.
"Oftel's decision is nuisance value for BT. (but) the Cable &amp; Wireless deal has far-reaching implications," said Patrick Hickey of Henderson Crosthwaite.
The merger announced on Tuesday created Cable &amp; Wireless Communications, a company controlled by C&amp;W that brings together its own Mercury telecoms business with the British operations of NYNEX of the U.S., Bell Canada International, and Videotron to create a $7.5 billion group. Its constituent companies already reach almost 2.5 million homes in Britain.
Following the Oftel decision, by 1230 GMT, BT shares were off 5.5 pence to 348.5 pence and BSkyB was off 17 pence to 661.5 pence, a low for the day, while C&amp;W was up 7.5 pence to 474.5.
Oftel said that BT's promotion, which involves discounts on subscriptions to BSkyB for customers using a "Friends and Family" phone charges offer, was discriminatory.
BT said it was "baffled" by Oftel's statement and claimed that the promotion offered cost savings to customers and was open to all BT users.
Oftel's decision is particularly emotive, analysts said, as it follows hot on the heels of its rivals' merger and despite active lobbying by BT to have the restriction on it offering television lifted.
BT welcomed the new Cable &amp; Wireless Communications, saying that it would help to create a market where "competition can become the natural regulator."
"The stronger Cable &amp; Wireless is perceived, the more Oftel will get off BT's back," suggested Tressan MacCarthy, analyst at Panmure Gordon. "BT is likely to push hard and use this as an argument for letting them into the market," she added.
The Conservative government has stood its ground on BT's ban from cable television, saying there will be a review of the situation in 2001 with a possible early look in 1998.
The opposition Labour party, currently leading in polls ahead of a general election which must be held by May 1997, has linked opening doors for BT to connecting up schools to the Internet.
BT's promotion with BSkyB would have seen cost savings of around 90 pounds ($143.8) a year per customer in subscription discounts and credits to telephone bills, a BT spokesman said.
Analysts said customers also stood to benefit from the emergence of C&amp;W as a strong domestic competitor to BT.
"As the businesses are put together, say a year out, it will begin to have an impact on BT," said Hickey.
"It will be a pretty competitive environment," he added.
Cable &amp; Wireless Communications has around 2.47 million homes in its sights through a variety of franchises throughout the country and access to 18 million business and domestic telephone customers through its Mercury unit.
It will be offering not just cable television and telephony but also home shopping and Internet link-ups.
"It will be a more coherent competitor to BT, customers will feel more confident of one name instead of fractured franchising," said one analyst who asked not to be named.
For BSkyB, which is 40 percent owned by media tycoon Rupert Murdoch's News Corp, the new cable power could mean harder negotiations on programme pricing, analysts said.
"Cable &amp; Wireless Communications might feel it has more muscle to flex but BSkyB could see it as desperate for content; they both will need each other," Hickey said. ($1=.6260 Pound)
