British utility South West Water could face bids worth 950 million pounds ($1.51 billion) if the government lets Severn Trent and Wessex Water go ahead with firm offers, analysts said on Thursday.
However, the official go-ahead for any bids is likely to be linked to a deal offering price cuts for customers, they said.
"The Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) will probably decide that the bids are against the public interest unless there are price cuts to outweigh that," said Philip Hollobone, analyst at Williams de Broe.  
The DTI could make an announcement as early as Friday, four weeks after a report on the bids was submitted in late September by the Monopolies and Mergers Commission (MMC).
Wessex Water announced that it intended to bid for South West Water on March 7, prompting Severn Trent to put its hat into the ring on March 21.
Both intended bids were automatically passed on to the MMC under government regulations covering mergers of water and sewerage companies.  
Neither Wessex nor Severn Trent put a figure on their offers, preferring to wait for the DTI's decision, while South West Water has consistently said the bids are unwelcome.
South West Water shares were trading at 705.5 pence, up 4.5 pence by 1253 GMT, prompting analysts to suggest that offers might be at around 750 pence per share which would value the company at over 950 million pounds ($1.52 billion).
Severn Trent, which covers the Midlands of England, saw its shares trading down 3.5 pence to 572.5 pence while Wessex, which abuts South West Water's territory in the west of England, was down two pence to 317.5 pence.  
Analysts expect the DTI to seek price cuts of about 20 percent before giving approval to bids, after it secured decreases of 15 percent by 2001 from France's Lyonnaise des Eaux last year when it paid 823 million pounds for Northumbrian Water.
"I think there will be significant price cuts proposed but they will not want to over-egg the pudding," said Nigel Hawkins of Yamaichi.
The government could put off the two bidders if price cut requirements were too severe, analysts pointed out, leaving South West Water with no incentive to cut bills.  
"They won't want to make the price cuts so big that there's no bid, because then there will not be any price cuts at all," Hollobone said.
The area, which has large stretches of coastline demanding hefty investment to meet environmental standards, has some of the highest customer bills in the country and a strong representation from the minority opposition Liberal Democrats.
"There are some clear political incentives for getting price cuts in place for the area, particularly ahead of a general election," the analyst said.  
The ruling Conservative party, which sold off the water companies in 1989 as part of its privatisation drive, must call a general election by May 1997 and currently lags in the polls behind the opposition Labour party.
Analysts said price cuts of 20 percent should still leave South West Water an attractive proposition for the two bidders, who stand to make cost savings from combining operations.
United Utilities, formed from the merger of North West Water and Norweb earlier this year, forecast that it could secure annual savings of 140 million pounds by the turn of the century.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 5427717
