J. Sainsbury Plc announced plans Friday to launch a jointly owned banking service with Bank of Scotland, the first supermarket to do so in Britain's hotly competitive food retailing business.
Sainsbury said it had applied to the Bank of England for authorisation for a new bank to be owned 55 percent by the company and 45 percent by the Bank of Scotland, a banking and financial services company based in Edinburgh.
Industry analysts said the move was a bold one that could eventually prove profitable but noted that Sainsbury, Britain's largest supermarket chain in terms of sales, had its work cut out for it.
"It could be a winner if it is done in the right way," said one industry analyst who asked not to be identified.
Sainsbury has about 690 supermarkets and other outlets in Britain, including five in Scotland. Its Shaw's chain has 105 stores in the United States and it also owns a stake in Giant, with 169 U.S. outlets.
The new venture, to be called Sainsbury's Bank, will offer telebanking services for deposits, lending and cash management to a targeted 12 million customers, Sainsbury said. It will kick off next year with the launch of Classic and Gold Visa cards along with account and card-based services.
"It certainly shows Sainsbury is alive and kicking, which we had begun to doubt," one sector analyst said.
Sainsbury, which posted lower profits for the first time in 22 years last year, was forced to launch its Reward loyalty card in June after archrival Tesco Plc offered its ClubCard, which allows shoppers to build up credit balances at favourable interest rates to be used in Tesco stores.
But Sainsbury's move makes ClubCard Plus look timid, one analyst said. "The market wanted to see them doing something and this is certainly a pleasant surprise," the analyst said.
Sainsbury Chairman David Sainsbury said that Sainsbury's Bank would give customers "the reassurance of a name they know and trust, coupled with the banking expertise of the Bank of Scotland."
The move will result in "a compelling alternative ... for Sainsbury's customers," said Bank of Scotland Chief Executive Peter Burt.
Analysts warned, however, that Sainsbury's Bank would have to offer attractive deals to secure customers, many of whom already have bank accounts.
"It has to undercut the competition or link banking up to Reward points, a lot will depend on the marketing," one industry analyst said.
Sainsbury marketing director Kevin McCarten said the new service would offer "great products ... at better value than is currently available," but declined to specify interest rates on accounts or give financial terms of the venture.
Sainsbury expected the new services to turn in profits "in a relatively short space of time," he said in an interview.
One analyst noted, however, that the financial services of retailer Marks &amp; Spencer Plc, although not directly comparable, has made only a small contribution to profits although it has been running for 15 years.
"They will have to decide to really go for it if they are going to make it profitable," he said of Sainsbury.
Sainsbury shares rose 10.5 pence (17 cents) to 360.5 pence ($5.75). Tesco rose 2.5 pence (4 cents) to 324 pence ($5.17).
