Britain's J. Sainsbury Plc stole a march on competitors on Friday by announcing plans to become the first supermarket to launch banking services in a link with Bank of Scotland which analysts said may prove to be a money spinner.
"It could be a winner if it is done in the right way," said one analyst who asked not to be identified.
Marketing director Kevin McCarten said in an interview with Reuters that he expected the banking services to turn in profits "in a relatively short space of time."
Sainsbury, second placed to Tesco in market share, said in a statement it had applied to the Bank of England for authorisation for a new bank to be owned 55 percent by the company and 45 percent by Bank of Scotland.
The venture, to be called Sainsbury's Bank, will use telebanking for a range of deposit, lending and cash management services to 12 million customers, the company said.
McCarten said the banking service would offer "great products...at better value than is currently available," but declined to comment on possible interest rates on accounts or give financial terms of the venture.
Sainsbury's Bank will kick off in 1997 with the launch of Classic and Gold Visa cards along with account and card-based services.
"It certainly shows Sainsbury is alive and kicking, which we had begun to doubt," one sector analyst said. Sainsbury, which turned in its first fall in profits for 22 years last year, was forced to launch its Reward loyalty card in June after arch-rival Tesco Plc pipped it to market leader with its ClubCard, and it has been struggling to regain the intiative.
Tesco pre-empted Reward's launch by introducing its ClubCard Plus account which allowed shoppers to build up credit balances with favourable rates of interest to be used in its stores. But Sainsbury's move "makes ClubCard Plus look a bit of a damp squib," the analyst said.
"The bank plan has certainly cheered the market up, the initial reaction is clearly positive," the sector analyst said.
Sainsbury shares closed up 10.5 pence at 360.5 pence, off a high of 363 pence while Tesco was up 2.5 pence to 324 pence, off a high of 326 pence.
"The market wanted to see them doing something and this is certainly a pleasant surprise," the analyst said.
Sainsbury chairman David Sainsbury said that Sainsbury's Bank would give customers "the reassurance of a name they know and trust, coupled with the banking expertise of the Bank of Scotland."
The move will result in "a compelling alternative to the conventional high street bank or building society for Sainsbury's customers," said Bank of Scotland chief executive Peter Burt.
Sainsbury currently has around five stores in Scotland and 367 supermarkets in the UK, along with 307 do-it-yourself outlets and 12 hypermarket SavaCentres.
It owns Shaw's in the U.S. with 105 stores and has 50 percent voting rights in Giant, which runs 169 U.S. outlets.
Bank of Scotland will benefit because it has a limited presence south of the border.
"It's a lovely distribution channel," a Bank of Scotland spokesman told Reuters, adding that the new bank would have its own identity and not carry the Bank of Scotland logo.
Analysts warned, however, that Sainsbury's Bank would have to offer attractive deals to secure customers, many of whom already have bank accounts. "It has to undercut the competition or link banking up to Reward points, a lot will depend on the marketing," the sector analyst said.
"They will have to decide to really go for it if they are going to make it profitable," he said. And analysts said the market would still look for progress in its core grocery business sales when Sainsbury reports interim results on October 30.
Analysts forecasts for half-year pre-tax profits range from 383 million pounds ($611.4 million) to 396 million pounds, compared with 450 million previously.
