J. Sainsbury Plc announced plans Friday to launch a jointly owned banking service with Bank of Scotland, the first supermarket to do so in Britain's hotly competitive food retailing business.
"It could be a winner if it is done in the right way," said one industry analyst who asked not to be identified.
Sainsbury said it had applied to the Bank of England for authorisation for a new bank to be owned 55 percent by the company and 45 percent by the Bank of Scotland, based in Edinburgh.
The venture, to be called Sainsbury's Bank, will offer telebanking services for deposits, lending and cash management to a target audience of 12 million customers, Sainsbury said. It will kick off next year with the launch of Classic and Gold Visa cards along with account and card-based services.
"It certainly shows Sainsbury is alive and kicking, which we had begun to doubt," one sector analyst said.
Sainsbury, which posted lower profits for the first time in 22 years last year, was forced to launch its Reward loyalty card in June after archrival Tesco Plc offered its ClubCard, which allows shoppers to build up credit balances at favourable interest rates to be used in Tesco stores.
But Sainsbury's move makes ClubCard Plus look timid, one analyst said. "The market wanted to see them doing something and this is certainly a pleasant surprise," the analyst said.
Sainsbury Chairman David Sainsbury said that Sainsbury's Bank would give customers "the reassurance of a name they know and trust, coupled with the banking expertise of the Bank of Scotland."
The move will result in "a compelling alternative ... for Sainsbury's customers," said Bank of Scotland Chief Executive Peter Burt.
Analysts warned, however, that Sainsbury's Bank would have to offer attractive deals to secure customers, many of whom already have bank accounts.
"It has to undercut the competition or link banking up to Reward points, a lot will depend on the marketing," one industry analyst said.
Another warned that the financial services of retailer Marks &amp; Spencer, although not directly comparable, made only a small contribution to profits even though it had been running for 15 years.
"They will have to decide to really go for it if they are going to make it profitable," he said.
Analysts said the market would still look for progress in its core grocery business sales when Sainsbury reports interim results on Oct. 30.
Sainsbury shares rose 10.5 pence (17 cents) to 360.5 pence ($5.75). Tesco rose 2.5 pence (4 cents) to 324 pence ($5.17).
