Electricity stocks crackled higher on Friday as rumours swirled around the market of a U.S. buyer for one of five remaining regional utilities and analysts said the forthcoming results season could provide a spur for action.
"There is going to be a big focus on the ability of these companies to hand out more cash...if the results season is not going to get it going, then nothing will," said Chris Perry, analyst at Charterhouse Tilney.
Electricity sector companies kick off their half year results season towards the end of November.
Leading the sector higher on Friday was East Midlands Electricity, after a report in the Daily Mail newspaper that a bid might emerge from Houston Industries of the United States at around 750 pence a share.
Houston, tipped to buy one of the five remaining regional electricity companies (Recs) earlier this year, had been thought to have given up on the idea in August when it bought U.S. gas utility NorAm Energy for $3.8 billion.
East Midlands shot up to a high of 565 pence but eased back to close at 562, up 44 pence.
"At the time of its last results, the company effectively indicated its surprise that it hadn't been taken over. Their shares had fallen back a long way and perhaps it's no surprise that bid rumours are re-emerging," Perry said.
Other power utilities which remain independent also climbed, with Yorkshire Electricity up 28 pence to 742 pence and Southern Electric adding 13.5 pence to 631 pence.
Northern Electric, which survived a takeover bid from Trafalgar House last year, was up 29 pence to 523 pence and London Electricity, which supplies the capital with power, jumped 18.5 pence to 585 pence.
"East Midlands is the one most likely to face a bid, it is smaller than others and more purely a distribution company," Nigel Hawkins at brokers Yamaichi said.
A report in the Daily Telegraph newspaper also suggested that U.S. utility Duke Power might be circling the sector but no comment was available from either U.S. company.
Analysts said U.S. companies might not be the only ones interested in the sector, which has seen seven of the 12 Recs created at privatisation in 1990 fall prey to takeover bids.
The domestic supply business is to be opened to competition in 1998 and a range of companies from oil producers to supermarkets have already indicated an interest.
Other potential interest could come from water companies, analysts said, especially following Britain's decision on Friday to block planned bids for South West Water from Severn Trent and Wessex Water.
"You've got two disappointed companies there," said Marshall Whiting of Societe Generale Strauss Turnbull.
Analysts said Severn Trent could decide to use its resources to make a share buyback or a special dividend payout.
But Wessex Water may be enticed to link up with Southern Electric, analysts said, as multi-utilities have been approved.
Welsh Water took over Swalec to form Hyder while United Utilities combined North West Water and Norweb.
"The idea of multi-utilities is gaining ground," Whiting said.
