The government's surprise decision to block proposed bids for South West Water on Friday seems to make mergers between water firms taboo but keeps open the door to the creation of more multi-utilities, analysts said.
"It is surprising...(now) the idea of multi-utilities is gaining ground, it does look as if that is the platform from which companies can grow," said Marshall Whiting of Societe Generale Strauss Turnbull.
Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) head Ian Lang said in a statement he had decided not to permit planned bids by Severn Trent and Wessex Water for South West because they would be against the public interest.
Ian Byatt, head of industry watchdog Ofwat, told Reuters Financial Television such mergers were "not in my view the best way to get efficiency for customers."
He added takeovers from outside the water industry "do not damage competition and my use of (yardsticks) in the same way."
Wessex Water said on March 7 it wanted to bid for South West, prompting Severn Trent to enter the arena on March 21 but both companies declined to name a price until the DTI, which automatically considers such mergers, announced its decision.
Analysts had suggested such bids might value South West Water at over 950 million pounds ($1.52 billion) or around 750 pence per share.
The two bids were the first by British water companies for one of their colleagues, although France's Lyonnaise des Eaux bought Northumbrian Water last year after promising 15 percent price cuts to 2001.
North West Water took over regional electricity company (REC) Norweb to create United Utilities in January this year while Hyder was formed when Welsh Water bought South Wales Electricity (Swalec).
The DTI's block shook the market, which had been expecting approval conditional on price cuts, possibly up to 20 percent.
Ofwat said it had recommended price cuts of 15 percent from Wessex if its bid were to be approved but had advised that it saw no remedy which would make Severn Trent's bid acceptable.
South West Water's shares plunged to touch a low of 565 pence before recovering slightly to be down 128 pence at 577.5 pence by 1144 GMT.
Severn Trent shares peaked at 619 pence but then eased back to be up 37 pence at 612.5 pence while Wessex added 25 pence to 342.5 pence, off a high of 349 pence.
Relieved of the bid pressure, South West bowed to promptings from Ofwat and said it would pay customers a 15 pound rebate in June 1997 while promising to hike its interim dividend 20.4 percent to 11.8 pence as sector results begin to flow next week.
The company, whose area covers large stretches of coastline requiring hefty investment to meet environmental standards, has the highest customer bills in the country.
Wessex said it was "disappointed" that it could not go ahead with a bid, saying it felt a merger would have created "significant benefits for both customers and investors."
The utility, which abuts the area of South West Water in western England, said it remained committed to strategic goals of delivering quality service and enhanced shareholder value.
Analysts said Severn Trent might now buyback shares or make a special dividend, despite recent tax changes adverse to these.
Severn Trent said it had expected to offer savings of 27 pounds a year to households from the proposed merger, adding that now it would concentrate on sharing benefits of improved operational performance with shareholders and customers.
Wessex Water, meanwhile, might switch attention to the possibility of a merger with another utility, analysts said.
"Now the government has blocked Wessex from bidding for South West, Southern Electric might take a look," said Nigel Hawkins of Yamaichi.
The regional electricity company was confounded in its attempts to take over Southern Water earlier this year, losing out to generator and distributor Scottish Power. ($1=.6264 Pound)
