A unit of CalEnergy Co., a fast-growing, Nebraska-based energy company, Monday launched a $1.2 billion takeover bid for British regional utility Northern Electric Plc, which promptly rejected the unsolicited offer.
The bid is the latest for a British power company and the second for Northern Electric in just over a year. Industry analysts said Northern Electric might end up agreeing to a takeover if it could extract a higher price.
Omaha, Neb.-based CalEnergy, through its 70 percent-owned CE Electric unit, said it would pay 630 British pence ($10.06) for each common share and 103 pence ($1.64) for each preferred share of Northern Electric, making the deal worth about $1.23 billion. The U.S.-based construction and mining company Peter Kiewit Sons owns the other 30 percent of CE Electric.
Northern Electric successfully fended off a hostile bid last year from Trafalgar House, now owned by Sweden's Kvaerner, by offering a special package worth 560 million pounds ($894 million) for shareholders.
"Our strategy is to become a leading global provider of a full range of energy services," CalEnergy Chairman David Sokol said in a statement announcing the offer.
Sokol's company has invested in geothermal and other energy projects at home and in Indonesia and the Philippines in recent years. Its core operations are in California, New York and Texas, and the bid for Northern Electric is a major move outside the U.S. market.
U.S. utilities, faced with slow growth and deregulation in their local markets, have been merging in the United States and investing abroad as they seek to grow.
Sokol said Northern Electric, based in northeastern England, had distribution and supply know-how that would complement CalEnergy's production capacity, while its size was "very manageable."
"They are the smallest regional electricity company and that means that you can get them cheaper," said one analyst who asked not to be identified.
"We will see an agreed bid eventually," said Philip Hollobone at brokers Williams de Broe, who said CE Electric might eventually raise its price to secure agreement from Northern's board of directors.
In its statement rejecting the bid, Northern Electric said that in talks through Sunday, CE Electric had contemplated offering about 700 pence ($11.17) per share.
"Northern Electric is clearly saying you can have us for 700 pence per share," said one sector analyst who asked not to be identified.
CE Electric, which bought a 12.7 percent stake in Northern in the open market, said that it never suggested "any intent to value the company at 'around 700 pence per share' or even anywhere close to this figure."
Sokol said he felt the offer was "a very full price," adding that CE Electric had sought a merger agreement with Northern Electric but "the only area we could not agree on was value."
Some analysts said Northern Electric's weak balance sheet would limit what CE Electric would be willing to bid and that it might be hoping to attract another bidder. The special shareholders' package it paid to fend off Trafalgar House left it heavily in debt.
Northern Electric stock jumped 131 pence ($2.09) to close at 651 pence ($10.40) after CE Electric had managed to buy its 12.72 percent stake at the offered price earlier in the session.
CalEnergy announced in August that it bought three gas-fired cogeneration plants in Texas, Pennsylvania and New York for $226 million from Falcon Seaboard Resources Inc., a closely held energy company.
