CalEnergy of the U.S. threw British regional electricity company Northern Electric its second bid challenge in just over a year on Monday with a $1.225 billion offer and analysts said it may succumb.
"We will see an agreed bid eventually," said Philip Hollobone at Williams de Broe, who said the price could rise to 650-657 pence per share from the current 630 pence offer.
CE Electric, jointly owned by CalEnergy with 70 percent and U.S.-based construction, mining and telecoms group Peter Kiewit Sons with 30 percent, said on Monday it would pay 630 pence each for the ordinary shares of Northern Electric.
The deal also offers 103 pence per preference share. CE Electric pounced on 12.72 percent of Northern at the bid price of 630 pence as the shares vacillated between a peak of 645 pence and a low of 609.75 pence, trading up 120 pence at 640 by 1320 GMT.
Northern Electric successfully fended off a hostile bid last year from Trafalgar House, now owned by Sweden's Kvaerner, offering the carrot of a special package worth 560 million pounds ($894 million) for shareholders.
That has left its balance sheet too weak to squeeze a substantially higher bid, according to Hollobone.
CalEnergy chairman David Sokol said he felt the offer was "a very full price," adding that CE Electric had sought to agree a bid with Northern Electric but "the only area we could not agree on was value."
A rash of bids last year in the electricity sector were made at levels of around 14 times earnings, according to Andrew Stone, analyst at Daiwa, but CE Electric's price values Northern at a ratio of about 10.5.
"There might well be some upside, but I don't think we're likely to see the 14 times earnings figure," Stone added.
CalEnergy's Sokol said CE Electric had targeted Northern Electric, based in north-east England, because it wanted to add distribution and supply to its existing skill base of generation while the previous bid had made information on the regional electricity company more accessible.
In addition, he said Northern's size was "very manageable."
"They are the smallest regional electricity company and that means that you can get them cheaper," said one analyst who asked not to be named.
Northern urged its shareholders to do nothing and said it would make a further statement later on Monday, while CalEnergy's Sokol said he hoped to secure a recommended bid.
Rumours a U.S.-based company, possibly Houston Industries or Duke Power, might bid for one of the five remaining independent British regional electricity companies sent shares surging on Friday, but Northern had been seen as one of the least attractive because of its high gearing.
East Midlands Electricity, which led Friday's climb, slipped back 9.5 pence to 555 pence, while Yorkshire Electricity added nine pence to 757 pence and Southern Electricity rose 18.5 pence to 647 pence with London Electric gained 16 pence to 600 pence.
Some analysts suggested that CE Electric might have to raise its bid to cover a 56.5 pence special dividend which Northern intends to pay as a special dividend in February.
CalEnergy is a U.S.-based power generator which uses geothermal, natural gas and hydroelectric resources and operates facilities worldwide. Total assets are $3.5 billion with a market capitalisation of $1.9 billion. ($1=.6264 Pound)
