CE Electric's $1.225 billion bid for British regional electricity company (Rec) Northern Electric has highlighted possible renewed interest in the four other remaining independent Recs, analysts said on Tuesday.
"There are clearly operational reasons which make the bid attractive to CE Electric, so there may be other bidders. And other Recs must also be under the spotlight," said one sector analyst who asked not to be identified.
The U.S. group said it wanted Northern's expertise in supply to complement its own generation capabilities as the international market in electricity opens up to privatisation.
But Northern Electric rejected the bid, the second unwanted advance it has faced in two years. However, its chairman, David Morris, has indicated that it might consider a higher price.
On Monday he said talks with CE Electric, which is 70-percent owned by Nebraska-based CalEnergy, culminated on Sunday with a proposal that bid negotiations be pitched at about 700 pence per share, compared with the 630 pence which was then offered.
This was promptly denied by CE Electric, which insisted that it had at no time suggested such a price.
Even that level is some way off the giddy heights paid for many of the seven cash-rich Recs already sold to predators, four of them to U.S. companies. Those sales peaked with North West Water's 11.50 pounds per share bid for Norweb in November 1995.
But analysts said Northern, which used a 560 million pound ($900 million) package of benefits to shareholders to beat a hostile bid last year from shipping and construction firm Trafalgar House, now owned by Norway's Kvaerner, has little left in its cupboard.
"They (CE Electric) are not going for its cash pile, because it hasn't got one. The logic must be for operational reasons," the sector analyst said.
Northern's attractions in this context could be that its price would be cheaper than other Recs because it lacks cash.
Reports have suggested other possible interested U.S. buyers of CE Electric might be Houston Industries, Duke Power, Florida Power and Light or Pacific Gas and Electric.
But if other U.S. firms decline to get involved in a tussle with CE Electric, they might look at other Recs and be keen to buy before the next British election, due by May 1997, which could give power to the opposition Labour Party. Labour has slammed previous takeovers.
"These U.S. companies need the expertise, they need the supply experience and they are looking to move into the international market ahead of further privatisation," the sector analyst said.
However, one analyst questioned the strategy and asked why U.S. companies did not just hire employees with the required knowledge.
"It doesn't make sense to me to buy these companies at these prices," he said. Northern Electric shares eased on Tuesday to 636 pence, down 12 pence by 1600 GMT, as the market held its breath to see if a higher offer would emerge.
Without a rival bidder, analysts said there was little to prompt CE Electric, in which U.S.-based construction, mining and telecoms group Peter Kiewit Sons has a 30 percent stake, to raise its offer, apart from the prospect of an agreed rather than a hostile bid.
That might be possible around half way between CE Electric's current offer and Northern's price ideas, they added.
But one analyst noted that CE Electric had already snapped up 12.72 percent of the company at the offer price, indicating that some investors were happy to sell at this level.
Northern, which has said it will bring forward its half-year results, will have two weeks to submit an initial bid defence after CE Electric posts its offer document.
Under British takeover rules, the last day a company may announce defence measures is 39 days after posting the bid document. A bidder has up to 46 days after posting its offer in which to raise the terms, unless a rival bidder emerges. ($1=.6223 Pound)
