Thames Water reported a strong rise in profits and dividend on Tuesday to kick off Britain's water utility half-year results season, perking up shares in the sector with hopes others would be as generous to shareholders.
Thames said first half pre-tax profits rose to 176 million pounds ($281 million) after exceptional items from 165.4 million pounds in the same period last year while profits before exceptionals were up 15 percent to 188 million pounds.
The one-off items included a 12.2 million pound cost on the premium of repurchasing convertible bonds alongside its buyback of 10 percent of its shares over the summer. Thames hiked its dividend by 22 percent to 11.2 pence.
"The figures are quite reassuring, the dividend is probably the major feature," said David Campbell of broker Greig Middleton.
Thames managing director Bill Alexander told Reuters he expected to "maintain the dividend at this sort of level," pointing out that the half year increase included a rise of some 11 percent taking account of the buyback.
"They are indicating the rate of dividend increase will be like this for the full year," Campbell said.
Thames shares were up four pence to 549 pence by 1056 GMT, off a high of 555 pence. Among other privatised water companies due to report in the coming weeks, Severn Trent was up eight pence to 611 pence and Yorkshire Water gained six pence to 590 pence.
Thames also said it would make extra investment of 150 million pounds in services, which Alexander said would be targeted at reducing leakage of water, at sewerage systems, an extension to the London ring main supply and a new reservoir.
Leakage, which has been a hot political issue for the privatised water firms, was down 10 percent from year-ago levels, Alexander said.
Thames will focus on core water and sewerage activities, it said, but still managed to turn round its activities outside the regulated British water sector to a nine million pound profit at the half year from three million pounds loss a year ago.
"People will be pleased we got nine million pounds from the non-core for the first time...but our primary concern is the core and getting that right," Alexander said.
The non-core businesses cover international contracts, services such as waste management, and property and insurance. Thames said in a statement i
"There is a little confusion as to where all that's going," Campbell said.
Thames said that operating margins rose to 33.7 percent in the first half, up 2.6 percent on the same time last year, while gearing was up to 39 percent from 30 percent.
Alexander said the company was looking at broadening cooperation with local electricity supplier London Electricity but said a merger between the two was still not on the cards.
"We considered that and ruled it out some time ago," he said.
($1=.6264 Pound)
