Shares in Britain's second biggest supermarket chain J. Sainsbury Plc rose on Wednesday after the group held out hope of an improved performance despite a fall in half year profits and sluggish sales.
"The share price rise is a triumph of hope over statistics," said one sector analyst.
Sainsbury, which last year was overtaken as market leader by arch-rival Tesco, said half year pre-tax profits slipped, as analysts expected, to 393 million pounds ($637.4 million) from 456 million pounds in the same period last year.
Sainsbury also announced a dividend of 3.5 pence per share, up from 3.4 pence.
The company suffered its first fall in full year profits in 22 years when it reported in May. Pre-tax earnings before exceptional items fell 5.5 percent to 764 million pounds in the business year to March 9, 1996.
After Wednesday's results, several analysts cut forecasts for the current full year to 710-725 million pounds, a level some analysts were already predicting, market sources said.
But shares closed up 8.5 pence to 363.5 pence, in a market which was generally easier after an unexpected quarter-point rise in British interest rates.
The group said current sales from comparable stores, excluding petrol, were rising in line with inflation of around three percent, well below the 7.5-percent gain reported by Tesco in September.
A sector analyst who asked not to be named said "Sales moving in line with inflation is pretty disappointing, considering they've introduced the loyalty card."
The Reward card is now accounting for much of the increase in sales Sainsbury is currently seeing.
"Clearly, we want to do better (than three percent)", chairman David Sainsbury told Reuters. "This year will be about getting the basics right, next year will be about getting profits moving."
The company said marketing and operations initiatives along with the Reward card should continue to help boost sales and provide a strong Christmas season.
"We will be fighting on our traditional ground of quality and choice, along with customer loyalty," Sainsbury said.
Sainsbury, which last week announced plans to launch a bank with Bank of Scotland, said there would be another "major development" on Reward soon and that it would move to strengthen its leadership in quality and choice.
The group also said Dino Adriano, currently deputy chief executive of the supermarket business, will take over from Tom Vyner as chief executive of the unit on March 8 rather than at the end of 1997 as previously planned. ($1=.6165 Pound)
