Britain's second biggest supermarket group J. Sainsbury Plc reported a fall in half year profits as expected on Wednesday and sluggish sales.
But the company, which last year was overtaken as market leader by arch-rival Tesco, held out the hope of improvements, and its shares rose.
Sainsbury said half year pretax profits slipped to 393 million pounds ($631.5 million) from 456 million pounds in the same period last year and is paying out a dividend of 3.5 pence per share, up from 3.4 pence.
The company suffered its first fall in full year profits for 22 years when it reported in May.
Its shares were up 11 pence to 366 pence by 1120 GMT, however, just off a high of 367 pence.
"The share price rise is a triumph of hope over statistics," said one analyst who asked not to be named.
The group said current sales from comparable stores, excluding petrol, were rising in line with inflation of around three percent, well below the 7.5 percent gain reported by Tesco in September.
"Clearly we want to do better (than three percent)", chairman David Sainsbury told Reuters.
"This year will be about getting the basics right, next year will be about getting profits moving," David Sainsbury said.
"Sales moving in line with inflation is pretty disappointing considering they've introduced the loyalty card," said one sector analyst who asked not to be named.
The company was forced to introduce its Reward loyalty card offering special deals for regular customers four months ago after Tesco's ClubCard helped it to beat Sainsbury to the market leader slot, and it is now accounting for much of the sales uplift.
Sainsbury said marketing and operations initiatives along with the Reward card should help to boost sales and the company said it was looking forward to a strong Christmas season.
"We will be fighting on our traditional ground of quality and choice, along with customer loyalty," David Sainsbury said.
Sainsbury, which last week announced plans to launch a bank with Bank of Scotland, said there would be a further "major development" on Reward soon and said it would move to strengthen its leadership in quality and choice.
The group said Dino Adriano, currently deputy chief executive of the supermarket business, will take over from Tom Vyner as chief executive of the unit on March 8 rather than at the end of 1997 as previously planned.
Analysts have been waiting for Adriano to show himself as a rising star but so far he remains largely unproven, they said.
The company said it intended to boost its sales area by 6.4 percent this year, which David Sainsbury said "enormously helps in driving forward market share."
Despite sluggish sales growth, Sainsbury managed to increase market share during the first half to 12.5 percent from 12.3 percent and still has the highest sales per square foot of the big four retailers, including ASDA and Safeway.
At the same time, the group is now breaking even on petrol sales after a fierce price war triggered losses which helped to erode first half gross margins by 0.8 percent of sales.
"There's relief that it was not even worse and Sainsbury carries an enormous amount of goodwill, but sentiment could still go either way," one analyst said. ($1=.6223 Pound)
