Britain's Northern Electric is set to rush out a glowing set of figures aimed at persuading the market that the 630 pence per share hostile bid by CE Electric is too low, analysts said on Friday.
The regional electricity company (Rec) said it would bring its half-year results forward from a scheduled date of December 5 when it rejected U.S.-based CE Electric's bid on Monday. Industry sources expect the results to come some time next week.
Northern could boost its case with an improved gearing forecast after a 560 million pound ($918.6 million) package for shareholders which helped it fend off last year's bid from Trafalgar House.
"The critical answer is interim results, especially the balance sheet, which could be stronger than expected," said David Campbell of Greig Middleton.
Northern has said that CE Electric, which is 70 percent owned by CalEnergy of the U.S., had indicated a price of 700 pence per share, but that claim was denied by the Americans, who said their $1.225 billion bid was a full and fair price.
Since the bid on Monday, there have been no further talks between the companies, industry sources said, and CE Electric has snapped up around 13 percent of Northern's shares.
The share price has struggled to rise above the offer level, which was at a premium of 21.2 percent to the last closing prices before the bid, and On Friday was trading at 631.5 pence, down two pence.
"I think Northern should be able to force a higher price but the critical factor is portfolio investors, who may prefer an instant 630 pence rather than a possible higher number," said one analyst who asked not to be named.
Northern's costly defence against Trafalgar House, the only successful rebuttal by any of the eight Recs which have faced bids since privatisation in 1990, has left it with little more to offer, analysts said, which could keep a lid on the shares.
There is also scepticism a rival bid will emerge, as the remaining four independent and cash-rich Recs could be more attractive without the operational rationale of CE Electric, which wants to add supply expertise to its generating business.
Electricity sector shares were led higher last Friday by East Midlands Electricity, which was seen as the most attractive bid candidate before CE Electric launched its offer for Northern.
Northern is likely to report pretax profits slightly down at around 50 million pounds from 58.7 million pounds a year ago and raise the dividend by seven percent to near 13 pence.
Gearing could come in around 125 percent and show signs of falling to 100 percent or less, analysts said, from peaks nearer 170 percent under the impact of the costly defence package.
The market is also waiting for CE Electric, in which U.S. construction, mining and telecoms company Peter Kiewit Sons has a 30 percent stake, to post its offer document. This move will set the 60-day clock ticking for the takeover timetable.
At the same time, electricity industry watchdog Offer has started a review of the bid, requesting comments by November 7.
Analysts said Offer's move might have contributed to dampening Northern's share price by triggering concerns the bid might be referred to British competition authorities.
There appears to be little precedent for such a referral, however, as three Recs have already fallen to U.S. companies with approval from the government.
But last week's surprise decision to block rival bids for water utility South West Water from its colleagues Severn Trent and Wessex has unsettled the market, analysts said.
The Conservative government, well behind the opposition Labour party in opinion polls with no more than six months to go before a general election, might see Northern's takeover as a political hot potato.
Labour, traditionally against privatisation and fiercely critical of takeovers in the sector, might take an additional interest in Northern as it supplies the party leader Tony Blair's constituency in north east England.
