British spirits, pubs and fast food outlet group Allied Domecq on Tuesday reported a fall in annual profits but effectively ruled out a demerger of its spirits business as a solution to its problems.
Allied chairman Sir Christopher Hogg said in a statement the company was "clear that the best way to improve shareholder value is to improve operating performance and that this should be our overriding objective for the foreseeable future."
Costs of a demerger, which the market had hoped was on the cards, would have been "very, very expensive," chief executive Tony Hales said in an interview with Reuters Financial Television.
It would have distracted management for at least 12 months, he said, adding that there was "no obvious shareholder value to be unlocked."
Full-year pretax profits to August before exceptionals slipped to 575 million pounds ($950.4 million) from 645 million previously but were within analyst forecasts of between 560 and 581 million.
Allied Domecq said exceptional losses for the year totalled 311 million pounds, the largest part of which was on the 205 mllion pound sale of its 50 percent stake in brewer Carlsberg-Tetley to Bass in August.
Allied paid out a total dividend of 23.59 pence a share, unchanged from the year ending March 1995, which was used as a comparison because of a change to its accounting period.
"The figures were very much in line with expectations. Some people had been worried the dividend may be cut but it has been maintained and that's positive," one analyst said.
Allied's shares had shed 15 pence to 453 pence by 1330 GMT after touching a low of 451 pence.
"The divisions have gone in the direction expected but if you were someone who wanted action -- a demerger or management change -- you haven't got either and there will be some disappointment," the analyst said.
But Hales stressed in the interview that there was "a lot we can do in terms of improving performance."
The spirits and wines business could benefit from increasing marketing, improving relations with customers, taking more costs out and improving returns on capital employed, he said.
In the retail sector, expansion in the pub business and cost cutting should push business forward, he added.
The company said that the cost of tackling overstocking of U.S. spirits was the main factor in a 14 percent fall in year trading profits in the group's spirits business.
It said it was "determined to increase prices (in spirits and wines) where we can," adding that strong brands and market leadership were the best basis for achieving this.
But it warned that the trading environment "may offer little prospect of improvement."
The group's retailing business, which includes pubs and fast food outlets, saw underlying profits rise by four percent during the year and Allied said it saw further opportunities for developing its leading pub brands.
"The important thing now is to get the businesses trading well," said one sector analyst who declined to be named.
Some analysts were sceptical, however, that Allied could achieve its goals.
"They are trying to do the right things, but they have poor raw material," the sector analyst said. ($1=.6050 Pound)
