British spirits, pubs and fast food group Allied Domecq on Tuesday reported a fall in annual profits but effectively ruled out a demerger as a solution to its problems.
Allied chairman Sir Christopher Hogg said in a statement the company was "clear that the best way to improve shareholder value is to improve operating performance and that this should be our overriding objective for the foreseeable future."
He disappointed market hopes of a demerger of the company's spirits and wines business, saying this option had been "thoroughly reviewed" and the company was "intent on developing the group's two principal businesses."
Full-year pretax profits to August before exceptionals slipped to 575 million pounds ($947.4 million) from 645 million previously but were within analyst forecasts of between 560 and 581 million.
Allied Domecq said exceptional losses for the year totalled 311 million pounds, the largest part of which was on the 205 million pound sale of its 50 percent stake in brewer Carlsberg-Tetley to Bass in August.
Allied paid out a total dividend of 23.59 pence a share, unchanged from the year ending March 1995, which was used as a comparison because of a change to its accounting period.
"The figures were very much in line with expectations. Some people had been worried the dividend may be cut but it has been maintained and that's a positive," one analyst, who asked not to be identified, said.
Allied's shares eased 10 pence to 458 pence by 1040 GMT.
"The divisions have gone in the direction expected but if you were someone who wanted action -- a demerger or management change -- you haven't got either and there will be disappointment," the analyst said.
Allied said its corporate restructuring had been largely completed with the sale of its stake in Carlsberg-Tetley and smaller food companies.
Hogg said the group "must improve the returns it delivers to shareholders." He said an essential part of this was recognising and remedying overstocking of spirits distributors.
The cost of tackling overstocking of U.S. spirits was the main factor in a 14 percent fall in year trading profits in the group's spirits and wines business, the company said.
Allied said it was "determined to increase prices (in spirits and wines) where we can," adding that strong brands and market leadership were the best basis for achieving this.
The company said it hoped the division would benefit from the increasing focus on key brand/market combinations, more favourable shipment patterns and from efficiency gains.
But it warned that the trading environment "may offer little prospect of improvement." The group's retailing business, which includes pubs and fast food outlets, saw underlying profits rise four percent during the year and Allied said it saw further opportunities for developing its leading pub brands.
"The company has said they can grow earnings and that's the way to create shareholder value," the analyst said.
But he added that there was still "a lot of scepticism that they have to dispose of." ($1=.6069 Pound)
