U.S. group Dominion Resources on Wednesday agreed a 1.3 billion pound ($2.15 billion) bid for East Midlands Electricity, one of only five remaining British independent regional electricity companies.
But East Midlands shares languished well below the 670 pence per share offer price, as concerns emerged the bid might face obstacles from British competition authorities.
Virginia-based Dominion said last week it was considering a bid "at a price not much in excess of 608 pence per share". But East Midlands had scorned that price, saying it would undervalue the Nottingham-based electricity company's prospects.
Executives from Dominion, the fifth U.S. utility to bid for a British power supplier, met East Midlands management late on Tuesday with a takeover price top of the agenda.
East Midlands chairman Sir Nigel Rudd said in a joint statement that his board was recommending the offer "because it represents fair value for an excellent business, which has successfully differentiated itself from the sector."
East Midlands shares were up 13 pence at 624 pence ahosrlty after 1400 GMT, off a high of 650 pence.
"Everyone's expecting the MMC (Monopolies and Mergers Commission) to take a close look at the deal. That is why the shares are only trading around 630 pence," said one trader.
Seven of the original 12 Recs have already been bought since they came up for grabs last March after the government's protective golden share expired, five years after privatisation in 1990.
Northern Electric is currently fighting off its second hostile approach in less than two years, rejecting a bid at 630 pence per share from CE Electric, a subsidiary of U.S. energy group CalEnergy, which holds just over 29 percent of the
"Dominion's offer looks a fair compromise price," said Chris Perry, utilities analyst at Charterhouse Tilney.
But he added there were "very genuine concerns" that the offer might be referred to the MMC.
"If Dominion is allowed to buy East Midlands and CalEnergy secures Northern, that would leave only three independent Recs," one analyst said.
British electricity watchdog Offer is expected to consult on Dominion's bid and then pass on its advice to Ian Lang, the trade and industry secretary, who will then decide whether the bid should be referred to the MMC.
Offer has completed consultations on CalEnergy's bid and will be passing on its advice to Lang shortly, industry sources said.
So far, only generators National Power and PowerGen have had their bids for Recs blocked, as they would have created fully integrated generation and supply companies.
Dominion's chief financial officer Linwood Robertson said in an interview that the company was now talking to the regulator.
"We intend to run this as a stand-alone business," he said, adding that he certainly hoped for approval from Offer.
He also said the group hoped to keep East Midlands' management team, which is highly regarded by industry analysts.
East Midlands was the first of Britain's electricity utilities, which were privatised with strong cash balance sheets, to launch a share buy-back to redistribute cash to shareholders.
Robertson said Dominion looked forward to the diversification East Midlands would bring to it and said the U.S. company would bring strengths to the British firm. ($1=.6050 Pound)
