Political pressures ahead of a general election may mean the latest bids in a wave of takeovers of British regional electricity companies (Recs) do not get a rapid nod from the UK government, analysts said on Wednesday.
"A referral (to competition authorities) is a distinct possibility. I think it is a 50-50 shot," said Gordon Culfeather, utilities analyst at Greig Middleton.
Seven of the original 12 cash-rich Recs have now been sold in a flurry of takeovers since they came up for grabs last March after the government's protective golden share expired, five years after privatisation in 1990.
Three of those have been sold to U.S. utilities, who see the UK sector as an opportunity to expand outside U.S. regulatory shackles, particularly into a market which is scheduled to be liberalised to supply competition in 1998.
The latest bid is from  U.S. energy group Dominion Resources which agreed to pay 1.3 billion pounds ($2.15 billion) on Wednesday to take control of East Midlands Electricity, one of only five remaining independent Recs, in an a offer at 670 pence per share.
Northern Electric faces its second hostile approach in less than two years as it battles to throw off a 630 pence per share bid from CE Electric, a unit of U.S.-based CalEnergy, which has already snapped up 29 percent of its target.
Only two bids have so far been blocked by trade secretary Ian Lang, who stunned the market by stopping generators National Power and PowerGen from consuming two Recs earlier this year.
Another two Recs fell prey to their regional water and sewerage companies, while industrial conglomerate Hanson picked up Eastern Electricity, which it now aims to spin off as part of a separate business under its demerger plans.
The remaining victim was Manweb, which succumbed to Scottish Power, an aggressively expansive electricity generator and distributor based in Scotland.
Dominion and East Midlands said they saw no reason for their deal to be referred to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission (MMC), adding that a meeting was scheduled with industry watchdog Offer, which initially consults on bids.
"If Lang was following a consistent route, he would not stop these latest bids," said one analyst who asked not to be named.
"But if I were a regulator, I would probably want at least five firms to make comparisons," he added.
Offer head Stephen Littlechild will send his advice on both bids to Lang for the trade secretary to decide whether they should be referred to the MMC.
Another pressure on Lang is the prospect of a general election, which must be held by May 1997, with the opposition Labour party running ahead in opinion polls and allegations of sleaze miring the current Conservative government.
Its privatisations, which have seen most of Britain's strategic industries sold off, have been heavily criticised for huge executive pay packets, hefty shareholder payouts and heady takeovers which value firms well above privatisation levels.
Labour, which has vowed to levy a "windfall" tax on privatised utilities, said in an opening salvo on the latest bids that it planned "tough, efficient regulation wherever necessary in the privatised utilities and we intend to see it enforced whoever is the owner."
Lang could chose to refer the bids to the MMC in order to delay any decision on this hot political issue beyond an election, some analysts said.
The market on Wednesday showed its concerns by capping share prices at well below the bid levels, with Northern trading at 592 pence per share by 1450 GMT and East Midlands at 623 pence.
"The market is holding its breath on this issue," Culfeather said. ($1=.6054 Pound)
