U.S.-based Dominion Resources on Wednesday agreed a 1.3 billion pound ($2.15 billion) takeover of East Midlands Electricity, one of only five remaining British independent regional electricity companies (Recs).
But doubts that the deal would make it past UK competition authorities as political pressures gather ahead of a general election due by May 1997 kept the lid on share prices.
Executives from both firms told a press conference they saw no reason for a referral of the 670 pence per share bid, the fifth by a U.S. utility for a Rec, to the UK's Monopolies and Mergers Commission (MMC).
But East Midlands shares closed up only 12 pence at 623 pence, as concerns grew trade secretary Ian Lang might halt this latest in a wave of bids in which seven of the 12 cash-rich Recs have been snapped up since expiry of a protective golden share last March, five years from privatisation.
"Everyone's expecting the MMC to take a close look at the deal. That is why the shares are only trading around 630 pence," said one trader.
Three of the seven Recs sold have already gone to U.S. utilities which are attracted by relatively loose UK regulation.
Only two bids have so far been blocked by trade secretary Ian Lang, who stunned the market by stopping generators National Power and PowerGen from consuming two Recs earlier this year.
Executives from Dominion met East Midlands management late on Tuesday with a takeover price top of the agenda.
The Virginia-based company said last week it was considering a bid "at a price not much in excess of 608 pence per share." But East Midlands rejected that, saying it would undervalue the Nottingham-based electricity company's prospects.
East Midlands chairman Sir Nigel Rudd said in a joint statement that his board was recommending the current offer "because it represents fair value for an excellent business, which has successfully differentiated itself from the sector."
"Dominion's offer looks a fair compromise price," said Chris Perry, utilities analyst at Charterhouse Tilney.
Dominion chairman Tom Capps told a press conference that the company had looked at many Recs but focused on East Midlands in spring as it "liked the management...and the way the numbers fitted with ours."
Chief financial officer Linwood Robertson told Reuters that the company intended to run its target as a stand-alone business and that it wanted to keep East Midlands' management team, which is highly regarded by industry analysts.
East Midlands was the first of Britain's electricity utilities, which were privatised with strong cash balance sheets, to launch a special dividend to redistribute cash to shareholders, in November 1994. Robertson said Dominion looked forward to the diversification East Midlands would bring to it and said the U.S. company would bring strengths to the British firm.
The U.S. company has a 1.3 billion pound credit to fund its bid underwritten by NationsBank and Union Bank of Switzerland, banking sources said.
($1=.6054 Pound)
