Virginia-based Dominion Resources Inc., continuing an American invasion of the recently privatised utility industry in Britain, agreed Wednesday to acquire East Midlands Electricity Plc for about 1.3 billion pounds ($2.15 billion).
Executives from Dominion met East Midlands management late Tuesday to offer 6.7 pounds ($11.07) a share for one of five remaining independent electric companies in Britain.
But East Midlands shares languished well below the offer price Wednesday as concerns emerged that the bid might face obstacles from British competition authorities.
"Everyone's expecting the MMC (Monopolies and Mergers Commission) to take a close look at the deal," said one trader.
Dominion, based in Richmond, Va., said last week it was considering a bid "at a price not much in excess of 608 pence per share." But East Midlands scorned that price, saying it would undervalue the Nottingham-based electricity company.
East Midlands Chairman Sir Nigel Rudd said Wednesday that his board was recommending the latest offer "because it represents fair value for an excellent business, which has successfully differentiated itself from the sector."
Seven of Britain's original 12 regional electricity companies have already been bought -- four by U.S. firms -- since they came up for grabs last March when the government's protective golden share expired, five years after privatisation in 1990.
"Dominion's offer looks a fair compromise price," said Chris Perry, utilities analyst at Charterhouse Tilney.
But he added that there were "very genuine concerns" that the offer might be referred to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission.
Dominion Chief Financial Officer Linwood Robertson said in an interview that the company was talking to the regulator.
"We intend to run this as a stand-alone business," he said, adding that he certainly hoped for approval.
He also said the group hoped to keep East Midlands' management team, which is highly regarded by industry analysts.
Robertson said Dominion looked forward to the diversification East Midlands would bring to it and said the U.S. company would bring strengths to the British firm.
Dominion's stock gained 37.5 cents to $40.125 in early trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
