British water and sewerage company South West Water turned in sparkling first half profits on Thursday and hiked its dividend by an expected 20 percent, promising further increases in years to come.
The company, which evaded takeover earlier this year when two proposed bids were blocked by the UK government, said it expected to raise its total dividend by 20 percent this year and make real a rise of eight percent "for the foreseeable future".
South West Water's pretax profits for the six months ending September 30 rose to 72.9 million pounds ($121.4 million) up 35 percent and ahead of expectations of 57 to 68 million pounds.
It paid out a dividend of 11.8 pence as promised when the bids, from Severn Trent and Wessex, were unexpectedly halted by the UK government in October.
"The dividend policy will continue to be based on the pursuit of progressive growth," the company said in a statement.
But the half year surge in profits was unlikely to be repeated, finance director Ken Hill told Reuters. "I do not think a 35 percent increase in PBT (profit before tax) is likely to occur at the end of this year," he said, nor in years immediately following. "But we are looking for profit increases," he added.
Shares in the company closed three pence up at 580 after touching a high of 589 pence.
Anglian Water, which reported last week, saw half year profits rise 5.5 percent and raised its dividend 14.6 percent. Thames Water, which kicked off the flow of interim results in the sector on October 29, turned in pretax profits before exceptionals up 15 percent and raised its dividend 22 percent.
South West Water has also committed to pay out a rebate of 15 pounds each to customers after the planned bids were blocked but Hill warned further rebates would not be automatic.
The company failed last year in a bid to have price caps imposed by regulator Ofwat raised as the Monopolies and Mergers Commission said it should find an extra 100 million pounds it said it needed for environmental upgrades from efficiencies.
It has since made an earlier rebate of 10 pounds to customers, announced additional investment of 74 million pounds and brought forward 20 million pounds of investment in cleaning up at Newquay, a favourite beach area for surfers. Hill said the company's strategy now was to "focus on the core business...and develop very carefully the strategy of the non-regulated businesses."
Dividend payouts would be helped by efficiency savings and improved profitability in its non-regulated businesses, which contributed 6.6 million pounds to interim profits, executives told a press conference.
Chairman Keith Court told journalists the company aimed to balance turnover contributions of non-regulated and regulated businesses "as soon as we can."
New acquisitions contributed around 3.5 million pounds to operating profits of some 7.5 million pounds in non-regulated business this year and Hill said there was between 100 and 200 million pounds available to make further purchases.
But there are no specific plans for acquisitions. "Our track record shows...we are not frightened (of making acquisitions) but it is a question of finding ones that make sense," Colin Drummond, head of the group's non-core division, said.
At the same time, the company's balance sheet was strong enough to effect a share buyback if it decided to make use of a mandate to buy 10 percent of shares, Hill said.
($1=.6004 Pound)
