British water and sewerage company South West Water saw half year profits surge on Thursday and it hiked its dividend 20 percent, as expected, with a promise of real dividend increases of eight percent in coming years.
"The dividend policy will continue to be based on the pursuit of progressive growth," the company said in a statement.
South West Water's pretax profits for the six months ending September 30 rose to 72.9 million pounds ($120.4 million), up 35 percent and ahead of expectations which were between 57 and 68 million pounds.
It had promised to pay out an interim dividend of 11.8 pence when two proposed bids for it, from Severn Trent and Wessex, were blocked by the UK government in October.
In a statement, the company said it hoped to raise the total dividend for the year by 20 percent and then reach eight percent real increases in the annual payout to shareholders.
But the half year surge in profits was unlikely to be repeated, finance director Ken Hill told Reuters.
"I do not think a 35 percent increase in PBT (profit before tax) is likely to occur at the end of this year," he said, nor in years immediately following. "But we are looking for profit increases," he added.
Shares in the company gained five pence to 582.5 pence by 0940 GMT.
Anglian Water, which reported last week, saw half year profits rise 5.5 percent and raised its dividend 14.6 percent.
Thames Water, which kicked off the flow of interim results in the sector on October 29, turned in pretax profits before exceptionals up 15 percent and raised its dividend 22 percent.
South West Water has also committed to pay out a rebate of 15 pounds each to customers after trade secretary Ian Lang blocked the bids, which were awaiting approval before being priced.
Hill said the company's strategy now was to "focus on the core business...and develop very carefully the strategy of the non-regulated businesses."
South West Water has interests in waste management, environmental instrumentation and construction services, which contributed 6.6 million pounds to profits in the first half.
Hill said recent tax changes affecting some share buy backs would not alter the company's strategy of only using its mandate if it were in the interests of shareholders.
South West Water said a complicated financing deal which involves standby letters of credit which are counter-indemnified by cash deposits had contributed 5.7 million pounds to first half profits.
The facility should boost annual profits by nine million pounds in each of the next three years, the company added.
It said capital expenditure was 61.6 million pounds in the first half of the year and "a further substantial uplift is planned for the second half."
Water leakage, an issue which has triggered severe criticism of water companies from politicians and lobby groups, has been cut to 21 percent from 28 percent in 1992, the company said.
Its target of only 15 percent of water leaking from infrastructure by 1999 should be reached, it added.
The company's non-executive chairman Keith Court steps down in February and a replacement is being sought after non-executive deputy chairman Alan Fletcher bowed out.
($1=.6054 Pound)
