Shares in British utility Northern Electric rose on Friday after a newspaper reported that U.S. group CalEnergy was set to raise its 630 pence a share takeover offer.
The report in the London Evening Standard said CalEnergy, through CE Electric in which it has a 70 percent stake, might be willing to increase its 650 million pound ($1.08 billion) bid to 660 pence to win a recommendation from the regional power distribution company (Rec).
Neither side would make any offical comment, however, and market sources were sceptical that any increased bid was in the offing.
Despite market scepticism, Northern shares rose to an intraday high of 618 pence before easing back to close up seven pence at 608.
Other stocks in the sector also gained, bouyed by a resurgence in bid activity which saw East Midlands succumb to an agreed 1.3 billion pounds bid at 670 pence per share from U.S.-based Dominion Resources on Wednesday.
Seven of Britain's original 12 regional power firms have been swallowed up in under two years. Among the remaining five, Southern Electric jumped 30p to 708p, while London Electric added 21-1/2p to 627p.
CalEnergy, which has already snapped up more than 29 percent of Northern, has consistently said its 630 pence offer is a full and fair price.
But Northern has argued the offer undervalues the company and claimed a level of 700 pence was discussed in talks ahead of the bid launched on October 28, an assertion which CalEnergy has denied.
Analysts said the U.S. company might be in no rush to improve its offer as it has already attracted nearly 30 percent of Northern shareholders and the shares are languishing below this level.
Hanging over both bids are concerns they may be referred to British competition authorities as political pressure mounts on the Conservative government, which lags the opposition Labour Party in the polls ahead of a general election due by next May.
Previous similar bids have been approved, but the market is worried that heavy criticism of high shareholder payouts, hefty executive pay packets and high takeover prices might weigh the scales against approval this time.
In addition, approval of both bids would leave just three independent power firms in the sector and this may not be enough for industry regulator Offer to make comparisons, analysts said. Those worries have kept share prices of both bid targets largely below offer levels, with East Midlands closing down 4-1/2p at 623p.
It is not clear whether Trade Secretary Ian Lang, who will decide whether to refer the bids, would be swayed by a recommended offer.
In addition, CalEnergy might want to wait for Northern's defence document, expected by next Tuesday, and interim results due by the end of the month instead of the previously scheduled December 5 announcement.
Northern, which spent 560 million pounds last year on a package of shareholder benefits to successefully fend off Trafalgar House, now a unit of Hanson, is expected to use sparkling interim results to pitch for a higher offer.
Analysts said CalEnergy's bid compares favourably with that of Dominion on a cashflow basis and shows a 27.5 percent premium to share prices ahead of the bid, compared with a 25 percent level for Dominion's offer.
But on a price to earnings basis, CalEnergy's offer comes in slightly lower than that for East Midlands, they added. ($1=.6005 Pound)
