British regional electricity company Northern Electric on Monday promised to rush out results by the end of November to prove that a $1.225 billion hostile bid from America's CE Electric undervalued it. But CE Electric said it still felt its 630 pence per share offer was full and fair, adding that there was "nothing in Northern Electric's defence document which changes our view."
In its first formal defence since CE Electric posted its bid on November 5, Northern said the half-year figures, previously scheduled for December 5, would include "important financial information" to show the value of the company. It reiterated its belief that the offer was too low and said that when CE Electric announced the bid at the end of October, it had suggested a price of 700 pence per share.
But CE Electric, which is 70 percent owned by U.S. energy group CalEnergy, denied this in a statement on Monday, saying: "This ambitious range was entirely the proposal of Northern Electric's board."
The U.S. group has already snapped up nearly 30 percent of its target, as Northern's shares were clouded by uncertainty over whether the government would approve the bid. Northern shares eased half a penny to 608-1/2 pence by 1543 GMT. Northern confirmed it planned to pay a 56.5 pence special dividend in February 1997 if CE Electric's offer lapsed and said that could mean the U.S. firm stood to reap gross yields of over 9.5 percent a year from its net investment. "Northern Electric is worth more to CE Electric," the company said in a statement. But CE Electric said the special dividend was "fully reflected" in the share price before the offer was launched. Northern chairman David Morris said the company believed that uncertainty as to whether CE Electric's bid would be referred to the MMC (Monopolies and Mergers Commission) was dominating the market's reaction and keeping the share low. The British government has approved takeovers of seven of the original 12 cash-rich regional electricity companies (Recs) in two years, of which three were bought by U.S. companies. Only two bids for Recs have been blocked, when offers from generators National Power and PowerGen were deemed against the public interest by trade secretary Ian Lang. Northern itself is the only Rec to have survived a hostile bid, when it fended off Trafalgar House, now a unit of Kvaerner, with a 560 million pound ($934.2 million) benefit package last year.
Since Northern came under threat, East Midlands Electricity agreed to a 670 pence per share $2.15 billion takeover by Dominion Resources of the U.S. last week. Bid speculation has sparked price rises in other RECS, including Yorkshire Electricity.
A report in the Sunday Telegraph said Yorkshire was in talks with Entergy of the U.S., but both firms denied this on Monday.Shares in Yorkshire gained 12 pence to 747-1/2 pence while East Midlands slipped 2-1/2 pence to 623 pence. The market is worried that political pressures on the ruling Conservative government, which opinion polls put in second place before the general election less than six months away, might prompt it to block any more bids.
The electricity sector, privatised by the Conservatives in 1989, has proved unpopular due to high dividend payouts, hefty executive pay packets and head-turning takeover deals.
($1=.5994 Pound)
