British regional electricity company Northern Electric said on Monday it would rush out results by the end of November to show that a $1.225 billion bid from CE Electric of the U.S. was inadequate.
In its first formal defence since CE Electric posted its bid on November 5, Northern said the half-year figures, previously scheduled for December 5, would include "important financial information" to show the value of the company.
It reiterated its belief that the 630 pence per share CE offer was too low and "below even the lowest price put...by the bidder prior to the launch of its hostile offer."
Northern said when the bid was announced at the end of October that CE Electric, which is 70 percent owned by U.S. energy group CalEnergy, had suggested a price of 700 pence per share, a claim that the Americans have denied.
CE Electric made no immediate comment on Northern's latest statement.
The U.S. group has already snapped up nearly 30 percent of its target, as its shares have been clouded by uncertainty over whether the government will approve the bid. Northern shares were up just a penny by 1310 GMT to 610 pence.
The company reiterated plans to pay a 56.5 pence special dividend in February 1997 if CE Electric's offer lapsed and said that could mean the U.S. firm stood to reap gross yields of over 9.5 percent a year from its net investment.
"Northern Electric is worth more to CE Electric," the company said in a statement.
Chairman David Morris added that the company "believes that uncertainty as to whether CE Electric's bid will be referred to the MMC (Monopolies and Mergers Commission) is currently dominating the market's reaction," which is keeping shares low.
So far, the government has approved takeovers of seven of the original 12 cash-rich regional electricity companies (recs) in under two years, three of which have been bought by U.S. companies.
Only two bids for recs have been blocked, when offers from generators National Power and PowerGen were deemed against the public interest in a surprise decision by trade secretary Ian Lang.
Northern itself is the only rec to survive a hostile bid, when it fended off Trafalgar House, now a unit of Kvaerner, with a 560 million pound ($934.2 million) benefit package last year.
Since Northern came under threat, East Midlands Electricity has agreed to a 670 pence per share $2.15 billion takeover by Dominion Resources of the U.S.
Yorkshire Electricity, one of the three remaining recs untouched by bids so far, denied on Monday a report in the Sunday Telegraph that it was in talks with Entergy of the U.S., a report also denied by Enetergy.
Shares in Yorkshire gained 12 pence to 746-1/4 pence while East Midlands slipped four pence to 620 pence.
The market is now worried that political pressures on the Conservative government, in second place in opinion polls ahead of a general election which is expected within six months, might prompt it to block any more bids.
The sector, privatised by the Conservatives in 1989, has reaped unpopularity for high dividend payouts, hefty executive pay packets and head-turning takeover deals.
"We believe this bid should be decided on value and...(call) for a rapid end to this period of regulatory uncertainty," Northern's chairman David Morris said in a statement.
($1=.5994 Pound)
