London Electricity on Tuesday became the latest British regional electricity company (Rec) to attract bid speculation after U.S. Entergy was reported to be planning a 1.2 billion pound ($2 billion) bid.
London Electricity declined comment on the report in the Wall Street Journal Europe.
"It is speculation and obviously we can't comment on a rumour," a London Electricity spokeswoman said.
Shares in the company leapt to a high of 665 pence before easing back to 662-1/2 pence, up 26 pence by 1115 GMT.
The Wall Street Journal Europe said on Tuesday that a 1.2 billion pound bid for the Rec could be in the offing.
It said confidential Entergy company documents showed the company seeking 1.1 billion pounds for an acquisition.
The documents used a code name "Atlantic" for the target company whose financial profile, the newspaper said, met that of London Electricity on a number of points.
The Journal said the bid was assumed in the documents to be for around 700 pence per share.
The newspaper quoted Entergy spokesman Patrick Sweeney as saying Entergy was interested in the British market and "obviously if you're interested, one of the results could be an acquisition."
Sweeney on Monday denied to Reuters a report in The Sunday Telegraph newspaper that it was considering a bid for Yorkshire Electricity Group Plc.
But he added, "We simply don't comment on situations until they get to a point until it is prudent to do so."
The electricity sector has seen a flurry of bid speculation recently over the five remaining independent Recs.
Northern Electric currently faces its second hostile offer in less than two years as it tries to fend off a $1.225 billion bid at 630 pence per share from CE Electric, of which CalEnergy of the U.S. holds 70 percent.
Last week, East Midlands Electricity agreed to a 1.3 billion pound offer at 670 pence per share from U.S.-based Dominion Resources.
Both bids depend on approval from the British government, which has already nodded through the sale of seven of the original 12 cash-rich Recs, three of which were bought by U.S. firms attracted by the looser regulations in the British market.
But concerns that political pressures might prompt the government to block the latest batch of bids have kept share prices of both targets well below offer levels.
Northern was trading down a penny at 593 pence while East Midlands off half a penny at 617 pence.
High dividend payouts, hefty executive pay packets and head-turning takeover deals have all contributed to criticism of the electricity sector, which was privatised by the Conservative government in 1989.
The Conservatives currently lag the opposition Labour party in opinion polls and must hold a general election by May 1997.
An added concern is that approval of current bids would leave just three independent Recs -- London Electricity, Southern Electricity and Yorkshire Electricity -- which might not be adequate for watchdog Offer to use as yardsticks. ($1=.5994 Pound)
