Entergy Corp on Wednesday called off talks with British regional electricity company (Rec) London Electric but the U.S. firm said it was still keeing an eye on the electricity sector, which has seen a recent flurry of bids and rumours.
In a statement responding to newspaper reports it planned a 1.2 billion pound ($2.02 billion) takeover of London Electric, Entergy said exploratory discussions had taken place but had been discontinued.
"We continue to evaluate attractive markets and investment opportunities worldwide and consider the UK electricity market to be in that category," Entergy spokesman Patrick Sweeney said.
Shares in London, which had surged higher on the bid reports, slipped to a low of 630 pence but later climbed back to 661-1/2 pence, down just 3-1/2 pence.
"What (Entergy is) saying is that the talks with London Electricity have ended. That doesn't mean they've ruled out a hostile bid for London Electricity, Yorkshire, or another," said Yamaichi analyst Nigel Hawkins.
Recent interest has seen two of the five remaining Recs attract U.S. predators -- Northern Electric is fighting CalEnergy's $1.225 billion bid and East Midlands has agreed to a $2.15 billion offer by Dominion Resources.
Seven of the original 12 cash-rich Recs have already been sold, three of them to U.S. companies which are attracted by the looser regulatory system in the UK.
Earlier this week, Entergy denied a report in the Sunday Telegraph newspaper that it was interested in bidding for Yorkshire Electricity, considered the most attractive of the remaining Recs.
Southern Electric, which has so far kept out of this round of bid speculation, avoided takeover by British generator National Power when the government blocked the bid on competition grounds in April.
The company then went on to make an offer itself for its cousin Southern Water but was pipped by power company Scottish Power with a 1.68 billion pound bid.
The latest two bids for Recs are clouded by concerns that political pressures might prompt a block, however, as the ruling Conservatives struggle to catch the opposition Labour party's lead in polls before a general election due by May 1997.
The Recs, which were privatised by the Conservatives in 1989, have triggered sharp public and opposition party criticism for big dividends, bulging executive pay packets and bumper takeover prices.
But companies may well consider chances of an approval for takeover more likely with a Conservative government than from Labour, which already plans a "windfall" tax on utilities if it gains power.
"There's definitely a feeling that the window of opportunity is closing on these bids," said the sector analyst.
Analysts said there could be other U.S. companies looking at the sector, adding that Yorkshire Electricity remained one of the most attractive for a predator.
Industry watchdog Offer completed consultation on CalEnergy's bid on November 7 while the closing date for comments on Dominion's offer is November 22.
Trade secretary Ian Lang has a first deadline for deciding on CalEnergy's bid of November 25, analysts said, but might extend it to mid-December. ($1=.5950 Pound)
