British power generator National Power Plc said on Wednesday that half year profits had slipped, hurt by exceptional charges over costs of an aborted takeover, and said the year's output could be 20 percent down.
Pretax profits for the half year before exceptional items of 57 million pounds ($95.79 million) were 251 million pounds, down from 254 million pounds previously, compared with forecasts of between 210 and 253 million pounds.
The company paid out a dividend of six pence per share, up from 5.4 pence, towards the lower end of forecasts, and said it would continue to deliver real dividend growth.
Shares slid 12-1/2 pence by 1206 GMT to 440-1/2 pence, having touched a low of 435 pence.
"The results were all pretty solid and as expected but there is some disappointment that the dividend was skimpy and the market was a bit caught out on the exceptionals," said one sector analyst who asked not to be named.
National Power's 11 percent increase in dividend compares with a 20 percent hike made by its colleague PowerGen at interim results on November 14.
The exceptional charges included an unrealised loss on its investment in and abortive acquisition costs of regional electricity company (rec) Southern Electric.
The bid was blocked by the UK authorities in April along with PowerGen 's proposed takeover of Midlands Electricity.
"Taking a charge over Southern is a prudent thing to do and they may be able to sell at a profit later," the analyst said.
National Power was understood to have written down the stake it holds in Southern at 615.5 pence per share, compared to trading levels of around 700 pence on Wednesday.
"The situation could reverse itself very easily, look at PowerGen," the analyst said.
PowerGen sold the 21 percent stake it had built up in Midlands to the Rec's eventual owner Scottish Power and took an exceptional credit of 69 million pounds.
National Power said increasing competition in the UK market had affected first half results and that its market share slipped to 27 percent from 30 percent a year ago as total demand grew by three percent.
The slide was largely anticipated after National Power was forced to sell 4,000 MegaWatts of generating capacity to comply with industry watchdog Offer requirements.
The company said it was changing shape to emerge as "a leading global power company," and pointed to an increasing input from overseas activities, which are expected to contribute post tax income of 70 million pounds for the year.
Overseas investments now total 900 million pounds with interests in some 7,500 MW of capacity or 3,000 MW on a net basis.
"Overseas is coming along quite nicely," the analyst said.
National Power said its repositioning "means we are well placed both to compete strongly in the UK market, and to build on our material and increasingly profitable overseas business."
The company said costs associated with paying out a one pound per share special dividend, announced with full year results in May, would total around 50 million pounds and would fall in the second half of the year.
"Over time, National Power is going to become a different type of company with less earnings from the UK. This is the uncertain transition period," the sector analyst said.
($1=.5950 Pound)
