British opposition Labour party's plans for a one-off "windfall" tax on utility companies may be causing more stock market damage through uncertainty than the tax itself would, analysts said on Thursday.
If it won the next general election, due within six months, Labour has said it would levy a tax to reap excess profits from recently privatised utilities to help pay for welfare reform.
"The market does not like uncertainty -- give it a tax like this with no parameters and it will assume the worst-case scenario," said one analyst who asked not to be named.
As parliament prepared to debate the issue, at the prompting of the ruling Conservatives, analysts said if the Labour party would be more specific about plans, some of the uncertainty weighing on utility shares might lift.
"They have promised to raid the utilities but they have not said which, how much or when, and that is damaging," said Philip Hollobone, analyst at Williams de Broe.
Labour, which is well ahead in opinion polls, has said it would use the funds to tackle youth and long-term unemployment but has declined to set target companies, amounts or timeframes.
Newspaper reports have suggested the tax might be aimed at raising more than five billion pounds ($8.42 billion) and possibly as much as 10 billion pounds.
Speculation on possible targets has widened to include up to 30 companies, like British Telecom, British Gas and perhaps airport operator BAA Plc, in addition to the water and electricity companies initially pointed to.
Some of these, such as BAA, have already rehearsed arguments why they should not be included in any windfall tax net.
The water and electricity sectors, privatised around the start of the decade by the Conservatives, became unpopular after a spate of huge executive pay rises, hefty dividend payouts, and head-turning takeovers deals.
One analyst who declined to be named, suggested that the water sector stocks are currently undervalued by around five billion pounds, reflecting concerns over the tax.
Thames Water, for example, has underperformed the FT All Share Index by as much as 10 percent since late August, according Reuters Securities 3000 data, although its relative has improved recently to underperformance of some four percent.
Shares in regional electricity companies, however, were pulled in two directions as a resurgence of bids in the sector boosted speculation which analysts said may have offset some of the downside of a utility tax.
"The worries over the windfall tax are severely overdone...even if it does happen, most companies will be able to find the money, even if they do not want to," said Hollobone.
Along with several other analysts, he warns that even if Labour does win power it may not be able to effect the tax because of legal problems in ensuring it is non-discriminatory.
Several utility companies have said they would challenge any windfall tax plans in court, but Labour's treasury spokesman Gordon Brown described the proposal as "legally iron tight."
On Thursday, the Institute of Directors (IoD), which represents British business interests, warned against the tax although it acknowledged that "some of the utilities do have spare funds at the moment."
The IoD said the tax could lead to problems over who should pay what amounts and said customers might face increased prices.
The Conservatives have claimed the tax could mean an extra 192 pounds on the average household bill and challenged Labour to come up with figures to contradict this.
"Investors who are wise to the market's over-caution on the proposed tax are buying. These stocks are undervalued and...some are yielding more than long-term bonds," said one analyst.
($1=.5940 Pound)
