British supermarket chain Safeway, known for cute kid adverts and innovative technology, turned in a seven percent rise in half year profits on Thursday and said sales were rising with hopes of a cheery Christmas.
"I am positive about Christmas, there are some good statistics on retail generally...I would hope that (consumers) would have more confidence to spend," chief executive Colin Smith said in an interview.
The company announced plans to open 450,000 square feet (41,810 sq metres) of extra space, or about 18 stores, in the next two years, which will generate about 5,200 jobs.
But with the company's profits and dividend coming in towards the lower end of expectations, Safeway shares reversed a recent trend to slip to a low of 362 pence, down nine, before recovering to 370 by 1150 GMT,
Safeway checked in half year pretax profits of 228.2 million pounds ($383.5 million), compared with forecasts of between 228 and 231 million. It paid a dividend of 4.4 pence, up from 4.05 pence and within forecasts of 4.4 to 4.6 pence per share.
The company, which completed its "Safeway 2000" strategic review in the summer aimed at boosting sales and cutting costs, said sales from existing stores were up five percent in the first five weeks of the second half.
That followed a 5.1 percent gain in the first half, including price inflation of 2.6 percent.
"Our strategy to attract more family shoppers to our stores is succeeding and this success is reflected in sales growth which is outperforming the industry average," the company said.
But Smith said the sector was "very competitive...and margins at the moment are slightly down."
Supermarkets are attempting to steer clear of an all-out price war by relying on marketing initiatives such as loyalty cards and customer service to boost sales, but pricing remains a key element.
In the first half, a fierce petrol price war hit profitability in Safeway's petrol forecourts to the tune of 10 million pounds, but Smith said he hoped this would not impact on the second half.
Gross margins have run slightly down on a year ago in the first half and start of the second half, Safeway said, driven by "our immediate and vigorous response to a number of significant marketing and pricing initiatives launched by our competitors."
But net margins were stable in the first half at 6.9 percent as productivity gains and efficiency improvements helped.
The supermarket chain plans to extend its innovative self-scan shopping, where customers track and total their own shopping to avoid queueing at checkouts. The scheme will be added at 50 stores on top of the current 100.
Smith said the company would continue to focus on the family shopper and the large family weekly shop to boost sales.
"Increasing efficiencies mean we can be a low cost operator...which allows us to afford to reinvest in being competitive." ($1=.5950 Pound)
