British electricity transmission business National Grid should report a rise in half year profits on November 26 and could explain how it will cope with new pricing controls that come into effect on April 1, 1997.
"We will be looking for indications on how they are going to cope, whether there will be any cost cutting," said one analyst who asked not to be named.
Analysts expect National Grid's first half profits to range from 279 to 304 million stg, up from 278.9 million previously. A dividend payout of 4.45 to 4.9 pence per share is forecast.  
The company, which was floated in December 1995, capitulated in October to revised transmission pricing proposed by industry watchdog Offer which included a one-off reduction of 20 percent in the first year starting April 1, 1997.
For the following three years, price increases will be capped at four points below inflation.
National Grid had called Offer's original proposals of a one-off cut between 20 and 26 percent "contrived, illogical and inconsistent."  
The company said when it accepted the revised controls that it would introduce further measures to improve efficiency but that the cuts would have "a material impact on transmission business profitability."
"Does the review mean that its finances are going to be hit hard?" asked the analyst. "I feel it needs to justify its capitulation, which sold shareholders down the river," he added.
National Grid chief executive said at the time price cuts were agreed that he was confident of maintaining a "progressive" dividend policy but analysts said clearer indications would be welcomed.  
The market will also be watching for updates on progress in finding a partner for its Energis telecommunications service.
Energis said in October that it was on track to announcing a link with an international carrier within a year.
Energis made an operating loss of 72.8 million stg last year but expects to break even in 1999/2000.
National Grid shares were up 6p in late trade on Friday at 192p.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
