Welsh multi-utility Hyder's shares rose after it posted a 25 percent hike in half-year profits on Friday and said electricity business Swalec, which it took over in January, should boost earnings.
Pretax profits rose to 100.7 million pounds ($169.5 million) for the six months ending September 30 from 80.6 million pounds a year ago, and Hyder paid an interim dividend of 14.6 pence per share from 12.6 pence. The results were in line with forecasts.
Shares were up 13-1/2 pence to 755-1/2 pence by 1127 GMT.
The company said in a statement that Swalec, taken over by Welsh Water to form Hyder, "should be materially earnings enhancing on a full year basis."
It added that efficiency savings from its merged services were ahead of target.
"These are very good results. Hyder is also showing that synergy savings are happening more quickly than expected," said one analyst who asked not to be identified.
Hyder managing director Graham Hawker said in an interview with Reuters that Swalec's savings were ahead of targets set before Welsh Water's bid last year.
"Before the bid, Swalec was looking at savings of 45 million pounds by 2000. We are slightly ahead on achieving those," he said.
Hyder said in June that the merger could cut operating costs by 46 million pounds in 2000 while cumulative cost savings from the merger should total 275 million pounds by then.
That compares with cost savings of 105 million pounds in 1997/98 predicted by United Utilities, the first multi-utility to be created when North West Water took over regional electricity company Norweb last year.
United Utilities also said it expected real dividend growth of 11 percent, but Hawker would not comment on whether Hyder would maintain half year real dividend growth of 11 percent.
"We will let actions speak louder than words," he said.
Hyder will continue to take costs out of its regulated businesses which should help dividend growth, Hawker said.
But it will also be looking to increase its non-regulated business, he said. Those turned in profits before interest of 13.1 million pounds in the half year.
Its infrastructure business saw profits before interest leap to 3.3 million pounds from 0.6 million a year ago and the company said its Infrastructure Developments business profits are "continuing to improve."
Hawker said the infrastructure business should benefit from government moves to finance projects through the government-sponsored Private Finance Initiative.
"That could be a very big market," he said.
Hyder will aim to secure a "largish number of five to 10 million pound-a-time projects," which spread exposure, he said.
He said returns for Hyder on its involvement with a group which won a contract to run 122 kilometres of the busy M40 motorway between London and Warwick in central England "will considerably exceed our cost of capital."
Hyder holds a 40 percent stake in that group, UK Highways, along with Tarmac, John Laing, France's Caisse des Depots et Consignations and Transroute International. ($1=.5940 Pound)
