Tax changes on long-term assets made in the British budget sparked falls in utility sector stocks on Wednesday but analysts said the concerns might be overdone and expected the sector to recover.
"It is not a welcome move but it should not be a disaster. I do not think it should have a significant impact," said one analyst who asked not to be named.
The changes, proposed by finance minister Kenneth Clarke in the budget on Tuesday, cut capital allowances on assets with a working life of over 25 years to six percent from 25 percent.
The Treasury said it hoped to raise around 1 billion pounds ($1.68 billion) over three years from the move.
Shares in utilities fell across the board, with water company Anglian Water down five pence to 566 pence at 1150 GMT, Yorkshire Water losing seven pence to 677 pence and Severn Trent slipping nine pence to 671 pence.
Multi-utility Hyder slid 18 pence to 738 pence.
Among energy and power companies, PowerGen shed eight pence to 571.5 pence and Yorkshire Electricity lost 7.5 pence to 772 pence.
"The tax changes are definitely why the shares are down," one analyst said. The proposals will affect companies spending over 100,000 pounds a year on long-term fixed assets with exceptions for shipping and rail businesses and office buildings.
Utilities could be particularly vulnerable because they have large amounts of infrastructure and plant which will require future investment, analysts said.
"But a billion pounds across all companies means the impact will be pretty small for each business," one analyst said.
Companies were largely unwilling to comment immediately on the likely impact, with United Utilities and Southern Electric both saying it was too early to assess.
But both companies might give further details when they report half year results on Thursday, analysts said.
The change has been seen by some observers as pre-empting the opposition Labour party's proposals for a one-off "windfall" tax levy on utilities for what are seen as excess past profits.
These plans, from a party which is well ahead of the Conservative government in polls running up to a general election in the next six months, have been keeping a dampener on utility stocks recently.
Analysts said the changes in the budget would mean that any windfall tax imposed by a Labour government might hit companies harder.
Estimates are that a Labour government might seek to raise five billion pounds or more from such a measure in order to finance measures to combat youth and long-term unemployment.
At the same time, Labour might seek to reverse the changes on capital allowances, analysts said, as it pushes for increased investment by companies.
"These measures could reduce Labour's ability to push ahead with any windfall tax, on the other hand the party might repeal the changes to encourage investment," the analyst said.
"Utility shares have been discounted because of worries over any plans for a windfall tax by Labour. Today's falls could make some of them more attractive for canny investors," he added. ($1=.5956 Pound)
