Strong demand for light trucks and relatively few production headaches will boost the Big Three U.S. automakers' combined profits to nearly $2 billion for the third quarter, exceeding year-ago results by a healthy margin, analysts said Tuesday.
The quarter is traditionally the weakest of the year with summer vacations and model changeovers, but Chrysler Corp. and Ford Motor Co., are expected to post strong gains from minivan and truck output.
General Motors Corp.'s earnings were held back by a significant increase in incentives, analysts said.
In the third quarter of 1995, the three automakers earned $1.35 billion.
"It'll be a good quarter overall for the Big Three," said Dean Witter Reynolds Inc auto analyst Kenneth Blaschke. "The issue that remains is how long the strike in Canada against GM will last."
GM, the nation's largest automaker, on Oct. 15 is expected to report third quarter net income of about $850 million, or $1.02 a share, according to the First Call financial information service.
The results include an after-tax gain of $250 million, or 33 cents a share from the reversal of the automaker's decision to close its Wilmington, Del., plant and build a new Saturn model there at the end of the decade.
In the year-ago period, GM earned $642 million, or 42 cents a share. The third quarter 1995 results also included $246 million in earnings from Electronic Data Systems Corp., the computer services unit that the automaker spun off in June after 12 years of ownership.
Burnham Securities auto analyst David Healy said GM's worldwide car and truck production rose 11 percent in the third quarter over a year ago. But a heavier mix of less-expensive vehicles and a $230 increase in incentives per vehicle squeezed GM's profit margins, resulting in a small pretax loss in North America during the period.
On an operating basis, Ford's third quarter profits, are expected to increase 78 percent to $637 million, or 51 cents a share, from $357 million, or 28 cents, a year earlier, marking the biggest rebound of the Big Three. Ford results are scheduled for release on Oct. 16.
The strength at Detroit's No. 2 automaker largely rides on the fact that it is not paying the enormous product launch costs for the Taurus sedan and F-Series pickup truck that dragged down year-ago results.
Ford also is beginning to reap profits from the F-Series, and the Expedition full-size sport utility vehicle, which have brightened the automaker's future outlook.
"We think Ford's new products will enable it to gain an increased share going forward, and as a result Ford's earnings momentum should continue," Blaschke said.
Ford's profits would be even better had it not been for losses in Brazil and Argentina that the automaker warned analysts about in September.
Ford is scambling to put its Fiesta small car into production in Brazil following the breakup of the company's Autolatina joint venture with Volkswagen AG in 1995.
Chrysler's profits for the July-September period, scheduled for release Oct. 14, are expected to increase 41 percent to about $500 million, or 69 cents a share, from $354 million, or 48 cents, a year earlier.
No. 3 Chrysler also experienced launch problems in the year-ago period in its all-important minivan product lines.
This year, the company is churning out minivans and has raised its share of the U.S. vehicle market to record levels. The launch glitches have not returned, as the company's new Dodge Dakota compact pickup truck is proceeding ahead of schedule, analysts said.
"Chrysler has everthing going for it right now and it should be reflected in the earnings," said Bear Stearns &amp; Co. auto analyst Nicholas Lobocarro, who added that he would not be surprised if Chrysler's results exceeded Wall Street estimates.
