General Motors Corp. may face mounting losses as the strike against its Canadian operations heads for a second week, but GM Chairman Jack Smith Wednesday vowed not give up his quest for competitiveness.
The last of 26,000 Canadian Auto Workers members are set to strike GM plants at midnight Wednesday, bringing the automaker closer to parts shortages and assembly plant shutdowns in the United States.
The strike will inevitably affect GM's U.S. plants, but they can "run for a while" before a shutdown, said G. Richard Wagoner, president of GM's North American Operations.
But Smith, who met with reporters at GM's Technical Center to receive a new J.D. Power and Associates award, said some of the union's demands on outsourcing -- the shifting of work to outside, often non-union companies -- are unacceptable.
"We've got certain things that will cripple the company if we don't get fixed right," Smith said. "There's a couple (items) on the table that we need to work our way through, otherwise we will not be competitive."
He said GM, the least efficient U.S. automaker, needs to sell certain parts plants, despite the CAW's objections, because their wage structures are too high for GM to compete effectively.
Smith also said GM was in a strong financial position to handle the strike, with $13 billion in cash, and a fully funded pension plan.
Adding to its wherewithal, GM also on Wednesday filed a shelf registration statement with the Securities and Exchange Commission that would allow it to sell up to $1.3 billion in debt securities.
Despite the labor strife, Smith credited both U.S. and Canadian workers for helping GM win J.D. Power's first-ever Chairman's Award, which recognizes its gains in quality and customer satisfaction.
Smith also said GM continued to have a "constructive dialogue" with the United Auto Workers hoped to reach a labor agreement coviering 215,000 U.S. hourly workers soon.
Although GM so far has been able to avoid major U.S. shutdowns from the Canadian strike, analysts said the first casualties may be the company's Cadillac luxury car plant in Hamtramck, Mich., which uses trim components made at a Windsor, Ontario, plant set to go on strike Wednesday.
GM's small and mid-size car plants in Lansing, Mich., Lordstown, Ohio, and Oklahoma City, Okla., also are in danger of shutdowns, because they use transmissions from another Windsor plant to be struck Wednesday.
The Oklahoma City plant is in the midst of launching two important new mid-size sedans, the 1997 Chevrolet Malibu and Oldsmobile Cutlass.
The cars, slightly smaller than the Ford Taurus and expected to be priced in the $15,000-$17,000 range, could help GM regain a sizeable piece of the mid-size car market, a segment it once dominated.
GM also is launching an all-new Pontiac Grand Prix sedan and a trio of new minivans that are viewed as the automaker's first serious challenge to Chrysler Corp.'s dominance of the segment.
Analysts said the Canadian strike, if it continues, will wreak havoc on the production and marketing launches of the products and hand market share gains to Chrysler, Ford Motor Co. and import manufacturers. The only new car to reach dealers in significant volume has been the Grand Prix.
"There was some very strong opportunity for them to gain share with some of the new vehicles," said Wesley Brown, an analyst with CSM Forecasting, an automotive consulting firm in Farmington Hills, Mich. "This will push back their launches."
Dean Witter auto analyst Kenneth Blaschke estimates that a three-week Canadian strike will cost GM about $700 million in profits. A 17-day strike at two Dayton, Ohio, parts plants in March reduced the automaker's first quarter profits by $900 million.
But Wall Street analysts maintain the costs, both in profits and lost market share, are worth it if GM can retain the right to shift parts work to outside suppliers and sell unprofitable plants.
