With the strike against General Motors in Canada headed for a second week, the automaker's losses will start mounting as its U.S. plants are forced to shut down, delaying the launch of important new models, analysts said Wednesday.
The walkout by the Canadian Auto Workers union is set to spread to two key components plants in Windsor, Ontario, Wednesday at midnight, which could cause the first shutdowns of GM's U.S. assembly plants by early next week. Much of GM's core North American automotive business could be crippled in about two weeks if the strike is not resolved.
"Once you start shutting assembly plants, the other plants start shutting very quickly," said Wesley Brown, an analyst at CSM Forecasting, an automotive consulting firm in Farmington Hills, Mich.
The expected first casualties will be GM's Cadillac luxury car plant in Hamtramck, Mich., which uses trim components made in Windsor, and GM's small and mid-size car plants in Lansing, Mich., Lordstown, Ohio, and Oklahoma City, Okla., which use transmissions from Windsor.
The Oklahoma City plant is in the midst of launching two important new mid-size sedans, the 1997 Chevrolet Malibu and Oldsmobile Cutlass.
The cars, slightly smaller than the Ford Taurus and expected to be priced in the $15,000-$17,000 range, could help GM regain a sizeable piece of the mid-size car market, a segment it once dominated.
GM also is launching an all-new Pontiac Grand Prix sedan and a trio of new minivans that are viewed as the automaker's first serious challenge to Chrysler Corp.'s dominance of the segment.
Analysts said the Canadian strike, if it continues, will wreak havoc on the production and marketing launches of the products and hand market share gains to Chrysler, Ford Motor Co. and import manufacturers. The only new car to reach dealers in significant volume has been the Grand Prix.
"There was some very strong opportunity for them to gain share with some of the new vehicles," Brown said. "This will push back their launches."
Dean Witter auto analyst Kenneth Blaschke estimates that a three-week Canadian strike will cost GM about $700 million in profits. A 17-day strike at two Dayton, Ohio, parts plants in March reduced the automaker's first quarter profits by $900 million.
But Wall Street analysts maintain the costs, both in profits and lost market share, are worth it if GM can retain the right to shift parts work to outside suppliers and sell unprofitable plants.
Lehman Brothers analyst Joseph Phillippi said investors would be extremely disappointed if GM caves in to the Canadian Auto Workers' demands to restrict outsourcing.
"They've got to do whatever it takes to get competitive," he said. "They cannot be focused on short-term considerations of market share."
He also noted that with $13 billion in cash reserves, virtually no debt and a fully funded pension plan, GM is in a strong position to take a longer strike. "They aren't the financial cripple they were in 1993," he said.
James Harbour, an automotive manufacturing consultant based in Troy, Mich., said he believes GM is finally determined to retain control of its sourcing decisions.
"This is a battle for the right to run their company," Harbour said. "It's going to be a long cold winter."
