Strong demand for light trucks and relatively few production headaches boosted the combined profits of the Big Three U.S. automakers to nearly $2 billion in the third quarter, exceeding year-ago results by a healthy margin, analysts said.
The third quarter is traditionally the industry's weakest, with summer vacations and model changeovers, but strong minivan and truck output helped buoy profits at Chrysler Corp and Ford Motor Co, they said.  
General Motors Corp operating earnings were held back by a significant increase in U.S. incentives, analysts said.
In the third quarter of 1995 the three automakers earned a combined total of $1.35 billion.
"It'll be a good quarter overall for the Big Three," said Dean Witter Reynolds Inc analyst Kenneth Blaschke. "The issue that remains is how long the strike in Canada against GM will last."
GM is expected to report third quarter net income of about $850 million, or $1.02 a share, according to First Call.  
The results will include an after-tax gain of $250 million, or $0.33 a share, from the reversal of GM's decision to close its Wilmington, Del., plant and build a new Saturn model there at the end of the decade.
In the year-ago third quarter GM earned $642 million, or $0.42 a share, including $246 million in earnings from Electronic Data Systems Corp, the computer services unit spun off by GM in June.
Burnham Securities analyst David Healy said GM's worldwide car and truck production rose 11 percent in the third quarter over a year ago.  
But a heavier mix of less-expensive vehicles and a $230 increase in incentives per vehicle squeezed GM profit margins, which likely resulted in a small pretax loss in North America during the period, he said.
GM is to report third quarter results on October 15.
On an operating basis, Ford's third quarter profits are expected to increase 78 percent, to $637 million, or $0.51 a share, from $357 million, or $0.28, a year earlier, marking the biggest rebound of the Big Three. Ford results are due October 16.  
The strength at Ford largely rides on the fact that it is not paying the enormous product launch costs for the Taurus sedan and F-Series pickup truck that dragged down year-ago results.
Ford also is beginning to reap profits from the F-Series and the Expedition full-size sport utility vehicle, which have brightened the automaker's outlook.
"We think Ford's new products will enable it to gain an increased share going forward, and as a result Ford's earnings momentum should continue," Blaschke said.  
Ford's profits would have been even better but for losses in Brazil and Argentina that the automaker warned about in September.
Ford is scambling to put its Fiesta small car into production in Brazil following the breakup of the company's Autolatina joint venture with Volkswagen AG in 1995.
Chrysler's third quarter profits, scheduled for release October 14, are expected to increase 41 percent, to about $500 million, or $0.69 a share, from $354 million, or $0.48, a year earlier.
Chrysler also experienced launch problems in the year-ago period in its all-important minivan product lines.
This year, it is churning out minivans and Dodge Ram pickup trucks and has raised its share of the U.S. vehicle market to record levels. The launch glitches have not returned, and the company's new Dodge Dakota compact pickup truck is proceeding ahead of schedule, analysts said.
"Chrysler has everthing going for it right now and it should be reflected in the earnings," said Bear Stearns &amp; Co analyst Nicholas Lobocarro.
He said he would not be surprised if the automaker's results exceeded Wall Street estimates.
