Ford Motor Co. is in talks with the Detroit Lions on a multi-million dollar deal to purchase naming rights to the football team's proposed new stadium in downtown Detroit, Ford Chairman Alex Trotman said Thursday.
The deal, expected to be signed in the next few days, comes as little surprise, since the Lions are owned by Ford board members William Clay Ford and his son, William Clay Ford Jr.
Trotman, speaking to reporters following a Ford board of directors meeting at the automaker's Dearborn, Mich., headquarters, said reports that Ford would pay $30 million to $40 million for the rights "aren't far off" from the deal Ford is discussing with the National Football League team.
Trotman said the company wants to have exclusive rights with the Ford name prominently featured on the domed structure, but has not yet decided on a specific name.
"It would be big-time Ford something -- we don't know what -- either Ford Stadium or Ford Dome," Trotman said.
William Clay Ford Jr., who holds the Ford board's purse strings as chairman of its finance committee, abstained from board discussions of the project, as did his father. The new stadium project is largely viewed as the younger Ford's brainchild.
A contribution of $30 million to $40 million would help the $225 million domed stadium meet a major financing hurdle -- the Lions face a Nov. 1 deadline to gain committments for $50 million in corporate and private contributions.
The proposed 65,000-seat football stadium would be built near the end of the decade next to a new $240 million, open-air ballpark for the Detroit Tigers on the edge of downtown Detroit that would seat about 45,000 people.
The Lions would leave the Pontiac Silverdome in suburban Pontiac, Mich., where they have played for the past 21 years, but have pledged to honour terms of their current lease, which expires in 2004.
The 80,000-seat Silverdome, opened in 1975 at a city-financed cost of $50 million, would become the youngest major league sports facility in the United States to be replaced with a new venue.
