The president of the Canadian Auto Workers held out little hope on Friday for a quick end to a 10-day-old strike against General Motors Corp and said his counterparts at the United Auto Workers are having similar problems reaching a labor pact with the automaker.
Basil "Buzz" Hargrove told reporters in a conference call that GM is trying to resist the U.S. pattern agreement set at Ford Motor Co and Chrysler Corp, which guarantee employment levels at 95 percent of the companies' current hourly workforces.  
The provision is aimed at curbing the automakers' ability to shift work to outside suppliers, known as outsourcing, which also is the major sticking point in the CAW talks.
"I'd be quite happy if Steve were to get a settlement," Hargrove said of UAW President Stephen Yokich. "He's having the same problem -- getting the pattern agreement with GM."
He said GM has "agreed to the principle of limiting the outsourcing" in the U.S.", but doesn't want to meet the 95 percent employment guarantee and wants to exclude parts plants it has on sale from the guarantee.  
Talks between the UAW and GM have been low key during the Canadian strike. Negotiators have met only during normal business hours and do not plan to meet over the weekend.
UAW spokesman Reg McGhee declined to characterize progress of the discussions, only to say bargainers were "down to the larger issues."
But Hargrove has not asked Yokich to delay a U.S. settlement with GM during the Canadian strike.
The CAW launched an escalating strike on October 3 and all the union's 26,000 GM workers were on the picket line by midnight on Wednesday.  
The UAW has about 215,000 U.S. hourly workers at GM and, so far, only about 2,000 have been idled at an engine plant and a transmission plant.
The strike may affect some of GM's U.S. plants next week, although the automaker canceled most overtime work this week.
Hargrove said he saw no progress in talks with the automaker.
"I don't want to kid anybody," he said. "It hasn't been very productive last few days, I do not believe it will be productive today."
Hargrove wanted the Canadian walkout to have as little effect on GM's U.S. production as possible so as to protect UAW workers and the profit-sharing checks they expect to receive this year. Prolonged shutdowns in the U.S. due to lack of Canadian-made parts could seriously hurt GM's profits and reduce profit sharing for employees.
