Second-shift workers at General Motors Corp. 's Cadillac assembly plant here will not report to work on Monday because of the Canadian Auto Workers strike and thousands more U.S. assembly employees may be laid off this week, GM said on Sunday.
The Cadillac plant on the outskirts of Detroit will operate with only one shift on Monday and Tuesday, when it is expected to halt production completely unless the strike is resolved, GM spokesman Thomas Klipstine said.
"Once they run out of parts, that's it," he said.
The plant employs more than 3,000 hourly workers represented by the United Auto Workers union, but Klipstine said he did not know the exact number of workers on each shift.
The sprawling factory, which builds Cadillac's DeVille, Seville and Eldorado luxury cars, depends on interior trim parts made at a strike-bound plant in Windsor, Ontario, just across the Detroit River.
GM's Canadian workers began an escalating strike on Oct. 3, shutting down all of the automaker's operations in Canada by late on Oct. 9.
The company and union have been unable to reach an agreement for a new national labour contract for GM's 26,000 CAW members because of disagreements over the thorny issue of shifting parts work to outside suppliers, known as outsourcing.
The union wants tough restrictions on outsourcing to protect its members' jobs, while GM, the least efficient automaker in North America, says it needs flexibility on parts purchases to become more competitive.
So far, GM's U.S. operations have been relatively untouched by the strike in Canada, largely because the CAW gave the automaker ample warning that it was preparing to strike. That, coupled with the slow escalation of the strike over a week-long period, allowed GM to build up stocks of some parts and prepare for the walkout.
"The bottom line is there was no surprise with this strike," Klipstine said. "We did as much as we could, but we don't have huge amounts of parts stockpiled."
Klipstine said he did not know how much longer GM could operate its U.S. plants.
Industry analysts have said some of GM's plants may be able to continue to operate until the end of the month, particularly those that build GM's popular full-size pickup trucks and sport-utility vehicles.
On Friday, Ford Motor Co. President Alex Trotman said he did not believe his company would be able to gain a significant amount of market share due to the strike, because there has been "little evidence" that GM's hottest-selling truck lines will be affected.
Most GM dealers have sufficient car inventories to weather the strike without turning away customers, he said.
Thus far, the CAW has been responsible for the idling of only 2,000 U.S. workers.
The walkout forced the layoff of 1,050 workers at an engine plant in Tonawanda, N.Y., near Buffalo, and 950 at a transmission plant in Ypsilanti, Mich., near Detroit.
By contrast, a UAW strike in March at two Dayton, Ohio, brake plants had forced more than 55,000 of GM's workers off the job just one week after that walkout began.
No formal talks were scheduled between GM and the CAW, although CAW President Buzz Hargrove was expected to be in contact with GM's chief negotiator, Dean Munger.
Canada celebrates its national Thanksgiving Day holiday on Monday.
Meanwhile, in the United States, negotiators working towards a contract for GM's 215,000 United Auto Workers members also took the weekend off.
The UAW talks have taken a low profile during the Canadian strike.
