Chrysler Corp., planning for a future without fear of financial crisis, said Tuesday it can boost its annual production capacity past 4 million vehicles and grab 20 percent of the U.S. car and truck market.
Chrysler's top executives, in a series of briefings Tuesday, said the automaker was poised to boost its financial performance further through cost cuts, engineering innovations, new products and other initiatives.
Chrysler Chairman Robert Eaton said the automaker has not made market share a goal, but said an 18 percent to 20 percent share of the U.S. car and truck market "is not unrealistic" for Chrysler.
Detroit's third-largest automaker held 16.2 percent of the market during the first nine months of 1996 -- roughly its highest share ever.
After working to rebuild Chrysler's product line, operations and balance sheet after financial crises in 1980 and 1991, the automaker's management team is now focusing on long-term growth.
"For the first time in its history, this company doesn't have to spend every waking moment looking over its shoulder and worrying about its future," said Chrysler President Bob Lutz. "We've moved beyond saying 'never again' to 'Why not?'"
Indeed, Eaton said he now believes that Chrysler can withstand a 10 percent to 20 percent drop in production and remain profitable -- something that was impossible five years ago.
With a string of hit products, especially Jeeps and minivans, under its belt, the automaker is planning to boost capacity to 3.765 million vehicles by the year 2000 from 3.2 million this year.
Included in those figures are a new Dodge sport utility vehicle that will go on sale in the fall of 1997. Industry analysts have said the vehicle will be called the Dodge Durango and will be based on the new Dakota compact pickup truck.
The automaker could build up to 4.2 million vehicles annually in its current assembly plants if it adds third production shifts, said manufacturing Executive Vice President Dennis Pawley.
That does not include the possible replacement of Chrysler's Toledo, Ohio, assembly plant.
Eaton confirmed that the automaker was working with state and local officials to study replacement options for the 86-year-old facility, but has made no firm plans.
Much of Chrysler's increased capacity will be aimed at overseas markets. The executive vice president of international operations, Thomas Gale, said Chrysler expected to double its international vehicle sales to 500,000 vehicles over the next three years from 250,000 this year.
Gale said he believed Chrysler can ultimately sell more than 1 million vehicles overseas but did not offer a timetable.
He showed off a prototype of a proposed ultra-low-cost car for emerging markets such as China, which features an all-plastic body and a two-cylinder, 0.8-litre engine made by Briggs &amp; Stratton Corp.
The bare-bones car, which would not meet U.S. emissions and safety regulations, resembles France's discontinued but much-loved Citroen 2CV and could sell for $5,000 to $6,000.
Eaton, who Monday announced surprisingly strong third-quarter earnings of $680 million, up from $365 million a year ago, outlined several financial goals for the automaker, without giving a timetable. They include:
-- Boosting production by 6 percent a year.
-- Cutting research and development spending to 2.5 percent of revenues from 2.7 percent. Ford Motor Co.'s spending rate is 5.9 percent of revenues, General Motors Corp. is at 5.5 percent and Toyota Motor Corp. is at 5.0 percent, Chrysler said.
-- Cutting marketing costs to 6.3 percent of sales from 6.5 percent currently.
-- Boosting return on sales to 8.0 percent from 6.5 percent for the first nine months of 1996 and 3.7 percent for the same period of 1995.
