Ford Motor Co., which reported a $472 million loss in Europe this week, faces a long and difficult job to cut costs and jump-start its product line to deal with a sluggish European market and tough competition, analysts said Friday.
Ford executives this week disclosed that they plan a broad effort to cut costs in Europe, including product costs, material costs, and personnel and plant costs.
"We need to restructure and we need to reduce our costs," Ford Vice President of Finance David McCammon told reporters.
The cuts will include an early retirement programme that is expected to eliminate more than 2,000 jobs in Europe, he said.
The initiatives, to be announced within the next three months, follow Ford's actions in 1993 to eliminate about 13,000 jobs from its Euoprean operations.
Ford's $472 million European loss compared with a $320 million deficit a year ago, and was due partly to product launch costs.
But analysts said there are no quick fixes to Ford's problems in Europe, which include high costs for its smaller cars and the lack of a competitive, high-volume large car.
"I don't think it's something that's corrected in one or two quarters," said PaineWebber analyst Michael Ward. "We probably have another year or two where the news from Ford's European operations is not very good."
The automaker's production and parts suppliers are heavily concentrated in Germany, where costs are high and the company is more susceptible to fluctuations in currency exchange rates. General Motors Corp.'s assembly operations and suppliers are spread more evenly throughout Europe, giving the automaker a competitive advantage.
Although the third quarter is typically the weakest period of the year because of vacations and model changeovers, GM's European operations earned $75 million during the third quarter, compared with a year-ago loss of $98 million -- a performance analysts attribute to extremely low investment costs and strong product acceptance.
Shifting Ford's supplier base is a long-term task, as is cutting investment costs in new products. The first new cars developed under Ford's more efficient "Ford 2000" structure are not expected to be on the market for at least two more years, analysts said.
The new Ford Ka minicar, developed for $250 million using off-the-shelf components, is a step in the right direction, but is expected to bring only razor thin profit margins, due to its low price, analysts said.
Unlike in the United States, Ford in Europe cannot count on highly profitable light trucks and sport utility vehicles to make most of its money. It must rely on mostly small cars, including the Fiesta, Escort and the mid-size Mondeo.
Ford's Scorpio large car, which was widely panned two years ago when it was last redesigned, has performed poorly against the likes of Bayerische Motoren Werke AG's 5-Series, GM's Opel Omega and the Mercedes-Benz E-Class.
"They have no money spinner in Europe," said Lehman Brothers auto analyst Joseph Phillippi.
Ford's Mondeo, a strong seller, is still handicapped by its initial $6 billion development cost, which also included the Ford Contour and Mercury Mystique in the United States.
Although the Mondeo received exterior and interior changes for the 1997 model year, competition in that segment of the market is much tougher than it was when the car first debuted in 1993.
Opel's new Vectra, Audi AG's A4 and Volkswagen AG's new Passat are expected to draw many buyers away from the Mondeo.
Making matters worse is the sluggish market. Analysts estimate that automakers have enough capacity to build 16 million cars in Europe, but sales this year will be only about 12.5 million, forcing deep price cuts.
"What's happening is there's an overcapacity situation in Europe," Ford's McCammon said. "Everybody's fighting it out for market share and spending a lot of money for marketing incentives."
He said all European automakers, except for GM, have been struggling through the same problems. A decade ago, it was GM that was struggling in Europe and Ford was the top performer.
"I guess things switched," McCammon said. "We had a great position of leadership and we're unhappy that we don't have that any more."
