The United Auto Workers union is discussing the possibility of an extended five- or six-year contract with the nation's largest automakers, UAW and company officials said Monday.
The union is open to the idea of a contract longer than the typical three-year pact if it offers significant job security guarantees, officials said.
"It has surfaced in the subcommittees," said Carl Dowell, president of UAW Local 862 in Louisville, Ky. "There was no problem with a longer-term agreement if it's fruitful for our people. Job security is the key."
Contract talks with General Motors Corp., Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp. resumed Monday after meetings late last week between UAW President Stephen Yokich and the automakers' chairmen.
The UAW has not yet chosen which company it will negotiate a pattern agreement with. Yokich said last week that he delayed the union's traditional choice of a "strike target" to allow the negotiating progress to continue at all three companies.
A UAW spokesman said no decision on a target company is expected this week.
Traditionally, the target is threatened with a national strike on the contract expiration date if no agreement is reached by then. The current pact, covering about 400,000 U.S. hourly workers at the three automakers, expires September 14.
Ford spokesman Jon Harmon said the automaker suggested to the UAW about three weeks ago that both sides should examine possibly negotiating a longer-term contract.
He said a longer agreement would stabilise Ford's future costs, allowing it to evaluate future product and investment decisions more accurately. "It gives you more of a known quantity," he said.
Yokich has said he would be open to a longer contract if the automakers "want to buy it."
However, many UAW officials remain sceptical about a longer-term pact and say that removal of a strike threat every three years could invite abuses by the automakers.
"The question is how can GM live up to a five-year agreement when they can't live up to a three-year agreement?" said Ed McNulty, president of UAW Local 14 at GM's Toledo, Ohio, truck transmission plant.
Such an agreement would have to provide a mechanism for enforcement of the contract and for revisions to resolve local issues over sourcing and staffing levels that are sure to arise over the life of the contract, he said.
GM has been hit by several strikes at individual plants over the current three-year contract over sourcing and jobs.
"You're going to have to have some good job security and outsourcing provisions for the membership to go for it," McNulty said.
