With a contentious, 20-day strike by the Canadian Auto Workers now behind it, General Motors Corp. could reach a U.S. labor agreement with the United Auto Workers in a matter of days, union officials said Wednesday.
The UAW talks, which affect some 215,000 hourly workers, were moving quickly when the strike in Canada started on October 2 and stole the spotlight.  
"I think without question they would have settled by now, but the UAW did not want to undermine the Canadian union's negotiating stance," said Harley Shaiken, a professor of labor relations at the University of California-Berkeley. "The (UAW) negotiations will move very quickly."
UAW president Stephen Yokich remains directly involved in the talks, and major unresolved issues are much the same as those that sparked the walkout in Canada: the shifting of work to outside suppliers, the sale of several parts plants and the UAW's demands for job guarantees for 95 percent of GM's workers.  
Sources close to the talks said they believe GM will agree to guarantee jobs for 95 percent of its workforce -- nominally the same terms that rivals Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp. agreed to -- but that level may exclude certain plants and may contain other exceptions.
In addition to the two parts plants GM won the right to sell in Canada are two U.S. parts plants on the sale block.
The automaker wants to sell a door hardware plant in Flint, Mich., and an interior trim plant in Livonia, Mich., which together employ 2,100 UAW members.  
UAW officials have identified the buyer for all four of the U.S. and Canadian plants as Joseph, Littlejohn and Levy, a New York-based investment firm that owns other auto parts companies.
But GM also wants to sell other components factories. Its Delphi Automotive Systems division has about 12 plants that it considers "troubled."
And the automaker in August disclosed that was evaluating restructuring plans for parts plants other than the four now on the sale block.  
A GM spokesman declined to discuss the talks, other than to say that GM and UAW negotiators were meeting Wednesday, as they have each weekday during the Canadian strike.
"We reamin hopeful we can get this resolved as soon as possible," UAW spokesman Reg McGhee said Wednesday.
Shaiken said he believes that the GM-UAW agreement will largely continue the tradition of pattern bargaining for each of Detroit's Big Three automakers. Many analysts and even Yokich had downplayed the importance of maintaining a strict pattern for all three companies.
"What we're seeing is the continuation of pattern bargaining, and nonetheless, GM will be able to compete effectively under the agreement," Shaiken said.
