Boosting the pressure on General Motors Corp. for a new labor agreement, the United Auto Workers union Friday set a Sunday night deadline for a strike against the world's largest automaker.
UAW President Stephen Yokich said in a statment that union negotiators were not optimistic that a new contract deal could be reached by the deadline of 11:59 p.m. EST Sunday (0459 GMT Monday).
While he did not say if the union's 215,000 GM hourly workers would actually strike, Yokich said the UAW had notified GM that it will terminate its extended 1993 contract with the automaker if the deadline passes with no agreement. The union typically does not work without a contract.
"UAW members have been advised to continue to work unless notified by their local union," Yokich said.
"The UAW bargaining team will continue to make serious efforts to achieve a new agreement. While we are not optimistic, we remain hopeful that this can be accomplished prior to the expiration of the current contract at 11:59 p.m. on Sunday," he added.
The move comes just three days after GM settled a contentious, 20-day strike with the Canadian Auto Workers union that caused parts shortages that are still forcing the auto giant to shut down some U.S. assembly plants.
Although the UAW talks had been moving quickly before the strike in Canada, people close to the negotiations said the two sides remain at odds over the union's demand for employment guarantees and GM's desire for flexibility to shift more parts work to outside, usually non-union suppliers.
Both Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp. have agreed to guarantee jobs for 95 percent of their current work forces over the next three years. GM has resisted the pattern, saying it wants to exclude certain components plants from the employment guarantees.
A GM spokesman said full-scale UAW negotiations at GM's Detroit headquarters will continue throughout the weekend for the first time since the strike in Canada began on Oct. 2.
In a statement, GM chief negotiator Gerald Knechtel said, "We remain committed to entering into agreement that balances the needs of our employees and the UAW with the flexibility GM needs to continue to improve our competitiveness."
"We've had open and constructive dialogue with the UAW since the talks began and we're hopeful we can focus with the UAW on concluding these negotiations as soon as possible."
Meanwhile, GM continued to run out of Canadian-made parts at U.S. assembly plants. In Flint, Mich., local UAW officials said GM told more than 6,600 workers not to report to work at the automaker's massive Buick City complex on Monday.
The facility makes Buick LeSabre, Oldsmobile 88 and Pontiac Bonneville sedans, as well as V-6 engines and other components.
Buick City is the largest of several facilities to cut back production due to shortages of parts following the end of the Canadian Auto Workers' strike this week.
On Thursday, GM laid off about 5,000 workers at its Lordstown, Ohio, assembly plant in a shutdown that will last two weeks. The plant builds the popular Chevrolet Cavalier and Pontiac Sunfire small cars.
Also on Friday, GM notified some of the 2,926 workers at the nearby Lordstown metal stamping plant they would be idled next week. Another 474 workers at a components plant in Vandalia, Ohio, will be idled next week, GM said.
Excluding the layoffs that will start next week, GM said it had a total of 23,340 workers idled in the United States and Mexico on Friday.
GM's 26,000 Canadian Auto Workers members began returning to work on Wednesday after they ratified a new contract that puts some limits GM's ability to shift work to outside suppliers but allows the automaker to sell two contested parts plants.
