Adding to the controversy over the safety of automobile air bags, the federal government's auto safety agency said Thursday it was stepping up an investigation into spontaneous air bag deployments in several General Motors Corp. cars.
The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration said it has received five reports of air bags deploying without a collision in 1996-model GM mid-size sedans, due to corrosion in the air bag sensing and diagnostic module. In each case, water was spilled or leaked onto the floor of the vehicle.
The probe involves 395,994 cars currently on the road, including the 1996 Chevrolet Lumina and Monte Carlo, Buick Regal, Pontiac Grand Prix and Oldsmobile Cutlass Supreme.
In its monthly defect investigation report, NHTSA said three of the "inappropriate deployments" resulted in injuries, but none resulted in death. Four of the five cars were traveling between 10 and 40 mph when the bags inflated.
News of the probe comes as the NHTSA is fielding growing numbers of calls from consumers worried about reports of  child deaths caused by air bags.
Air bags have saved the lives of more than 1,136 adults since 1986, said NHTSA spokeswoman Liz Neblett. But with inflation speeds of up to 200 mph, they also have killed 28 children since 1990.
Earlier this week, NHTSA Executive Director Ricardo Martinez said the the agency advised that all children under the age of 12 should ride in the back seats of cars and trucks equipped with dual front air bags.
The agency raised that age after 5-year-old Frances Ambrose was killed by an air bag in a Nashville, Tenn., crash despite properly wearing lap and shoulder belts.
The NHTSA is now considering several remedies to the situation, including an auto industry request to reduce the inflation pressure of passenger air bags.
Other alternatives include requiring "smart" air bag systems that have the ability to detect the size and weight of the occupant and adjust inflation accordingly.
In the probe of the GM cars, NHTSA said all of the vehicles use an air bag sensing and diagnostic module that is located underneath the front passenger seat on top of the carpeting. It is not sealed, making it susceptible to moisture intrusion.
NHTSA said owners of the vehicles reported that they:
-- Spilled a glass of water on the vehicle floor.
-- Drove through a car wash.
-- Spilled a bucket of water on the vehicle floor.
-- Spilled soapy water on the vehicle floor.
-- Discovered a trunk leak in the vehicle.
In addition, the agency said it was investigating two other instances of unexplained air bag deployment, one when a driver was backing out of a driveway and another when the car was driving at 20 mph.
A GM spokesman said the automaker was cooperating with the probe.
The company also uses the same air bag sensor on 1994 and 1995 model versions of the same cars, but reported only two instances of airbag deployments due to corrosion.
In one case, GM said the vehicle was apparently flooded by an ocean tide, and in another case, the entire rear end of the vehicle was severely corroded.
The investigation was upgraded to an engineering analysis, in which the agency will examine and physically test the components in question.
