Negotiators for General Motors Corp. and the United Auto Workers union were back at the bargaining table on Saturday in an effort to reach a new national labor agreement before a Sunday night strike deadline.
Bargainers, led by UAW President Stephen Yokich, reconvened about 8 a.m. (noon GMT) at GM's Detroit headquarters following a night off after the union's decision late on Friday to cancel its contract with the automaker at 11:59 p.m. EST Sunday (0459 GMT Monday).
The deadline marks the first time the UAW threatened a strike in its 1996 negotiations with Detroit's Big Three automakers, which up to now have been marked by an unusually conciliatory tone and extremely secretive discussions.
It also came days after GM's 26,000 Canadian Auto Workers members began returning to work on Wednesday following a three-week strike against the automaker's Canadian operations.
In the U.S. talks the two sides were at odds over the same issues that caused the walkout in Canada -- the union's demand for job security and GM's desire to sell several parts plants and maintain flexibility to shift components work to outside suppliers, a practice known as outsourcing.
In the U.S. negotiations GM wanted to modify the UAW contract pattern set by Ford   Motor Co. and Chrysler
Corp., which agreed to guarantee jobs for 95 percent of their UAW  workforces over the next three years.
GM, the least efficient U.S. automaker, wanted to exclude certain components plants from the employment guarantees, including a door-hardware plant in Flint, Michigan, and an interior trim plant in Livonia, Michigan.
Ford and Chrysler buy more of their parts from outside suppliers than GM does, often from firms that paid their workers significantly less than the $19-an-hour base wage paid in Big Three factories.
Yokich said in a statment Friday that he was not optimistic that a deal could be reached before the deadline, but told workers to remain on the job until further notice.
On Saturday UAW spokesman Reg McGhee declined to say whether the union was still pessimistic about the talks.
"That was yesterday's statement," McGhee said. "We're just saying that the talks are continuing and we're not characterizing the progress."
GM spokesman Charles Licari said the automaker was prepared for round-the-clock negotiations, but declined to provide further details of the talks.
GM's chief negotiator, Gerald Knechtel, said Friday that the automaker was "committed to entering into agreement that balances the needs of our employees and the UAW with the flexibility GM needs to continue to improve our competitiveness."
GM flush with $14 billion in cash on its balance sheet and operating earnings that more than doubled in the third quarter to $1 billion, showed much willingness this year to sustain costly strikes in its continued quest for competitiveness.
Industry analysts estimated the cost of the Canadian strike at $150 million to $450 million, while a 17-day strike at two Dayton, Ohio, brake plants in March reduced GM's first quarter profit by $900 million.
In Dayton, GM preserved its right to buy a future brake system from an outside supplier, while in Canada, GM won the right to sell two parts plants in return for recognizing some limits on outsourcing.
But the effects of the Canadian strike continued to linger last week, as more of GM's U.S. assembly plants plants ran out of Canadian-made parts.
In Flint, Michigan, local UAW officials said GM told more than 6,600 workers not to report to work at the automaker's massive Buick City complex on Monday.
The facility makes Buick LeSabre, Oldsmobile 88 and Pontiac Bonneville sedans, as well as V-6 engines and other components.
On Thursday GM laid off about 5,000 workers at its Lordstown, Ohio, assembly plant in a shutdown scheduled to last two weeks. The plant builds the popular Chevrolet Cavalier and Pontiac Sunfire small cars.
Also on Friday GM notified some of the 2,926 workers at the nearby Lordstown metal stamping plant they would be idled next week. Another 474 workers at a components plant in Vandalia, Ohio, will be idled next week, GM said.
Excluding the layoffs that will start next week, GM said it had a total of 23,340 workers idled in the United States and Mexico on Friday.
