Negotiators for General Motors Corp. and the United Auto Workers adjourned their talks on Saturday evening with less than 30 hours to go before a midnight Sunday strike deadline.
Bargainers, led by UAW President Stephen Yokich, took their second consecutive night off since the union announced on Friday that it will cancel its contract with the automaker at 11:59 p.m. EST Sunday (0359 GMT on Monday).
GM spokesman Charles Licari declined to say whether the adjournment was a sign of poor progress in the talks aimed at a new national labor agreement covering the automaker's 215,000 UAW workers. Typically bargaining runs around the clock when a settlement is near.
The deadline marks the first time the UAW has threatened a strike in its 1996 negotiations with Detroit's Big Three automakers, which up to now have been marked by an unusually conciliatory tone and extremely secretive discussions.
It also came two days after GM's 26,000 Canadian Auto Workers members began returning to work on Wednesday after a three-week strike against the automaker's Canadian operations.
In the U.S. talks, the two sides are still at odds over the same issues that caused the walkout in Canada -- the union's demand for job security and GM's desire to sell several parts plants and maintain flexibility to shift components work to outside suppliers, a practice known as outsourcing.
GM wants to modify the UAW contract pattern set by Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp., which have agreed to guarantee jobs for 95 percent of their current UAW work forces over the next three years.
GM, the least efficient U.S. automaker, wants to exclude certain components plants from the employment guarantees, including a door hardware plant in Flint, Michigan and an interior trim plant in Livonia, Michigan.
Ford and Chrysler buy more of their parts from outside suppliers than GM does, often from firms that pay their workers significantly less than the $19-an-hour base wage paid in Big Three factories.
Yokich said in a statement on Friday that he was not optimistic that a deal could be reached before the deadline but told workers to remain on the job until further notice.
On Saturday UAW spokesman Reg McGhee declined to say whether the union was still pessimistic about the talks.
"That was yesterday's statement," McGhee said. "We're just saying that the talks are continuing and we're not characterizing the progress."
GM spokesman Charles Licari said the automaker was prepared for round-the-clock negotiations, but declined to provide further details of the talks.
GM's chief negotiator, Gerald Knechtel, said on Friday that the automaker was "committed to entering into agreement that balances the needs of our employees and the UAW with the flexibility GM needs to continue to improve our competitiveness."
GM, flush with $14 billion in cash on its balance sheet and operating earnings that more than doubled in the third quarter to $1 billion, has shown willingness to sustain costly strikes to continue its quest for competitiveness.
Industry analysts estimate the cost of the Canadian strike at $150 million to $450 million, while a 17-day strike at two Dayton, Ohio, brake plants in March reduced GM's first quarter profit by $900 million.
But the effects of the Canadian strike continued to linger last week, as more of GM's U.S. assembly plants plants ran out of Canadian-made parts.
In Flint, local UAW officials said GM told more than 6,600 workers not to report to work at the automaker's massive Buick City complex on Monday.
