General Motors Co. and the United Auto Workers recessed contract negotiations early Monday, several hours after their existing contract expired, but union officials said talks were likely to resume later in the day.
Union members continued working despite the impasse and UAW President Stephen Yokich said the union and GM officials planned to resume their talks, possibly later Monday.
Bargaining between the two sides recessed about 3 a.m. EST after the contract expired. The pact covers 215,000 UAW members who work at GM's U.S. facilities.
At a news conference Monday, Yokich made no mention of possible selective strikes at some GM plants, as had been speculated Sunday.
"We hope that everyone understands that we can't do it in the street. It isn't weakness -- we have to do it at the bargaining table," he said.
Yokich said a small number of bargainers may return to GM later Monday. Negotiators talked for about 17 hours Sunday and early Monday morning trying to reach a new agreement.
In a written statement in response to Yokich's comments, GM vice president of personnel Gerald Knechtel said the talks have been constructive.
"We have had open and constructive dialogue with the UAW since these talks began and have made significant progress on many of the issues," Knechtel said.
The UAW has already reached a new three-year contract with Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp. covering about 171,000 UAW members in the United States.
Ford and Chrysler both agreed to guarantee jobs for 95 percent of their current UAW workforces. Forcing GM to accept that pattern has been a sticking point for the UAW. The world's largest automaker has said it needs to shed about 12 North American parts plants that it says are uncompetitive, and wants to exclude those plants from any job guarantee pledges.
There was speculation Sunday the UAW may hit GM with selective strikes at plants that build GM's high-profit full-size pickup trucks and sport/utility vehicles, including facilities in Janesville, Wis., Pontiac and Flint, Mich., and Fort Wayne, Ind.
Yokich, who said he is disappointed with the progress of the talks, said some of the UAW's locals have "sticky" issues that are not yet resolved.
"We decided that some of these locals need to work on these issues probably before we can ever get a settlement," he said, declining to identify the locals.
The previous national labor agreement expired Sept. 14, but the UAW said in September it would extend the contract. Last week Yokich said the contract extension for GM would end at midnight Sunday.
Yokich defended his tactics against critics who say the union, which is facing a shrinking membership base, has not been tough enough on the Big Three automakers, whose profits and sales are both increasing.
GM has 12 parts plants that it considers uncompetitive and wants to exclude several of those facilities from the job guarantee, including a door hardware plant in Flint, Mich., and an interior trim plant in Livonia, Mich., that it wants to sell.
GM's stock slipped 12.5 cents to $54 in morning trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
