A midnight Sunday strike deadline for General Motors Corp expired without a walkout as talks between the car maker and the United Auto Workers continued into the early morning hours on Monday.
A GM spokesman declined to provide further details of the negotiations, saying the automaker would make a more detailed statement later on Monday morning.
"They're still on the job," said Norman Harp, a union commiteeman for UAW Local 14 at GM's Toledo, Ohio, transmission plant, which started its third shift shortly before midnight Sunday.
"The deadline's here and gone and they're still talking," Harp said of the negotiators at GM's Detroit headquarters.
Local UAW officials at other GM plants also said they were told to stand by for further instructions.
The UAW cancelled its national contract covering 215,000 GM hourly workers one minute before midnight Sunday in a move to increase pressure on GM for tentative agreement.
However, there was speculation among UAW officials late Sunday that instead of a national strike, the union could strike selected plants that make GM's high-profit light trucks. Top on the list of such facilities were GM's Janesville, Wis., plant, which makes Chevrolet Tahoe and GMC Yukon and Suburban full-size sport/utility vehicles, and the Pontiac, Mich., plant, which makes GM's popular full-size pickup trucks with extended cabs.
A selective strike at those facilities would inflict pain on GM while minimizing the drain on the UAW's strike fund, which pays each UAW worker $150 a week. It also would blunt some of the political fallout from a massive strike close to the U.S. presidential election.
UAW officials say the two sides remain at odds over the union's demand that GM follow the pattern set at Ford Motor Co and Chrysler Corp by guaranteeing employment for 95 percent of its current UAW workforce.
GM, which has 12 parts plants that it considers uncompetitive, wants to exclude several of those facilities from the guarantee, including a door hardware plant in Flint, Mich., and an interior trim plant in Livonia, Mich., that it wants to sell.
In settling the Canadian strike last week, GM was able to secure a deal that included the selling of two parts plants in Windsor and Oshawa, Ontario and retained some flexibility to outsource more products. However, GM agreed to guarantee pensions for workers in the two plants or up to nine years and to allow them to transfer back to jobs that open up in other GM facilities.
GM still has more than 20,000 workers in the United States and Mexico idled because of lingering parts shortages associated with the Canadian strike.
