General Motors Corp. workers remained on the job without a contract Monday as United Auto Workers President Stephen Yokich refrained -- for now -- from calling a strike against the auto giant.
Negotiations on a new national labor contract covering GM's 215,000 UAW hourly workers recessed early Monday after a midnight strike deadline passed. Yokich said some bargainers would resume talks later in the day.
"The only place you can settle these agreements is at the bargaining table," Yokich told a news conference early Monday. "We feel that with or without a contract in place, we can continue (working). It's open-ended."
The union plans to bring its plant-level leaders to Detroit for a meeting on the talks on Saturday, a move that typically comes after a tentative agreement is reached.
Although Yokich played down the threat of a strike on Monday, he said some of the more than 100 local unions at GM plants may resort to walkouts unless the automaker meets union demands in separate negtiations for local labor agreements.
The local talks have become a sticking point for the national negotiations, Yokich said, because only a few of the locals have signed agreements with GM.
The local pacts typically cover plant-specific issues such as work rules and health and safety standards, while the national contract covers wages, benefits, job security and other common issues.
"We decided that some of these locals need to work on these issues probably before we can ever get a settlement," Yokich said, declining to identify specific plants or issues.
Nevertheless, he urged anxious UAW members who watched their Canadian counterparts strike for three weeks this month to stay on the job for the time being.
"We hope that everyone understands that we can't do it in the street. It isn't weakness -- we have to do it at the bargaining table," he said.
Negotiations at GM's headquarters building here continued for 17 hours until about 2 a.m. EST on Monday, when bargainers began leaving, carrying their overnight bags.
Although some talks were scheduled to resume Monday afternoon, Yokich and other top UAW officers do not plan to return to the bargaining table until Tuesday morning.
In a written statement in response to Yokich's comments, GM Vice President of Personnel Gerald Knechtel said the talks have been constructive.
"We have had open and constructive dialogue with the UAW since these talks began and have made significant progress on many of the issues," Knechtel said.
Yokich chided GM's hard-headed negotiating style as "typical GM," and noted that the union has consistently had a better relationship with Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp.
The UAW wants GM to agree to the same job guarantees granted by Ford and Chrysler, which call for the two companies to guarantee employment for 95 percent of their combined 171,000 UAW members in the United States.
GM has 12 North American parts plants that it considers uncompetitive and wants to exclude several of those facilities from the job guarantee pledges, including a door hardware plant in Flint, Mich., and an interior trim plant in Livonia, Mich., that it wants to sell.
Although GM is viewed as the least efficient of Detroit's Big Three automakers, Yokich insisted that the auto giant can live with the pattern.
"I think Ford and Chrysler understood when we said we're preparing ourselves and our union to enter the 21st Century with you as partners in the corporation," he said. "I'm not too sure GM understands that. They've always been late bloomers. Maybe they'll get the message sooner or later."
The UAW's strike threat comes less than a week after GM settled a 20-day strike by the independent Canadian Auto Workers union. The CAW struck over many of the same issues -- job security and shifting jobs to outside suppliers.
UAW Vice President Richard Shoemaker said the U.S. union did not feel pressure to get the exact same provisions that GM agreed to in Canada.
GM's stock slipped 12.5 cents to $54 in early afternoon trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
