United Auto Workers bargainers reconvened at General Motors Corp.'s headquarters Tuesday following a day off Monday, but talks between the two sides maintained a low profile, UAW and company spokesmen said.
UAW workers continued to report to their jobs at GM's U.S. factories, despite the expiration of their national labour agreement with the automaker at 11:59 p.m. EST Sunday.
GM spokesman Charles Licari said there were no major "main-table" meetings scheduled Tuesday, but key negotiators were communicating in small groups and by telephone.
"Discussions are taking place, but there is no set timetable regarding the negotiations," Licari said, adding that such communications still may prove fruitful.
A person close to the talks said, however, that he did not expect the situation to change much before Saturday, when the union's key local GM plant-level leaders are scheduled to meet in Detroit.
UAW President Stephen Yokich recessed the talks on Monday and expressed disappointment with the lack of progress toward a settlement, but he refrained from calling a strike against the world's largest automaker.
Still, Yokich said some of the union's GM locals may resort to strikes if progress in local negotiations does not improve. In addition to the national contract, GM is negotiating with more than 100 UAW locals for pacts that cover plant-specific issues.
In New York on Tuesday, GM Chairman Jack Smith said little about the UAW negotiations, but told reporters that he hoped there would be no local strikes.
The threat of additional strikes comes less than a week after Canadian Auto Workers members returned to work following a three-week walkout over the issues of job security and outsourcing, or the shifting of work to outside contractors.
Smith, speaking at a news conference on alternative fuel vehicles, declined to specify the dollar cost of the strike.
"We lost quite a few cars," he said.
GM said Tuesday that 22,913 workers in its U.S. assembly, powertrain and stamping operations remained idle because of lingering shortages of Canadian-made parts.
The automaker said it laid off an additional 465 workers at its Lordstown, Ohio, metal stamping plant Tuesday, one of four such plants affected.
GM's nearby Lordstown, Ohio, assembly plant remains completely idled, as does its Buick City assembly plant in Flint, Mich. Five other assembly plants remain partially idled, bringing GM's laid off assembly workers to 15,284.
GM has 5,702 engine and transmission workers laid off, with six such powertrain plants partially idled.
In the UAW talks, which cover a total of 215,000 U.S. hourly workers, GM has resisted the union's demand that it follow a pattern set by Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp. and guarantee jobs for 95 percent of current work force over the next three years.
GM wants to exclude from the guarantee several parts plants that it wants to sell. The automaker has identified 12 facilities that it considers uncompetitive.
GM's stock gained 50 cents to $54.375 in afternoon trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
