General Motors Corp. and the United Auto Workers resumed contract negotiations Wednesday under the threat of additional strikes as local walkouts continued in Wisconsin and Indiana.
Bargainers reconvened at GM's headquarters here Wednesday morning but GM spokesman Charles Licari declined to say if GM Chairman Jack Smith was directly involved in the talks.
"Talks are taking place at all levels," Licari said.
About 2,750 members of United Auto Workers Local 23 struck GM's Indianapolis metal stamping plant Tuesday night and 4,800 workers also walked off the job at GM's Janesville, Wis., truck assembly plant.
UAW spokesman Reg McGhee said no other local strikes had started as of Wednesday morning, but said the union was not ruling out other actions. UAW President Stephen Yokich raised the threat of local strikes on Monday after the union's national contract with GM expired.
"Steve made it clear that without a national contract, the locals are on their own," McGhee said, noting that they do not have to provide GM with the typical five-day notice before a walkout.
Although UAW officials said the strikes were called over local issues, the actions increased pressure on GM for a national agreement by threatening to paralyse much of the lucrative light truck operations at the world's largest automaker.
The local walkouts thus may nudge GM into a tentative national agreement before Saturday, when the UAW's 250-member National GM Council is scheduled to meet in Detroit. The council, made up of plant-level leaders, would have to approve any agreement.
A major sticking point in the national talks covering 215,000 workers is the future of 12 domestic parts plants GM considers uncompetitive. GM wants to exclude several of the plants from union demands that it guarantee employment for 95 percent of UAW workers over the next three years.
Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp. have already granted such guarantees, but GM, the least efficient of Detroit's Big Three automakers, wants changes to the pattern to allow it to cut costs.
A national agreement probably would also require the signatures of Smith and Yokich. McGhee said Yokich was not at GM headquarters Wednesday morning but was involved in the talks. "His physical presence is not demanded for every meeting we have with GM," McGhee said.
Workers at all of GM's truck and truck parts plants have been working heavy overtime in recent months, putting a strain on workers and leading to union demands for relief. For example, at the Janesville plant, which makes the Chevrolet Tahoe, Suburban and GMC Yukon sport utility vehicles, UAW Local 95 has pressed GM to hire a third shift of workers.
The Indianapolis plant supplies doors, fenders, hoods and other parts to nine of the automaker's 11 North American truck assembly plants. At least some of those plants likely will have to halt operations within days due to parts shortages.
Only a handful of GM's 123 local units have signed new local contracts with the automaker. The pacts typically cover items such as work rules, staffing levels and health and safety standards, while the national agreement covers wages, benefits, job security and other broad issues.
While GM has refused to identify the plants it wants to sell, the list includes a door hinge plant in Flint, Mich., and an interior trim plant in Livonia, Mich., officials said. Together, the plants employ 2,100 UAW members.
The local strikes mark a departure in Yokich's bargaining strategy, which until last week had been marked by unusually conciliatory remarks and virtually no strike threats.
The walkouts also came less than a week after Canadian Auto Workers members returned to work following a three-week strike over the issues of job security and shifting work to outside contractors.
