The United Auto Workers union unleashed two local strikes against General Motors Corp.'s truck operations Tuesday night in bids to boost pressure on the automaker for new national and local labor agreements.
About 2,750 members of UAW Local 23 walked off the job at GM's Indianapolis metal stamping plant at about 6 p.m. EST, followed an hour later by 4,800 workers who struck the automaker's Janesville, Wis., truck assembly plant.
The negotiations at GM's Detroit headquarters were scheduled to resume Wednesday morning after adjourning for the night around 9 p.m. EST Tuesday.
GM spokesman Jerry Holmes said the automaker had no formal response to the walkouts, which threaten to paralyze much of GM's light truck production, the automaker's biggest source of profits.
The Janesville plant builds GM's popular Chevrolet Tahoe, Suburban and GMC Yukon sport utility vehicles. The Indianapolis plant supplies doors, fenders, hoods and other sheet-metal stampings to nine of the automaker's North American truck assembly plants.
All of GM's truck-related plants have been working heavy overtime in recent months, and the increasing workload has put a strain on workers.
UAW President Stephen Yokich had raised the threat of local strikes Monday after intense negotiations over the weekend failed to produce an agreement. He also chided GM for a lack of progress in local negotiations at individual plants.
He said the expiration of GM's national contract covering 215,000 UAW workers Sunday meant that local units were free to strike to get local issues resolved.
Union officials also said there could be other local walkouts in the near future.
"I'm the one who called this strike," Ron Gettelfinger, UAW regional director, said of the Indianapolis walkout. He added that the action was aimed solely at resolving local issues, which he refused to identify.
In Janesville, UAW Local 95 said in a statement that it, too, struck over local issues because 44 bargaining sessions failed to produce an agreement with the automaker.
Only a handful of GM's 123 local units have signed new local contracts with the automaker. The pacts typically cover items like work rules, staffing levels and health and safety standards, while the national agreement covers wages, benefits, job security and other broad issues.
Bargainers in the national talks reconvened at GM's headquarters here Tuesday after a day off Monday. Still on the table is the future of 12 U.S. parts plants that GM considers uncompetitive, the company's top components executive confirmed Tuesday.
J.T. Battenberg, president of GM's Delphi Automotive Systems division, told reporters at an automotive supplier conference here that none of the 12 factories have improved their performance enough in recent months to be dropped from the company's list of troubled facilities.
GM has refused to identify the plants, but the list includes a door hinge plant in Flint, Mich., and an interior trim plant in Livonia, Mich., that the automaker intends to sell. Together, the plants employ 2,100 UAW members.
The automaker wants to exclude several of the plants from the union's demand that it guarantee employment for 95 percent of its UAW workforce over the next three years.
Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp. have already granted such guarantees, but GM, the least efficient of Detroit's Big Three automakers, wants changes to the pattern that allow it to cut costs.
The strikes mark a major departure in Yokich's bargaining strategy, which until last week had been marked by unusual conciliation and virtually no strike threats.
The walkouts could help pressure GM into a tentative national agreement before Saturday, when the UAW's 250-member National GM Council is scheduled to meet in Detroit. The council, made up of plant-level leaders, would have to approve a plant.
The walkouts also came less than a week after Canadian Auto Workers members returned to work following a three-week strike over the issues of job security and outsourcing, or the shifting of work to outside contractors.
GM also said Tuesday that 22,913 workers in its U.S. assembly, powertrain and stamping operations remained idle because of lingering shortages of Canadian-made parts.
The automaker said it laid off an additional 465 workers at its Lordstown, Ohio, metal stamping plant Tuesday, one of four such plants still affected by shortages.
