The United Auto Workers union unleashed two local strikes against General Motors Corp.'s truck operations Tuesday night in a bid to increase pressure for new national and local labor agreements.
About 2,750 members of UAW Local 23 walked off the job at GM's Indianapolis metal stamping plant at about 6 p.m. EST, followed an hour later by 4,800 workers who struck the automaker's Janesville, Wis., truck assembly plant.
The strikes threaten to paralyze much of GM's light truck production, the automaker's biggest source of profits.
The Janesville plant builds GM's popular Chevrolet Tahoe, Suburban and GMC Yukon sport utility vehicles. The Indianapolis plant supplies doors, fenders, hoods and other sheet-metal stampings to nine North American truck assembly plants.
GM spokesman Jerry Holmes said the automaker had no formal response to the walkouts, but said negotiations were continuing Tuesday night.
UAW President Stephen Yokich raised the threat of local strikes on Monday after intense negotiations over the weekend failed to produce an agreement. He also chided GM for a lack of progress in local negotiations at individual plants.
The expiration of the GM's national contract covering 215,000 UAW workers on Sunday meant that UAW locals were free to resort to strikes to get local issues resolved, Yokich said.
"I'm the one who called this strike," UAW regional director Ron Gettelfinger said of the Indianapolis strike. He added that the walkout was aimed solely at resolving local issues, which he refused to identify.
All of GM's truck-related plants heen working heavy overtime in recent months, which has put a strain on workers.
"General Motors are hard people to deal with," said Henry Summerville, a worker at the plant. "They don't like to give up anything."
In Janesville, UAW Local 95 said in a statement that it also struck over local issues because 44 bargaining sessions failed to produce an agreement.
Only a handful of GM's 123 locals have signed new local contracts with the automaker. The pacts typically cover items like work rules, staffing levels and health and safety standards, while the national agreement covers wages, benefits, job security and other broad issues.
Bargainers in the national talks reconvened at GM's headquarters here Tuesday after a day off Monday.
Still on the table in the talks is the future of 12 U.S. parts plants that GM considers uncompetitive, the company's top components executive confirmed Tuesday.
"We're talking about them in negotiations and I really don't want to talk about any labor issues at this time," said J.T. Battenberg, president of GM's Delphi Automotive Systems division.
Battenberg told reporters at an automotive supplier conference here that none of the 12 factories have improved their performance enough in recent months to be dropped from the company's list of troubled facilities.
GM has refused to identify the plants, but the list includes a door hinge and hardware plant in Flint, Mich., and an interior trim plant in Livonia, Mich., that the automaker intends to sell. Together, the plants employ 2,100 people.
The automaker wants to exclude several of the plants from the union's demand for employment guarantees. The UAW wants GM to follow a pattern set by Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp. and guarantee jobs for 95 percent of its UAW work force over the next three years.
The strikes mark a major departure in Yokich's bargaining strategy, which until last week had been marked by unusual conciliation and virtually no threats of strikes.
The walkouts could help pressure GM into a tentative national agreement before Saturday, when the UAW's National GM Council is scheduled to meet in Detroit. The 250-member council is made up of the top local officials from each GM local and plant bargaining unit.
Earlier Tuesday in New York, GM Chairman Jack Smith told reporters that he hoped there would be no local strikes.
The walkouts also came less than a week after Canadian Auto Workers members returned to work following a three-week strike over the issues of job security and outsourcing, or the shifting of work to outside contractors.
GM said Tuesday that 22,913 workers in its U.S. assembly, powertrain and stamping operations remained idle because of lingering shortages of Canadian-made parts.
The automaker said it laid off an additional 465 workers at its Lordstown, Ohio, metal stamping plant Tuesday, one of four such plants affected.
