General Motors Corp.  has packed its new EV1 electric vehicle with exotic materials and sophisticated, unproven technology, but is taking a cautious approach to introducing it to the public.
GM officials said Tuesday they plan to offer the two-seat car only on three-year leases and will hold the customer's hand virtually every step of the way.
"Our total focus is to provide a hassle-free experience and comprehensive customer care," said Joseph Kennedy, vice president of sales and marketing for GM's Saturn unit, which will sell the EV1 under the GM nameplate.
The first modern production car designed from the ground up to be an electric vehicle, the EV1 will roll into Saturn dealerships sometime this fall in the Los Angeles, San Diego, Phoenix and Tucson, Ariz., areas. Colder climates would shorten the vehicles' already limited range, which is a maximum of 70 to 90 miles under ideal conditions, GM says.
California, which recently eased its 1998 mandate for electric vehicles, is expected to offer consumer incentives for the vehicle.
Depending on such incentives, monthly lease payments on the car will probably fall between $400 and $500, about the same as a $30,000 luxury car, GM officials said at a news briefing.
Customers will have to add another $50 a month or so to lease a 220-volt charging unit and pay to have it mounted in their garage. But the electricity to run the EV1 is a bargain -- about a penny a mile, versus gasoline costs of four to five cents a mile for an average normal car.
GM executives will not discuss production plans or sales targets for the vehicle and say they plan to let market dictate demand. But Kennedy said he expects the initial demand to outstrip supply due to the vehicle's novelty.
So far, about 1,000 people have called a toll-free telephone number, and dealers have taken names of 300 serious customers, including Tonight Show host Jay Leno, he said.
Customers who want performance won't be disappointed with the EV1. The whisper-quiet vehicle offers neck-snapping acceleration and sports-car like handling, although a heavy foot will quickly drain the battery, requiring a three- to four-hour recharge.
"We can keep up with a Nissan 300ZX from zero to 30" miles an hour, said Sean McNamara, marketing manager for GM's Advanced Technology Vehicles group.
The car's aerodynamic tear-drop shape, considerably narrower in the rear than in the front, slips through the wind easily and looks unlike anything else on the road.
GM could have built a spartan small boxy car but wanted its first electric vehicle to have some flair, said Robert Purcell, general manager of GM Advanced Technology Vehicles.
"This is the car that gets the market started," he said. "We wanted to put out a car that was very exciting so that people would fall in love with it."
The sporty configuration was aimed at highly educated customers with incomes of $125,000 a year who like high technology, GM said. The customers also likely own two other vehicles for longer trips or heavy hauling.
Saturn, which won't necessarily sell all future GM electric vehicles, plans to emphasise its customer-friendly sales practices more heavily for the EV1.
The decision to lease the vehicle was made in part to protect consumers from the inevitable march of technology. The automaker does not want EV1 customers to be stuck with obsolete cars in a few years, as personal computer owners often are.
At the end of the lease, GM is considering refitting the plastic and aluminum-bodied cars with newer technology and leasing them again, Purcell said.
The division also is training about 14 EV1 "product specialists" to handle sales of the vehicle at 26 designated dealerships in California and Arizona.
The specialists will come to a prospective customer's home, office, or elsewhere to explain the details of the car and the charging unit.
They'll work with the utility companies and arrange municipal permits for the installations, Kennedy said, adding that it will probably take about a week to set up a customer with a car and charger.
GM has invested $350 million in developing the EV1, which it does not expect to recoup through sales of the first generation vehicle, Purcell said. But the car does pioneer a wide range of exotic materials and new technology that could find its way to other GM vehicles.
Magnesium and other lightweight materials counteract the weight of batteries, and the cars have braking systems that transfer power back to the battery.
Despite the technology, the cars are largely hand-built at a Lansing, Mich., plant that produced the now-defunct Buick Reatta in the late 1980s. The operation employs 54 production workers but could be expanded quickly, GM officials said.
