Negotiators from General Motors Corp. and the United Auto Workers union appeared to be grinding toward a national contract deal Thursday as a local strike at a metal stamping plant threatened the automaker with As a marathon bargaining session that started at 10 a.m. EST Wednesday wore on, UAW officials said the two sides were closer to an agreement, but disagreements over job guarantees and plants on the selling block remained an obstacle.
UAW President Stephen Yokich was meeting in Detroit Thursday with members of the union's executive board, a body that would have to approve any deal. He was expected to return to the talks at GM's headquarters later Thursday.
"The feeling I had around here this morning was that there was some progress made last night," said UAW spokesman Reg McGhee. He declined to characterise the pace of talks Thursday afternoon.
Meanwhile, plant-level union officials said the number of workers idled by local strikes in Indianapolis and Janesville, Wis., could reach nearly 21,000 by Saturday.
GM truck plants in Moraine, Ohio, and Flint, Mich., were expected to run out of fenders, hoods, and other sheet-metal parts from GM's strikebound Indianapolis stamping plant by late Thursday night, officials at the plants said.
Flint employs about 2,000 workers and builds crew-cab and heavy-duty full-size pickup trucks, while Moraine employs about 4,000 and builds Chevrolet Blazer and GMC Jimmy compact sport/utility vehicles.
"B-crew will come in tonight and that'll be it," said George Dunaway, vice president of International Union of Electronics Workers Local 801 in Moraine. Although his union is not involved in the UAW talks, he supports the strikers in Indianapolis and Janesville, Wis.
"A lot of their concerns are our concerns," he said.
The remainder of the nine GM truck plants fed by Indianapolis are expected to halt operations soon. GM's Shreveport, La., compact pickup truck plant is scheduled to shut down during the day Friday, idling 2,500 workers, and the Linden, N.J. plant, which employs 2,500 and builds both compact pickups and sport/utility vehicles, will shut down Friday night.
GM's Fort Wayne plant laid off about 2,250 of its 2,600 workers as it halted production of GM's popular full-size Chevrolet and GMC pickup trucks Wednesday night. GM's other full-size truck plants in Pontiac, Mich., Oshawa, Ontario, and Silao, Mexico, are expected to follow close behind.
The strikes on Tuesday by 2,750 workers at Indianapolis and 4,800 workers in Janesville, Wis., have formed a two-pronged effort to squeeze GM's highly profitable light truck operations, increasing pressure for national and local settlements.
The shutdown of the Janesville plant alone could cost GM $50 million a week in pre-tax profits, adding to pressure on the automaker for national and local contract settlements, said David Healy, an auto analyst with Burnham Securities.
The southern Wisconsin factory is the sole source for GM's popular four-door, full-size Chevrolet Tahoe and Suburban and GMC Yukon sport utility vehicles. Analysts estimate that GM makes an average of $9,000 in variable profits on each of the trucks.
Meanwhile, other UAW locals sought to join the Indianapolis and Janesville walkouts. GM's Kokomo, Ind., electronics plant requested permission to send about 5,500 workers out on strike.
A walkout at that facility would be particularly damaging to GM because it supplies all of the automaker's North American assembly plants with engine electronics, audio systems and other parts.
The future of 12 domestic parts plants that GM considers uncompetitive remained a major sticking point in the negotiations. GM wants to exclude several of the plants from union demands that it guarantee employment for 95 percent of UAW workers over the next three years.
Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp. have already granted such guarantees, but GM, the least efficient of Detroit's Big Three automakers, wants changes to the pattern to allow it to cut costs..
GM's stock gained 50 cents to close at $53.875 on the New York Stock Exchange.
