Local strikes in Wisconsin and Indiana began taking their toll on the rest of General Motors Corp.'s truck production Wednesday, clouding the automaker's national contract talks with the United Auto Workers.
GM said the day-old walkout at its Indianapolis metal stamping plant would force it to halt production of full-size Chevrolet and GMC pickup trucks at its Fort Wayne, Ind., assembly plant Wednesday night.
The Indianapolis walkout on Tuesday has halted shipments of major steel body panels to nine of GM's 11 North American truck assembly plants, threatening to shut them down within days.
Analysts said Wednesday the cost of the strikes by 2,750 workers in Indianapolis and 4,800 workers at its Janesville, Wis., truck assembly plant could mount quickly, eating into profits from GM's lucrative light truck operations.
The shutdown of the Janesville plant alone could cost GM $50 million a week in pre-tax profits, said David Healy, an auto analyst with Burnham Securities.
The southern Wisconsin factory, which employs 4,800 workers, is the sole source for GM's popular four-door, full-size Chevrolet Tahoe and Suburban and GMC Yukon sport utility vehicles. Analysts estimate that GM makes about $9,000 in variable profits on each of the trucks.
In addition to Janesville and Fort Wayne, the Indianapolis plant supplies facilities in Pontiac and Flint, Mich.; Oshawa, Ontario; Linden, N.J.; Shreveport, La.; Moraine, Ohio, and Silao, Mexico.
"It really starts to add up quickly when you add in all of the other big C/K pickups they can lose," said Lehman Brothers analyst Joseph Phillippi.
The UAW strikes came as GM is still staggering from a three-week strike in Canada that curtailed production at a number of U.S. plants and may cost up to $450 million.
On Wednesday, GM said it still had 23,158 U.S. workers idled due to shortages of Canadian-made parts, but added that 3,200 workers at its Buick City assembly plant in Flint, Mich., were scheduled to return to work on Thursday.
No other UAW strikes had started on Wednesday, but UAW spokesman Reg McGhee said the union was not ruling out other walkouts. UAW President Stephen Yokich raised the threat of local strikes on Monday after GM's national contract covering 215,000 UAW workers expired.
"Steve made it clear that without a national contract, the locals are on their own," McGhee said, noting that they do not have to provide GM with the typical five-day notice before a walkout.
Some UAW officials speculated that other stamping and parts plants may also be struck, because they would force shutdowns at other facilities.
National contract talks continued Wednesday at GM's Detroit headquarters, but officials declined to say whether progress was being made.
"Talks are taking place at all levels," said GM spokesman Charles Licari.
Although UAW officials said the strikes were called over local issues, analysts said it was clear that the actions were aimed at pushing GM into a tentative national agreement.
That may take place before Saturday, when about 250 UAW leaders from GM plants across the nation are scheduled to meet in Detroit to discuss the status of the talks.
The future of 12 domestic parts plants that GM considers uncompetitive remained a major sticking point in the negotiations Wednesday. GM wants to exclude several of the plants from union demands that it guarantee employment for 95 percent of UAW workers over the next three years.
Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp. have already granted such guarantees, but GM, the least efficient of Detroit's Big Three automakers, wants changes to the pattern to allow it to cut costs.
GM has already put two of the 12 plants on the sale block -- a door hinge plant in Flint, Mich., and an interior trim plant in Livonia, Mich., that together employ 2,100 workers.
"We know the sale is going to happen. We're concerned about what's going to happen to us," said Whitey Hale, president of UAW Local 326 in Flint.
