Rested negotiators for General Motors Corp. and the United Auto Workers met again Friday to make another push for agreement on a new national labour contract before a Saturday meeting of UAW leaders.
The bargainers went home without a deal Thursday night after meeting for nearly 32 hours, although some officials said the talks were grinding toward a settlement.
The negotiating session on Wednesday and Thursday was the longest since talks began between the automaker and union in June. Bargainers typically meet for long periods just prior to a tentative agreement.
"They're working on trying to resolve the final issues," GM spokesman Gerry Holmes said Friday.
Talks "have snagged several times in the past week," said Harley Shaiken, a professor of labour relations at the University of California-Berkeley. "The pressure's been increased considerably by the two plants that are out on strike."
The toll from local strikes in Janesville, Wis., and Indianapolis continued to mount as more plants shut down because of parts shortages.
GM's compact sport/utility plant in Moraine, Ohio, halted operations late Thursday night, idling 4,000 workers.
Seven other GM truck plants were expected to run out of doors, fenders and hoods made at the Indianapolis plant in the next few days. They include plants in Flint and Pontiac, Mich.; Shreveport, La.; Linden, N.J., Oshawa, Ontario, and Silao, Mexico.
Some states may determine that the laid-off workers will not be eligible for state unemployment benefits because they were idled by a strike.
The strikes on Tuesday by 2,750 workers at Indianapolis and 4,800 workers in Janesville, Wis., have formed a two-pronged effort to squeeze GM's highly profitable light truck operations, increasing pressure for national and local settlements.
Meanwhile, other UAW locals sought to join the Indianapolis and Janesville walkouts. GM's Kokomo, Ind., electronics plant requested permission to send about 5,500 workers out on strike.
A walkout at that facility would be particularly damaging to GM because it supplies all of the automaker's North American assembly plants with engine electronics, audio systems and other parts.
The future of 12 domestic parts plants that GM considers uncompetitive remained a major sticking point in the negotiations. GM wants to exclude several of the plants from union demands that it guarantee employment for 95 percent of UAW workers over the next three years.
Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp. have already granted such guarantees, but GM, the least efficient of Detroit's Big Three automakers, wants changes to the pattern to allow it to cut costs.
