General Motors Corp. and the United Auto Workers union reached a tentative agreement early on Saturday for a new national labor contract, ending months of contentious bargaining.
"I think we said back in June that it would be a difficult negotiation, and I think we fulfilled that expectation," said a visibly tired GM Chairman Jack Smith. "Like any negotiation, you never get everything you want."
The three-year deal, which covers 215,000 hourly UAW workers, will not end local strikes that started on Tuesday night in Indiana and Wisconsin, where local grievances remain unresolved, UAW President Stephen Yokich said.
He also held out the threat of additional strikes among GM's 123 UAW locals that have not yet reached plant-specific agreements with the automaker.
"I would suggest that the company work hard and get their locals cleaned up," Yokich said. "Quite frankly the two that walked out have a heavy agenda on the table and they have a lot of work."
Yokich declined to say when the agreement would go to rank-and-file members for ratification, but about 250 local leaders from GM plants around the country would meet in Chicago on Wednesday Nov. 6 to consider the pact.
Instead of the traditional joint statements and handshakes between company and union officials, Yokich insisted that the two sides hold separate news conferences to announce the agreement shortly after 2 a.m. CST (0700 GMT) Saturday.
Details of the agreement were not released, but Gerald Knechtel, vice president of personnel, said it fits within the pattern that the UAW set at Ford Motor Co and Chrysler Corp.
Both of those companies agreed to guarantee jobs for 95 percent of their current hourly workforces.
"The UAW presented its objectives to us and we talked about the objectives that we had and we found a way to address those within the pattern that was so important to the UAW," he said, adding that the deal allows GM to make competitive improvements.
The talks were said to hit several snags over the past week over several plants that GM wanted to exclude from the 95 percent employment guarantees. Among those were a door hinge plant in Flint, Mich., and an interior trim plant in Livonia, Mich., that GM has put on the sale block.
The proposed exceptions to the pattern were aimed at allowing GM, the least efficient of Detroit's Big Three automakers, to cut costs and boost productivity.
Although all three of the companies pay a base wage of about $19 an hour, Ford and Chrysler buy more of their parts from lower-cost outside suppliers than GM does. GM wanted the ability to "outsource" more of its parts work.
Economic provisions of the GM contract were expected to follow those at Ford and Chrysler, offering workers a $2,000 bonus in the first year of the contract, followed by 3 percent increases in base wages during the second and third years.
The deal came as GM's production losses due to strikes at a metal stamping plant in Indianapolis and a truck plant in Janesville, Wis., mounted on Friday.
By late Friday, more than 19,000 workers at seven plants were idled, including 2,750 strikers in Indianapolis and 4,800 in Janesville.
