Strike-fueled production losses mounted for General Motors Corp. Friday as the United Auto Workers signaled a snag in labor contract talks by canceling a Saturday meeting of plant-level leaders here.
The UAW said its 250-member National GM Council was now scheduled to meet Wednesday, Nov. 6, in Chicago if the union reaches a tentative agreement covering 215,000 GM workers in the next few days.
Although GM officials declined to rule out an agreement on Friday, the UAW's move was viewed as a negative sign for the talks because it buys more time. The council, made up of local leaders from across the country, must approve any contract deal.
Meanwhile, pressure from local strikes in Indiana and Wisconsin mounted Friday as the number of workers idled by the walkouts exceeded 19,000.
In a two-pronged effort to deprive GM of profits from its light truck operations, 2,750 workers walked off the job at the company's Indianapolis metal stamping plant and 4,809 struck the Janesville, Wis., truck assembly plant Tuesday.
The Indianapolis plant feeds fenders, doors, hoods and other major body panels to nine of GM's 11 North American light truck plants, five of which are now idle, including Janesville.
GM's Shreveport, La., compact pickup truck plant shut down Friday, idling 2,400 workers, while GM's Linden, N.J., plant, which employs about 2,500 workers, was expected to run out of parts Friday night. Linden produces Chevrolet and GMC compact pickups and sport utility vehicles.
About 3,500 workers were idled at GM's Moraine, Ohio, compact sport utility vehicle plant Thursday night, while 2,250 workers were laid off at GM's Fort Wayne, Ind., full-size pickup truck assembly plant on Wednesday night.
In addition, 900 workers who build V-8 engines for trucks assembled in Janesville and Fort Wayne were idled on Friday.
Michael Ward, an auto analyst at Paine Webber, said the Janesville, Fort Wayne and Moraine shutdowns alone will cost GM $10 million a day in after-tax lost profits.
"We're looking at $10 million a day right now, and that could easily expand to $20 million by Monday," Ward said.
GM's board of directors on Monday is expected to delay an anticipated increase in the company's quarterly common stock dividend if a deal is not reached soon. The company's quarterly payout rate of 40 cents a share is unchanged since February, despite strong profits.
Rewarding shareholders could jeopardize the talks, especially when GM is seeking concessions that would allow it to cut costs and sell off unprofitable plants, said Dean Witter Reynolds auto analyst Ronald Glantz.
"Unless a settlement is reached by Sunday, the board is not going to throw gasoline into the fire," Glantz said.
Full-size pickup truck plants in Flint and Pontiac, Mich., Oshawa, Ontario could run out of parts within the next several days, while a GM truck plant in Silao, Mexico, was believed to have a greater supply of parts on hand.
Layoffs from the UAW strikes are increasing as GM's U.S. car operations are still staggering from the effects of the three-week Canadian Auto Workers strike, which ended Oct. 23 and is estimated to cost the automaker $350 million to $375 million.
GM said it still had 18,958 workers idled by continuing shortages of Canadian-made parts at six car assembly plants, six engine and transmission plants and four metal stamping facilities.
The two sides have been haggling over the total number of hourly workers that GM will guarantee to maintain over the next three years.
Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp. have agreed to guarantee jobs for 95 percent of their current hourly workforces, but GM wants to exclude several parts plants from the guarantees.
GM, the least efficient of Detroit's Big Three, wants changes to the pattern to allow it to cut costs and shift more parts work to outside suppliers.
GM is expected to match the Ford and Chrysler wage package, which calls for a $2,000 bonus in the first year, and 3 percent base wage increases in the second and third years.
