General Motors Corp. and the United Auto Workers union reached a tentative deal for a job-preserving labour contract early Saturday, but the accord failed to halt costly local strikes in Wisconsin and Indiana.
The three-year national agreement, which covers wages, benefits and job security for GM's 215,000 hourly UAW workers, did little to resolve contentious plant-specific issues that remain unresolved at most of the carmaker's 123 locals.
UAW President Stephen Yokich, announcing the pact at a 2 a.m. EST (0700 GMT) news conference, held out the threat of "We can't tell you what's going to happen in the other locals," Yokich said. "I would suggest that the company work very hard and get their locals cleaned up."
President Clinton applauded the agreement. "I am very hopeful that the tentative agreement will be ratified, and that the outstanding local issues will quickly be resolved so that everyone can get back to work," he said.
On Tuesday night, about 2,750 workers walked off the job at GM's Indianapolis metal stamping plant and 4,800 struck the company's Janesville, Wisconsin, truck assembly plant over local grievances, including demands for more workers to deal with increasing workloads.
The strike at Indianapolis cut off supplies of fenders, hoods, roofs and other steel body panels to nine GM North American truck plants. It threatened to paralyse much of GM's highly profitable light truck operations by early next week.
On Saturday, more than 19,000 workers at seven GM assembly and components plants were idled because of the two strikes. That comes on top of 18,958 U.S. workers still on layoff status because of lingering parts shortages from a three-week Canadian Auto Workers strike that ended Oct. 23.
Analysts estimate the UAW-related shutdowns will cost the carmaker $20 million a day in lost profits, on top of a $350 million loss from the Canadian walkout.
But the national UAW accord Saturday appeared to push negotiations in Janesville and Indianapolis forward. "I think they've intensified their talks a bit," said an official at UAW Local 95 in Janesville.
UAW Local 292 officials also reported progress in local talks at GM's 5,500-employee Delco Electronics plant in Kokomo, Indiana. On Thursday, the unit sought Yokich's permission to join the other locals on strike.
The UAW-GM national agreement will be submitted to rank-and-file members for ratification after about 250 UAW leaders meet to consider the pact on Wednesday in Chicago.
The deal was unanimously approved by the union's national GM bargaining council.
Details of the pact were not released Saturday, but Gerald Knechtel, GM vice president of personnel, said it fits within the pattern that the UAW set at Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp.
Both of those companies agreed to guarantee jobs for 95 percent of their current hourly workforces and will give workers a $2,000 bonus in the first year of the contract, followed by three percent raises in the second and third years of the contract.
Knechtel said GM will depend on its UAW workforce to gain efficiencies over the next three years. The company had been seeking the flexibility to shift more work to lower-cost outside suppliers.
"We feel we have the ability to make competitive improvements in the company. We will need to do that with the UAW," he said.
In a sign that contentious issues remain, company and union officials did not announce the pact in a joint news conference with the traditional handshakes and smiles. Instead, they held made grim-faced separate statements to reporters gathered at GM's Detroit headquarters building.
"I think we said back in June that it would be a difficult negotiation, and I think we fulfilled that expectation," said a visibly tired GM Chairman Jack Smith. "Like any negotiation, you never get everything you want."
The talks were said to hit several snags during the past week over plants that GM wanted to exclude from the 95 percent employment guarantees. Among those were a door hinge plant in Flint, Michigan, and an interior trim plant in Livonia, Michigan, that the company has put on the sale block.
The proposed exceptions to the pattern were aimed at allowing GM, the least efficient of Detroit's Big Three automakers, to cut costs and boost productivity.
Although all three of the companies pay a base wage of about $19 an hour, Ford and Chrysler buy more of their parts from lower-cost outside suppliers than GM does.
