Labor negotiations between General Motors Corp. and the United Auto Workers went around the clock into early Saturday morning as pressure from strike-related production losses mounted on the world's largest car maker.
Bargainers at GM's world headquarters were said to be haggling over a list of plants that GM wants to exclude from employment guarantees in the three-year national contract covering 215,000 hourly workers.
Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp. have already agreed to guarantee jobs for 95 percent of their current hourly work forces, but GM wants to exclude several parts plants from the guarantees, including a door hinge plant in Flint, Mich., and an interior trim plant in Livonia, Mich., now on the sale block.
"It ain't done yet," one union negotiator at GM's Detroit headquarters said on Friday night.
GM spokesman Gerry Holmes declined to rule out a settlement early on Saturday, but would not characterize the progress of the discussions.
Bargainers struggled for nearly 45 hours from Wednesday through Friday over the proposed exceptions to the pattern, which was aimed at allowing GM, the least efficient of Detroit's Big Three automakers, to cut costs and boost productivity.
Although all three of the companies pay a base wage of about $19 an hour, Ford and Chrysler buy more of their parts from lower-cost outside suppliers than GM does.
On Friday, the UAW signaled that the talks had hit a snag when it canceled a Saturday meeting of plant-level leaders here.
The UAW said its 250-member National GM Council is now scheduled to meet on Wednesday, Nov. 6, in Chicago if the union reaches a tentative agreement in the next few days. The cancellation was viewed as a negative sign for a quick settlement because it buys significantly more time to craft a deal.
Meanwhile, pressure from local strikes in Indiana and Wisconsin mounted early Saturday as the number of workers idled by the walkouts exceeded 19,000.
By late in the evening, workers at seven plants were idled, including 2,750 strikers in Indianapolis and 4,800 in Janesville, Wis.
The Indianapolis plant feeds fenders, doors, hoods and other steel body panels to nine of GM's 11 North American light truck plants, including Janesville.
GM's Shreveport, La., compact pickup truck plant also shut down Friday, idling 2,400 workers, while GM's Linden, N.J., plant, which employs about 2,500 workers, was expected to run out of parts Friday night. Linden produces Chevrolet and GMC compact pickups and sport utility vehicles.
About 3,500 workers were idled at GM's Moraine, Ohio, compact sport utility vehicle plant Thursday night, while 2,250 workers were laid off at GM's Fort Wayne, Ind., full-size pickup truck assembly plant on Wednesday night.
In addition, 900 workers who build V-8 engines for trucks assembled in Janesville and Fort Wayne were idled on Friday.
Michael Ward, an auto analyst at Paine Webber, said the Janesville, Fort Wayne and Moraine shutdowns alone will cost GM $10 million a day in after-tax lost profits.
"We're looking at $10 million a day right now, and that could easily expand to $20 million by Monday," Ward said.
Full-size pickup truck plants in Flint and Pontiac, Mich., and Oshawa, Ontario, could run out of parts within the next several days, while a GM truck plant in Silao, Mexico, was believed to have a greater supply of parts on hand.
Layoffs from the UAW strikes were increasing as GM's U.S. car operations are still staggering from the effects of the three-week Canadian Auto Workers strike, which ended Oct. 23.
GM said it still had 18,958 workers idled by continuing shortages of Canadian-made parts at six car assembly plants, six engine and transmission plants and four metal stamping facilities. Lost profits associated with the Canadian walkout are estimated at more than $350 million.
