Investors pushed General Motors Corp. shares higher Monday, a sign that Wall Street is pleased that the auto giant signed a new national labour agreement that allows it to shed some workers.
GM's shares traded up $1.50 at $55.50 in late trading on the New York Stock Exchange after the company signed the tentative agreement with the United Auto Workers union early Saturday morning.
"The Wall Street reaction reflects some belief that GM didn't cave in," said Burnham Securities auto analyst David Healy. "GM appears to have retained its right to manage and indulge in some outsourcing."
Analysts said the pact will allow GM to reduce its 215,000-member hourly work force by 30,000 or more during the next three years through normal retirements.
The pact contains a nominal guarantee that GM maintain employment of about 95 percent of its current work force -- a pattern set in the Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp. agreements -- but it also allows GM to exit some unprofitable parts businesses and sell certain components plants.
David Cole, director of the University of Michigan's Office for the Study of Automotive Transportation, said he believes the pact will help GM to to boost efficiency.
"GM can use attrition to shrink its work force and take advantage of productivity improvements," Cole said. "The UAW has as much interest in a competitive General Motors as the shareholders do."
But the positive reaction was tempered by a continuing strike at GM's Janesville, Wis., truck assembly plant, where 4,809 workers walked off the job Oct. 29 over demands for more jobs.
The plant makes the Chevrolet Tahoe, Suburban and GMC Yukon sport/utilities, which are among GM's most popular -- and most profitable -- vehicles. UAW Local 95 wants GM to hire more workers in Janesville to reduce the strain of heavy overtime and an increasing workload.
On Sunday, members of UAW Local 23 returned to work at a key metal stamping plant in Indianapolis after ratifying a settlement on a new local contract.
The union members had struck for five days, shutting off shipments of fenders, doors, hoods and other steel body panels to nine of GM's 11 North American light truck assembly plants.
By the weekend, strike-caused parts shortages forced GM to shut down factories in Fort Wayne, Ind., Shreveport, La., Moraine, Ohio, and Linden, N.J.
GM said the Fort Wayne and Moraine plants are scheduled to resume normal operations Tuesday, while Shreveport and Linden will be running again by Thursday.
Last week, the UAW walkouts and lingering parts shortages from last month's Canadian Auto Workers strike had idled nearly 38,000 GM workers in the United States.
GM did not say how many workers were still idle, but added that four car plants stricken by the CAW strike will be back to full production by Tuesday, including Detroit; Lordstown, Ohio; and Lake Orion and Lansing, Mich.
Healy estimated that between the two walkouts, GM's production losses will total 175,000 cars and trucks, which will slash the company's fourth-quarter profits by $600 million to $650 million.
In contrast to the tense atmosphere that continues to surround the GM labour situation, UAW President Stephen Yokich and Chrysler Chairman Robert Eaton signed a new three-year contract in an historic ceremony at the union's Detroit headquarters.
The signing marked the first time that a Big Three automaker has signed a new labour accord at the UAW's Solidarity House.
Yokich and Eaton were in a jovial mood as they signed the pact -- a stark contrast to the separate, grim-faced news conferences where the UAW and GM announced their deal early Saturday morning.
Yokich told reporters the Chrysler signing "shows that this company recognises the union and wants to work with them."
Meanwhile, GM declared an unchanged quarterly dividend of 40 cents a share on its $1-2/3 par value common stock.
Some analysts had expected GM's board of directors to increase the annual payout to $2 a share from $1.60 because of its growing cash pile. But Lehman Brothers analyst Joseph Phillippi said the board did not want to disrupt the UAW pact's ratification by giving more cash to shareholders.
