Workers at a key General Motors Corp. metal stamping plant in Indianapolis began returning to work on Sunday after ratifying a deal to end a five-day strike that threatened to paralyze most of the automaker's light truck production.
But a similar settlement eluded negotiators at GM's Janesville, Wis., truck assembly plant, where a strike over local issues by 4,800 workers entered its sixth day. Janesville, which builds GM's popular Chevrolet Tahoe, Suburban and GMC Yukon sport/utility vehicles, is one of the automaker's most profitable factories.
The deal for 2,750 workers in Indianapolis, which came hours after GM and the UAW announced a tentative agreement for a new national labor contract early Saturday morning, calls for the hiring of 200 new workers at the plant.
Due to strong demand for GM's trucks, the plant has been working heavy overtime, which has put a strain on workers, causing them to seek relief.
GM also dropped its plans to change job classifications and seniority rules for skilled trades workers and will pay thousands of dollars to workers to settle grievances.
"I regret we did have to call a strike here," said UAW regional director Ron Gettlefinger in Indianapolis. "I'm hoping other General Motors plants I'm responsible for will heed the seriousness of local agreements."
The Indianapolis strike shut off shipments of fenders, doors,hoods and other steel body panels to nine of GM's North American light truck assembly plants. By the weekend, strike-caused parts shortages forced GM to shut down factories in Fort Wayne, Ind., Shreveport, La., Moraine, Ohio and Linden, N.J.
Including the strikers at Janesville and Indianapolis, the UAW walkouts had idled over 19,000 workers, in addition to 18,958 GM workers still on layoff because of lingering parts shortages from a three-week Canadian Auto Workers strike, which ended Oct. 23.
UAW officials said stamping operations would resume Sunday night, with the plant back to full production by Monday. But that may not prove soon enough to keep other plants from running out of parts, including GM's full-size pickup truck plant in Pontiac, Mich., which employs nearly 6,000 people.
Other plants that receive parts from Indianapolis are located in Flint, Mich.; Oshawa, Ontario; and Silao, Mexico.
On Saturday, UAW President Stephen Yokich put GM on notice that some of the automaker's GM's 123 other locals may go on strike over lack of progress in local negotiations.
A clearer picture of the UAW-GM national agreement, which covers some 215,000 U.S. hourly workers, began to emerge Sunday. The contract meets the pattern set by Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp. on most major issues, including a guarantee that GM will maintain jobs for 95 percent of its current hourly workforce.
But the pact contains exceptions that will allow GM to sell some unprofitable parts plants, including a door hinge plant in Flint, Mich., and an interior trim plant in Livonia, Mich.
The pact also is believed to contain complicated formulas that allow GM to shrink employment in certain businesses as workers retire.
"On the surface, it looks as though as it ought to be viewed by the investor community in a positive light." said Lehman Brothers auto analyst Joseph Phillippi. "GM's primary focus was to gain the ability to ride the attrition curve."
On economics, the pact gives wokers a $2,000 bonus in the first year of the contract, followed by 2 percent raises in the second and third years of the contract. It also provides generous gains in pension benefits, including the elimination of a cap on outside earnings for retirees, which is viewed as a major incentive for older workers to leave the company.
Like Ford and Chrysler, GM will be able to trim jobs when it makes productivity improvements, and can pay workers in new auto parts businesses that it enters a lower wage than the standard $19 an hour paid by the Big Three.
GM has been trying to shed parts businesses as it tries to catch up to Chrysler's and Ford's efficiency levels. But the contract probably will not allow GM to shrink employment as much as it would like, said Eugene Jennings, a retired Michigan State University professor of management who is close to Detroit's Big Three automakers.
"GM is not going to get the competitive lift from labor in this contract," he said.
