General Motors Corp. Tuesday  reached a tentative deal to end a week-long strike at its truck plant in Janesville, Wis., the last of a recent wave of local walkouts against the automaker.
About 4,809 members of United Auto Workers Local 95 were scheduled to vote on the tentative local labor agreement at a 1 p.m. EST Wednesday meeting.
Production of Chevrolet Tahoe and Suburban and GMC Yukon full-size sport-utility vehicles at the Janesvillle plant could resume shortly thereafter if the deal is ratified, said GM spokesman Thomas Beaman. The trucks are among GM's most popular and profitable vehicles.
The resumption would mean that by Thursday, all of GM's North American car and truck operations would be operating normally for the first time since Oct. 3, when about 26,000 members of the Canadian Auto Workers went on strike.
GM was still reeling from the Canadian strike when workers at Janesville and GM's Indianapolis metal stamping plant walked off the job last week. By last weekend, the auto giant had nearly 40,000 U.S. workers idled by the two local UAW strikes and lingering Canadian parts shortages.
However, the UAW has threatened GM with additional local walkouts if the automaker drags its feet in plant-specific negotiations with the rest of its 123 locals.
Neither GM nor officials for Local 95 would discuss details of the agreement. The union's members walked off the job Oct. 29 over plant-specific issues, including demands for more workers to ease the burdens of heavy overtime and an increasing production rate.
"We're confident we've got a fair and equitable agreement for our membership," said Buford Beleau, a spokesman for Local 95 in Janesville. "We just want to get back to work building trucks and provide for our families, like everybody else."
To settle the Indianapolis strike, GM agreed to hire 200 more workers, pay thousands of dollars in back pay to workers and drop plans to change job classifications for skilled trades workers.
GM truck plants in Shreveport, La., and Linden, N.J., which were shut down by a lack of fenders, doors, and other steel body panels from Indianapolis, will be back to their normal work schedules by Thursday.
But the automaker's Wentzville, Mo., plants which halted one of two production shifts because of the Canadian strike, will keep 1,100 workers on temporary layoff for nearly two more weeks. The extended layoff is aimed at reducing dealer inventories of GM's all-new, full-size vans, Beaman said.
Despite an all-new design for 1997 and a complete renovation of the Wentzville factory, he said the new Chevrolet Express and GMC Savana were falling victim to lower demand for all full-size vans.
Also on Wednesday, about 250 UAW local leaders from plants around the country will meet in Chicago to review details of the union's tentative, three year national contract with GM. They must approve the pact to send it to GM's 215,000 U.S. hourly workers for ratification.
The contract is expected to give GM flexibility to exit some unprofitable parts businesses and reduce its workforce through attrition and early retirements, while nominally guaranteeing that the automaker will maintain hourly employment at 95 percent of its current level.
The 95 percent job guarantee was a cornerstone of the UAW's contracts with Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp., which also offered workers a $2,000 bonus in the first year of the pact, follwed by 3 percent raises in the second and third years.
