General Motors Corp. can shrink its workforce under a United Auto Workers pact that differs significantly from contracts with Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp., the union disclosed Wednesday.
But the three-year GM agreement also contains tougher restrictions on using outside companies for parts, aimed at curbing job losses to lower-cost outside suppliers.
Following a unanimous approval by about 250 plant-level leaders gathered here Wednesday, GM's 215,000 rank-and-file UAW members are expected to ratify the pact by Nov. 17.
Despite the differences, most local officials said they were pleased with the pact.
"This agreement definitely sells itself," said Duane Zuckschwerdt, president of UAW Local 659 in Flint, Mich. "I don't foresee a problem with ratification."
In documents distributed to the leaders, the union said the contract calls for GM to follow Ford and Chrysler in maintaining employment at 95 percent of current levels, but contains certain key exceptions.
The pact allows GM to halt replacements of retiring workers when it makes efficiency gains in its factories -- a point that will be especially helpful to the automaker as it introduces new cars and trucks that can be built with fewer workers over the next several years.
Another provision allows GM to adjust workforces in plants and business lines located in larger geographic groupings than at Ford and Chrysler.
For example, GM's 13 factories in Flint, Mich., which employ nearly 28,000 workers, constitute a single grouping. As such, GM does not have to guarantee 95 percent of the jobs in each facility, only 95 percent of the total, which would allow the automaker to exit certain uncompetitive businesses.
Some plants in the Flint grouping remain at risk. GM's V-8 engine plant there is still scheduled to close in the third quarter of 1999, and the contract did not address the future of the Buick City assembly plant, which has been assigned no new product beyond the 1999 model year.
UAW officials say they hope to persuade GM to commit to new products to those plants.
GM wants to exit such labor-intensive businesses such as "cut-and-sew" interior trim operations because it maintains it cannot be competitive at base wage rates that will reach $21.59 an hour for the average assembly and parts worker by the end of the contract. Including benefits, GM's hourly labor costs exceed $43 per worker.
GM is currently negotiating to sell an interior trim plant in Livonia, Mich., and a door hinge plant in Flint, but UAW Vice President Richard Shoemaker said the contract gives no consent to the sale and does not exclude any other plants.
"We have not agreed they can sell those plants," he said. "If they do sell them, there isn't any question that they're covered by the GM national agreement."
However, Jim Macbride, a UAW international representative, warned that Livonia is among several plants that may wage local strikes against GM. "There's going to be a line in the sand drawn somewhere," he said.
Workers at GM's Janesville, Wis., truck plant began returning to work on Wednesday after a ratifying a deal to end a week-long strike. Most of GM's 123 locals are still in contentious negotiations over local agreements.
To help cushion the blow for workers that may be idled by productivity improvements and discontinued businesses, the UAW said GM has pledged to spend up to $3.75 billion to pay idled workers -- a $400 million increase over the company's committment under the previous contract.
Chrysler agreed to increase its income security committment by $200 million to a total of $551 million, while Ford did not add to its $1.156 billion income security fund.
GM faces more stringent outsourcing restrictions than Ford and Chrysler do. For example, when GM is contemplating a decision to put a product up for bid by outside firms, it must notify the union sooner in the process.
If GM selects an outside supplier to make the part, it must give the UAW at least 30 additional days to match the supplier bid. And the company also will now povide the union with a quarterly master list of parts made by outside firms.
Most other provisions in the agreement are identical to the Ford and Chrysler contracts. The pact calls for workers to receive $2,000 in the first year, followed by base wage increases of 3 percent in the second and third years.
The pact also includes a 13 percent increase in pension payments for workers under 62 with 30 years of service who retire during the agreement. Elimination of a cap on outside income earned by retirees is viewed as an incentive for older workers to retire.
