SkyePharma Plc, one of Britain's most unusual and fastest-growing drugs companies, said on Thursday 1998 would be "the magic year" for proving to investors that its unique growth strategy was paying off.
SkyePharma chairman and chief executive officer Ian Gowrie-Smith, the Australian entrepreneur behind the creation of Medeva Plc, promised that by then there would be "a lot of products filed" for approval, plus news on product launches and collaborations with drug giants.  
"1998 is the magic year. I can't wait for that, because it seems like a lifetime away," he said in a telephone interview.
Earlier SkyePharma, which has the distinction of being formed out of former tent hire company Black &amp; Edgington, announced a narrowing of pretax losses in the six months to July to 6.0 million stg from 10.0 million a year before.
The company is being built out of two key acquisitions, Krypton Ltd, which holds a portfolio of generic drugs to be launched in the U.S. as patents expire, and Jago Holdings AG of Switzerland, which specialises in controlled-release drug delivery.  
The U.S. generic drug market is expected to expand rapidly in the next few years, with new versions of tried and tested drugs much easier and cheaper to get on the market than entirely new products.
Gowrie-Smith said SkyePharma, which is 50 percent owned by its directors, has never been "an investment for short-term punters." The group's share price reached an all-time high of 96 pence in May and fell to a low for the year of 69 pence in July. It was trading at 73 1/2 pence, up 1 1/2, late afternoon.  
"There is a very mature base of investors," he said, adding he hoped to give them a near-term "steer" about the company with a flow of news about the progress of products. SkyePharma said it had two drugs in Phase III trials, with two more about to go in "in the near future." Clinical trials on a non-CFC asthma inhaler developed by Jago are due to start next year.
Gowrie-Smith said these developments were a "signpost", adding that current sales of drugs totalled $2.5 billion annually. The company is reformulating its drugs with Jago's Geomatrix technology which it believes makes them more effective and more easily absorbed by the body.  
The U.S. will dominate expansion plans over the next 18 months, with the workforce of SkyePharma's Brightstone marketing subsidiary gradually rising to 60 from 15. Brightstone is to target the U.S.'s rapidly-expanding managed healthcare sector.
SkyePharma had net cash of 24.3 million stg at the end of July, and Gowrie-Smith said it had no plans to return to the market for cash, unless it saw the opportunity of adding new technology to its existing portfolio.
--London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
