Daewoo Cars Ltd, the British motoring arm of Korean conglomerate Daewoo Corp, is considering transferring its unique UK marketing strategy to new markets.
In an interview with Reuters at this week's British International Motor Show in Birmingham, Daewoo UK Ltd managing director Tong Won Rhie said: "We are now reviewing the performance over the past two years, and the UK strategy has proved a good model."
He said adapting the policy of cutting out car dealerships by selling directly to customers, which has rapidly carved Daewoo a significant slice of Britain's highly competitive car market, "is a big possibility."
Daewoo already operates in 12 European countries and is preparing to launch its models, which are revamped versions of old General Motors Corp cars, in five more.
In its first nine months of operation in Britain last year Daewoo sold more than 13,000 cars. And by October 8 this year Rhie said it had already sold another 18,500 units.
"Our target when we launched was one percent market share in three years. We have already reached that," Rhie said.
Daewoo, which likes to advertise itself as breaking the mould of car supply in Britain, launched itself through cleverly targeted publicity, including surveys of customer likes and dislikes.
Rhie summed up customers' pet hates as "too much hassle" from salesmen and poor aftercare once the sale was complete.
"It is like a wedding, with the customer as the bride. Before, they say I love you, darling,' and all that, but after the marriage they forget," Rhie said.
Daewoo was the first company to offer three years' free servicing on all models and packed its cars with extras including airbags and mobile phones.
It has also led a revolution in all-inclusive pricing, a trend followed this week by GM unit Vauxhall Motors and by Porsche AG with its new Boxster sports car.
But Rhie said its U.K. strategy was not applicable to all markets, particularly those where the relationship between car producers and dealers is even more entrenched than in Britain.
"The UK market is more sophisticated than many other countries. The level of (consumer) awareness is higher."
Daewoo has encountered severe criticism from rivals, some of whom are alarmed at the speed with which it has penetrated the British market, where it has overtaken longer-established names like Saab, Mitsubishi and Hyundai.
Some question whether its pioneering servicing agreement with the Halfords superstore chain can provide the level of support for customers that it claims.
Daewoo's response to criticism that its current range of models is outmoded will be to launch three entirely new cars at the end of 1997. Rhie said one of these, known as the J Car, had been developed largely by its U.K. R&amp;D operation in the southern town of Worthing, which employs nearly 1,000 people.
Rhie declined to state Daewoo's next target for U.K. market share. "Quantity is very important but that is not the final goal," he said. "Our aim is a customer focus and how to continuously follow up customers' requirements."
