Shares in perennial bid favourite Zeneca Group Plc spiralled higher once more on Thursday, but analysts said it was on the thinnest of pretexts.
The stock touched a new record of 17.25 pounds during the morning session, with the rise once more triggered by speculation about the intentions of Swiss drugs giant Roche Holding AG. -- hotly tipped by takeover theorists as the only company rich enough to buy Zeneca.
News that Roche had named Franz Humer as chief operating officer combined with talk in the press that Humer is keen to ensure Roche does "not play second fiddle" to his old employer Glaxo Wellcome fuelled the latest rise, traders said.
With few people willing to sell Zeneca stock in case they miss out on any takeover, which could be worth $30 billion, the stock is being continually squeezed higher.
Societe Generale Strauss Turnbull (SGST) analyst Peter Laing said Zeneca shares, which have gained 37 percent this year, are now at "eye-popping" levels. SGST believes that a hostile bid is implausible at current valuations, and, without this, the stock's current rating is increasingly hard to justify.
"Is it valid for a stock which is only two-thirds a drug stock and the rest agro-chemicals and specialty chemicals to be on the same premium as Pfizer?" said Laing, who argued that the current gains are a story of "supply and demand."
Cash-rich Roche is widely believed to want to make a large acquisition, both to reassert its position as number one in Switzerland and to counteract the shortfall in new drugs coming through the industry's pipeline.
But some analysts and industry executives believe that Zeneca would not necessarily be its chosen target.
One industry source said he believed Roche would be much more interested in the U.S. company Schering-Plough Corp, which had a similar market capitalization to Zeneca. He said Roche had eyed Schering Plough on a number of occasions.
Schering-Plough would offer Roche a much stronger footing in the key U.S. market than Zeneca, and it would plug gaps in Roche's existing infrastrucure, offering the Swiss group badly-needed muscle in the non-hospital and U.S. over-the-counter sectors.
However, analysts said Zeneca had a more attractive pipeline of new drugs than Schering-Plough. And as the world's second-biggest cancer drug company after Bristol Myers Squibb Co it would also boost Roche in a key therapeutic area.
"I am quite sure that at the right price several companies would like to acquire Zeneca," said Panmure Gordon analyst Robin Gilbert, adding that good quality medium-to-large businesses like Zeneca and Schering-Plough are few and far between.
But Gilbert said Zeneca, which is "firing on all cylinders" since its split from chemicals group ICI Plc in 1993, is determined to remain independent.
"They believe they have a future as an independent company, and obviously they don't agree with the size philosphy of people like Glaxo Wellcome," Gilbert said.
