British household products group Reckitt &amp; Colman Plc pleased shareholders on Tuesday with a 152 million pound ($242 million) handout.
The group, known for brands ranging from Mr Sheen polish to Dettol disinfectant, announced a special Foreign Income Dividend (FID) of 35.65 pence per share, combined with plans to take one in every 20 of its shares out of circulation.
It said it hoped the novel scheme, which is funded from earnings made outside Britain, would avoid the tax problems which had hit other share buybacks recently.
News of the plan sent Reckitt shares soaring 18 1/2 pence to 735 by midmorning.
Reckitt said it was taking the opportunity of sharp falls in its debt to clean up its balance sheet.
The company splashed out $1 billion in 1994 to buy the U.S. household products group L&amp;F, maker of America's best-selling disinfectant, Lysol.
Since then sales of many of its non-core businesses, including the famous Colman's mustard brand, have brought in more than 430 million pounds.
"We have been looking for some time at ways to organise our balance sheet to enhance shareholder value," chief executive Vernon Sankey said in an interview.
Sankey said that the move was a clear signal to share markets that it had no major takeover target on the scale of L&amp;F in its sights.
But he added that it would not be embarrassed about going back to shareholders for cash if an opportunity came up to boost its ambition to become world number one in household products.
For the time being, Reckitt &amp; Colman is content to pursue its strategy of acquiring smaller business which fit in with its product range and extend its global reach.
These ambitions can be fulfilled from the group's strong cash generation of around 150 million pounds a year.
Sankey said the purchase of an insecticide business earlier this year with strength in China, the Middle East and Africa was a good example of this strategy and added that Reckitt had similar moves "up our sleeves." Asia, Latin America and "conceivably Africa" are favoured targets, he added.
Sankey said the choice of foreign income dividend, which is paid from the 92 percent of Reckitt's business now done outside Britain, was not influenced by Chancellor Kenneth Clarke's recent decision to restrict repayment of tax credits on special dividends which are linked to share consolidation.
"We have had to make no alterations because this is in line with the Chancellor's indications," Sankey said. "It doesn't use U.K. money, it uses money from outside the U.K." ($1=.6270 Pound)
