Ethical Holdings Plc, the UK-based drug delivery company listed on the U.S. Nasdaq index, said on Wednesday it expected research and development spending to continue to rise sharply as it targets the key U.S. market. The company said earlier that a 32 percent rise in R&amp;D spending to 10.4 million stg helped to push it into the red in the year ended August 31.
Ethical, which specialises in controlled oral release and skin patch drugs, posted a pre-tax loss of 11.0 million stg after a profit of 3.4 million a year before.  
The results were also affected by a one-off payment of 7.9 million stg for the repurchase of product rights from Drug Royalty Corp Inc.
In a telephone interview with Reuters, chairman and chief executive Geoffrey Guy said the sharp rise in R&amp;D spending was likely to continue over the next couple of years, "and probably at a greater rate".
The company has decided to target the U.S, where it has had a relatively low profile despite its Nasdaq listing.  
This involves taking a number of products, including a once-daily morphine tablet used by cancer patients and a Hormone Replacement Therapy (HRT) skin patch, through late-stage trials.
"We took the view that to get the major markets and royalties of the U.S. we have to go back into an investment phase," Guy said.
Ethical, which is based near Ely in Cambridgeshire, southern England, has 16 products on the market. It focuses on four core areas -- hormone replacement therapy (HRT), cardiovascular disease, asthma and analgesia. Its technology is useful for producing generic versions of off-patent drugs.  
As well as targeting the U.S, Guy said the company had consolidated its position in Europe during the year, acquired a South American skin patch company and put a foot in the potentially lucrative Japanese market through agreements on its morphine and cardiovascular drugs.
Guy said Ethical had strong hopes for its once-daily pain-killing morphine tablet, which offers advantages over current drugs which have to be taken twice a day.
He said the Ethical product is about 18 months behind its main competitor and estimated the global market for morphine tablets at $250 to $350 million a year "and still growing".  
Ethical has also applied for a U.K. licence for an HRT skin patch which it claims will eliminate monthly bleeding caused by existing treatments in some women.
--London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
