New evidence about British Biotech Plc's anti-cancer treatment Marimastat next week will provide important clues about its potential as a blockbuster product, analysts said on Friday.
British Biotech is using a meeting of the European Society of Medical Oncologists (ESMO) in Vienna to make five presentations, including Marimastat's effects in ovarian, colo-rectal, pancreatic and gastric cancer. It will issue a general update on Monday morning.
The Oxford-based group has become the bellwether for the increasingly crowded biotech field in the U.K, with sentiment towards Marimastat having a disproportionate impact on the sector.
Millions of pounds of investors' money has been placed on the bet that Marimastat will turn out to be Europe's first big-selling biotech product, with forecasts for annual sales ranging from a few hundred million dollars to up to $4 billion.
Monday's data comes from patients who continued to use the drug beyond the period necessary for completion of Phase II clinical trials. The company said this meant there would be a further six months of extra information.
Yamaichi International analyst Erling Refsum said he hoped to see the first hard evidence that patients were living longer as a result of taking Marimastat. Refsum said the surrogate marker data provided so far "is like the indicator board at the train station rather than the train actually coming."
In a note on the trials Lehman Brothers analyst Ian Smith, who will attend the ESCO meeting, said it might be possible to glean indications of the effect of Marimastat on patient survival in ovarian and pancreatic cancer.
There will also be interest in Marimastat's impact on gastric cancer, where little information has so far been available. And analysts are keen to see how serious the side effects caused by the drug are. The main problem reported so far is joint pain.
Yamaichi's Refsum said the results are "not definitive as to whether it works or not, but it is another indication as to whether it will sell or won't sell, and that is the bottom line." Lehman's Smith added that the results "won't prove Marimastat's efficacy but will raise the probabilities."
British Biotech will announce late-stage data on another key product, pancreatitis drug Lexipafant, on November 27.
Smith said that favourable news on both drugs could lift the group's share price to 300 pence by the end of the month from 230 at Friday's close. But Refsum is more sceptical about the potential impact of Marimastat and said 150 pence is "reasonable value" for the shares.
A British Biotech spokeswoman said Phase III Marimastat trials are likely to take two years to complete, meaning that the first results would not be available until 1998 at the earliest. But she said British Biotech would probably make academic presentations at conferences like ESMO from time to time to keep the market up to date.
Late stage trials on pancreatic cancer started in June, and trials in small-cell lung cancer, ovarian cancer, gastric cancer and a form of brain cancer are being set up, she added.
