Biotechnology star British Biotech Plc published fresh evidence on Monday that its cancer drug Marimastat worked, but analysts said there was still a long way to go before its potential could be confirmed.
British Biotech's shares ended the day 19 pence lower at 210 after its keenly-awaited announcement appeared to provide comfort for both bulls and bears on Marimastat.
Some predicted that Marimastat, a new class of cancer drug, could one day have sales of $4 billion a year and project British Biotech into the blue chip FT-SE 100 index.
Some analysts said presentations on the drug's effectiveness in gastric, colo-rectal, ovarian and pancreatic cancer to a science conference in Vienna were a rehash of data published in May, which sent the share price soaring to record levels.
"Those who were sceptical in May will remain sceptical and those who were bullish in May will remain bullish," said one.
Finance director James Noble told Reuters the company had been deliberately cautious about its statement on Monday, because it was "extremely concerned not to raise patients' hopes of the drug."
But he said there was "significant" evidence that Marimastat increased the chances of survival in cancer patients and added "in many ways I think it is the most impressive data since the company was founded."
The studies, based on 381 cancer patients who continued taking the drug after the 28-day period required for Phase II trials, confirmed Marimastat's ability to reduce the rate of rise of cancer antigens, one measure of how much cancer is present in the body.
"Those patients who continued to take it for more than 28 days lived ... significantly longer" than those who stopped taking it, Noble said.
One of the supporters of the drug, Greig Middleton analyst John Savin, agreed, saying that "on this information today we can say that ... 37 percent (of patients) had a real overall response which improved their survival chance significantly."
However, others expressed disappointment that British Biotech failed to provide more detailed analysis of side-effects caused by Marimastat. The Oxford-based group confirmed that it caused joint pain, mainly in the arm and shoulder, with around 30 percent of patients affected after three to five months.
Yamaichi International analyst Erling Refsum said the side effect profile would be crucial to Marimastat's potential.
"Drugs become top sellers because of their side effect profile rather than because of their efficacy profile," he said.
Noble played down concerns about side effects, saying "they are not a serious problem. They are reversible."
Patients who suffered badly could interrupt their treatment from time to time without adverse impact.
Analysts said credible estimates of exactly how big Marimastat will turn out to be would be impossible until final, Phase III trials were completed.
This means investors will have to wait until 1998 at the earliest for hard evidence about whether their optimism about Marimastat and British Biotech is well founded.
