British Biotech Plc published further evidence on Monday that its cancer drug Marimastat worked, but analysts said there was still a long way to go before its potential as a blockbuster product can be confirmed.
Shares in the company slipped back after its keenly-awaited announcement appeared to provide comfort for both bulls and bears on Marimastat, a new class of cancer drug which some predict could one day have sales of $4 billion a year.
The stock was down 14 1/2 pence at 217 pence in early afternoon trading. But analysts noted that it rose sharply last week ahead of publication, while the decision by Morgan Grenfell to sell a sizeable chunk of its holding on October 29 had mopped up much of the buying interest in advance.
Oxford-based British Biotech used a cancer conference in Vienna to make a number of presentations on trials of the drug in gastric, colo-rectal, ovarian and pancreatic cancer.
It said the studies, based on cancer patients who continued taking the drug after the 28-day period needed for Phase II trials, confirmed Marimastat's ability to reduce the rate of rise of cancer antigens, one measure of how much cancer is present in the body. It also provided evidence of succcess in gastric cancer, where a large scale trial is now underway.
Some analysts said there was little new in the statement, which was largely a confirmation of Phase II, or intermediate stage, data published in May.
"Those who were sceptical in May will remain sceptical and those who were bullish in May will remain bullish," said one analyst who asked not to be named.
Finance director James Noble said the company had been deliberately cautious in its comments to avoid raising false hopes among cancer sufferers. Nevertheless he told Reuters that "In many ways I think this is the most impressive data since the company was floated.
One of the bulls, Greig Middleton analyst John Savin, said the real news was hidden in presentations made by doctors at the Vienna conference. He said that despite the "mishmash" of data from the trials, which covered 381 patients, there was "very compelling" evidence that Marimastat had improved chances of survival.
"On this information today we can say that...37 percent (of patients) had a real overall response which improved their survival chance significantly," Savin said.
However, others expressed disappointment that British Biotech failed to provide more detailed analysis of side effects caused by Marimastat. British Bitoech confirmed that it caused joint pain, mainly in the arm and shoulder, with around 30 percent of patients affected after three to five months.
Yamaichi International analyst Erling Refsum said the side effect profile will be crucial to Marimastat's potential. "Drugs become top sellers because of their side effect profile rather than because of their efficacy profile," he said.
Noble played down concerns about side effects, saying "they are not a serious problem. They are reversible." He said patients who suffer badly will be able to interrupt their treatment from time to time without any adverse impact.
Analysts pointed out that no real estimate of just how big Marimastat will be could be made until Phase III trials were completed. This means investors will have to wait until 1998 at the very earliest for hard evidence that their optimism about Marimastat and British Biotech is well founded.
-- London Newsroom +44 71 542 7717
