British Petroleum Co Plc (BP) extolled the virtues of "self help" on Tuesday as it reported its best-ever third quarter earnings despite pressure on profit margins in some key businesses.
Third-quarter net earnings jumped by 22 percent to 650 million pounds ($1.07 billion), towards the top end of forecasts, while in the first nine months of the year they were up 28 percent to a record 1.93 billion pounds.
BP said strong oil prices, which have recently been at their highest levels since the 1991 Gulf War at around $22 a barrel, boosted earnings by between $400 million-$500 million in the third quarter.
But it added that the gains were more than offset by weaker profit margins in refining, marketing and chemicals, which accounted for about 27 percent of group net earnings.
Group chief executive John Browne said BP was enjoying the benefits of a raft of cost-cutting and efficiency drives, which were adding $150 million to profit every quarter.
"What we see here has not come about as a result of high oil prices, it has come about as a result of self help," he said.
The market took the results calmly, with BP shares adding two pence to close at 640.5 pence after touching a high of 647p. However, trading in BP shares on the options market was active.
"People are still speculating on a fairly sharp rise in BP shares," one options specialist said.
"In a sense BP have spoilt us," said Societe Generale Strauss Turnbull analyst Irene Himona.
"We've got used to them coming out with a good set of numbers at the top of the range, and unfortunately with (rival) Shell it is the other way around."
BP's results contrasted with disappointment last week at third-quarter figures from rival Royal Dutch/Shell Group, where profits fell on the back of low refining margins and a weak chemicals market.
BP also emphasised the relative stability in its earnings, partly as a result of the vigorous cost-cutting at its exploration and production activities.
"They are very much on the ball and very focused. They have achieved a lot of efficiency improvements and delivered a lot of savings," said Himona.
BP was upbeat about near term propsects, with oil demand expected to remain strong into 1997. But it said its long-term view that the oil price would settle back into a range of $16 to $18 a barrel had not changed. "The question is how we get from here to there," said Browne.
Morgan Stanley analyst Chris Buckley said the oil price was always the greatest uncertainty, but added that lower prices tended to mean margins could improve in downstream activities like chemicals and refining.
($1=.6051 Pound)
