Dominion Resources Inc of the United States ended a day of rampant speculation on Wednesday by declaring it was interested in bidding for British power supply company East Midlands Electricity Plc.
But the U.S. group, which owns power generator and distributor Virginia Power, made clear it would walk away from making a bid if East Midlands' share price continued to rocket on Thursday.
East Midlands' share price leaped 70 1/2 pence to close at 608 pence on Wednesday, lifting the Nottingham-based group's value to more than 1.2 billion pounds, as rumour swirled around it.
In a statement published after the close of London trading, Dominion said it did not intend to make an offer at a price "much in excess" of East Midlands' closing price
Sources close to the company said that if the price "runs away tomorrow then Dominion will run away".
The sources said East Midlands had already cut costs "to the bone", adding that "the comapny needs investment to grow again".
East Midlands declined to comment on the Dominion statement.
Rumours that another bid was about to claim one of the few remaining independent regional electricity companies (RECs) in England and Wales had sent shares in the sector soaring on Wednesday.
Besides East Midlands, Yorkshire Electricity Group Plc's shares rose 15.5 pence to 754, while Southern Electric Plc jumped 21.5 pence to 669, and London Electricity Plc gained 12 1/2 to 618.
However the name of any likely bidder remained a mystery.
Dominion Resources Inc is a medium-sized player in the U.S., with a market capitalisation of around $6.6 billion and annual sales of around $4.7 billion.
As well as Virginia Power, its main subsidiary, Dominion has a number of joint generation ventures in the U.S. and internationally, notably in South America. It also has an interest in gas and real estate.
If Dominion's board does decide to go ahead with a bid it will be the latest in a line of U.S. utilities to buy into the privatised British power supply business.
Last week a unit of U.S.-based CalEnergy launched a hostile 650 million pound ($1.07 billion) bid for Northern Electric Plc.
Northern Electric, which is due to release sparkling half year results early in an attempt to attract a higher bid, saw its shares rise 1 1/2 pence to 634 pence on Thursday, adding to recent sharp gains.
Out of the 12 privatised cash-rich RECS, seven have already changed ownership -- four of them to U.S. companies.
