Dominion Resources Inc. ended a day of speculation Wednesday by declaring it might bid for British regional utility East Midlands Electricity Plc in a deal that could be worth about $2 billion.
The bid would mark the lastest in a a line of U.S. utilities companies seeking to buy into the privatised British power supply business.
But in a statement published after the close of London trading, Richmond, Va.-based Dominion, which owns electric utility Virginia Power, said it would not make an offer at a price "much in excess" of East Midlands' closing price.
Sources close to the situation said that if the price "runs away tomorrow, then Dominion will run away."
East Midlands' share price leaped 70.5 British pence to close at 608 pence ($9.97) on Wednesday, lifting the Nottingham, England-based group's value to more than 1.2 billion pounds ($1.97 billion), as rumour swirled around it.
Dominion stock gained 75 cents to $39.75 on the New York Stock Exchage.
The sources said East Midlands had already cut costs "to the bone," adding that "the comapny needs investment to grow again."
East Midlands declined to comment on the Dominion statement.
Rumours that another bid was about to claim one of the few remaining independent regional electricity companies in England and Wales sent their shares soaring.
Besides East Midlands, Yorkshire Electricity Group Plc.'s shares rose 15.5 pence to 754 ($12.37), while Southern Electric Plc. jumped 21.5 pence to 669 pence ($10.97), and London Electricity Plc. gained 12.5 to 618 pence ($10.14).
The names of any likely bidders remained a mystery.
Dominion Resources is a medium-sized company in the United States, with a market capitalisation of around $6.6 billion and annual sales of around $4.7 billion.
In addition to Virginia Power, its main subsidiary, Dominion has a number of joint generation ventures in the United States and internationally, notably in South America. It also has an interest in gas and real estate.
If Dominion's board proceeds, the bid would be the latest in a series of U.S. companies that has turned up recently in the privatised British power supply business. Last week, a unit of U.S.-based CalEnergy launched a hostile 650 million pound ($1.07 billion) bid for Northern Electric Plc.
Northern Electric, which is due to release strong half-year results early in an attempt to attract a higher bid, saw its shares rise 1.5 pence to 634 pence ($10.40) on Thursday, adding to recent sharp gains.
Out of the 12 privatised cash-rich regional electric companies, seven have already changed ownership -- four of them to U.S. companies.
