British health and industrial gases giant BOC Group Plc reported its best-ever set of full-year profits on Tuesday, dispelling some of the gloom which has settled over its share price in recent months.
BOC, one of the world's biggest suppliers of specialist gases, saw profits surge 11 percent to 444.9 million pounds ($745 million) despite problems caused by a stronger pound and a deterioration in the performance of its health-care business.
Sales climbed seven percent to just over 4.0 billion pounds.
The outcome was at the top-end of analysts' forecasts, which had been pared down after BOC issued cautious noises about its two non-core operations, health and industrial vacuums, along with third-quarter results on August 13.
Shares in the group, which have fallen from more than 940 pence since mid-June and touched 12-month lows on Monday ahead of the results, climbd 29 pence to 865 in early afternoon trading.
Industrial gases, which are used in industries as varied as foods, chemicals, metallurgy and water purification, saw operating profits rise nine percent to 408.3 million pounds on sales up 6.8 percent to 2.8 billion pounds.
In an interview with Reuters, chief executive Danny Rosenkranz said he expected profit margins in gases to improve by about two percentage points over the "next three to four years" from the 14.5 percent achieved in the year ended in September.
He said a major factor behind the improvement would be the huge increase in the number of 15-year supply contracts BOC has won in the U.S, which entail building gas-making plants next to customers such as steel works in return for guaranteed sales.
The Ohmeda health division, hit by continued falls in the price of BOC's once top-selling anaesthetic gas Forane and weak U.S. demand for anaesthetic machinery, was the only BOC unit to see operating profits fall, dropping 11 percent to 53.1 million pounds.
Rosenkranz said Ohmeda would continue to have a difficult time in the six months to March 1997 but should turn in a flat performance for the year as a whole, and "...starting next year this thing ought to start climbing.
The market had also been braced for a poor performance at Edwards Vacuum Products, whose machinery creates super-clean environments for industry, because of a downturn in the overcrowded semi-conductor market.
In the event the loose alliance of business known as vacuum and distribution posted a 28 percent gain in full-year operating profit to 90.3 million pounds, although the gain in the fourth-quarter had slowed to just eight percent as the impact of a fall-off in semi-conductor orders started to bite.
Rosenkranz pointed to tentative signs of a pick-up in the computer industry, such as a rise in the October U.S. industry book-to-bill ratio. Nevertheless he said the vacuum business "will see a decline in profits this year", but did not predict its extent.
Uncertainty also remains over the impact of sterling, whose newfound strength ate into the gain in fourth-quarter profits, trimming their advance by three percentage points to around nine-percent.
Rosenkranz warned that stronger sterling "is bound to hit profits" if it continues. ($1=.5970 Pound)
