Yorkshire-based chemicals group Allied Colloids Plc said on Tuesday that its strategy of growing organically remained unchanged, despite the $390 million acquisition of CPS Chemical Co Inc of the U.S.
Chief executive David Farrar said Allied Colloids "has not been acquisitive" by tradition.
"We saw this as an opportunity that does not come along very often," Farrar said in a telephone interview with Reuters following the announcement of the purchase and interim results.  
"This is a good strategic fit for us. CPS are in the same business as us, the chemistry is similar. We have had a long association with them and have been major customers of theirs for eight years."
The move will substantially increase Allied Colloids' sales in the U.S, which already accounts for more than 30 percent of its annual turnover. CPS, which has plants in Arkansas and New Jersey, had sales of $157 million last year, some 75 percent of which were in the domestic market.  
Farrar said Allied, which provides chemicals for a wide range of industries including paper-making, minerals, textiles, oil and pharmaceuticals, remained committed to expansion in other key marekts, notably Europe and the Far East. But this would be achieved "by organic growth."
Allied Colloids believes the acquisition of CPS, which is partly being financed by a two-for-seven rights issue to raise 173 million stg, will be earnings enhancing in its first full financial yuear. It said it also expected to benefit from substantial U.S. tax credits.  
Farrar said the combined group would have a workforce of around 3,500 following the addition of CPS' 360 employees. He said CPS, which makes chemical intermediates and finished polymers for industry, will complement Allied in a number of areas, notably in coatings, paper and pollution control.
It will also add to Allied's technological base and provide new products to market through its existing 400-strong salesforce.
The rights issue and acquisition were accompanied by an upbeat statement on prospects, with Allied Colloids predicting a continued improvement in second-half sales and profits.  
First-half pretax profits rose 3.8 percent to 21.1 million stg on sales up 9 percent at 207.6 million stg.
Farrar said sharp falls in raw material costs earlier this year started to feed into second-quarter results, but their full impact would be felt in the second half. He predicted that gross profit margins would increase by 1 percentage point in the second half from the 37.5 percent seen in the first half and the 36.2 achieved in the 12 months to March.
Allied is also predicting a further pick-up in sales growth in the second half of the year, implying full-year sales of more than 430 million stg compared with 393 million a year earlier.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
