Health and industrial gases specialist BOC Group Plc said on Tuesday that its troubled healthcare business is likely to turn in a flat performance in the current year to Sept 1997 before recovering.
In a telephone interview with Reuters following publication of the group's best-ever full-year profit figures, chief executive Danny Rosenkranz said the Ohmeda health business faced another challenging 12 months in tough U.S. markets.  
The anaesthetic gas and machinery supplier will be "flat this year, but starting next year this thing ought to start climbing," said Rosenkranz.
The health division, hit by continued falls in the price of BOC's once top-selling anaesthetic gas Forane and weak U.S. demand for anaesthetic machinery, was the only BOC unit to see operating profits fall, dropping 11 percent to 53.1 million stg.
Solid gains in the rest of BOC's business saw full-year pre-tax profits rise by 10.6 percent to 444.9 million stg, right at the top of analysts' forecasts, while sales climbed 6.7 percent to just over 4.0 billion stg.  
The strong pound cut the advance in fourth-quarter pre-tax profits by three percentage points to around nine-percent, and Rosenkranz warned that stronger sterling "is bound to hit profits" if it continues.
Despite its laggardly performance, the fall in profits at healthcare was less steep than many analysts had feared after a warning from BOC at the end of the third quarter, which led to a rash of earnings downgrades.
Rosenkranz said the division, which accounted for less than 13 percent of BOC's 4.0 billion stg of sales, had performed "much better" in the fourth quarter.  
"You can go from being a bum to a hero very fast," he said.
The market had also been braced for a poor performance at Edwards Vaccum Products, whose machinery creates super-clean environments for industry, because of a downturn in the overcrowded semi-conductor market.
In the event the loose alliance of business known as vaccuum and distribution posted a 28 percent gain in full-year operating profit to 90.3 million stg, although the gain in the fourth-quarter had slowed to just eight percent as the impact of a fall-off in semi-conductor orders started to bite.  
Rosenkranz pointed to tentative signs of a pick up in the computer industry, such as a rise in the October U.S. industry book-to-bill ratio. But he said the vacuum business "will see a decline in profits this year", but did not predict its extent.
In the core industrial gases business, where operating profits rose 9 percent to 408.3 million stg on sales up 6.8 percent to 2.8 billion stg, Rosenkranz said he expected profit margins to rise by about 2 percentage points over the "next three to four years."
Margins edged up to 14.5 percent of sales in the year ended in September from 14.2 percent.  
A major factor behind the improvement will be the huge increase in the number of 15-year supply contracts BOC has won in the U.S. These entail BOC building gas-making plants next to customers such as steel works, in return for guaranteed sales.
The up-front costs involved in these contracts helped to push BOC's capital spending up to 708 million stg in the year just ended, and Rosenkranz said "I think it will be higher this year."
Outside the U.S, BOC is targeting investment in the Pacific region, notably in Malaysia, Thailand and Indonesia. Rosenkranz said BOC is also "looking pretty hard at India" where it could invest several hundred million pounds over the next few years.
--London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
