A revolution in the treatment of HIV and AIDS is proving a godsend not just for patients but for drug companies which have poured millions of pounds into fighting the epidemic.
Cocktails of new and old drugs are resulting in dramatic improvements in both quality of life and life expectancy, with some patient groups forecasting that death rates from AIDS in Europe next year could fall by 50 percent.
And as patients live longer and more people seek treatment at earlier stages of illness, drug companies like Britain's Glaxo Wellcome Plc are looking forward to a quantum leap in sales, with global turnover of AIDS and HIV products forecast to treble by the end of the century.
Analysts at Lehman Brothers expect sales of AIDS drugs at Glaxo Wellcome, which by a mixture of luck and good judgement holds two of the cornerstone drugs for combination therapy, to soar to around $2 billion by the end of the century from just $300 million in 1995.
Keith Alcorn, who writes for the influential British newsletter AIDS Treatment Update, used by both patients and doctors, said: "This year has been the most exceptional year in AIDS treatment yet, and the effects are very, very tangible. People are going back to work after being very ill and that in itself is quite unexpected."
ADVANCES REVIVE AZT
Advances have led to an extraordinary revival in the fortunes of Glaxo Wellcome's Retrovir. The drug, also known as AZT, was launched with a great fanfare in 1987, but its erratic performance disappointed patients and shareholders alike.
Doctors have found that using Retrovir, which stops the HIV virus from replicating, in combination with other treatments such as Bristol Myers Squibb Co's Didanosine, Hoffmann-La Roche's Zalcitabine and above all a new Glaxo Wellcome drug called Epivir can radically cut levels of HIV in the blood.
And preliminary evidence suggests the addition of a whole new class of drug, known as protease inhibitors, to the cocktail can produce even more sensational results, with the virus brought below detectable levels.
Lehman Brothers analyst Ian Smith said: "Use of Retrovir alone had a relatively minimal and transient effect on CD4 cell levels (key cells which HIV destroys, undermining the immune system) and viral load. But in combination the impact on viral load and CD4 was nothing short of stunning compared to what we saw a few years ago."
The progress has electrified an industry that just two years ago was mired in gloom over prospects for a breakthrough in treating AIDS. Anita Kidgell, Glaxo Wellcome's antivirals product communication manager, said that when scientists, activists and drug companies met at the 11th International Conference on AIDS in Vancouver, Canada, in July the atmosphere had been transformed.
"We were seeing that one could reduce the levels of the virus in patients' blood to undetectable levels," Kidgell said.
For the moment Glaxo Wellcome seems to have cornered the AIDS drug market, with Lehman predicting sales of Retrovir will double to $600 million by 1998 and that sales of Epivir, which Glaxo shrewdly licensed from Canada's BioChem Pharma Inc in 1990, will hit $750 million by 2000 from just $12 million in 1995.
But other companies are ahead of the British giant in developing protease inhibitors, the third element in the cocktail, which block an enzyme crucial to the spread of the HIV virus within the body.
Some 20 protease inhibitors are being developed, and Merck &amp; Co, Abbott Laboratories Inc and Roche Holdings AG have all rushed versions on to the market this year. The three companies are cautious about giving sales figures, but anecdotal evidence from patient groups together with U.S. sales data suggests that Merck's Crixivan is far outselling its rivals. Sales of this class of drug are likely to reach around $300 million this year.
NOTE OF CAUTION
But while there is understandable euphoria over the progress made to date, Robin Gorna, director of health promotion at Britain's leading AIDS charity the Terrence Higgins Trust, said: "We must be very cautious about saying everything is OK, we have got a cure." She said the mix of drugs taken by AIDS patients carry a raft of side effects and enforce a strict and life-changing dietary regime and timetable.
The explosion in effective treatment also has serious consequences for overstetched health and insurance budgets.
The Terrence Higgins Trust estimates that costs to the British taxpayer in the year to March 1998 of treatment with Retrovir alone would be 10.3 million pounds ($17.29 million). Treatment with a combination of three drugs would bump this up to around 50 million. And if, as expected, more people are encouraged to come forward and seek treatment before they develop AIDS, this could rise to around 74 million pounds.
Gorna said stories already abounded of patients being unable to get the drugs they need, either though lack of funds or ignorance on the part of doctors. AIDS support groups and companies, who cooperate increasingly, say they have to persuade governments that extended treatment with drugs is much cheaper than costly hospital care and dealing with the multiple complications of AIDS.
"We are all very hopeful," said Gorna. "It is looking good, but it really isn't over yet and we need drugs that are effective in the long term."
