Chemicals group Courtaulds Plc is targeting sales growth of at least 10 percent a year up to the end of the century at its key coatings business as it reaps the fruits of a major modernisation drive and Far Eastern expansion.
Speaking to journalists at a recent presentation, Courtaulds European Coatings finance director Bob Wheeler said the group's multi-million pound restructuring of its European and U.S coating operations launched in 1994 was starting to pay off.
"The profits coming through now are...partly because of our Far East expansion, but also because of the restructuring programmes we have got in place in Europe and the U.S," he said.
Courtaulds will have spent around 75 million pounds ($125 million) on reorganising and updating its European manufacturing base -- centred in Britain, France, Germany, Sweden and Spain -- by the end of 1998.
Wheeler said a similar amount was being spent in the United States.
The coatings and sealants division supplies specialist paint and protective products to the marine and aerospace sectors as well as powder coatings for a wide range of products including cars, buildings and washing machines.
In the six months through September 30, sales at the division rose 4.6 percent to 501 million pounds. This represented around 47 percent of the group's total.
But Wheeler said the group had much greater ambitions.
"I think we would be disappointed if we weren't growing the business by 10 percent per annum through organic growth ... up to the end of the century," Wheeler said.
He said the division was also benefiting from Courtauld's decision in the early 1990s to get out of low margin businesses such as general industrial coatings and household paints and to exploit its long-standing presence in fast-growing Asia.
Courtaulds has built on its presence in Hong Kong, where it has been represented since the 1950s, to the point where it is involved in every major market in the region.
Asian growth was a major factor behind the rise in the division's first-half sales.
Courtauld's Coatings had chosen its marine and yacht coatings site at Felling in northeast England as one of six prototype factories for improvements in quality, productivity and safety which it planned to roll out across the division's 70-plus sites around the world, Wheeler said.
Using U.S. chemicals giant EI Du Pont de Nemours as its benchmark for safety standards and Nippon Paint for best practise in working methods, Courtaulds said it had already transformed the operation at Felling.
Wheeler said investment at the site, which is expected to total around 10 million pounds, had resulted in output doubling to 400 litres of paint per man hour in just two years, while wastage had more than halved.
Last month the site won an award sponsored by corporate advisers KPMG for most improved British factory in competition with more than 200 other British plants.
Wheeler said the transformation of the site, which Courtaulds had operated for more than 100 years, "was about people, training and the equipment we use." He said Felling was now "a genuinely world class site."
($1=.5995 Pound)
