British chemicals group Albright &amp; Wilson Plc said on Monday that a keenly-awaited drop in raw materials prices had failed to emerge.
In an interview with Reuters, Albright &amp; Wilson chief executive Robin Paul said although costs had stabilised after sharp gains last year "there has still been a small net increase, which has meant that any improvement in our performance has had to come from our own efforts, whereas we had been hoping for some reduction."  
Cost increases have affected the performance of the whole industry, and added an extra 40 million stg to Albright &amp; Wilson's bills in 1995. The Birmingham-based group is the world's biggest and lowest-cost producer of wet phosphoric acid, used in a wide range of processes from putting the tang into fizzy drinks to making soap powders. Rises in phosphorous prices, especially in China and the rest of Asia, partly eroded gains from strong demand for phosphates in the first half.  
Paul, who steered Albright &amp; Wilson back onto the stock market last year after 17 years as a subsidiary of U.S. giant Tenneco Inc, said another threat on the horizon was the continued strength of sterling, which could raise the cost of exports from the UK and reduce foreign earnings.
"Where this isn't expected to have a substantial effect on 1996 results, because most of the contracts are in place, it is causing us to look very hard at the 1997 budget because of inevitable pressures on translation and transaction," Paul said.  
He added it was difficult to quantify the impact of the pound continuing at current high levels, although he said strength against the dollar would act as a "net hedge" by lowering raw material costs.
Although phosphorous-derived products have driven profits since its foundation in 1851, Albright &amp; Wilson also produces specialty chemicals, including flame-retardants for protective clothing and furniture, and surfactants, foaming and wetting agents used in detergents and soaps.  
Paul said in some ways the company's relaunch had come at a difficult time, with its first set of interim results as a newly independent company in 1995 heralding a worldwide downturn in the chemical industry as higher costs ate into profits.
The group's share price has clawed its way back from a low of 152 pence last November to stand at 177 pence early Tuesday afternoon after touching a peak of 207 1/2 pence in September. But Paul warned that shareholders and analysts should not expect "one-year spectaculars," especially in terms of a share buyback.  
News at the start of the year that the group had sought authority for a share buyback caused some excitement, particularly given its low gearing, which stood at just 14 percent at the end of June. "The directors got permission to buy back shares, but without plans to do so," Paul said. "People read rather more into it than was justified."
Nor will cash be used for acquisitions, unless they "tidy up" shareholdings in associates or offer technological benefits. Paul said growth would be organic, with a reinvigorated research and development program producing a range of new products, including improved water treatment and flame-retardant chemicals and a breakthrough to stop paints from flaking.
"We are not looking for one-year spectaculars at Albright &amp; Wilson. We have been around for 145 years and and even Tenneco's ownership (from 1978) could be seen in retrospect as a phase in the history of the company,"said Paul. "Our aim is to build up a solid performance year-on-year-on-year."
--London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
