Investors in the fast-growing British biotechnology sector can look forward to another roller-coaster ride in 1997, with serious profits still there to be made by investors who pick their stocks carefully.
Although sharp falls in the value of the sector since its peak last May have underlined the riskiness of biotechs as an investment, analysts said 1997 should be the year when a host of companies publish data which will start to prove that the underlying technology can produce drugs that really work.
It should also see a number of businesses step out of the long shadow cast by British Biotech Plc, which continues to ride high on hopes that its cancer treatment Marimastat will be the sector's first wonderdrug.
Among those most keenly tipped for success next year are Biocompatibles International Plc, Celltech Group Plc, Chiroscience Group Plc, Cortecs International Ltd and Scotia Holdings Plc.
And there are growing signs that other countries, notably France and Germany, will start to challenge Britain's domination of the European biotech industry. Britain currently has more biotech companies than the rest of Europe combined.
STOCKS STILL AHEAD DESPITE 1996 SETBACK
Analysts at Lehman Brothers said the end of a 14-month long run of gains by Britain's biotech stocks in May, since when prices have dropped by around 40 percent, jolted investors, leading many to question the real value of biotechs.
But the Lehman Brothers UK/Europe Biotechnology Index also shows that even after this setback, biotech stocks are still showing an overall gain of around 150 percent compared with the start of their bull run in February 1995.
And in a note on the sector, Lehman said investors could buy into drug discovery and development in biotechs at a fraction of the cost of buying into the pipelines of mature companies like Glaxo Wellcome Plc and Zeneca Group Plc.
Nomura Equity Research analyst Nick Woolf also disputed another claim of recent months, that UK biotech stocks are vastly overvalued compared with the much larger U.S. sector.
Woolf said a ratio of market capitalisation to five years of spending on research and development showed U.S. biotechs are valued at four to five times accumulated spending and British companies at between four and six times.
"We are not overvalued compared to the U.S," he said. "When people say the U.K. is overvalued they are looking at British Biotech, but second place companies like Chiroscience, Celltech and Cortecs are all looking very good value."
Woolf and Yamaichi International analyst Erling Refsum said investors had become much more choosy about which stocks to buy, but there was now a danger that people were being too cautious. Where a year ago people would put money into almost any biotech that could type out a prospectus, in recent months a number of small flotations and fundings have been scaled down or dropped.
Even British Biotech was forced to turn to underwriters to rescue its 143 million pounds ($236.5 million) cash call in July.
Refsum said the market was focusing too much on the 50 percent chance that a drug in Phase II trials would fail to get to market rather than the equal chance it would succeed. Woolf added "I think it is the wrong way of looking at it. You should evaluate risk, but across a portfolio of companies where you are spreading the risk."
ISSUES TO WATCH IN 1997
Among key stocks to watch in 1997 will again be British Biotech, where clinical trials of Marimastat are entering the final phase. Although trials will not be completed until 1998 at the earliest, the company plans detailed updates on the drug, probably in May and November. Bad news is still expected to have a disproportionate effect on the whole of the sector.
Celltech is singled out by Nomura, Yamaichi and Lehman. Nomura said Celltech is "very good value," and Lehman have a target valuation of 10 pounds per share for the company by the end of this year compared with a price of 485 pence on Friday afternoon. Optimism about a septic shock drug, being developed with Germany's Bayer AG, and progress on a therapy for Acute Myeloid Leukaemia are seen as key drivers.
Cambridge-based Chiroscience, which Lehman values at 600 pence per share compared with last Friday afternoon's price of 312, is also favoured, amid hopes that a new local anesthetic will provide a flow of cash for an ambitious pipeline of novel drugs including cancer and arthritis treatments.
UK-Australian group Cortecs is strongly tipped by Yamaichi's Refsum, who believes oral osteoporosis and insulin drugs could turn out to be $1 billion-sellers, while he also favours Scotia, which is in the unusual position of having three drugs nearing the market. Tiny Scottish group Shield Diagnostics Plc could be sitting on a product worth around $200 million a year if data due to be published in the first half of 1997 prove its diagnostic kit is an accurate forecaster of heart attacks.
And Lehmans said contact lens and medical devices company Biocampatibles had "enormous upside potential". It said the stock could be worth 16 pounds by the end of 1997 compared with 693 pence on Friday.
($1=.6047 Pound)
