Expertise ranging from crisp packet design to nuclear waste and the destruction of chemical weapons was put up for sale Monday as the UK government embarked on what may be its last privatisation venture, the sale of AEA Technology Plc.
Trade and industry secretary Ian Lang will be hoping to swell Treasury coffers by around 200 million stg through the disposal of 100 per cent of the Oxfordshire-based group, which is a spin-off from the Atomic Energy Authority, at the end of September.  
With a general election looming the sale immediately ran into a political row over the government's decision to keep its "golden share" in AEA Technology, allowing it to veto an unwelcome takeover attempt, for just three years.
The opposition Labour Party cited "security implications" over AEA Technology's role in monitoring UK nuclear submarine safety, and sources told Reuters Labour will consider extending the veto if it wins power.  
At a distinctly low-tech launch for the pathfinder prospectus, AEA Technology chief executive Peter Watson shrugged off the embarrassment of a malfunctioning slide projector to explain that the group "is all about taking technology to market and converting science to profit."
Watson could easily have a sign on his desk reading "no job is too big or too small" for AEA Technology, whose interests have spread far beyond the state-owned nuclear industry which spawned it in the 1940s.  
Work such as decommissioning nuclear plants and offering safety expertise worldwide, including at the site of the 1986 Chernobyl disaster in the Ukraine, accounted for just over half its 253.3 million stg of sales in the year to March.
But Watson is keen to stress success in using the group's 3,500 employees to solve a plethora of scientific conundrums, including doubling the life of batteries for Sony Corp mobile phones, helping Subaru win the World Rally Championship and assisting the U.S. with the destruction of chemical weapons.
"And we are helping a client to research an improved crisp packet," Watson added.  
AEA Technology hopes to persuade would-be investors, expected to be institutions rather than the army of small investors which bought into the likes of British Gas Plc and British Telecom Plc, that sales growth is about to take off after three static years, which it attributes to a drop in reliance on government contracts.
With most cost-cutting behind it, Watson told Reuters he wants to lift foreign sales to one-third of the total from just over one-fifth and take advantage of a growing trend for major companies like SmithKline Beecham Plc to outsource research to help drive pretax profit up from the 15.8 million pounds seen in the year to March.
-- Jonathan Birt London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
