British building materials group Blue Circle Industries Plc produced the first tentative signs of a turnaround at its troubled European heating operations on Tuesday and set out ambitious plans for a ten-fold increase in operating profits at the division over the next three years.
The recovery in the heating sector, together with continued strong performance in the highly profitable Chile and Malaysia markets and the USA, helped lift Blue Circle's interim pretax profit by 11.7 percent to 116.3 million pounds ($181.5 million), at the top end of analysts' forecasts, with the interim dividend rising by 6 percent to 4.25 pence.
The heating operations, which are undergoing a major restructuring focused on France, Germany and the Britain, posted operating profits of nine million pounds in the six months to June, up from just 100,000 pounds a year before.
However, Britain's biggest cement producer also warned that it sees "no significant signs of recovery" in the key British cement market, and against a backdrop of a weak stock market Blue Circle shares slipped 5.5 pence to 373.5 pence by 1105 GMT.
Blue Circle chief executive Keith Orrell-Jones told Reuters the group's aim of achieving annual cost savings of 25 million pounds from restructuring heating is "well up to programme," with nine million pounds coming through this year and the full benefit seen in 1997.
Orrell-Jones said he is confident the group can achieve a 15 percent return on its 600 million pound investment in the struggling division, or some 90 million pound, within three years, despite sluggish economic performance in Germany and France.
"We are disappointed with the performance of the economies of both those countries, and we think it is not likely to ease very rapidly," said Orrell-Jones, adding "that is why we set a three-year time horizon" for recovery.
Blue Circle blamed a 24 percent drop in operating profit at the British cement operations on low infrastructure investment and "weak new housing starts." Orrell-Jones said the full-year outcome will be better than the first half, but he does not expect any real upturn until next spring.
With gearing a miniscule 1.5 percent at the end of June, Orrell-Jones confirmed Blue Circle is actively looking for opportunities to expand.
"We'd like to grow our cement business: it depends on where the opportunities crop up. In the U.S. it's a question of waiting for the right opportunity and the right time in the cycle," he said.
Blue Circle is "actively looking in South-East Asia, and we are taking a very careful look at India," he said, adding that it is also interested in expanding its south American operations beyond the fast-growing Chile market.
($1=.6406 Pound)
