Healthcare group Smith &amp; Nephew Plc reassured analysts on Monday that it was set to report a solid performance for 1996, despite continuing tough market conditions and the impact of a strong pound.
The company, which is due to announce full-year results on March 4, told an analysts' meeting that little had changed from its last update in October, when it reported that operating conditions and price pressures in the key U.S. market remained difficult.
Analysts who attended Monday's meeting said Smith &amp; Nephew, which reported a 7.4 percent rise in first-half sales to 540 million stg, was likely to report an increase in full-year sales of between six and seven percent from the 1.03 billion stg achieved in 1995.
They said there were also signs that profit margins could have turned out better in the second half of the year than the first.
Another positive aspect of the meeting was a signal that sales in the highly competitive U.S. market, which accounts for around 40 percent of turnover, had seen a two percent improvement in the second half of the year after gaining just one percent in the first half.
Prices in the U.S. for Smith &amp; Nephew's products in areas including orthopaedic implants and wound management are being forced down by increasingly powerful health providers.
Shares in the company, which had been trading close to their 12-month lows of 174 3/4, rose 4 3/4 pence to 182 3/4 in early afternoon trading. The stock had reached record highs of 217 1/2 pence in June amid hopes for a novel skin replacement product, Dermagraft, currently being developed with Advanced Tissue Sciences Inc of the U.S.
BZW analyst Steve Plag said the shares had taken a "phenomenal pounding" in recent months as over-optimistic predictions for Dermagraft had been reined back, and had taken some support on Monday from the absence of bad news.
"There are signs that the second-half revenue performance was a bit stronger, which is encouraging, and there was some reassurance on Dermagraft, but the full picture (on Dermagraft) won't be available until April."
Another analyst, who asked not to be identified, said Smith &amp; Nephew had been "very upbeat" about the the skin replacement product, which would initially be targeted at foot ulcers.
"I think Dermagraft is potentially a very significant product for the company," he added.
Analysts said the technology, which enables cells derived from babies' foreskins to grow on a naturally-absorbable scaffold across wounds, could add up to 20 pence per share to Smith &amp; Nephew's value if it succeeded.
SocGen analyst Alyson Coates said she was happy with the current value of the shares, which reflected a balance between limited growth prospects in the next 12 to 18 months and "the promise of the pipeline," including Dermagraft.
SocGen believes that in addition to Dermagraft and similar high-tech products, Smith &amp; Nephew will use its financial strength for acquisitions to help lift growth above the "pedestrian" in the medium term.
Coates said she might shave 1 million stg off her full-year pre-tax profit forecast of 185 million stg to take account of the impact of sterling's strength on the group in the last three months of 1996.
BZW's Plag said full-year pre-tax profit forecasts in the range of 183 to 186 million stg "would be sensible."
--London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
