British building materials group Blue Circle Industries Plc produced tentative signs of a turnaround at its troubled European heating operations on Tuesday, and promised a ten-fold increase in heating profits over the next three years.
The company also launched a blistering attack on the government, blaming "disgracefully low" infrastructure spending for a slide in its British cement sales.
The recovery in heating, together with continued strong performances in the highly profitable Chile and Malaysia markets and the USA, helped lift Blue Circle's interim pretax profit by 11.7 percent to 116.3 million pounds ($181.5 million), at the top end of analysts' forecasts, with the interim dividend rising by 6 percent to 4.25 pence.
Against a background of a weak stock market Blue Circle shares closed down 5 pence at 372 pence.
The heating operations, which are undergoing a major restructuring focused on France, Germany and Britain, posted operating profits of nine million pounds in the six months to June, up from just 100,000 pounds a year before.
But Britain's biggest cement producer also warned that it saw "no significant signs of recovery" in the key British cement market, and said it expected 1996 sales to be down four percent from 1995's depressed performance.
Ian McKenzie, chief executive of the group's British cement business Blue Circle Cement, blamed poor housing starts and low government infrastructure spending, warning that if the underspend continued "the damage done to the competitiveness of British industry would be very great indeed."
Worries about cement were offset by strength overseas and signs of early progress in turning around heating, which encouraged analysts to maintain full-year profit forecasts.
Chief executive Keith Orrell-Jones told Reuters the group's aim of achieving annual cost savings of 25 million pounds at the division is "well up to programme," with nine million pounds coming through this year and the full benefit seen in 1997.
Orrell-Jones said he was confident Blue Circle could achieve a 15 percent return on its 600 million pound investment in the struggling division, or some 90 million pounds, within three years, despite sluggishness in Germany and France.
"We are disappointed with the performance of the economies of both those countries, and we think it is not likely to ease very rapidly," said Orrell-Jones, adding "that is why we set a three-year time horizon" for recovery.
With gearing a miniscule 1.5 percent at the end of June, Orrell-Jones said Blue Circle was actively looking for opportunities to expand.
"We'd like to grow our cement business: it depends on where the opportunities crop up. In the U.S. it's a question of waiting for the right opportunity and the right time in the cycle," he said.
Blue Circle is "actively looking in South-East Asia, and we are taking a very careful look at India," he said, adding that it was also interested in expanding its south American operations beyond Chile and into Argentina.
($1=.6406 Pound)
