A bullish Zeneca Group Plc set out its declaration of independence on Wednesday, predicting years of strong profit growth on the back of robust sales of new drugs and agro-chemicals.
Chief executive David Barnes, in his last interview before the group announces 1996 results on March 11, told Reuters he was confident Zeneca would meet his "inspirational target" of effectively doubling profit by the end of the century.
All three key businesses, pharmaceuticals, agro-chemicals and speciality chemicals, would contribute to the improvement.
Zeneca's share price has jumped by more than 50 percent in the past 18 months, closing at 1631 pence on Wednesday, as takeover rumours swirled around it. Speculation has linked Zeneca with a dizzying number of partners, including Switzerland's Roche Holdings AG, Germany's Bayer AG and France's Sanofi.
While Barnes said a takeover bid was "most unlikely," he added that shareholders would have to compare any offer with the average annual growth of 15 percent in earnings per share promised by Zeneca between 1996 and 2000.
Despite its debt-free balance sheet, Barnes said the company had little interest in getting on the acquisition trail itself, preferring to buy in new products and technologies on a case-by-case basis.
"I am not against acquisitions per se but they have to offer value and quality, and most of the opportunites that have come up have failed on one or both criteria," Barnes said.
The company's main focus is the roll-out of a raft of new products, including the asthma drug Accolate and the new agro-chemical fungicide Amistar, which Barnes described as "the biggest single product we've got in the Zeneca portfolio".
On Wednesday the company announced that it was expanding its drug sales force in the United States by more than 20 percent to cope with the rush of new products, including the potential launch later this year of a ground-breaking schizophrenia drug, Seroquel, and a new migraine drug, Zomig.
Barnes forecast significant sales for Accolate and for Seroquel, squashing fears from some analysts that either drug might turn out to be a disappointment.
"Our benchmark for a substantial product is one that has sales of $400 million plus, and both of those have that potential," he said.
A lot of hopes are riding on Accolate, the first of a new generation of asthma drugs in which tablets take the place of steroid-based inhalers.
"The Holy Grail for the treatment of asthma has been simple tablet formulation," said Barnes. Since the drug's launch in the key U.S. market last October, Barnes said, sales had been "fully up to our expectations" with a lot of interest shown by doctors."
Another new drug, the prostate cancer treatment Casodex, is also making rapid progress in the United States, accounting for more than 50 percent of all new prescriptions.
But Barnes said he was aware that in line with the rest of British industry, Zeneca would have to work harder for its profits in 1997 as the strong pound bites into overseas earnings. He acknowledged that the exchange rate could wipe around 70 million pounds off Zeneca's 1997 profits, which are still expected to top 1.1 billion pounds.
"I don't think the level of sterling is such that our products will be uncompetitive," said Barnes, but he added: "I do think the pound is getting very fully priced now."
