Zeneca Group Plc said on Wednesday that it expected "substantial" peak sales in excess of $400 million for its new asthma treatment Accolate and schizophrenia drug Seroquel.
In an interview with Reuters, chief executive David Barnes said: "Our benchmark for a substantial product is one that has sales of $400 million plus, and both of those have that potential."
Barnes also painted an upbeat picure of prospects for Zomig, the migraine treatment obtained last year by Zeneca from its newly-merged rival Glaxo Wellcome Plc.
Some analysts had questioned whether Seroquel and Accolate -- which represent treatment breakthroughs in their repsective categories but also face potentially stiff competition -- would prove to be major sellers.
Accolate is the first of a new generation of asthma drugs taken in tablet form which will aim to erode the market share of inhaled steroids. The drugs, known as leukotreine antagonists, are designed to prevent or reduce the severity of asthma attacks rather than relieve existing attacks.
"The Holy Grail for the treatment of asthma has been simple tablet formulation," said Barnes.
Accolate was launched in the U.S, where steroid-based inhaled asthma drugs have never been as accepted as in Europe, in October. Although he declined to give details of sales, Barnes said "experience has been encouraging," and added "sales are fully up to our expectations."
"One of the most gratifying things has been the level of physician interest generated by the launch of Accolate," said Barnes, adding that the company had received "a large number" of inquiries from U.S. doctors about Accolate.
Earlier today Zeneca announced a 21 percent expansion of its U.S. sales force to help it deal with a rush of product launches, including the possible launch of Seroquel and Zomig later this year.
"The migraine market is growing very fast indeed, it's a substantial market, and so far as one is able to judge from clinical data Zomig has faster onset of action and maybe more consistent results than the leading product , (Glaxo Wellcome's) Imigran. I think it has substantial potential."
Barnes said Zeneca's new prostate cancer drug Casodex continued "to make very exciting progress" in the second half of 1996, taking more than 50 percent of new prescriptions in the U.S. and was "ahead of our forecasts."
Some $35 million worth of Casodex was sold in the first six months of 1996. The drug, which is currently approved for combination therapy, is being tested for use as monotherapy and for use at earlier stages of the disease.
"We now know that Casodex will be a bigger product than we thought in 1993 (when Zeneca was demerged from Imperial Chemical Industries Plc ) and it will be a substantially bigger product than most analysts thought in 1993," said Barnes.
--London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
