Britain's chemical industry faces a period of steady growth in 1997, helped by improvements in European economic prospects and lower stock levels, the industry's trade body said.
In an interview with Reuters, Chemical Industries Association (CIA) director-general Elliot Finer said that after an erratic performance over the past 18 months, stock of chemicals "are fairly low...and as a result of that we see prospects for pretty steady growth over the next 12 months."
Speaking ahead of a two-day conference on the outlook for the industry next week, Finer said prospects in the rest of Europe, which takes more than a quarter of British output and half of all exports, "are better than one might have thought a few months ago."
Finer said he believed the disruption caused by German reunification was now easing, while problems linked to the struggle to meet Maastricht convergence criteria for a single currency was also nearing its climax.
"Those two large factors mean that there are some quite good times ahead," Finer said.
But he warned that concern about the recent sharp rise in the value of sterling was causing concern among chemical companies, describing the current level of around 2.67 Deutsche marks and $1.69 as "unpalatable."
"$1.50 was nice, $1.60 we could live with but $1.70 is too much," Finer said, but he added that sterling's strength should not undermine the "steady, warmish prospects for the coming year."
He said Britain's chemical industry, which is the third largest in Europe after Germany and France with annual sales of 40 billion stg, was in a strong position.
Access to North Sea oil feedstocks gives the UK an advantage in bulk chemicals, while British companies also produce a wide range of high-performance specialty chemicals in fast-growth areas like ink-jet colour printing.
But Finer said he was concerned about levels of research and development spending by parts of the industry. British chemical companies spend around three percent of turnover on R&amp;D compared with 21 percent for pharmaceuticals and an average of 5.3 percent in Europe's chemical business as a whole.
"I think there are some middle-ranking companies in the industry whose expenditure on R&amp;D is less than some...might consider sensible given the hotting up of international compeition," said Finer.
Finer said innovation would also be a key theme of next week's business outlook conference on January 15 and 16, and was vital if the industry was to meet the challenge of competition from southeast Asia, India and the United States.
"We are still a very inventive country," said Finer. "Despite all the moaning we are still pretty good at fundamental science, and in our industry we are pretty good at bridging the gap between fundamental science and products."
--London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
