International specialty chemicals group BTP Plc said on Wednesday it expected profit margins at its key adhesive and textile coatings business to recover fully over the next 18 months.
Raw material price rises and intense competition pushed margins as low as three percent in the year to March. Divisional operating profit slumped 37 percent to 3.8 million stg.
But in a telephone interview with Reuters, finance director Rob Martin said, "There is no reason why over the next 12 to 18 months they can't be restored to six or seven percent."  
Weakness at adhesives and textile coatings and at the performance chemicals division helped hold BTP back in the year to March, with group pretax profit rising just 0.7 percent to 37.5 million stg.
The group is busy restructuring its adhesives manufacturing operations in France and Germany, and Martin said all group operations, which range from making preservative chemicals for cosmetics and toiletries to safety harnesses for people who work at heights, "are going quite well".
On a regional basis, Martin said, "The tougher markets are continental Europe, but there are signs of life even there."  
Sluggishness in France and Germany, which account for around 15 percent of group sales, continues to be a problem. "But things are getting better even there," Martin added.
BTP is a major supplier of agrochemical intermediates in the U.S., which accounts for about 30 percent of group sales, and Martin said there was no sign of a slowdown there.
The Manchester-based company underlined its committment to growth in the U.S. on Wednesday by announcing the acquisition of a small leather chenmical manufaturer from Henkel Corp for $7.5 million.  
With low gearing, which stood at just seven percent at the end of March, Martin said BTP could comfortably make an acquisition of up to 100 milllion stg.
"The general strategy is to add on to existing businesses. We are not going to leap into the dark in other arease," said Martin, who said any acquisitions must meet strict financial criteria. "They have got to fit and be earnings enhancing."
London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
