Shareholders in tiny British healthcare group Enviromed Plc staged a bloodless coup on Friday, toppling the embattled company's board.
The gentlemanly storming of the barricades around Enviromed's Knightsbridge headquarters was led by Ron Zwanziger, chief executive officer of Enviromed's biggest shareholder, U.S. company Selfcare Inc.
Zwanziger has watched the value of Selfcare's 29 percent stake in Enviromed dwindle as the share price plummeted from around 112 pence per share in December 1994 to around 25 pence, in line with a collapse in the group's profitability.
Selfcare, which produces tests for pregnancy and infectious diseases, asked shareholders to back its plans to remove four members of the board, led by managing director Thomas Murphy, at an extraordinary meeting on Friday.
But after weeks of charge and counter-charge by both sides, the expected showdown in the unlikely setting of Dean's Yard, next to Westminster Abbey, turned out to be a sedate rubber-stamping exercise.
The board of Enviromed, which produces specialist enzymes and diagnostic equipment, spiked the guns of its opponents by conceding defeat after proxy votes showed 49 percent backing for Selfcare and just under 39 percent supporting the status quo.
A brief show of hands was sufficent to confirm the handover of power and the new board, with Selfcare's Zwanziger as non-executive chairman, was already holding its first meeting as individual shareholders continued to drift in.
This was Zwanziger's second attempt to get rid of the board, which he quit in April 1995 over differences involving a joint venture between Selfcare and Enviromed. Resolutions demanding the board step down were withdrawn just before the start of another extraordinary general meeting in February 1996.
Zwanziger accused Enviromed of eroding shareholder value through poor management and of holding firesales of assets, including the disposal of a dental distribution business and veterinary diagnostic operation, as it sought to cut debts.
In turn Enviromed accused Zwanziger of trying to gain control of the company "via the back door", and challenged him to launch a full takeover bid.
Enviromed's value began to plunge in December 1994, the month that Murphy was appointed, as a pretax profit of 2.2 million stg in the year to September 1994 turned into a loss of 8.2 million stg a year later. The company's market capitalization fell from around 28 million stg to just over 6.0 million.
Murphy vehemently rejected blame for the collapse, saying he had inherited a pile of problems he and other board members had worked hard to resolve.
One of the new board's first goals will be to appoint a finance director. In a letter to shareholders ahead of the extraordinary meeting Zwanziger said the new board would focus on the development of the enzyme buisness Biozyme which it said was already profitable.
