Biotechnology company Celltech Group Plc said late on Tuesday that it expected to post a pre-tax loss of around 10 million stg in the year to September 1997 before moving firmly into profit.
Finance director Peter Allen said in an interview with Reuters that a further 10 million stg receipt next December from the 1996 sale of the Biologics business to Alusuisse-Lonza Holding AG would push the group back into the black the following year. Analysts said around half of the payment would go to Celltech's bottom line.
And a successful launch of Celltech's septic shock treatment, being developed with Germany's Bayer AG, and leukaemia drug, with American Home Products Corp should see the Slough-based group post an operating profit in 1999.
"I think that 1997/1998 will be a better year. Providing both products launch when we expect them to launch we will start to get some contribution from the septic shock product in 1998," he said.
With the Biologics sale swelling cash in the bank to more than 46 million stg at the end of last September, Allen said Celltech would have no need to seek fresh funding for its day-to-day operations. A cash-call would only have to be made if there were problems with the two lead drugs or Celltech decided to make an acquisition.
Cash burn for the current year would be just under 10 million stg, Allen said, with spending on research and development rising by around a fifth to 21 million stg. He predicted that milestone payments would be at similar levels to last year, totalling 5.5 to 6.0 million stg.
Allen added that analysts' forecasts of 3.5 million stg of royalties from the Centocor/Eli Lilly product ReoPro were "fairly conservative."
Chief executive Peter Fellner told Reuters that Celltech remained committed to its strategy of collaborating with major drug companies, but was considering taking more products through to later stages of development itself. He said the group's psoriasis drug, currently in Phase II trials, would be a prime candidate for such a move.
"We can see that by doing it ourselves, at least in Europe, we can control the timetable better ... and probably get a larger slice of the cake," he said.
The chief executive also told Reuters that Celltech could be interested in making an acquisition in the right circumstances. He praised rival Chiroscience Group Plc's $120 million acquisition of U.S. gene technology company Darwin last November as "very creative."
"I think if we could identify a particular set or sets of technology, or alternatively one or two pipeline products, then potentially we would have an interest..but we wouldn't simply go and buy something with a view to making ourselves that bit bigger."
--London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
