Shares in British-based drugs group Medeva Plc raced ahead on Thursday following encouraging results from tests of a potential new vaccine and treatment for hepatitis B.
Shares in Medeva, which have climbed steadily this week on the expectation of good news, jumped almost six percent to 296 pence before easing to 289-1/2 pence in early afternoon trading, up 10 pence on the day. The stock has risen more than 13 percent since the start of the year.
In an update of its product portfolio, Medeva also announced a tie-up with small drug discovery group Peptide Therapeutics Plc which could see painful injections against illnesses such as influenza, typhoid and tetanus replaced by nasal sprays or capsules.
The two are also investigating a vaccine against the E-coli bacteria, which has killed 17 people in a recent outbreak in Scotland. Medeva said it spent three million pounds ($4.90 million) taking a 2.5 percent stake in Peptide, whose shares soared nearly 20 percent to 289 pence.
But the market's main focus was on prospects for the hepatitis B vaccine, Hepagene, which many analysts see as a huge potential money-spinner. In an interview with Reuters, Medeva chief executive Bill Bogie said Hepagene could eventually sell "millions of doses" a year, and carry a three-figure price tag.
The vaccine is targeted at a significant group of people who do not respond to existing Hepatitis B vaccines, such as SmithKline Beecham Plc's Engerix-B.
Medeva sees a large market for it, especially among health workers and police who are routinely protected against the infection.
Still more exciting is the drug's potential to treat people who are already infected with Hepatitis B, which is 100 times more infectious than HIV and kills two million people a year around the world. Bogie said tests on people who do not respond to the current treatment, Interferon, showed a 38 percent response rate.
Medeva will decide later this year whether to expand production capacity for Hepagene at its plant in Speke in northwest England or to look elsewhere for extra output.
A major surprise was Medeva's declaration that it would seek regulatory approval for Hepagene in Europe and the United States in 1998, opening up the prospect of first sales in 1999. Bogie said this was a sign of confidence that Medeva would win outstanding battles over patents on both sides of the Atlantic.
It won a key judgement in Britain's House of Lords against U.S. rival Biogen Inc last year. Bogie said Medeva would not be seeking marketing partners for Hepagene beyond its existing agreement with Johnson &amp; Johnson to sell Hepagene in southeast Asia.
"We are not looking for a partner. That does not mean they won't happen but we are fairly confident we can do it ourselves," he said.
Medeva, whose executives spent Thursday morning with analysts, also announced plans to go ahead with development of a purified form of its most profitable product, the behaviour-controlling drug Methylphenidate.
Bogie said the new version of the drug being developed by Chiroscience Group Plc would give Medeva important patent advantages over rivals and cut down the number of times a day Methylphenidate is taken.
The drug is used to control attention deficit disorder in children and young adults. It is widely used in the United States but Bogie said it was starting to be more accepted in Britain and Europe. ($1=.6119 Pound)
