Shares in Britain's pharmaceutical industry were sharply higher across the board on Thursday, bouyed by sterling's weakness, continued takeover speculation, positive broker comment and upbeat news from Medeva Plc.
Shares in the "big three" of Glaxo Wellcome Plc, SmithKline Beecham Plc and Zeneca Group all rose.
Glaxo Wellcome added 3.3 percent or 31 pence to 955, SmithKline Beecham was up 4.4 percent or 37 pence at 880 1/2 and Zeneca rose 3.0 percent or 50 1/2 pence to 1,723.
Traders said sterling's sharp falls on the foreign exchanges overnight had been a major factor behind the gains, easing some of the anxiety over the effect of a strong pound on crucial overseas earnings.
Shares in the major companies fell earlier this month after analysts at NatWest Securities cut 1997 earnings estimates because of the currency impact.
"Currency is very important," said Panmure Gordon analyst Robin Gilbert. "There is a general view that the sector has lagged a bit because of currency, and we had something of a rebound."
Speculation that Roche Holding AG is preparing to announce a merger or takeover may also be buoying Zeneca and SmithKline Beecham, analysts said, although scepticism about such a move is widespread.
The two were further helped by Salomon Brothers' decision to place a buy stance on their stocks, with a hold on Glaxo Wellcome.
Shares in Medeva, which has long traded at a discount to other large drug stocks, rose 8 1/2 pence to 288 pence on the back of "positive" trial data from its hepatitis B vaccine Hepagene, which the company hopes will act both to stop people getting the disease and to help those already infected.
News that Medeva had formed a collaboration with Peptide Therapeutics Plc, one of the smallest stocks in the sector, made it the biggest gainer, jumping nearly 20 percent or 46 1/2 pence to 288.
The two companies hope to develop a range of non-injectable vaccines, and Medeva cemented the link by taking a 2 1/2 percent stake in Peptide for 3 million pounds.
Other strong biotech performers included the flagship British Biotech Plc, which was squeezed up 11 percent or 23 1/2 pence to 232 as several sell positions finally unwound.
Celltech Group Plc also continued to benefit from optimism about its two lead drugs, for septic shock and leukaemia, rising 17 1/2 pence to 637 1/2.
