Milumil babymilk powder, used by around 25,000 mothers in Britain and Ireland, was withdrawn from British stores and clinics on Friday after a scare over Salmonella poisoning.
Milupa, part of the Dutch specialist food producer Nutricia NV, said it was withdrawing its Milumil milk powder because of an unconfirmed link with 12 cases of a rare form of the Salmonella bug.
Dennis Segal, managing director of Milupa UK, told reporters the company was also in talks with the Irish government, although no incidents had been reported there.
The company launched a damage limitation exercise after it was contacted by Britain's Department of Health on Thursday afternoon.
Government scientists had identified 12 cases of Salmonella anatum infection, leading to gastro-enteritis, in children under 12 months old which followed consumption of the French-made milk, sold as "Milumil for Hungrier Bottle Fed Babies."
The Department of Health said that only two of the children involved were admitted to hospital and all had since recovered. However it told parents and other carers to stop using the product immediately and ordered the withdrawal of all stocks.
"There is no direct, incontrovertible proof that (the cause) is Milumil. It is a statistical association but we have to take every precaution," a company spokeswoman told Reuters.
Shares in Nutricia were suspended for around an hour in Amsterdam after falling sharply. However they later recovered some of their losses, trading down 9.70 guilders at 267, above a low of 260.50 guilders.
Milupa said it would hold a thorough investigation at the French plant where the milk was made, and added that production of the product had been suspended.
Sales of Milumil milk powder total between six and seven million pounds a year, and the product has a market share of around five percent. Another Milumil product, Milumil Ready to Feed, is not affected.
Dutch-based Nutricia, which also owns the Cow &amp; Gate brand, is no stranger to controversy.
In June 1993, it withdrew all of its powdered baby food products in the United States because of possible Salmonella contamination.
And 140 million guilders were wiped off the value of the company in November of the same year after it recalled batches of its Olvarit baby food when excessive levels of disinfectant were found in some samples.
