Two very different Cambridge biotechnology companies set out their plans to join the stock market on Monday.
Cambridge Antibody Technology Group Plc (CAT), which uses human antibodies to discover new drugs, and the Bioscience Innovation Centre, which aims to "incubate" new biotech businesses, both hope to raise millions of pounds to fund their work.
Sources close to CAT said its listing later this year should raise between 30 and 35 ($48-57 million) through a placing of its shares with institutional investors, valuing the company at around 85 million pounds.
Kleinwort Benson Ltd has been appointed as sponsor to the flotation, with Cazenove &amp; Co as broker.
CAT, which has been operating since 1990, is working to find drugs to tackle inflammation, fibrosis, cancer and obesity.
It said two drugs were expected to enter human clinical trials this year. CAT plans to develop drugs on its own up to intermediate stage clinical trials, and then find partners to help fund the costly business of late-stage trials, registration and marketing.
The strategy would enable the company to keep a higher percentage of profits from drug sales than if it introduced a partner early on, but will also increase its costs.
The Bioscience Innovation Centre (BIC) said it hoped to raise up to 6 million pounds through a share placing and open offer, and to list its shares on the Alternative Investment Market (AIM).
The money will go towards the construction of a 20,000 square foot building in Cambridge which will act as a "business incubator", offering technical and commercial skills to budding biotechs.
"In the U.S, sector-specific business incubators have been shown to have a positive and dramatic effect on the success rate and growth of start-up businesses," BIC said.
It added that the planned centre would give suitable companies access to "professionals in the fields of intellectual property, commercial management, licensing, marketing, regulatory affairs and finance."
Teather &amp; Greenwood have been appointed as advisers and brokers for BIC's flotation.
Cambridge is growing rapidly as a biotechnology centre. Companies already established in the city include Chiroscience Group Plc, Peptide Therapeutics Plc, Cantab Pharmaceuticals Plc and Celsis International Plc. ($1=.6161 Pound)
