Home decorating giants ICI Paints and Black &amp; Decker hope their new product to be launched on Wednesday won't make a splash.
The two companies have invested two years and millions of pounds in developing the Black &amp; Decker Paintmate, a battery-operated roller system they claim will take the pain out of painting.
The Paintmate, which will be sold in DIY (do-it-yourself) stores across Britain from April for 39.99 pounds ($65), uses an air-filled bellow system to squeeze the contents of a two-litre refill bag of Dulux paint down a tube and onto a roller, with the flow controlled by a trigger.
The small, cylindrical Paintmate can be strapped on to the back to eliminate tiresome bending over. Black &amp; Decker spokesman Richard Sanderson told Reuters, "It is a long time since the DIY market saw a product of such significance."
Sanderson said the companies hoped to sell 500,000 of the British-designed, Chinese-made Paintmates in the first full year in Britain, together with a million bags of paint.
If all goes well in Britain, which Sanderson said was "quite a sophisticated DIY market", Paintmate will be rolled out across western Europe next year, after which attention would switch to the huge U.S. home improvement market.
ICI, which sells enough paint in the UK to decorate five million homes a year, hopes the product will revolutionise the way people decorate.
"It's quick, it's easy and I think people will find it fun," said ICI Decorative Paints international marketing director Chris Harris.
Harris said the whole system could be flushed out with water. "We think people would redecorate more regularly if the painting process was quicker and easier," he added.
The Paintmate's promoters hope to benefit from a surge in DIY sales, fuelled by an upswing in Britain's temperamental housing market.
The product's launch will be backed by a 10 million pound promotional campaign in Britain and Europe, with television adverstising starting in April. ($1=.6199 Pound)
