Britain's Imperial Tobacco Group Plc took advantage of its new-found independence on Tuesday to buy the world's biggest maker of handrolling tobacco papers.
Imperial, which was demerged from conglomerate Hanson Plc last October, said it was paying 168 million pounds ($272.7 million) for Netherlands-based Rizla International BV, as well as acquiring 17 million pounds of Rizla's debt.
Chief executive Gareth Davis told Reuters that Rizla, which employs more than 700 people in France, Belgium and Wales, would enhance the group's international expansion.
"Imperial Tobacco is a relatively late entrant to international markets but is making some very fast strides in growth," Davis said.
Rizla has a large market share in seven or eight European countries, he said.
Shares in Imperial, which will finance the deal out of bank borrowings, rose 9.5 pence to 394 as traders greeted the news.
Founded in 1796, Rizla is the world's largest producer and seller of the thin papers used for handrolling cigarettes. It has around 66 percent of world market share in branded products.
Davis said the company was active in more than 60 countries, adding: "Obviously we are looking to extract the potential we see at Rizla for increased profitability and productivity."
Davis said Imperial had been able to take advantage of its new-found independence from Hanson.
"It is a company we have been interested in for many years," he said, adding that the acquisition was "very much in line with our strategy at demerger of focusing on tobacco and tobacco-related products."
No job losses are anticipated as a result of the acquisition. "We do see scope for productivity improvements but the plants are working at capacity," Davis said.
Imperial said Rizla, which is based in Breda, would continue to be run as a separate division, with the existing management remaining in place.
In 1996, Rizla posted a trading profit of 23 million pounds on sales of 74 million pounds, and had net tangible assets of around 17 million pounds.
($1=.6161 Pound)
