Drug group Rhone-Poulenc Rorer Inc said on Wednesday it was still keen to forge a cancer drug partnership in the U.S. as part of its goal of becoming a major oncology player over the next five years.
Setting out the U.S.-based group's growth strategy, RPR President Tim Rothwell said the company "aims to be in the top five, and ideally the top three" in cancer sales.
RPR ranked 15th in oncology sales in 1995. Rothwell said the improvement would be driven by breast and lung cancer drug Taxotere, which he predicted would achieve peak sales of at least $500 million over the next five years.
Sales this year are forecast to double in 1997 from around $90 million last year. Brain cancer treatment Gliadel, which Rothwell said should be approved in the U.S. in 1998, will also fuel the improvement.
"We continue to be interested in a partnership or alliance in the U.S. Others have two or three cancer products in a market dominated by Bristol-Myers Squibb, so it would make sense to ally ourselves," he said.
Rothwell cited RPR's link with Novo Nordisk on hormone replacement therapy as a model for other therapeutic alliances.
He again brushed aside recent speculation that RPR, which is 68 percent-owned by France's Rhone-Poulenc SA, could be a suitor for Sanofi, saying that the French company would not help achieve his aim of building up RPR's strength in the U.S. and Japan.
"The U.S. is still the largest and most profitable market in the world," Rothwell said, noting that only 24 percent of RPR's sales are in the United States compared to more than 40 percent for many of its rivals.
He said he wanted to raise U.S. sales to around 35 percent of the group's total, adding: "That will only come about through internal growth and perhaps from opportunistic product deals." In Japan RPR's strategy would be to continue with alliances and to build on the "eight or nine products in Phase II and Phase III trials."
"If the right kind of acquisition came along we would consider it, but the very good Japanese companies are the ones that can't be bought," he added.
In addition to cancer, RPR's growth strategy will centre on enhancing its position in key therapeutic areas, including thrombosis, asthma/allergy and anti-infectives.
It will also seek to swap non-core products with other companies and build up its base of early-stage products through links with universities and biotech companies.
In thrombosis, where RPR is number three in the world, the company expects sales of its best-selling drug Lovenox to double by the end of the century to more than $800 million.
In asthma and allergy, where RPR's position was enhanced by the acquisition of Britain's Fisons FISN.L, Rothwell said RPR was likely to remain in fourth place in five years' time, but predicted it would have overtaken Germany's Boehringer and would be challenging Sweden's Astra for third place.
Rothwell also hopes RPR will move up from 15th to be in the top five for anti-infective sales by the year 2005. He said new oral antibiotic Zagam and "other compounds under consideration" should boost its standing.
RPR is currently the 11th largest drug company in the world in terms of total sales. On Monday the company announced a 25 percent jump in 1996 net profits to $428.7 million.
