British Biotech Plc said on Wednesday that a rethink on the way drug giants form alliances with fledgling biotechs was "desperately required".
British Biotech chief executive Keith McCullagh told the IIR's Pharma Summit conference that many product partnerships failed because small drug discoverers were forced to relinquish control of their projects too early.
He said a project that might be very important to a biotech was "one of many at an early stage of development" for a large company "and is usually not regarded with any great sense of uniqueness or urgency."
McCullagh said biotech projects often got clogged up in bureaucracy, rarely achieved the same priority as in-house discoveries and often fell victim to changes in management.
"The consequences of this are that the majority of biotech-pharma alliances fail, not as a consequence of product failure but as a result of a change of will on the part of the partner," he said.
British Biotech's deals over several years had been affected by changes in research and development management, complete R&amp;D reorganisation and changes in overall control of the partner through merger and acquisition, said McCullagh.
"Success is more likely to be achieved, as judged by product progress to market, if the originating company continues to play an important role in ongoing development," he said.
The chief executive said this could be achieved by the biotech company continuing to control development of a drug in-house with funding from its partner, or by establishing a joint venture "to progress the project with equal input into its management."
A third way could be for large companies to invite biotech staff to sit on project teams and management committees.
"By allowing the originator greater control over the outcome of the development, not only is the chance for success for the project enhanced but (the large company) is also more likely to achieve a return on its investment," he added.
British Biotech is unusual among its peers in choosing to develop and market its cancer portfolio, including its lead cancer drug Marimastat, on its own, although it has formed alliances in other key areas.
-- London newsroom 44 171 542 7717
