Solid growth in the Commonwealth Bank of Australia's (CBA) home loan portfolio has brightened its profit outlook slightly and should underpin its half year result due for release on Wednesday, analysts said.
The bank is expected to report a profit rise of about one percent for the six months to December 31.
CBA itself has been warning since early 1996 that margin pressure would ensure flat profits for the year to June 30.
But some analysts said CBA has been privately more bullish in recent months.
"It's been outlined by the bank that trading conditions have been reasonable and may be slightly better than expected, given the price war last year," said one Sydney banking analyst.
"Given some of the statements coming out of the banks, if the result's not going to be flat then it's going to be higher rather than lower," said ABN AMRO banking analyst Michael Pulman.
Analysts are forecasting a net profit before abnormals for the six months of between A$535 million and A$560 million compared with A$541.9 million in the first half o 1995/96, but below the second half's A$577 million.
"I think you'll see a lot of volume in housing coming through which will be enough to maintain their net interest revenue," said the Sydney analyst.
Reserve Bank of Australia figures show CBA's home loan portfolio grew 10.3 percent to A$28.8 billion in the year to November, while home lending growth by all banks rose just 7.5 percent.
The CBA's share of home lending by banks, which does not include lending by the burgeoning non-bank mortgage originators, rose to 22.3 percent from 21.7 percent during the year.
"They do have a strong focus on the need to keep their share of housing and they've kept their share rolling along better than some of the other banks," said Macquarie Equities banking analyst Graham Maloney.
Analysts also said CBA's bad debts and provisioning were unlikely to drag profits any lower than in previous years.
"Provisioning will be fairly benign. We think that provisioning is at a trough and will stay in it for a few more results, particularly for CBA which is loaded up with housing more than some other banks," said Macquarie's Maloney.
Market attention is likely to focus on just how much CBA's pre-emptive cut in its key variable mortgage rate last year, which effectively forced a 75 basis point cut in big-bank home loan margins, has cut its overall margin.
CBA's group interest margin fell to 4.1 percent from 4.3 percent in the 1995/96 year, but this was before the home loan rate cuts of late 1996. CBA's containment of costs and what has happened to its cost to income ratio will also be of interest.
Analysts said CBA appeared to have kept costs down well, although it was unlikely to have made big inroads into staff and branch numbers.
Analysts expect CBA to declare a dividend of about 42 cents to 44 cents, up from the 38 cent interim dividend set in the first half of 1995/96.
CBA shares closed 15 cents up at a record A$13.50 on Friday.
There has been talk for some time that the bank has plans for a special dividend.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 373-1800
