Australia's largest home mortgage lender, the Commonwealth Bank of Australia (CBA), announced a surprisingly strong 11 percent surge in first half 1996/97 profits on Wednesday, despite erosion of its interest margins.
CBA said good cost control and a 33 percent surge in business lending more than offset a further squeeze in home loan margins.
"Business volumes during the first half of 1996/97 were pleasing, leading to a better than expected interim result," CBA managing director David Murray told a news conference.
"This is likely to lead to a slightly better than expected full-year result," Murray said.
CBA's net profit for the six months to December 31 rose to A$602 million (US$455 million) from A$542 million in the comparable period a year earlier.
CBA had itself been saying until now that it expected hot competition in its key home loan market would squeeze margins and keep profits flat in the year to June 30, 1997.
Analysts too had expected a subdued profit performance, forecasting a profit of between A$535 million and A$560 million.
CBA's shares rallied sharply on the profit and on news of a interim dividend of 45 cents per share, up seven cents on the previous interim dividend.
CBA's shares closed up 50.1 cents at A$13.91, having climbed in afternoon trade to a record high of A$14.00. CBA's surge led the All Ordinaries index overall to a record closing high of 2,473.5, up 25.4 points.
"Obviously the market liked it. The profit was probably about A$50 million above expectations and there was a nice increase in the dividend," said Lance Jones dealer Hamish Dee.
Analysts later said they would increase their forecasts for CBA's full-year profit by about A$50 million to A$1.15 billion.
But CBA dampened optimism about its business lending boom on Wednesday by cutting its key varible home mortgage rate to 7.55 percent from 8.25 percent, ensuring further margin pressure.
CBA's group net interest margin fell to 3.71 percent in the first half from 4.12 percent in the first half of 1995/96 and Murray said the latest cut would further erode margins.
This is CBA's second unilateral home loan interest rate cut in less than a year. The bank cut its key variable home loan rate to 9.9 percent from 10.5 percent in May.
That cut triggered a round of mortgage rate cuts by the other major banks and was generally seen as the catalyst to a 50 to 75 basis point cut in big bank home loan margins.
But CBA's pre-emptive strike was also popular with home lenders, who increased their lending from the bank by 14 percent in the half.
Murray said the latest home loan cuts had more to do with increasingly aggressive competition in the home loan market than with any pre-emption of another cut in official cash rates.
Non bank lenders like Aussie Home Loans have snared about 10 percent of the home loan market in the last three years with cheap loans funded by securitised bond issues.
CBA also said its efforts to control costs and increase productivity were a factor in the better than expected profit.
Meanwhile, CBA confirmed that it was looking closely at securitising some of its mortgage portfolio and that it was not looking at issuing a special dividend, contrary to speculation.
(A$1=US$0.75)
