Analysts said on Wednesday they would increase their forecasts for the Commonwealth Bank of Australia's (CBA) year net profit by about A$50 million to A$1.15 billion after a surprisingly strong first half result.
CBA posted a net profit for the six months to December 31 of A$602 million, up 11 percent from A$542 million in the previous comparable half and well above analysts' expectations of A$535 million to A$560 million.
But analysts said the CBA's announcement of another round of unprompted mortgage rate cuts had dampened their enthusiasm.  
"I'll have to push my numbers up a bit. It just depends on the effect of that rate cut today," said Macquarie Equities banking analyst Graham Maloney said.
CBA announced that it would cut its main variable mortgage rate to 7.55 percent from 8.25 percent and would cut its 'no frills' Economiser variable rate to 6.95 percent from 7.35 percent from March 27 for existing customers and February 13 for new customers.  
The rate cut is seen ebbing further away at CBA's margins because of CBA managing director David Murray's comments that the cut was for competitive reasons, not in advance of another cut in official cash rates.
ABN AMRO banking analyst Michael Pulman said he had increased his forecast for CBA's full year net profit post goodwill to about A$1.158 billion from about A$1.1 billion before the result.
Pulman said the new rate cut would further cut margins, but that it may not be as much as in the past.  
Analysts said the increasing size of the CBA's commercial lending portfolio and its overseas portfolio meant the rate cut would have a proportionally lower effect.
The competitive benefits and the resultingly stronger lending growth also dampened the effect of the cut on margins, they said.
"It's not huge at the end of the line," said Pulman.
"They said last year that for every 10 basis point cut in the fully variable rate, you can cut A$12 million from the profit immediately and A$5 million over time," he said.
"I think it will be less than that this time."  
CBA's commercial lending approvals rose 33 percent in the first half and new equipment finance rose 30 percent.
CBA said the launch of its Business Asset Finance and Capital Business Card products in July and October 1996 had attracted significant new business.
Housing loans rose 14 percent to A$36.63 billion in the first half and the CBA's share of total new home loan approvals continued to run ahead of its share of the total existing home loans.  
BNP Equities analyst Linda Lyon said she wouldn't be surprised if CBA's second half profit was actually lower than in the first half.
"There's this continual slicing into the margins," Lyon said. "I would be looking at a flat second half," she said.
Share traders however were much more ebullient, shunting CBA stock to a new all time high of A$14.00 in late afternoon trade, before it eased back to close 50.1 cents higher at A$13.911.
CBA's surge led the All Ordinaries index overall to a record closing high of 2,473.5, up 25.4 points.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 373-1800
