The Commonwealth Bank of Australia (CBA) announced a surprisingly strong 11 percent rise in first half profits on Wednesday as a 33 percent surge in business lending more than offset a further squeeze in home loan margins.
"Business volumes during the first half of 1996/97 were pleasing, leading to a better than expected interim result," CBA managing director David Murray told a news conference.
"This likely to lead to a slightly better than expected full year result," Murray said.  
CBA's net profit for the six months to December 31 rose to A$602 million from A$542 million in the comparable six months a year earlier.
CBA had itself been saying until now that it expected competition in its key home loan market would squeeze home loan margins and keep profits flat in the year to June 30, 1997.
Analysts too had expected a subdued profit performance, forecasting a profit of between A$535 million and A$560 million.
CBA's shares rallied sharply on the profit and on news of a interim dividend of 45 cents per share, up seven cents on the previous interim dividend.  
CBA's shares were up 47 cents at A$13.88 at 3.50 p.m. (0450 GMT), helping to drive the share market overall to a new record high. "Obviously the market liked it. The profit was probably about A$50 million above expectations and there was a nice increase in the dividend," said Lance Jones dealer Hamish Dee.
CBA said the launch of its Business Asset Finance and Capital Business Card products in July and October 1996 had attracted significant new business.  
But CBA dampened optimism about its business lending boom by cutting its varible home mortgage rates by up to 0.7 of a percentage point, ensuring further margin pressure on Australia's largest home lender.
"It will narrow the margins further," Murray said.
CBA's group net interest margin fell to 3.71 percent in the first half of 1996/96, compared with 4.12 percent and 4.10 percent respectively in the first and second halves of 1995/96.
This is CBA's second unilateral home loan interest rate cut in less than a year. The bank cut its key variable home loan rate to 9.9 percent from 10.5 percent in May.  
That cut triggered a round of mortgage rate cuts by the other major banks and was generally seen as the catalyst to a 50 to 75 basis point cut in big bank home loan margins.
It cut its key variable rate to 7.55 percent on Wednesday.
Murray was reluctant to predict that the CBA would sustain the 11 percent profit rise through the full year because of the expected margin squeeze, saying only that 1996/97 was likely to be a little better than the previously expected flat result.
He said the latest home loan cuts had more to do with increasingly aggressive competition in the home loan market than with any pre-emption of another cut in official cash rates.  
"It's true that this move has got more to do with the structure of home loan interest rates in Australia than it has to do with our view about monetary policy," he said.
CBA also said its efforts to control costs and increase productivity were a factor in the the better than expected profit. CBA's cost to income ratio fell to 60.3 percent from 60.9 percent and would have been 59.5 percent if not for CBA's buy-back of 10 percent of its shares from the government.
Meanwhile the CBA confirmed that it was looking closely at securitising some of its mortgage portfolio and that it was not looking at issuing a special dividend.
