Newspaper, magazine and radio group Rural Press Ltd said on Thursday that it was not confident of the economic turnaround needed to increase its profit for the full year to June 30, 1997.
"My personal view is that we're some time away from some significant turnaround ... in the consumer markets and in real estate," managing director Brian McCarthy told Reuters.
"I can't see much improvement up to the middle of the year at the earliest," McCarthy said in an Interview.  
Earlier Rural Press announced a four percent rise in net profit for the six months to December to A$16.96 million and set an unchanged dividend of four cents per share.
But Rural Press also warned that trading in the first five weeks of the second half had been below last year and that it needed an improvement in the economy to continue its history of profit rises for the full year.
McCarthy said earnings before interest and tax would have fallen marginally in the half year if they had been compared on a like-for-like basis before the effects of acquisitions.  
McCarthy said the slight profit fall on a like-for-like basis was a reflection of weak real estate and retail sectors, which provide the bulk of Rural Press' advertising income.
"The retailing industry is very flat to the point of depressed. There's not a lot of activity in the real estate sectors and they are our key sources of revenue," he said.
"We think we're doing all of the things that have to be done internally, but it's a very hard external environment that we're looking at today," he added. "In the framework in which we operate, we don't see it as a disappointing result."  
McCarthy said that given the tough economic outlook, there was not going to a major second half recovery in Rural Press' revenues.
He said it was unlikely that Rural Press' final dividend would fall.
However Rural Press, despite the operational pressure, remained keen to acquire new businesses, McCarthy said.
"We're still very, very keen to keep growing and acquiring," he said, adding that Rural Press had facilities in place to allow acquisitions worth up to A$50 million.  
Rural Press' share price closed unchanged at A$4.10, despite the market's one percent rise overall to a record high.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
