Commonwealth Bank of Australia (CBA) managing director David Murray, buoyant after a surprisingly strong profit result, said on Thursday that CBA had decided to expand its presence in Asia and New Zealand.
Murray also said CBA had submitted a first-round non-binding bid to buy Axiom Funds Mangement, which manages A$17 billion of funds and is being sold by the New South Wales state government.  
"We've already expanded our presence in Asia and we're about to start our joint venture bank in Indonesia, but I think there's more up there for us to do and we've decided to seek out some fresh opportunities," Murray told reporters after addressing a Securities Institute function.
"Our focus has been Indonesia, China, Vietnam and India because they are countries whose financial systems are still evolving because the Australian system, which is one we know very well, is quite mature," he said.  
"We're looking in each of those countries for joint venture opportunities," he said, adding such joint venture arrangements would not require significant capital injections from CBA.
CBA announced an 11 percent rise in net profit for the six months to December 31 to A$602 million and increased its interim dividend by seven cents to 45 cents per share.
The result was well above expectations and fired a four percent rally in CBA's share price to A$13.90. The stock closed up two cents at A$13.93 on Thursday as the overall market rallied another one percent to an all-time high.  
Murray said CBA was looking to diversify and expand in New Zealand as well as Asia, and was examining acquisition opportunities and the potential for organic growth of its ASB Bank unit there.
He said CBA had been successful in New Zealand with ASB Bank, but that it still had only a relatively small presence.
"So if we had any opportunities to expand any further, we'd like to take them, because we know the market and we think we could provide a pretty good service there," he said.  
Murray agreed that the only large bank in New Zealand not already owned by CBA or its Australian competitors was the National Bank of New Zealand Ltd, which is owned by Lloyds TSB Group Plc.
Murray said CBA had enough capital on hand to handle routine expansion and therefore would continue with its current high dividend payout ratio. CBA would go back to shareholders either to adjust its dividend payout ratio or to raise capital through a share issue if it wanted to make a larger than routine acquisition, Murray said.
He would not specify how big a war-chest CBA had.  
Meanwhile, Murray said the squeeze in home loan margins from about 300 basis points early last year to about 150 basis points now may have reached its limit.
CBA stunned the home lending market on Wednesday when it cut its key variable home mortgage rate to 7.55 percent from 8.25 percent, its second unilateral rate cut in less than a year. A similar sized unilateral cut in May last year was seen as the catalyst to a significant cut in big bank home loan margins.
"We're either at or fast approaching a margin which is very competitive in world terms for home mortgages," Murray told reporters.  
"I therefore believe that the process from here will be incremental."
Murray also took the opportunity to dismiss speculation that CBA was about to securitise its entire home loan portfolio and return the then un-necessary capital to shareholders.
He said the global trend  mutual funds would increase the pressure for funding mortgages through securitisation.
"This does not mean that we are going to run out tomorrow and securitise our whole home loan book because there is not enough buyers out there and enough funds to take it because of their asset allocations," he said.  
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
