Australian television network, The Seven Network Ltd, is expected to report a 25-30 percent higher pre-abnormal annual net profit on Monday, but analysts said this rise was likely to disguise a second half profit slowdown.
"Second half sales growth is going to be quite modest because the Ten Network and Seven lost to Nine," said one Sydney analyst.
"And post-Olympics the group hasn't bounced back," he said.
Seven had the Australian TV rights to the Atlanta Olympic Games, after it closed its books on June 30.  
The median forecast in BZW Australia's Barceps survey of analysts was for a pre-abnormals net profit for the year to June 30 of A$114 million.
Forecasts range from A$105 million to A$120.7 million and compares with the A$88.5 million posted in 1994/95.
But that 1994/95 figure was cut heavily by a bungle over discounted advertising rates, which cost Seven A$20-30 million and which has been reversed.
A A$114 million net profit would also represent slow growth from the already booked first half profit of A$91.88 million.  
Seven managing director Gary Rice said in April he expected a better second half in 1995/96 than for the discounting-affected second half of 1994/95.
Seven has also said it expected advertising sales in 1995/96 would be six to seven percent higher for the year, after sales growth of 7.5 percent in the first half of 1995/96.
Analysts said ratings losses to the dominant Nine Network, owned by Kerry Packer's Publishing and Broadcasting Ltd, had softened advertising sales. The Ten Network, majority owned by Canada's Canwest, had also been hit by Nine's strength, they said.  
Some said higher costs linked to an expansion of news and current affairs programming may also restrain second half profits.
"Most people will be looking out to see that the move to more news and current affairs will not have caused a blowout in costs," said Burdett, Buckridge and Young media analyst Vince Pepe.
"They'll also be looking for Seven's future strategy in relation to news and current affairs, given the existing strategy appears to have floundered in some time slots," Pepe said.  
Seven recently cancelled a new 5.00 p.m. national news programme after a short trial because of poor ratings and the recently launched Witness flagship current affairs programme has not been a runaway ratings hit.
Other analysts said Seven may have contained its costs.
"Costs have been pretty well contained in the four to five percent industry range, by dropping costs and laying off people quietly to accommodate the extra news and current affairs push," said a Sydney media analyst.
Analysts would also focus on further details about the future of Hollywood film studio, Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer.  
Seven and Kirk Kerkorian's Tracinda Corp agreed in July to pay US$1.3 billion for the studio.
"We'll be looking for any further indications on MGM because when the actual transaction has been completed I believe the business plan there will have changed quite considerably," said Pepe.
Seven itself is 15 percent owned by News Corp Ltd and about 20 percent owned by Seven chairman Kerry Stokes.
Seven's shares were down five cents at A$3.80 at 2.15 p.m. (0415 GMT).
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
