The consortium building the 2000 Olympic Stadium in Sydney has sought permission from the International Olympic Committee to sell Games tickets overseas after struggling to find local buyers for its financing scheme.
The Stadium Australia group -- hoping to ride the coat-tails of Atlanta Games enthusiasm -- said in October it wanted to raise A$364.4 million (US$282.4 million) by selling packages of Olympic tickets, equity and stadium memberships.
But a lack of local buyers for the 34,400 packages, which sell for A$10,000 each, has twice forced underwriters to extend their deadline for the novel Olympic float.
As a result of the slow demand, Stadium Australia want to sell the ticket component of the package separately to overseas buyers after originally restricting the scheme to the domestic market.
"We are in negotiation with the International Olympic Committee (IOC). We are also talking to the Olympic committees in the U.S., U.K. and several other countries," a Stadium Australia spokeswoman told Reuters.
The underwriters must fund the project regardless of whether all the packages are sold, thus guaranteeing the completion of the 110,000-seat stadium, which is due to open in 1999 at a cost of A$660 million.
Each "Gold" package includes one seat at each of the stadium sessions during the Olympics, a seat at most sporting events at the stadium until 2029 and 1,000 shares in the Stadium company.
But city brokers said on Friday only about one third of the packages had been sold as Olympic enthusiasm in the wake of Australia's record medal haul at Atlanta had waned and the local economy had slowed.
"There's just not much demand for them and the talk around is only about 30 to 40 percent are spoken for," one Sydney broker said.
Other brokers said repeated attempts to interest private clients had met with little success.
If the brokers are correct and the consortium fails to raise any further finance, the stadium's underwriters could be exposed to a shortfall of about A$240 million when the share and ticket offer closes on March 27.
The Stadium Australia spokeswoman said the offer was not in trouble and there was enough time to raise the capital, adding that "considerably more than one third" of the packages had already been sold.
"The demand has not been as great as originally anticipated locally but we have experienced the reverse internationally," the spokeswoman said. "It is a question not of whether we are going to sell them but who we are going to sell them to."
The four underwriters are ANZ Securities, Deutsche Morgan Grenfell, Macquarie Bank Ltd, and ABN Amro Hoare Govett.
(A$1 = US$0.7750)
