Australian-based pallet hire and logistics group Brambles Industries Ltd loaded up another strong first-half profit rise on Friday, but was quick to warn investors not to expect such strength in the second half.
Brambles chief executive John Fletcher said slow European and Australian economies, along with a smaller boost from lower net interest costs, would slow growth in the second half.
Fletcher told Reuters analysts should not get too excited by a better-than-expected first-half result and should hold on to the full-year profit forecasts they made before the result.
"The message is that the existing market expectations for the full year that were there before this announcement, they're still looking okay," Fletcher said.
He said the average of the Barceps survey of analysts' forecasts for the 1996/97 year to June 30 was A$240.3 million (US$186.2 million)
This would be a near 12 percent rise for the full year on the A$214.8 million pre-abnormal net profit posted in 1995/96.
Earlier, Brambles reported its first-half net profit before abnormals rose 14.8 percent to A$117.2 million.
There were no abnormal profits or losses in the period.
Brambles also raised its dividend to 35 cents a share from 34 cents.
Fletcher said the higher profit reflected strong growth in North America and higher earnings despite difficult conditions in Australia and Europe.
Revenue fell A$145 million to A$1.454 billion in the half.
"Lower net interest resulting from the proceeds of the sale of under-performing activities in Australia and Europe, and lower interest rates, also contributed to the overall improvement," Fletcher said.
Net interest expenses fell to A$22.3 million from A$32.3 million in the half because debt was repaid after asset sales.
Brambles said its Australian units continued to perform sluggishly overall, "with little evidence of an improvement in those areas of the economy in which the company operates".
Subdued economic conditions in continental Europe continued to affect growth from Brambles' European activites, it said.
"But this was offset by the good gains achieved by the CHEP (pallet hire) and Cleanaway joint ventures," Brambles said.
Brambles' CHEP joint venture is with Britain's GKN Plc.
Brambles said it experienced good profit growth from its U.S. activities.
Earnings before interest, tax and abnormals at U.S. operations rose to A$26.2 million in the half from A$17.8 million in the same period a year earlier.
"If only I had three Americas," Fletcher said.
Brambles said it was talking to General Electric Capital and General Electric Plastics about the supply and leasing of plastic pallets in the United States and Europe.
It said it had worked with various parties on the development of a plastic pallet, but had yet to find a pallet as strong, durable or cheap as wood.
Fletcher told Reuters that Brambles was a lot closer to finding an acceptable plastic pallet this year than in previous years. "We could be within 12 months of finding something," he said.
Brambles shares closed unchanged on Friday at A$21.70, after having earlier risen to an intra-day high of A$21.94.
(A$ = US$0.77)
