Australia's largest shopping mall owner, Westfield Holdings Ltd, announced on Wednesday its U.S. arm would list on the New York Stock Exchange in May and raise US$400 million in an initial public offering.
Westfield America Inc would then use the proceeds to go on a US$500 million shopping spree around the United States, buying out Westfield's partners in the shopping malls it already owns and buying new malls.  
The resulting group would then be the fourth largest listed shopping mall owner in the United States, Westfield Holdings chairman Frank Lowy said.
"We opened a little door before and now we're opening a huge door for us to expand our business in the United States," Lowy told a news conference.
Lowy said Westfield America Trust would list its U.S. vehicle CenterMark Properties Inc as Westfield America Inc, diluting its 67.2 percent stake in CenterMark to about 50 percent.  
Westfield America would then first buy Westfield Holdings' 50 percent stake in the Garden State Plaza shopping centre in New Jersey for US$145 million.
About US$210 million would then be available to buy out Westfield America's partners in shopping malls it already partly owns and to buy up new malls.
Lowy told the news conference the US$210 million of equity would be combined with debt to buy out partners and new malls.
"We see borrowings of maybe US$150 million to A$200 million which gives us an opportunity to consider acquisitions of about US$350 million altogether," Lowy said.  
Ownershiop of U.S. shopping malls was increasingly transferring from private or family companies into listed public companies and Westfield's U.S. listing would help accelerate the process, he said.
Lowy said many of Westfield America's partners were family concerns or closed-end funds, many of whom wanted to cash in their stakes. Closed-end funds must cash in their investments after a certain period.
Some were also unable to inject the extra capital needed to continually re-develop or expand the shopping malls, Lowy said.  
"Some of our partners just do not have the cash and now they have the option of watering down (their holdings) or selling out," Lowy said.
Westfield had said last year when listing the Australian unit trust vehicle for Centermark, Westfield America Trust, that it planned to list CenterMark in the United States within five years. Lowy said strong U.S. market conditions had led to the earlier than expected listing.
The offering is planned for May and is being underwritten by Merrill Lynch &amp; Co, but Lowy said the timing may change if the U.S. market slumps before then.  
"If conditions change, we'll have to reassess," he said.
"It would have to be a significant change."
Westfield officials said the U.S. listing gave the Australian-based company more flexibility when acquiring shopping malls in the United States, as it opened up access to the U.S. debt markets.
The ability to offer U.S. listed shares to shopping mall owners instead of cash would also open up a new range of acquisition opportunities as many sellers preferred shares to cash for tax reasons, they said.  
Westfield America Trust units closed up one cent at A$1.14 and Westfield Holdings shares closed up ten cents at A$19.80 against a flat market overall.
Westfield Holdings has about 30 percent of Westfield America Trust units.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
