Investment bank Natwest Markets Australia Ltd said on Tuesday it aimed to hold on to its leading market share in equities broking in Australia in 1997 but would stay clear of the burgeoning mortgage securitisation sector.
"The first thing is to make sure we maintain our market position," Natwest Markets Australia Ltd chief executive Peter St George told Reuters in an interview. "We want to broaden and deepen our penetration of the market," St George said.  
Natwest Markets currently leads the rankings of equities brokers in Australia as measured by the latest Australian Stock Exchange data with a 9.8 percent market share.
St George said Natwest would need to widen its research and distribution activities to keep up with the likely changes in the Australian stock market over the next two to three years.
The impending privatisation of Australia's largest telecoms group, Telstra Corp, as well as the sale of government-owned airports and the demutualisation of Australia's largest insurance and investment group, The Australian Mutual Provident Society, would change the shape of the market overall, he said.  
"If you look on a two to three year horizon you should see big movements in the market in telecoms, infrastructure and insurance," St George said.
"These are some changes for people to get their research capabilities and international delivery mechanisms in place for," he said.
Earlier on Tuesday Natwest Markets Australia, a unit of National Westminister Bank Plc, reported a 40 percent rise in operating profit before tax to A$70.5 million for calendar 1996.  
"The areas we will focus on in terms of the equities business are advancing some of the work we've been doing in the structured products and derivatives products," St George said.
Natwest's debt and corporate finance divisions would aim to extend non-government debt operations but would stay away from the structuring of securitised mortgage deals for now, he said.
"In the debt markets, we're getting away from some of the meatier bonds like government bonds and looking into some of the other areas, like corporate bonds and infrastructure financing," he said.  
St George said Natwest Markets was involved on a large scale in the mortgage securitisation market in the United States and elsewhere but would concentrate on the wholesale sector in Australia.
"It's quite labour intensive. It hasn't been attractive to us because we don't think the profits are there," he said.
"I wouldn't particularly think we're going to make a big move in there at this point in time."
Natwest Australia Corporate Finance currently manages the wholesale securitised vehicles, Prime Asset Vehicle (PAV) 1 and PAV 2.  
"They take really high quality paper and recyle those into the United States and international markets," he said.
"We're not aiming at that same segment of the market as Macquarie does from Australia," he added.
Fellow investment bank and broker Macquarie Bank Ltd has dominated the burgeoning mortgage securitisation market in Australia in recent years.
Macquarie's PUMA Management Ltd plans to raise A$3 billion in 1997 to fund securitised mortgages, having raised A$3.508 billion since its first bond issue in June 1993.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
