Papua New Guinea's (PNG) Australian-listed stocks slumped five to ten percent on Monday as international investors fearful of a law and order meltdown reacted to the army's attempt to force the PNG government aside.
Orogen Minerals Ltd, which is 51 percent owned by the PNG government, was one of the hardest hit, slumping seven percent or 24 cents to A$3.20. 
Other stocks jagged as much as ten percent lower in increasingly hectic afternoon trade as reports emerged that the head of the army and the police commissioner had told Prime Minister Julius Chan to resign or be forced aside in two days.
The army and police are angry the government has employed mercenaries to help the armed forces subdue seccessionists on Bougainville Island.
Brokers and analysts said investors feared an army mutiny and possible civil unrest in the capital Port Moresby would spread to the remote areas where most of PNG's huge gold mines and oil projects are located.  
"The danger is if any local tribes use this dispute as an excuse to act up and this would affect local mining operations," said Shaw Stockbroking research director Michael Heffernan.
Major mining projects in Papua New Guinea's rugged hinterlands like the giant OK Tedi project, controlled by the Broken Hill Pty Co Ltd, are often in dispute with local tribal groups.
Analysts said investors' need look no further than the now-dormant copper project on Bougainville to see what happens when the central government and armed forces lose control.  
The Bougainville Copper mine was shut down in 1989 when rebellious landowners who wanted bigger returns from the project sabotaged the mine and began the current recessionist revolt.
"There's always a certain amount of civil unrest, but if the more militant groups in the regions use this as an excuse to party as it were, it could disrupt operations," Heffernan said.
Local brokers became increasingly pessimistic through the afternoon, moving in anticipation of an expected selloff by overseas institutional investors.  
"I don't know what the outcome of that (situation) is going to be but it seems to me to be very dismal," said broker Kevin Lourey of Melbourne-based brokerage, Peake Lands Kirwan.
"The international reaction to this sort of situation is usually very negative," said resources analyst David Walker at broker ABN AMRO Hoare Govett
"The fear is that tonight, particularly on the London exchange, where most of the resource investment in this part of the world comes fron, there will be a strong negative reaction," Walker said.  
The worst-affected stock in the afternoon rout was oil producer and explorer Oil Search Ltd, which fell 8.5 percent or 24 cents to A$2.60.
Bougainville Copper Ltd, which is controlled by RTZ Corp Plc-CRA Ltd fell five cents to 55 cents.
Analysts said the government's moves over next day or two would be crucial in limiting any further damage. Prime Minister Chan had yet to respond to the army ultimatum by 0820 GMT.
"The next 24 hours is crucial for the Chan government and also for the value of these investments," Walker said.  
"It's important that the situation becomes as clear as it can very quickly in order not only for the stability of the country, but for the value of the investments."
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373 1800
