Analysts expectations that New Zealand-based whitegoods manufacturer Fisher and Paykel Ltd would post a slightly lower profit in 1996/97 were about right, chief executive Gary Paykel said on Thursday.
"I've been reading some of the local analysts reports and I think they've got it pretty right," Paykel told Reuters in an interview while in Australia opening an expanded factory.
He said was referring to research reports from J.B. Were, Hendry Hay McIntosh and others forecasting a lower profit in the year to March 31.  
"They're not far off the mark," he said.
"They're just saying that with the tough trading conditions it does look as if it will be a little bit less than probably last year."
He said Fisher and Paykel itself could not make a forecast, but that the analysts were about right.
Some analysts have forecast Fisher and Paykel's full year net profit would fall to about NZ$38 million from the NZ$39.25 million posted in 1995/96.  
Fisher and Paykel reported a first half net profit of NZ$19.2 million in early November and forecast then that full year profits would similar to or slightly better than in 1995/96.
Paykel said that New Zealand market conditions were tough and Fisher and Paykel had been hurt by the loss of an exclusive distribution agreement with appliance retailer Noel Leeming.
"That is impacting on sales -- not to the extent that we thought it would -- but obviously they were about 15 percent of sales in New Zealand and that takes some time to make up," he said.  
Fisher and Paykel had signed an exclusive distribution agreement with Australian-based retailer Harvey Norman Holdings Ltd for their yet-to-be opened New Zealand stores and was hopeful this would prove successful.
"It (the New Zealand market) is very tough now and I don't see the market coming back too much this calendar year, but the NZ fundamentals are still good and things will pick up gradually -- but not this year."
Conditions in the Australian whitegoods market, where Fisher and Paykel has a market share in the low 20 percent range, were looking better, he said.  
Fisher and Paykel was strongest in the higher quality washing machine market sectors in Australia, where it currently had a 40 percent share, Paykel said.
It was weaker in the oven, refrigeration, dishwashing and budget washing machine parts of the market, where it had generally had less than 20 percent market share.
But Paykel said the opening of an expanded factory in Brisbane and the launch of several new products in Australia would boost its market share in these sectors.
He said Fisher and Paykel had just launched a budget model washing machine in Australia retailing for about A$649 each.  
"It's a real competitive, agrressive move and let's see what our competitors do," he said.
Fisher and Paykel's major Australian competitors, Email Ltd and Southcorp Holdings Ltd, offer models with prices of A$499 to A$599.
"We think they're (prices) as low as they can go, and if that's the case we'll see a lot of volume given its features," he said, adding he hoped Fisher and Paykel could raise its share of the budget market to 40 percent.
Fisher and Paykel's share price closed unchanged at NZ$5.15 on Thursday. -- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
