Papua New Guinea's Australian-listed stocks rallied in active trade on Thursday as foreign investors breathed a sigh of relief at the peaceful resolution of the Pacific nation's 10-day political crisis.
Analysts and brokers said investors welcomed Prime Minister Sir Julius Chan's decision late on Wednesday to step aside, which appeared to have calmed an explosive situation and would allow a peaceful transition to a new government.  
"Everyone is relieved that the parliamentary process actually worked and that we didn't go into a period of military control," said ABN AMRO Hoare Govett Head of Mining Research David Walker.
"The expectation that the mid-year elections can be brought forward and that there can be an orderly resolution of the impasse has been accepted well," Walker said.
Chan stood down on Wednesday under widespread pressure to quit for his hiring of mercenaries to crush an uprising on copper-rich Bougainville island.  
Mining investments group Orogen Minerals Ltd, which is owned 51 percent by the PNG government, closed up eight cents at A$3.10. Oil producer and explorer Oil Search Ltd, which is the largest of the pure Papua New Guinea stocks listed in Australia, closed up 13 cents at A$2.70.
The developer of the one of the world's largest gold deposits at Lihir in PNG, Lihir Gold Ltd, rose two cents to A$2.15. Papua New Guinea retailer and trader, Collins and Leahy Ltd closed up 25 cents at A$3.50 while Bougainville Copper Ltd closed up five cents at 60 cents.  
Papua New Guinea does not have its own stock market, with most large public companies listing on Australia's exchange.
However, analysts said PNG stocks were unlikely to recover all their losses of the past ten days because investors remained somewhat wary of the resource-rich South Pacific nation while the makeup and policies of its new government were undecided.
"It's positive that Chan's (stepped aside) and it should calm the situation up there somewhat," said ANZ Securities gold analyst David Kauler.  
"However, it's clear PNG is now in election mode and there's still a period of three to six months of uncertainty ahead ... but it is a cheap time to be buying some of those PNG stocks, particularly Lihir on the gold side," Kauler said.
Investor confidence remained bruised by images of street riots and the tense standoff between the army and government.
"It's going to be a difficult, volatile period for investment in the country," Kauler said.
"You're going to see a fight between people who see a cheap buying opportunity and other people saying we don't know what the policy is going to be for six months, so let's steer clear."  
Analysts also said the resolution of the political crisis could bring higher taxes for foreign miners, although any new government was unlikely to restrict entry to resource groups.
ABN AMRO's Walker said the new government would have to look at raising taxes, possibly even the 1.25 percent mining royalty to solve its chronic budget deficits problem.
However, the return to stability in Papua New Guinea at the same time as the controversy over the supposedly huge Busang gold deposit in nearby Indonesia had also created a window of opportunity for extra resource investment, analysts said.  
"PNG, having overcome its immediate problems, has really got to settle down and project an image of stability, because there will be capital funds coming out of Indonesia potentially available for PNG projects," Walker said.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
