Underwriters to the heavily under-subscribed Stadium Australia float would not seek to cut their losses and sell the unbought passes at a discount ahead of the Sydney 2000 Olympic Games, Stadium Australia chairman Peter Ritc hie said on Wednesday.
Ritchie told Reuters the underwriters would seek to sell the approximately A$200 million worth of unsold passes over the next couple of years at prices above the float's offer prices.
"They have a couple of years and they're super-confident that they'll sell them and maybe even get more for them between now and the Games," Ritchie said in an interview.
"Our existing gold members are of course concerned that they (the passes) may be discounted and I can assure them that that won't happen because as the Games get closer there'd be more recognition that the prime seats that go with the gold packages wi ll get more and more valuable," he said.
Earlier, Ritchie confirmed market speculation of a A$200 million-plus shortfall in the A$364.4 million float of Stadium gold and platinum passes.
The 35,000 passes offered included packages of main stadium tickets to the 2000 Olympics, a 30-year stadium membership and an equity stake in the stadium itself.
"My rough top-of-the-head calculation is that it is about 40 percent (sold)," he said.
The underwriters, ANZ Securities, Deutsche Morgan Grenfell, Macquarie Bank Ltd and ABN AMRO Hoare Govett, are not due to announce the exact results of the float until this Friday.
They must fund the project regardless of whether all the packages are sold, thus guaranteeing the completion of the 110,000-seat stadium, which is due to open in 1999 in time for a season of pre-Olympic competitions.
The Stadium Australia float, which closed last Thursday, had been open for almost six months, more than twice as long as most share offers.
Its offer of 34,400 gold packages at A$10,000 each and 600 platinum passes at A$33,000 each opened on October 7 and its closing date has been extended twice due to lack of demand.
Brokers said the float had been too complicated for investors to generate enough enthusiasm. Ritchie acknowledged the underwriters had been over-confident and that its structure may have been difficult.
He said the underwriters were targeting a sharemarket listing for the stapled stadium shares and memberships around April 11.
Once the stadium was opened in 1999 however, the stadium shares and the stadium memberships would be unstapled and be traded separately.
Ritchie said the stadium would manage a private market for the stadium memberships, similar to those managed for other Australian stadiums like the Melbourne and Sydney Cricket grounds.
He said he expected the new Sydney stadium memberships would be worth more than those for these other grounds.
"There's no reason to think that our memberships won't sell for more than their's because our facilities are so much better and we'll know then who the hirees (sporting group users) are."
He said Stadium Australian already had strong expressions of interest from the Australian Football League (AFL) which runs the Victorian-based Australian rules competition.
"Strangely enough when it's not really their territory, they've been the most enthusiastic and then we'd have to reconfigure the stadium specification for an oblong field."
Ritchie said the stadium would be designed with mobile stands so after the Olympics the stadium could be converted into an oval easily.
"You put the big stands on wheels and you roll them back for the oval." Stadium Australia had also had talks with the major winter sporting codes in New South Wales, Rugby Union and Rugby League.
-- Sydney newsroom 61-2 9373-1800 (c) Reuters Limited 1997
