Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) chairman Allan Fels said on Thursday that he had a neutral attitude about Westpac Banking Corp's A$1.435 billion bid for Bank of Melbourne Ltd.
Fels also confirmed that he had told Westpac informally two years ago that the anti-monopoly regulator would be hesitant to allow a Westpac takeover of the smaller regional bank.
However, he said that the ACCC acknowledged then that structural change may occur to allow such a takeover at a future date.  
"We have a neutral attitude," Fels told Reuters in an interview.
"We look at mergers on a case-by-case basis at the time they happen. We're awaiting a submission on it and we'll be doing market inquiries," Fels said.
Fels said the earlier informal talks occurred in September 1995 when Westpac sought ACCC for approval for its takeover of Perth-based Challenge Bank.  
"During that time we discussed with Westpac wider issues about regional mergers in general. Obviously that touched on wider possibilities then just Westpac-Challenge," Fels said.
"We then issued a statement which by implication made it look as if we would have quite a bit of hesitation about Westpac-Bank of Melbourne, however there was no formal proposal put to us," he said.
"At that time we would have been hesitant had a formal proposition been put."  
Fels said, however, the commission took the unusual step of saying that this hesitation about Westpac-Bank of Melbourne only applied at that time.
"We did say at the time very explicitly that this was our view at THAT time," he said.
"We said that a couple of times, we don't normally say that sort of thing.
"We were signalling that we were aware that this matter would at some point have to be looked at again because people keep arguing that there's been structural change in the market."  
Fels was careful not to state whether he thought there had been structural change since 1995.
"That's what's been put to us by the parties," he said.
"There've been changes (generally), but we haven't really evaluated their impact," he said, adding he remained neutral on the question of structural change.
But later he told ABC radio he did not agree currently with those arguing there had been relevant, significant structural change in the regional banking sector.
"The question is: has there been a change of circumstance.  
"The parties argue 'Yes.' We haven't, certainly, taken that view at this time but we will look at their submissions," he said.
Fels said it would take the ACCC at least a month to make its decision and would take the Wallis inquiry's report into account, but would not be bound by it.
Earlier Westpac said it would present a strong case that the takeover was pro-competitive.
The two banks said they would merge their retail operations in Victoria and trade under the Bank of Melbourne brand name with local management.  
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
