Bank of Melbourne Ltd announced on Thursday it had agreed to a A$1.435 billion takeover bid by Westpac Banking Corp that valued the Victorian-based bank at 2.1 times net assets.
The two banks said they would merge their retail operations in Victoria and trade under the Bank of Melbourne brand name with local management, subject to the approval of Treasurer Peter Costello and the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC).  
Westpac said it would offer A$9.75 for each Bank of Melbourne ordinary share, including a full franked 90 cent per share special dividend.
Shareholders had a choice of receiving the A$8.85 balance in cash or in the form of one Westpac share plus up to A$1.85 in cash, it said.
Westpac would offer A$15.36 in cash for each converting preference share or a combination of Westpac shares and cash to a maximum of A$1.36.
The offer represented an earnings multiple of 15.2 times 1997 prospective earnings as forecast by Barceps.  
"This represented 2.1 times net assets which was comparable to the 2.1 times net assets paid by St George Bank for Advance Bank and the 2.1 times net assets paid by Westpac to Challenge shareholders," Bank of Melbourne said.
Bank of Melbourne and Westpac, who must convince the ACCC that their merger does not lessen competition in Victoria, said they would present a strong pro-competitive case to the ACCC.
"Our regional banking approach will ensure Bank of Melbourne becomes a stronger competitive force in Victoria and retains its local indentity," Westpac Managing Director Bob Joss said.  
"This approach which was established in Western Australia and New Zealand will provide the framework for Victoria in delivering local product and marketing discretion, local credit decision making with Westpac's overall credit policy guidelines, local personnel management and local community sponsorship," Joss said.
The ACCC has previously said it would not allow a merger that left a state market without a significant regional bank and the ACCC reportedly rejected an informal merger approach by the two banks two years ago. The ACCC said they would carefully examine the latest merger proposal over the next several weeks.  
Meanwhile, the Treasurer Peter Costello said he would not even consider the merger application until he had released the official Wallis Inquiry into financial market regulation and the government had considered its response. This could take months.
"Any application for a merger between Westpac and the Bank of Melbourne will be determined in accordance with that policy, policy as announced in response to the Wallis report," Costello told reporters in Canberra.
"The application will not be dealt with until that policy is announced and it will be determined in accordance with that policy."  
Market reaction to the merger deal was mixed, but analysts said it appeared fair and was likely to succeed.
"I think they would have both done their homework beforehand and I think it will be successful," said Merrill Lynch Australia bank analyst Hayden Aspinall.
Bank of Melbourne shares jumped 95 cents to A$9.75 as soon as trade started but had drifted back to A$9.44 by 3.30 p.m. (0530 GMT). Westpac's shares initially jumped nine cents to A$6.96, but has since settled to be two cents down at A$6.85.  
Late on Thursday, Standard and Poor's Corp said it had affirmed the AA-minus long term and A1 plus short term counterparty ratings for Westpac and placed the A-minus long term and A2 short term counterparty ratings for the Bank of Melbourne on creditWatch positive.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
