Australia's largest banks and insurance groups, impatient to go on the merger and acquisition warpath, have had to sit on their expansion plans over the last year while they waited for the "Wallis report".
Now their wait is almost over.
The Financial System Inquiry set up in June last year by the then newly elected Liberal/National government and chaired by businessman Stan Wallis will release its report at noon (0200 GMT) on Wednesday.
Analysts expect Wallis will recommend an easing of current restrictions on mergers between Australia's six largest financial groups, unleashing acquisitive banks like National Australia Bank (NAB) to go hunting for the smaller majors like Westpac Banking Corp and ANZ Banking Group Ltd.
The waiting has already proved too much for one bank, which jumped the gun last week and announced it had agreed to take over another smaller regional bank.
Treasurer Peter Costello, who is releasing the Wallis report, pointedly said he would not approve Westpac's plan to take over Bank of Melbourne until he had considered Wallis' recommendations.
Wallis is also expected to ease rules governing foreign takeovers of Australia's largest banks and revolutionise its systems for prudential supervision.
"The expectation in the marketplace is that Wallis will lead to an easing of the rules on mergers -- that's the key issue," said Craig Drummond, head of research at one of Australia's largest brokers, J.B. Were.
Share prices of Australia's banks, and particularly those seen as most vulnerable to takeover, have rallied in recent months in expectation of an easing of the former Labor government's "Six Pillars" Policy.
Then Labor Treasurer Paul Keating instituted the "Six Pillars" policy in 1990 to stop mergers between any of Australia's big four banks, ANZ, Westpac, NAB and Commonwealth Bank of Australia and the two largest pension and life insurance groups, Australian Mutual Provident Society and National Mutual.
Wallis said in November his inquiry would look at recommending "Six Pillars" be scrapped, leaving any judgement on a bank or life group merger to the anti-monopolies regulator, the Australian Consumer and Competition Commission (ACCC).
Those arguing for an end to "Six Pillars", including NAB, have said global competition and new technology like Internet banking meant big bank mergers would not reduce competition.
Wallis is also widely expected to cut back the number of regulators which currently monitor the prudential health of banks, credit union, insurance groups and superannuation funds.
Wallis may even remove the Reserve Bank of Australia's powers as the prudential supervisor to banks, leaving it to concentrate on operating monetary policy.
One other option being considered that could transform the big banks' share registers is a relaxation of laws which currently stop industrial companies and other non-banks from owning more than 10 percent of a bank.
The rule is supposed to stop a bank being weakened by one of its owners, if perhaps a more risky company went bankrupt.
Wallis has said he wants to foster competition and lower the barriers to ownership and participation in the banking system, possibly allowing telecommunciations groups and others to buy into banks or operate their own banks on the Internet.
