Treasurer Peter Costello on Wednesday announced the biggest financial reforms Australia has seen since 1983, loosening restrictions on bank and life office mergers and foreign takeovers of banks.
But against market expectations, Costello stopped short of allowing mergers between Australia's big four banks -- Westpac, Australia and New Zealand Banking Group (ANZ), National Australia Bank (NAB) and the Commonwealth Bank of Australia.
He also warned foreigners they would not be allowed to buy too big a chunk of Australia's banking sector.
"Today I announce the 'Six Pillars' policy is abolished," Costello told a news conference as he released the official Wallis Financial System Inquiry.
The "Six Pillars" policy, introduced by former Labor treasurer Paul Keating, prevented mergers between Australia's major banks and the two largest pension and life insurance groups, Australian Mutual Provident Society and National Mutual.
Costello's conservative Liberal/National coalition was elected in March last year and set up the Wallis Inquiry three months later to look at reforming Labor's policies.
Chairman Stan Wallis' brief was to set the next generation of financial reforms to follow those started in 1983 which floated the currency and removed interest rate controls.
Costello's dumping of the 'Six Pillar' policy means life insurance groups will be able to merge with the big banks and others.
But he did not let the banks off the leash.
"The government has further decided that mergers among the four major banks will not be permitted at this time," he said.
This surprised pundits and banks alike, who have waited eagerly for Costello to give the green light to big mergers.
"This (four pillars policy) will be reviewed when the government is satisfied that competition from new and established participants in the financial industry...has increased sufficiently to allow such mergers to be considered."
Brokers and analysts said this merger road-block would disappoint those who had built takeover premiums into the share prices of Westpac and ANZ, seen the likely takeover targets.
But they said the potential for foreign takeover was likely to soothe some of that disappointment.
"The equity markets are a little bit disappointed that the 'four pillars' effectively remain, but at the end of the day there is a potential for foreign takeover," said J.B. Were, head or research at Craig Drummond, adding that Westpac and ANZ were not expensive banks by global standards.
Westpac's shares closed down three percent down while ANZ fell one percent.
In contrast, the bank seen as the most likely predator in a liberalised regime, NAB, jumped 2.5 percent as the market decided it could be the juiciest target for a foreign player.
Investors were also relieved NAB would not have to make a hefty share issue soon to fund a domestic takeover.
Costello was quick however to dampen excitement about the prospect of takeover spree by foreigners, saying he would not allow them to take over as much as 60 percent of the sector.
"It can move off zero, but we won't allow it to go to sustantial foreign ownership," Costello said.
"We certainly would not allow it go as high as foreign ownership in the print media," Costello said. Foreign ownership of the print media was currently around 60 percent, he said.
