Australian Treasurer Peter Costello on Wednesday announced the biggest financial reforms the country has seen since 1983, loosening restrictions on bank and life office mergers and foreign takeovers of banks.
But Costello stopped short of allowing mergers between Australia's big four banks -- Westpac, Australia and New Zealand Banking Group (ANZ), National Australia Bank (NAB) and the Commonwealth Bank of Australia.
"Today I announce the 'Six Pillars' policy is abolished," Costello told a news conference.
The "Six Pillars" policy, introduced by former Labor treasurer Paul Keating, prevented mergers between Australia's major banks and the two largest pension and life insurance groups, Australian Mutual Provident Society and National Mutual.
"The Treasurer will retain powers to reject mergers under relevant banking and insurance laws," said Costello, adding the major domestic banks would not be allowed to merge at this time.
"This will be reviewed when the government is satisfied that competition from new and established participants in the financial industry...has increased sufficiently to allow such mergers to be considered," he said.
Shares in Westpac and Australia and New Zealand Banking Group fell by around three percent as the two, previously seen as takeover targets, lost some of their sheen.
In contrast, NAB and Commonwealth Bank shares both rose as the market decided that they could fall prey to foreign predators. NAB had been seen as likely to mount a bid for Westpac and its price rise was also seen as a sign of relief that no such bid would happen.
Costello also announced the end to an outright ban on foreign takeovers of Australian banks.
"The government has decided to reverse the blanket prohibition on foreign takeovers of any of the major banks," he said.
But Costello said any large-scale transfer of Australian ownership of the financial system to foreign hands would be contrary to the national interest.
"It can move off zero, but we won't allow it to go to sustantial foreign ownership," Costello said.
"We certainly would not allow it go as high as foreign ownership in the print media," Costello said. Foreign ownership of the print media was currently around 60 percent.
Costello was responding to a government-appointed inquiry into the Australian financial system, which released its report on Wednesday recommending the biggest reforms in Australian financial industry since 1983, when the dollar was floated.
Further deregulation followed in 1984, when the government first allowed foreign banks to enter Australia.
Australia's year-old conservative government set up the Financial System Inquiry last June to boost competition.
