Australian Treasurer Peter Costello's construction of a road-block in front of National Australia Bank Ltd's takeover plans has paradoxically made the bank look more attractive, analysts said on Wednesday.
But they said Costello's announcement that he would not allow a big bank merger until parts of the sector became more competitive tarnished the takeover premium built into Westpac Banking Corp's share price in particular.  
Investors who had expected National Australia Bank (NAB) to be given the green light to go on the big bank merger warpath pushed NAB's share price 2.5 percent higher, happy for now it will not have to make a big share issue to finance a takeover.
"The price movement in NAB is a reflection in the short term that the market sees it as a positive NAB won't be an acquirer because of the potential dilution of a share issue to fund such a takeover," said one senior Sydney bank analyst.
"NAB was underpriced and to the extent that a big rights isuse was hanging over the market, it makes sense for it to kick up a bit," said Macquarie Equities analyst Graham Maloney.  
NAB closed up 39 cents at A$16.11 after Treasurer Costello ended the "Six Pillars" policy banning mergers between the four major banks and two major life groups, but said the four majors would have to wait for stronger competition before merging.
Westpac Banking Corp, seen as the most vulnerable to takeover, closed down 20 cents at A$6.67, while ANZ Banking Group Ltd closed down 11 cents at A$7.89.
"There was a margin of acquisition premium there, particularly in Westpac. Now that it appears that there's unlikely to be an acquisition, it makes sense to mark it back," Maloney said.  
Analysts said however that Costello's comments about ending the current blanket ban on foreign takeovers of the major banks could offset some of the sector's disappointment.
"The equity markets are a little bit disappointed that the 'four pillars' effectively remain, but at the end of the day there is a potential for foreign takeover," said J.B. Were, head or research at Craig Drummond, adding that Westpac and ANZ were not expensive banks by global standards.
"The only risk is that there are major foreign holders that bought into both of those banks in the expectation that there could be a major bank merger," Drummond said.  
"Some traders could still cause Westpac and ANZ to be weak in the short term."
Brokers said NAB's share price appeared also to benefit from the potential for a takeover bid by a foreign group.
"(The Wallis report) hasn't ruled out the possibility of allowing a foreign bank to take over any of our banks -- it seems to strengthen NAB's position and also the Commonwealth's (Bank of Australia ) position," said Kevin Lourey, a dealer at Melbourne broker, Peake Lands Kirwan.
CBA's shares rose 28 cents to A$12.98.  
Longer term, analysts said the Wallis Inquiry's recommendations on freeing up access to the banking sector and allowing non-banks access to the payments system would sharpen competition and eventually put profit margins under pressure.
"Opening access to the payments system, I see that as critical," said Morgan Stanley banking analyst John Hobson.
"The capacity of someone like a GE Capital to have access to the payments system is a fairly important increase in competition," he said.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
