HSBC Holdings Plc, Citicorp and Standard Chartered Plc are seen as the hungriest of the predators eyeing Australia's major banks now a ban on takeovers by foreigners has been lifted, analysts said on Thursday.
Treasurer Peter Costello announced on Wednesday the end of a former Labor government's blanket-ban on takeovers of Australia's four largest banks by foreigners.  
The weakest of the four majors, Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd and Westpac Banking Corp, are considered the juiciest prey for the foreign banks.
"HSBC is regarded is as perhaps the number one predator," said ABN AMRO banking analyst Mike Pulman.
"After that Lloyds TSB or ABN AMRO or Citicorp or Deutche Bank are the most likely," Pulman said.
However analysts said HSBC was unlikely to be closely eyeing ANZ because of ANZ's strong presence in Asia through its Grindlays unit, which would simply create duplication.  
National Australia Bank Ltd, the strongest of the big four, is seen as the least likely of the takeover targets because of its hefty overseas assets and its sheer size.
"They (NAB) don't provide purely an Australian exposure and they carry some foreign assets which might not be attractive to a bidder, particularly if you're already in that market," said Shaw Stockbroking banking analyst Anusha Srinivasan.
NAB owns Britain's Yorkshire Bank and Clydesdale Bank, the National Irish Bank and Michigan National Corp.  
"ANZ carries with it the same sort of caveat, do you want exposure to this Asian distribution they've got?" Srinivasan said.
"ANZ argues it would be the least attractive to HSBC because of its Asian operations and the duplication aspect," Pulman said.
However, other analysts said ANZ's Asian connection may prove an attraction rather than a deterrent to those European and U.S. banks that don't have an Asian presence.  
Westpac, which does not have the same overseas assets, is therefore seen as the most likely of the weaker two banks to be taken over by a foreign bank. It is also seen most willing.
"Westpac is possibly the most likely, more because of the attitude of Westpac management which might be the most receptive to a bid," Pulman said.
Westpac's chief executive Bob Joss is an American seen more focused on maximising value for shareholders than keeping the bank Australian-owned.  
Standard Chartered Plc is seen first in line for Westpac, having already formed an alliance with Westpac to provide banking services to Westpac customers in Asia.
The recently privatised Commonwealth Bank of Australia, the final member of the big four, is the dark horse in the race, analysts said.
CBA is heavily exposed to the ultra-competitive home loan market, making it attractive to some who want a strong home loan book, but tarnishing it for others more interested in higher margin activities.  
But any budding foreign acquirer will have to move fast because the first takeover of a four major banks may well be the last to get through before the doors are slammed shut again, the analysts said.
Costello's announcement on the end to the foreign takeover ban went with the caveat that any large scale transfer of bank ownership to foreigners would not be allowed.
Costello did not say how many bank takeovers would be too many, but the official Wallis Financial Inquiry has said any more than one takeover would be a problem.  
"If that is correct, whoever makes their move from offshore is going to have to do it pretty smartly," Srinivasan said.
"If a takeover bid for one of the majors by a foreign bank is successful, then consequent bids might not be," she said.
