If there was any doubt that Prime Minister John Howard's government is obsessed with keeping the "battlers" happy, then Treasurer Peter Costello wiped those out on Wednesday.
Costello could have simply given up his veto on big bank mergers, passing on any bank merger judgement to the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) if, as he said, his primary concern was to make the banks more competitive.
The Wallis Inquiry, which Costello set up, recommended he do just that.
Instead he kept the veto and made up his own mind about how competitive the banks are now by telling the big four they could not merge until they become more competitive.
It's the ACCC's job to judge if a merger reduces competition and Costello is happy to let them pass jugdement in every other sector of the economy, so why not let ACCC Chairman Allan Fels decide on the banks?
The answer became clear when Costello was asked just this question in his news conference on Wednesday. Here's his reply.
"We are a government. We are elected. We are going to account to the Australian people and we have reserved to ourselves, at this stage, the decision that there will not be mergers between the four majors, and we have reserved to ourselves the decision to ensure that the Australian financial system still has healthy Australian ownership.
"We consider that a matter of public policy."
Costello's motivation becomes even clearer when you look at his reasoning for keeping a 'four pillars' policy.
"We do not have a competitive enough access for small business to financial services," he said.
"One of the things that we would be interested in seeing is new entrants, non-bank institutions, starting to develop widely used financial lending practices, in relation to small business."
For small business, read 'battlers'.
The same battlers John Howard has pledged to serve again and again since his election on March 3 last year.
Howard knows the battlers at least dislike the large banks and that they fear what the banks might do to bank fees and charges if they were allowed to get even more powerful.
Even the banks' own consumer surveys show they are very unpopular.
The last thing Howard wants is the ACCC telling him a bank merger is all right and being forced to swallow it.
The battlers, and therefore Howard, know better.
The prognosis for a change of heart is not good.
If the government cannot ignore the politics of bank mergers when it has a massive majority in the lower house, is two years out from the next scheduled election, and is in its first term of government, then when will it?
Some bank analysts expect a change of heart after the inevitable election win in 1999.
Don't bet on it while Costello and Howard are bowing to the battlers.
-- Canberra bureau 61-6 273-2730
