New Zealand-based investment group Brierley Investments Ltd on Tuesday called on the Australian government to relax its investment rules so that New Zealand companies are treated the same as Australian ones.
Brierley chairman Bob Matthew said Australia should change its rules to let New Zealand investment into Australia in the same way that trade between the trans-Tasman neighbours is now unhindered under the Closer Economic Relations agreement.  
"Certainly in the context of Australasia, there seems to be no merit whatsover in having one market for trade purposes and two distinct markets for investment," Matthew told Reuters in an interview.
"Australian business has had the benefit of entirely free investment environment in New Zealand and it's not possible to conceive an effective single market for trade when there's inhibitions as to where one can exploit capital," he said.
Brierley Investments has in the last two to three years made major investments in Australian groups.  
It has bought 28 percent of building materials group James Hardie Industries Ltd, 7.4 percent of retailer Coles Myer Ltd and 19.9 percent of publisher John Fairfax Holdings Ltd.
But this investment push, which sees the New Zealand-based Brierley now with A$1.8 billion invested in Australia and A$1.6 billion in New Zealand, has stalled this year as it came up against various rules restricting its investments.
Brierley was stopped from buying more of Fairfax by rules which force anyone holding more than 19.9 percent to make a full takeover bid or slowly increase their bid.  
Brierley would in any event be stopped from raising its stake any higher than 25 percent because of rules controlling foreign ownership in the media.
Foreigners are also stopped from buying more than 25 percent of telecommunications groups, which effectively stops Telecom Corp of New Zealand from taking a major role in Australia.
But Matthew said he was not overly hopeful the Australian government would kick its dependency on the "regulation habit", particularly when it had an uncooperative Senate.  
"I recognise that slender majorities tend to dampen achievement levels," he said.
Matthew said Australia should also drop its takeover rules and adopt those used in New Zealand which do not place the same restrictions on companies holding stakes over 19.9 percent.
Matthew, who is also Air New Zealand Ltd chairman, said he was optimistic that Australia would look at granting the airline further "beyond rights".
These rights allow Air New Zealand to stop over in Australia, pick up Australian customers and fly them to a third destination other than New Zealand.  
Australia's refusal to grant Air New Zealand further "beyond rights" has been a festering sore in diplomatic and business relations in the last two years.
Matthew said he expected the respective aviation ministers to meet again in May to discuss the issue.
"We consider it well and truly overdue," he said of the granting of the further rights.
Matthew also repeated comments by Brierley executive director Rod Price that Brierley had not spoken to Australian media mogul Kerry Packer about selling Brierley's Fairfax stake to Packer's Publishing and Broadcasting Ltd.  
"No. We aspire to be a long term and increasing shareholder in the Fairfax group," he said.
Packer has said he wants to increase his 11.8 percent stake if the government relaxes rules currently stopping television station owners from owning major newspapers at the same time.
The government is expected to ease these rules set up by the previous Labor government.
Brierley's shares closed unchanged at NZ$1.26 on Tuesday.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
