The Australian government ordered a Canadian television group to reduce its stake in an Australian television network on Friday, reflecting a strengthening in Canberra's opposition to more foreign ownership of local media.
Treasurer Peter Costello ruled that Canwest Global Communications Corp, controlled by Canadian Izzy Asper, must cut its stake in the Ten television network back to its previous 57.5 percent level from its current 76 percent.
Canwest raised its stake earlier this year through associated local companies, but a government authority said the increased ownership broke foreign control rules.
Costello's ruling came as Prime Minister John Howard, in his clearest statement yet, said he did not want foreign investment in the Australian media to go any higher.
"In the media for example, which is in the news at the moment, we've made it clear we don't want foreign investment to go any higher," Howard said in a radio interview after meetings with major media owners in recent weeks.
The government is reviewing cross-media ownership rules set by the former Labor government which stop television station proprietors from owning a major newspaper in the same city or vice versa.
The government is expected to drop these cross-media ownership rules, allowing local television and magazine mogul Kerry Packer to launch a takeover bid for newspaper publisher John Fairfax Holdings Ltd.
Howard also said a proposal by Rupert Murdoch's News Corp Ltd to increase its Australian television holdings had collapsed because Murdoch would not give up some of his newspapers to leave his total media holdings unchanged.
But Howard's determination to block foreign investors like Izzy Asper has unleashed a fierce debate about whether he was favouring Packer in his review of media laws.
Another of Australia's major media owners, Seven Network Ltd chairman Kerry Stokes, accused Howard of having done a "disgraceful" deal to deliver Fairfax to Packer.
Some commentators have said Packer's support for Howard ahead of last year's election has been a factor in Howard's opposition to the cross-media rules, which he says are outdated.
"For the Prime Minister to play king-maker revisits the darkest days of the Labor Party's deal-making with its mates," Stokes told Reuters.
Labor Prime Minister Bob Hawke was seen as close to Packer during the 1980s, before his successor Paul Keating fell out with Packer ahead of his 1996 election rout.
"He (Howard) has made a commitment...done a deal with Packer. There's no other reason for the change," Stokes said, commenting on an Australian Financial Review article which said Howard planned to arrange for Murdoch to support a Packer takeover of Fairfax.
A clearly stung Howard rejected Stokes' claim.
"I reject completely any suggestion of a deal as a silly, erroneous and quite dishonourable claim," Howard told a news conference in Sydney.
"I'm on the record over a period of 10 years as being opposed to the cross-media restrictions," Howard said, pointing out his views preceded Packer's support for him in 1996.
