Seven Network Ltd chairman Kerry Stokes attacked Prime Minister John Howard on Friday, accusing him of having done a "disgraceful" deal to deliver newspaper publisher John Fairfax Holdings Ltd to billionaire Kerry Packer.
Stokes told Reuters in an interview Howard had no right to negotiate any deal on Seven's ownership as part of a larger plan to ensure a Packer takeover of Fairfax.
"Who the hell does the Prime Minister think he's representing?", Stokes said.  
"For the Prime Minister to play king-maker revisits the darkest days of the Labor Party's deal-making with its mates," he said.
Earlier on Friday the Australian Financial Review newspaper reported Howard had offered to do a deal with Rupert Murdoch's News Corp Ltd whereby News would be allowed to raise its stake in the Seven Network if News supported an easing of cross-media rules to allow a Packer takeover of Fairfax.
The Financial Review said Howard's plan fell through last week when News rejected one part of it which would have seen News sell some of its Australian newspapers to a new owner.  
Stokes said the reported deal showed Howard had done a deal with Packer.
"He has made a commitment ... done a deal with Packer. There's no other reason for the change," Stokes said.
"It's obviously to deliver Fairfax to Packer," he said.
"It shows a disgraceful disregard for the public interest."
Stokes said such a deal meant the public would be robbed of an opportunity to have a say on media policy in Australia.
Stokes' Australian Capital Equities currently owns 26 percent of Seven while News owns about 14 percent.  
News, which is classified as a foreign shareholder because of Murdoch's U.S. citizenship, cannot own more than 15 percent of Seven under current foreign ownership rules.
Howard would have to grant an exemption.
The conservative Liberal-National government is currently reviewing the cross-media rules set up by the former Labor government prevent television station owners from owning a major newspaper in the same city or vice versa.
These rules stop Packer's Publishing and Broadcasting Ltd increasing its 12 percent Fairfax stake beyond 15 percent while it owns the top-rating Nine television network.  
The government is widely expected to drop the cross-media rules, allowing Packer to launch a takeover bid for Fairfax, which publishes the Sydney Morning Herald, The Australian Financial Review and The Age newspapers.
Some commentators have said the government's decision to drop the cross-media rules had come after Packer endorsed Howard in a television interview before the 1996 election campaign.
The Financial Review report earlier on Friday said Howard had attempted to arrange the deal so as to mute mounting criticism about a lack of media diversity should Packer take over Fairfax.  
Packer was forced to withdraw from a consortium bidding for Fairfax in the the early 1990s after a public outcry led by former Prime Ministers Gough Whitlam and Malcolm Fraser.
Prime Minister Howard was not available to respond to Stokes specific comments, but his office said earlier comments made by Howard rejecting accusations of such a deal still stood.
Howard said late on Thursday he had opposed the cross-media rules for a long time and his views had nothing to do with Packer's support for him in the election campaign.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
