A successful bid by local billionaire Kerry Packer for publisher John Fairfax Holdings Ltd is not the sure thing many market players and media commentators believe, analysts said on Tuesday.
Before Packer can launch a bid for Fairfax, the government would have to first decide to drop the current cross-media rules and then pass any legislation through a hostile senate.  
Packer would then have to offer a takeover premium on top of an already high Fairfax share price that was both tempting to existing shareholders and not too dilutive for Packer's fellow Publishing and Broadcasting Ltd shareholders.
"There's a few more hurdles to overcome yet," said ABN AMRO Hoare Govett senior media analyst Vince Pepe.
"Getting (Prime Minister John) Howard to introduce legislation is one thing, but getting it through parliament while keeping his backbench appeased is another thing," Pepe said.  
"The amount of political fallout that's beginning might see him wondering whether it is such a clever thing after all," he said.
Howard's cabinet was considering on Tuesday changes to the cross media rules set by the former Labor government that stop television station owners like Packer from buying a major newspaper group like Fairfax.
Howard has already said the rules are outdated and his government is widely expected to drop them, allowing Packer to use his current 15 percent stake as a beachhead for a full scrip-based takeover bid.  
But Howard's position has come under increasing fire in recent days after Seven Network Ltd Chairman Kerry Stokes accused Howard of having done what he called a disgraceful deal with Packer and of playing king-maker.
Former conservative Prime Minister Malcolm Fraser wrote to Howard on Monday, calling on him not to lessen media diversity and Fairfax journalists went on strike on Tuesday morning to protest any government move to drop cross-media rules.
A successful Packer takeover of Fairfax would mean Australia's major newspapers would be divided between Packer and Rupert Murdoch's News Corp Ltd.  
Government back-benchers have also written to Howard expressing their concern about the way changes are being considered.
Controversial independent senator Mal Colston threw up another roadblock in front of any media law changes earlier on Tuesday, threatening to vote against the government.
The fine balance in the senate means if Colston votes against the government, the balance of power transfers to the left-leaning Democrat and Green senators, who have said they oppose any further concentration of media ownership.  
"All the arrows are pointing in the right direction (for a takeover), but I wouldn't say it's a fait accompli," said a senior media analyst.
"It's (cross-media reform) got to get through the senate and the price has got to be reasonable," the analyst said.
Packer and PBL, which would be the vehicle for the scrip-based bid that Packer foreshadowed last year, would have to pay the equivalent of at least A$3.50 for each Fairfax share, analysts said. Fairfax's shares were unchanged at A$3.25 at 1.30 p.m. (0330 GMT).  
That price may prove too painful for Packer and his fellow shareholders, who would be concerned about earnings dilution and would have to approve any deal, analysts said.
"Despite Packer's apparent obsession for Fairfax, he's not going to pay a stupid price for it and some people in the market are expecting a stupid price," said a Sydney media analyst.
"I'd be a pretty disappointed PBL shareholder if he was prepared to pay more than A$3.40 for it," the analyst said, adding that a A$3.40 price would be earnings dilutive given Fairfax's forecast earnings.
"At A$3.50 to A$3.60 it becomes pretty savagely dilutive."  
Analysts said the final roadblock to a successful Packer bid would be dislodging major Fairfax shareholders Brierley Investments Ltd, with about 20 percent, and Bankers Trust Australia with about 13 percent.
Brierley in particular has said often and loudly that it is a long term shareholder with ambitions of its own to take a higher stake and has in recent years held onto its investments for long periods. Packer may also have competition.  
The Australian newspaper reported earlier on Tuesday that British publisher Pearson Plc was part of consortium called Australian Independent Newspapers (AIN) that was considering bidding for all or part of Fairfax.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
