Local billionaire Kerry Packer faces an uphill battle to overcome political opposition and a high asking price if he wants to take over Australia's oldest publisher, John Fairfax Holdings Ltd.
Speculation has simmered for months that Australia's biggest television station owner will launch a takeover bid for Fairfax as soon as the government eased cross-media rules set up by the former Labor government.
Comments by Prime Minister John Howard last week that Fairfax needed an owner like Packer fanned that speculation into talk of an imminent easing of the rules and an inevitably successful takeover bid.
Analysts said on Tuesday however that a successful Packer bid for Fairfax, which publishes three of Australia's most profitable daily newspapers, was not such a sure thing.
Growing political opposition from within Howard's conservative Liberal-National coalition and a hostile Senate have made any Howard plan look more fragile.
"There's a few more hurdles to overcome yet," said ABN AMRO Hoare Govett senior media analyst Vince Pepe.
"Getting (Prime Minister John) Howard to introduce legislation is one thing, but getting it through parliament while keeping his backbench appeased is another thing," Pepe said.
"The amount of political fallout that's beginning might see him wondering whether it is such a clever thing after all."
Howard's cabinet was considering on Tuesday changes to the cross-media rules that stop television station owners like Packer from buying a major newspaper group like Fairfax.
Howard has already said the rules are outdated and his government is widely expected to drop them, allowing Packer to use his current 15 percent stake as a beachhead for a full scrip-based takeover bid.
But Howard's position has come under increasing fire in recent days after Seven Network Ltd Chairman Kerry Stokes accused Howard of having done what he called a disgraceful deal with Packer that would concetrate media ownership into the hands of just two men.
A successful Packer takeover of Fairfax would mean Australia's major newspapers would be divided between Packer and Rupert Murdoch's News Corp Ltd.
A controversial independent senator, Mal Colston, threw up another roadblock in front of any media law changes earlier on Tuesday, threatening to vote against the government.
The fine balance in the Senate means if Colston votes against the government, the balance of power transfers to the left-leaning Democrat and Green senators, who have said they oppose any further concentration of media ownership.
Analysts also said Packer may baulk at having to pay the A$3.0 billion (US$2.35 billion) needed to convince some large entrenched shareholders to bail out Fairfax.
Packer may also struggle to convince his fellow shareholders in the bid vehicle, Publishing and Broadcasting Ltd, to swallow the earnings dilution such a bid would create.
"Despite Packer's apparent obsession for Fairfax, he's not going to pay a stupid price for it and some people in the market are expecting a stupid price," said another analyst.
"I'd be a pretty disappointed PBL shareholder if he was prepared to pay more than A$3.40 (a share) for it," the analyst said, adding that a A$3.40 price would be earnings dilutive given Fairfax's forecast earnings. Fairfax's shares closed down two cents at A$3.23 on Tuesday.
(A$ = US$0.78)
