Australia's Westpac Banking Corp, struggling like its fellow major banks to cope with a savage interest margin squeeze, surprised analysts on Wednesday by posting a strong profit rise in the first half year.
Higher income from bank account and transaction fees and a series of property sale profits more than offset the squeeze on home lending margins, boosting net profit for the six months to March 31 by 12.9 percent to A$638 million (US$496 million).
Westpac increased its interim dividend to 19 cents from 16 cents after earnings per share (EPS) rose to 34.4 cents from 29.2 cents. The EPS rise was helped by a share buy-back.
Analysts had expected a profit of about A$610 million after Westpac warned late last year about the margin squeeze and foreshadowed flat profits.
The market however had in recent weeks has taken a more optimistic view of the likely profit result than the analysts, boosting Westpac's share price 16 percent in the last month.
"That's why the stock hasn't bounced as much as you'd expect it to," Macquarie Equities banking analyst Graham Maloney said.
Westpac's shares closed down five cents at A$7.45 after a rise straight after the result to A$7.60.
Westpac Managing Director Bob Joss welcomed the profit rise as a solid result, but said it would be difficult to repeat the 12.9 percent rise in the second half because of what he said was a tremendous squeeze on lending margins.
"I think that it will be very hard to do in the second half given the margin pressures that we're seeing through all parts of our product range," Westpac Managing Director Bob Joss told a news conference.
Joss said however he expected the full year profit for the year to September 30 would be higher than the A$1.132 billion posted in 1995/96.
Australia's major banks have been forced in the last year to cut about 150 basis points off their home lending margins by red hot competition from non-banks that are funded by mortgage origination. These mortgage originators have snared about 10 to 12 percent of the Australian market in the last three years.
Westpac's group net interest margin fell to 3.55 percent in the six months to March 31 from 3.75 percent in the six months to September, which cost Westpac about A$88 million in the half.
Westpac's increases in bank fees and charges had not fully offset the effect of this margin squeeze, Joss said. Westpac's accounts showed Westpac's account keeping and transaction fee income rose to A$379 million from A$306 million a year earlier.
"There's constant pressure on margins so there's a test to do the best we can on fees, on lowering costs and increasing efficiencies," Joss said.
(A$ = US$0.7775)
