Australia's anti-monopolies watchdog, examining claims of collusion against the four major banks, has asked them to explain why they all cut their mortgage rates by the same amount within hours of each other.
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) Chairman Allan Fels said it was unusual that the banks would all move so quickly to cut their rates by the same amount.
"We don't claim to have evidence of collusion. What we are doing is seeking an explanation from the banks," Fels said in a radio interview broadcast on Monday.
National Australia Bank, Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd, Commonwealth Bank of Australia and Westpac Banking Corp all cut their standard variable mortgage rates by 0.35 percent to 7.2 percent on Friday, hours after the Reserve Bank cut official rates by 0.5 percent to 5.5 percent.
Government and opposition politicians and consumer groups have since suggested the banks colluded to ensure they did not pass all of the official rate cut on to their customers.
Fels said the commission would ask for details of any communications between the banks on Friday and whether there had been any previous discussion about their approach to possible official rate cuts.
"The reason why we're seeking an explanation from the banks is that it is unusual for them all to have moved so quickly within a few hours of one and other and to have reduced their rates by the same limited amount of 0.35 (points) as against a Reserve Bank reduction of 0.5," Fels said.
"Occasionally, one player will do something a bit different," Fels said.
"But in this case the four big players, all of them, moved by exactly the same amount, despite having told so many of us over time that their circumstances, their costs and their strategies all differ."
Commonwealth Bank of Australia, the first big bank to cut mortgage rates after Friday's official rate cut, denied on Monday that it had colluded with the other major banks.
"I haven't discussed interest rates with the other banks," CBA Managing Director David Murray said.
"We have a very careful discipline within the bank, because we don't believe in collusion, we believe in competition," Murray said, adding he would cooperate fully with the ACCC.
Australian Prime Minister John Howard on Friday questioned the level of competition amoung the banks.
"It is pretty hard to believe we have a highly competitive banking system at the present time when there can be delays of the kind that we are apparently about to witness in the passing on in the reduction in official interest rates," Howard said.
Opposition politicians also criticised the banks, who have also come under heavy public fire this year for increasing bank fees to offset a squeeze on home lending margins.
Opposition Treasury spokesman Gareth Evans said it was hard to believe the banks were not colluding on rates. "It's a little like a line of chorus girls, all with impeccable timing raising their leg exactly so high," Evans told reporters.
