Australia's largest banks, under increasing political pressure to pass on all of an official interest rate cut to their customers, hit back on Wednesday at government comments they described as "bank-bashing."
Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd (ANZ) chief executive Don Mercer said government criticism of the major banks in general was unfair and irresponsible.
"I'm very, very disappointed with this bank-bashing," Mercer told a news conference where he had just announced an 18-percent rise in ANZ's first-half net profits.
"I'm tired of it," he said.
Mercer said the Australia's major banks had cut variable mortgage rates by 330 basis points since the middle of last year while official rates had been cut by only 200 basis points.
"We have passed on more than the reductions in the cash rate," Mercer said. "It really isn't fair."
Mercer said banks had become easy targets for politicians wanting to earn easy political support.
"We're a free kick. Any time a politician wants a free kick, they just bash the banks. You can't lose," Mercer said.
The four major banks cut their variable mortgage rates by 35 basis points on Friday after the Reserve Bank's 50 basis point cut in official interest rates, sparking a round of criticism from government and consumer groups who claimed the banks had taken the opportunity to bolster their profits.
Australia's anti-monopoly watchdog is investigating allegations of collusion between the big four.
Treasurer Peter Costello, Prime Minister John Howard and various opposition politicians have attacked most of the banks' decision not to pass on all of the latest cut.
Costello again on Wednesday accused the major banks of profiting at the expense of consumers.
"The rate cuts were for consumers. That cut (on Friday) was not done for the benefit of the banks," Costello said in a radio interview on Wednesday.
"It wasn't done so that the banks could do a bit of price taking along the way," he said.
Costello went on to recommend consumers shift to those smaller banks and non-banks which had passed on all of the cut.
Ironically, Mercer's comments came after Costello praised ANZ's decision on Monday to again lower its standard variable rate. ANZ has now cut its key mortgage rate to 6.99 percent from the 7.55 percent before Friday's official rate cut.
None of the other three major bank have followed the ANZ.
"The ANZ is now the most competitive bank on home rates of the majors," Costello said.
Mercer was later joined by fellow major Commonwealth Bank of Australia (CBA) in hitting back at Costello's comment.
CBA released a statement challenging what it said were "uninformed comments" and a "misapprehension".
CBA also took out full-page advertisments in national newspapers advising Costello to take out CBA's no-frills home loan, which has a 6.7 percent rate.
"If you really want to save on a home loan Mr Costello, we'll tell you where to go," the advertisment read.
