Macquarie Bank Ltd, Australia's largest locally-owned investment bank, posted a stronger than expected annual profit on Monday, citing bullish investment markets and a steady flow of corporate advisory work as the driving factors.
Macquarie's net profit for the year to March 31 jumped 25.4 percent to A$116.94 million (US$88.87 million), producing a return on average shareholder funds or equity of 25.2 percent.
Macquarie raised its annual dividend to 43 cents from 36 cents a year earlier on an earnings per share rise to 74.9 cents a share from 61 cents a share.
Analysts had forecast a net profit of around A$105 million.
"All five major business groups performed well," Macquarie Bank managing director Allan Moss told a news conference.
"We were assisted by favourable market conditions, with a good level of corporate activity and fairly strong security markets," he said.
The Australian stock market rose 8.7 percent over the year to March 31 and ten year bond yields fell to 8.16 percent from 8.81 percent.
Macquarie's Corporate Advisory division, which advises companies on takeovers and mergers, benefitted from an active year of corporate plays and had 130 advisory mandates, up significantly from 1995/96.
Among others, Macquarie advised Placer Dome Inc on its takeover of Highlands Gold Ltd and TNT on its response to Dutch postal and telecoms group KPN NV's takeover bid.
However, Macquarie's advisory work with TNT produced the bank's one major hiccup for the year.
One of Macquarie's most senior corporate advisory executives, Simon Hannes, was charged with insider trading last month after he allegedly bought TNT options before KPN's takeover bid and made a notional profit of A$2 million.
Hannes, who was not working on the TNT project, allegedly had access to TNT documents at Macquarie. His lawyers have said he would be pleading not guilty.
Moss said the Hannes matter had not affected corporate advisory work and was not expected to in the current year.
"Our perception is that flow of business was unaffected by the Hannes matter, because our clients recognise this matter relates to an individual and not the bank as a whole," Moss said.
Meanwhile, Moss and analysts said the outlook for Macquarie was as bullish as that for the market overall, due in large part to low interest rates.
"With interest rates continuing to be low and perhaps going down a little bit further, there's every prospect for a reasonably good year in equity markets and we're also seeing quite a good flow in corporate activity," he said.
Australian stocks have risen another eight percent since balance date, while bond markets have also strengthened further.
Analysts said the result was stronger than expected.
"It's all looking fairly healthy, given the outlook for the market in general," said one Sydney analyst, who had forecast a A$110 million profit.
Investors welcomed the result and talk of an eventual capital return, boosting its stock four cents to A$9.50 at the close, near its A$9.60 all-time high.
Moss said an expected change to the way Macquarie's capital adequacy ratio was calculated was likely to boost its ratio to 16 percent in coming years from its current 13.2 percent, raising the possibility of a capital return through a share buy back or higher dividend payout ratio.
(A$1 = US$0.76)
