The Sydney 2000 Olympics does not appear to be generating the economic bonanza many had hoped for and will not boost Sydney house prices, two construction and real estate forecasters said on Tuesday.
"The impact of the Olympics hasn't been as great as we'd been led to believe," Knight Frank Independent director Philip Ragan told a Committee for Economic Development of Australia (CEDA) seminar.
Construction of the games facilities and preparations for the games were in full swing, but were not yet adding significantly to the economy, Ragan said.
In 1993, when the Sydney was awarded the games, analysts forecast that the extra construction, tourism and jobs generated by the games would cumulatively add A$7 billion (US$5.3 billion) to A$8 billion to gross domestic product by 2001.
Ragan said the cumulative economic effect was likely to be closer to A$3 billion because of cost over-runs, lower revenue projections and the leakage of sponsorship revenues offshore.
"The outcome is coming in at the low end of expectations, in fact, significantly lower," Ragan said.
Olympics-related job creation had originally been estimated at about 150,000, but only 800 specific jobs had been created so far and only about 2,800 temporary jobs were seen in 2000, he said.
The state government and various private consortia are expected to spend about A$3.2 billion building new facilities.
But Ragan said this amount spent over four years was not a major increase on the A$10 billion spent each year on such construction in Sydney.
An expected nine percent rise in state government revenues and a trend towards higher savings would also swamp the Olympic-led boost to the local economy, he said.
"The effect of the Olympics is being more than overshadowed by other changes happening in the economy," he said.
BIS Schrapnel building and construction director Robert Mellor said he expected Sydney property prices to rise almost 40 percent in the lead up to the year 2000 and then slide in the years immediately after the Olympics.
But Mellor said this would have happened regardless of Sydney having the Olympics.
"It's got nothing to do with the Olympics. I don't see it having any effect," Mellor told the CEDA seminar.
"The positives may not be as great as the econometric models may indicate," he said.
The Atlanta Olympics had shown retailers and street traders had not done nearly as well as expected, Mellor said.
He pointed to the recent rash of legal actions by Atlanta's Olympic vendors against organisers for promising unrealistic likely incomes.
Those residential areas very close to the games site at Homebush Bay in Sydney's Western Suburbs may benefit from the new recreational facilities built there, but the bulk of Sydney's housing market would not notice.
He said the prospect of some home owners being able to rent out their homes for A$1,000 or A$2,000 for two weeks was unlikely to provide a general boost to the market.
"It just doesn't change the fundamental reason for buying a house in Sydney," he said.
(A$=US$0.7590)
