Brokers Were Stockbroking and ABN AMRO Hoare Govett had placed all of The Broken Hill Pty Co Ltd's 616.6 million Foster's Brewing Group Ltd shares with institutions and private clients by early on Friday, Were said.
Retail investors bought about A$150 million of the A$1.535 billion package of shares, with about 55 percent of the remainder being sold to overseas institutional investors and about 45 percent sold to local institutions, Were Stockbroking managing director John Paterson said.  
Paterson pointed to a A$2.5 billion-equivalent placement of three percent of The British Petroleum Co Plc shares in May as possibly the largest such placement this year.
The Kuwait Investment Office sold three percent or 170 million of BP's shares through Goldman Sachs in mid-May this year for about 7.0 stg per share.
Paterson said the two brokers began placing the stock at about 3.30 p.m. (0530 GMT) on Thursday after Foster's announced the buy-back of 13.0 percent of its capital from Asahi Breweries Ltd and BHP's placement of 616.6 million Foster's shares. The buy-back and placement were at A$2.49 per share.  
Were and ABN AMRO's Australian offices worked until very late on Thursday night before handing it over to their New York and European offices.
Paterson said the buy-back was completed at about 9.00 a.m. (2330 GMT).
"We had strong institutional support in Australia, similarly in London and Europe, particularly London, and in the United States," Paterson said.
Private client support from Were's New Zealand and Australian clients was also strong, he said.  
"The other satisfying fact is you tend to assume after one of these deals that you've exhausted the demand in the market place, but with the stock trading up at A$2.55 against the placement price of A$2.49, it says there's still quite a lot of untapped demand out there," he said.
Foster's shares were down five cents at A$2.55 at 1.40 p.m. (0340 GMT) on 675 million shares put through the market.
Foster's said on Thursday it expected foreign investors to hold about a third of its shares after the reconstruction.  
Foster's said BHP had agreed to limit individual investors to parcels of no more than five percent of BHP's Foster's shares.
Paterson said the successful completion of the deal was satisfying for Were and ABN AMRO Hoare Govett and they were now looking forward to a rest.
"I won't mind having a three day weekend," he said.
Monday is the Queen's Birthday holiday in Australia.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
