Bre-X Minerals Ltd. said Wednesday it would consider merger offers at the right price, but was content for now to develop Busang -- the richest gold discovery this century -- with its existing partners.
"The 'For Sale' sign is not on the front yard," Bre-X Chief Executive David Walsh told analysts in a conference call. "That is not to rule out discussions with a potential suitor if the price is right. The old expression 'everything has its price' must be taken into account here."
His comments came after an agreement announced Monday on ownership of the Busang discovery in Indonesia. Under the deal, Bre-X would have 45 percent, with 15 percent to U.S.-based Freeport-McMoRan Copper and Gold Inc., 30 percent to Indonesia's PT Askatindo Karya Minerals and PT Amsya Lyna and partners and 10 percent to the Indonesian government.
Bre-X officials declined to speculate on potential bidders for their Calgary, Alberta-based company, which discovered the 71 million-ounce Busang gold find. Some Bre-X executives said the gold field, which was not yet fully explored, may contain as much as 200 million ounces of gold.
Walsh said Bre-X, which once owned 90 percent of the deposit, received no cash compensation for giving up a piece of Busang. But he said the Indonesian partners provided "tangible value" in developing the site.
"This relationship will ensure that things run smoothly. Without a good relationship, things can take years to get processed, and years of hold up for a 4 million ounce a year producer is very, very costly," Walsh told Reuters.
Vancouver-based gold miner Placer Dome Inc. said Wednesday its $5 billion offer to merge with Bre-X made before Monday's agreement was no longer feasible because Bre-X was now worth less. But Placer said it remained interested in the project and would like to hold talks with Bre-X.
Walsh said Bre-X would inform the Indonesian government if it agreed to a merger or sale of its Busang stake. But asked if a deal required government approval, Walsh replied: "No."
Walsh added that Bre-X's Busang partners did not have rights of first refusal if Bre-X received a third-party offer.
He said the Indonesian government indicated it would process contracts of work, known as COWS, for the Busang site as early as possible. "I do know the government has a wish to process these very, very quickly. So I would not think that we would have to wait very long," said Walsh.
A feasibility study of the project should be completed later in 1997, with construction of the mine expected to begin in 1998. Capital expenditure is estimated at about $1.5 billion.
Production was expected to begin in 2000 at a rate of two million ounces annually and climb to four million ounces a year in 2002, said John Felderhoff, Bre-X's senior vice-president of exploration.
Bre-X's latest estimate for the Busang Two area was about 71 million ounces of gold, but Felderhoff said it could be much higher. "If you would ask me what is the total potential, I would feel very comfortable with 200 million ounces," he said.
Bre-X's financial adviser, J.P. Morgan and Co. Inc., said Wednesday it would provide a fairness opinion on the agreement. "We're very confident it provides very good value to the shareholders of Bre-X," said J.P. Morgan's Leslie Morrison, who is advising Bre-X on the deal.
Canadian newspapers reported Wednesday that Indonesian businessman Jusuf Merukh alleged that the deal with Freeport and the Indonesian interests was illegal and asked Indonesian President Suharto to cancel it.
Merukh is suing Bre-X for $2 billion in a Canadian court, alleging that his company was entitled to 30 percent of Busang. Bre-X has filed a motion to dismiss the suit. Bre-X topped Toronto Stock Exchange actives Wednesday, gaining C70 cents to C$21.50 on 7.7 million shares after falling sharply Monday and Tuesday on news of the deal.
