Canadian police said on Thursday they expected more charges in a widening sex abuse scandal involving young boys at Maple Leaf Gardens, the fabled home of the Toronto Maple Leafs hockey club.
Police have identified at least a dozen more victims of a former Gardens employee who was charged this week with alleged sexual abuse of a teen-age boy almost two decades ago.
Gordon Stuckless, a former backstage helper for concerts and hockey games, will appear in a Toronto court on Tuesday to face charges of indecent assault and gross indecency.
Stuckless, 47, is alleged to have lured young boys to the Gardens with promises of free tickets, hockey sticks and autographs. Police said the abuse took place in back rooms of the arena.
"He would sneak them in and let them watch and get autographs. Things that little boys would love," Toronto police sergeant Marilyn McCann said in a telephone interview.
McCann said police have identified 12 more victims who have alleged abuse at the hands of Stuckless. She said more charges were expected by next week.
Martin Kruze, 34, has alleged that the sexual abuse started in 1975 when he was 13 and continued for seven years.
"Maple Leaf Gardens was a sex haven of abused boys, tons of them. They would lay down blankets and they would get us naked and have group sex," Kruze said this week.
Kruze filed a lawsuit against Maple Leaf Gardens in 1993 that was settled out of court for about C$60,000. Neither Kruze nor Gardens' management informed police of the alleged sexual abuse. However, Kruze said a decade of counseling gave him the courage to step forward.
The abuse allegations have grabbed headlines across the country, mainly because it involves the cherished home of one of Canada's oldest hockey clubs. It is also the latest sex scandal to hit Canada's national sport this year.
Graham James -- one of Canada's most successful junior hockey coaches -- pleaded guilty in January to sexually assaulting two former players in the 1980s and was sentenced to 3-1/2 years in prison.
James, a former coach in the Western Hockey League (WHA), admitted to over 300 instances of sexual assault over six years against Boston Bruins player Sheldon Kennedy, who was 14 when the assaults began in 1984.
The other player was assaulted more than 50 times over a period of 1-1/2 years.
Since the James case, a minor league hockey coach in Calgary has been charged with sexually assaulting a player at a summer camp and a community club hockey coach in Winnipeg has been suspended after a former player alleged sexual abuse.
