Canadians are experiencing a winter of dismay as their national religion -- ice hockey -- is shaken by sex scandals, fraud trials and the decline of their once dominant teams.
This year marks the 25th anniversary of Canada's greatest triumph on ice -- a last-minute victory in a series against the Soviet Union that whipped this placid country into a patriotic frenzy.
"It was the one time that we were distinctly Canadian," Paul Henderson, a journeyman player who achieved hockey sainthood for scoring the winning goal in the final game of the 1972 Summit Series, said in a recent interview.
But memories of past glory are tempered by fears that Canada is losing its grip on the game.
The current season began with the faith-shattering defeat of Canada by the United States in the final of the inaugural World Cup of Hockey.
And computer-enhanced pucks that leave bizarre colour trails on television screens, and the NHL's expansion into U.S. markets with little hockey tradition have left purists cringing at the Americanisation of their game.
The most disturbing recent blow has been a sex scandal involving young boys and Canada's oldest hockey shrine -- Maple Leaf Gardens, home of the Toronto Maple Leafs.
Canadian police have charged two Gardens' employees after uncovering a pedophile ring that allegedly lured teenaged boys to the arena with free tickets and autographs of their hockey heroes.
The sordid tale, which may involve up to 60 victims between the late 1960s and early 1990s, has grabbed newspaper headlines across the country.
"Maple Leaf Gardens was a sex haven of abused boys, tons of them. They would lay down blankets and they would get us naked and have group sex," one victim, 34-year-old Martin Kruze, has said of the abuse he says started when he was 13.
It's not the only sex abuse case to rock hockey this year.
Graham James, one of Canada's top junior coaches, pleaded guilty in January to sexually assaulting two players in the 1980s and was sentenced to 3-1/2 years in prison.
James admitted to more than 300 instances of sexual assault over six years against Boston Bruins player Sheldon Kennedy, who was 14 when the assaults began in 1984.
Since the James case broke, a minor league hockey coach in Calgary was charged with sexually assaulting a player at a summer camp, and a community club hockey coach in Winnipeg, was suspended after a former player alleged sexual abuse.
The revelations hit hard in a nation where it is traditional for parents of boys with pro hockey aspirations to turn their chidren over to the care of junior coaches, often far from home.
"The sex cases have made Canadians very uneasy. It speaks directly to this power relationship between adult coaches and the children in hockey," University of Toronto psychologist John Ferudy said.
Other criminal cases have also vied for space in the country's sports pages this winter.
Former hockey czar and player agent Alan Eagleson, architect of the 1972 matchup between Canada and the Soviet Union, faces fraud and theft charges related to the billing of clients and handling of funds from international tournaments.
The game's reputation for thuggery reared its ugly head again with a junior league brawl last month. Police in Halifax, Nova Scotia said criminal charges could soon come against a player who repeatedly punched an unconscious opponent who lay convulsing on the ice.
Canada's junior teams still dominate international tournaments, but critics argue their success is due more to a grinding physical style of play than to superior skills.
The influx of flashy Europeans into the NHL has also caused some concern in the game's homeland. Canadians now account for just 60 percent of NHL players, down from 76 percent a decade ago and 98 percent in 1968, and a Canadian has not led NHL rookies in scoring since 1988.
Meanwhile, the future of Canada's small-market clubs looks grim.
With the departure of the Winnipeg and Quebec teams to Phoenix and Denver, only six of the NHL's 26 clubs remain in Canada -- and all but one has a losing record this season.
To add further insult, the league's current expansion plans are focused far from hockey's roots in small frozen towns across Canada. Last week, Hamilton, Ontario's bid for an NHL franchise was rejected, while steamy Atlanta appears hot favourite to get the next NHL team.
"It's a slap not just in Hamilton's face, but in the face of all Canadians," said Hamilton bid organiser Gabe Macaluso.
Calgary, Edmonton and Ottawa are struggling to stay alive amid soaring costs.
The Ottawa Senators have warned fans to buy more tickets or face losing the team.
The Edmonton Oilers, who won five Stanley Cups in the 1980s before selling off their best players, plan to offer shares to the public this spring. "I'm doing this to keep the team here," Oilers' owner Peter Pocklington said.
But this supposed effort on behalf of Edmonton will never buy Pocklington's way into hockey heaven.
He will forever be loathed for shipping Canadian national treasure Wayne Gretzky to Los Angeles.
