Molson Cos Ltd will hold its annual shareholder meeting on Wednesday, under pressure for a stock buyback as the cash-rich Canadian beer giant searches worldwide for a brewing acquisition.
It also marks the debut of a new chief executive to lead the company's return to its 210-year-old brewing roots after a failed foray into specialty chemicals.
With the C$1 billion sale of its Diversey Corp chemicals unit almost completed, Molson is looking for overseas opportunities to expand its core brewing business.  
But some investors, worried that a deal would be too pricey, are pushing the brewer for a share buyback.
"We're getting answers from across the spectrum," Brian Crombie, senior vice president of corporate finance, said of Molson's recent talks with investors.
"You've got some institutions saying they would prefer that the company buy back shares. You've got other institutions saying that they are willing to give Molson time to consider its options," Crombie said in an interview.
Molson owns 40 percent of Canada's largest brewer, Molson Breweries, which makes Molson Canadian, Golden and Red Dog.  
The rest of Molson Breweries is owned 40 percent by Australia's Foster's Brewing Group Ltd and 20 percent by Philip Morris Cos Inc's Miller Brewing unit.
Molson has expressed interest in buying a bigger stake in Molson Breweries, but neither Foster's nor Miller appears ready to part with its stake, Crombie said.
Looking offshore, analysts said good brewing assets would likely command a high price. "There's a lot of work going on, but I don't think they can make an acquisition at a reasonable price," said Mike Palmer, an analyst with Toronto-based Equity Research Associates.  
Jitters about what Molson will do with the Diversey proceeds has weighed on the brewer's share price. Molson class A stock hit a 52-week high of C$25.125 after it announced plans to sell Diversey last winter. The stock has since drifted down to about C$20.
Norman Seagram, Molson's new president and chief executive, is expected to outline his vision for the company when he addresses shareholders at the meeting in Montreal.
Seagram a former Molson executive with more than two decades of experience in the brewing industry, replaced Marshall Cohen who oversaw the company's troubled diversification.
-- Reuters Toronto Bureau (416) 941-8100
