Canadian police said on Wednesday that they laid more charges in the widening sex scandal involving young boys at Maple Leaf Gardens, the fabled home of the Toronto Maple Leafs.
Police on Wednesday filed 50 more charges of sexual abuse against Gordon Stuckless, 47, a former backstage helper at the Gardens.
Stuckless, whose bail hearing was postponed to March 27, now faces 52 charges of indecent assault, gross indecency and buggery.
Stuckless and another former Gardens' employee, John Paul Roby, allegedly lured teen-aged boys to the arena with free tickets and autographs of their hockey heroes.
Roby is currently facing 75 charges of sexual abuse.
Toronto police detective Dave Tredrea said the investigation was not over.
"If enough grounds come up and other suspects come up, then they will be charged accordingly," Tredrea said in a telephone interview.
Police have said the abuse took place in the back rooms of the arena, sometimes during hockey games or other events.
The sordid tale, which may involve up to 90 victims between the late 1960s and early 1990s, has grabbed newspaper headlines across the country.
The scandal surfaced after 34-year-old Martin Kruze came forward with allegations of sexual abuse. "Maple Leaf Gardens was a sex haven of abused boys, tons of them," Kruze has said of the abuse he said started when he was 13.
Meanwhile, Gardens management has named a Toronto police veteran to review security at the arena.
Retired deputy police chief Walter Tyrrell has said his review will include how the company screens potential employees.
It's not the only sex abuse case to rock hockey this year.
Graham James, one of Canada's top junior coaches, pleaded guilty in January to sexually assaulting two players in the 1980s and was sentenced to 3-1/2 years in prison.
James admitted to more than 300 instances of sexual assault over six years against Boston Bruins player Sheldon Kennedy, who was 14 when the assaults began in 1984.
The revelations hit hard in a nation where it is traditional for parents of boys with pro hockey aspirations to turn their children over to the care of junior coaches, often far from home.
