The presumed death of geologist Michael de Guzman, who helped discover Indonesia's rich Busang gold site, on Wednesday shocked fellow prospectors and highlighted the dangers of their profession.
De Guzman, chief geologist for Calgary-based Bre-X Minerals Ltd, fell out of a helicopter as he was returning to the Busang mine site in Indonesia's East Kalamantan province.
Rescue crews were still searching the dense Borneo jungle for 41-year-old Filipino's body after he fell about 800 feet from the helicopter.
"It's very tragic and he will be remembered as a fine geologist," Bre-X Minerals chief executive David Walsh said in a telephone interview.
De Guzman was a key member of the team which discovered Busang -- the richest gold find this century -- a few years ago. Bre-X has since agreed to develop the Busang site, valued at US$25 billion, with U.S.-based Freeport-McMoRan Copper and Gold Inc and Indonesian partners.
"He (de Guzman) was a very respected geologist and well respected within the mining community," said Mario Steiner, president of Aerodat Inc, a geological survey company.
Bre-X's stock was halted for several hours on the Toronto Stock Exchange on Wednesday before Bre-X issued a statement.
The company's stock closed down 0.40 at 17.25 on volume of 5.2 million shares.
Bre-X senior vice-president of exploration John Felderhof, who is currently in North America, will return to Indonesia, Walsh said.
This is the latest tragedy involving Canadian mining and exploration companies in far-flung corners of the world.
In October 1995, nine employees of Saskatoon-based Cameco Corp were killed in a helicopter crash in Kyrgyzstan.
The Kyrgyzstan Air helicopter, chartered by a Cameco unit, was en route from the Kumtor gold mine when it went down.
The families of the nine Canadians killed in the crash have said they plan to file a C$20.7 million lawsuit alleging Cameco and other defendants were negligent.
Airborne surveyor Aerodat Inc has lost three aircraft since 1994, the latest in the dense eastern Amazon jungle of Peru.
In September 1996, Falconbridge Ltd chief executive Franklin Pickard died of a heart attack while visiting the company's copper site high in Chile's Andes Mountains.
"It puts you in circumstances that maybe other jobs wouldn't put you in, but the industry has very high safety standards," said Tony Andrews, executive director of the Prospectors and Developers Association of Canada.
"With the number of miles travelled and so on, there are bound to be accidents, but I don't think our industry is any different from others that are global in nature," he said.
((Reuters Toronto Bureau (416) 941-8100))
