Bre-X Minerals Ltd. chief geologist Michael de Guzman, who co-discovered the richest gold find this century, may have committed suicide when he fell out of a helicopter on Wednesday, a company spokesman said on Thursday.
Rescue crews were still searching the dense Borneo rain forest for de Guzman's body after he plunged 800 feet from a helicopter en route to the Busang site in Indonesia's East Kalamantan province.
Bre-X spokesman Steve McAnulty said company officials obtained a copy of an apparent suicide note found by Indonesian police among de Guzman's belongings.
"Mike did leave a note. Basically the upshot of it is Mike had just learned that he had hepatitis B. The prognosis was not good due to the fact that he had suffered many bouts of malaria which had weakened his system over the years," McAnulty said in a telephone interview.
"We understand the prognosis was not good for recovery and apparently there was a lot of pain involved and he decided he did not want to go through that," McAnulty said.
He added that foul play was not suspected and Indonesian police were treating his death as suicide.
The 40-year-old Filipino geologist was a key member of the team that discovered Busang a few years ago.
Calgary, Alberta-based Bre-X has agreed to develop the Busang site, valued at $25 billion, with U.S.-based Freeport-McMoRan Copper and Gold Inc. and Indonesian partners.
De Guzman, a 20-year mining industry veteran, was also credited with co-discovering the large Dizon copper-gold deposit in the Phillipines.
John Felderhof, Bre-X's senior vice-president of exploration, was traveling to Indonesia to replace de Guzman at scheduled meetings with Freeport-McMoRan.
The incident was the latest tragedy involving Canadian mining companies in far-flung corners of the world.
In October 1995, nine employees of Saskatoon, Saskatchewan-based Cameco Corp. were killed in a helicopter crash in the former Soviet republic of Kyrgyzstan.
The Kyrgyzstan Air helicopter, chartered by a Cameco unit, was en route from the Kumtor gold mine when it went down.
The families of the nine Canadians killed in the crash have filed a C$20.7 million ($15.1 million) lawsuit alleging Cameco and other defendants were negligent.
In September 1996, Falconbridge Ltd. Chief Executive Franklin Pickard died of a heart attack when visiting the Toronto-based company's copper site high in Chile's Andes Mountains.
Bre-X's stock rose C20 cents to C$17.45 on the Toronto Stock Echange on Thursday.
