Canadian brewing giant Molson Cos. Ltd., flush with cash from the sale of non-beer assets, said on Wednesday that it is seeking expansion opportunities in China and Latin America.
Despite shareholder pressure for a stock buyback, Molson said it wants to grow its core brewing business.
"We are looking strongly at Latin American and Chinese markets. Any sizable investment we would make would be with partners or as a joint venture," new President and Chief Executive Norman Seagram told reporters after the company's annual meeting in Montreal.
The meeting marked the launch of Seagram's bid to return to the company's 210-year-old brewing roots after a failed foray into speciality chemicals.
"J'aime la biere (I love beer)," Seagram, a brewing industry veteran, told shareholders.
He said the board is not considering a share buyback, but will spend the next three months scouring the world for brewing opportunities.
Analysts and investors, worried about the company's spotty track record on acquisitions, fear Molson will pay too much.
"The question is, 'Can Molson invest the money more wisely than shareholders?' That's what we're trying to figure out," said Michael Palmer, an analyst with Toronto-based Equity Research Associates.
Molson's class A stock closed down C$0.30 (22 cents) at C$20.20 ($15) on the Toronto Stock Exchange on Wednesday. The stock has wallowed around C$20 ($15) since buyback speculation pushed the shares to C$25 ($18) earlier this year.
Last winter's sale of Diversey Corp., a speciality chemicals firm, was part of a wider restructuring that will add almost C$1 billion ($729 million) to Molson's coffers.
Molson is still looking for a buyer for its retail assets, which include stakes in Home Depot Inc..'s Canadian unit, and home improvement chain Groupe Val Royal Inc. Molson also owns Beaver Lumber Co.
The Toronto-based holding company will be left with a 40 percent stake in Molson Breweries, Canada's biggest brewer, which makes Molson Canadian, Golden and Red Dog.
It also owns the famed Montreal Canadiens of the National Hockey League and the Molson Centre in which the club plays.
Molson officials have expressed interest in buying a larger stake in Molson Breweries, which is also owned 40 percent by Australia's Foster's Brewing Group Ltd. and 20 percent by Philip Morris Cos. Inc.'s Miller Brewing unit.
But Seagram said "Foster's has indicated no wish to change its 40 percent partnership in Molson Breweries and we continue to work with both Foster's and Miller."
That leaves the international market, and analysts said quality brewing assets will fetch a high price.
China and Latin America are fast-growing beer markets compared with North America, where beer consumption has been flat for several years, said William Chisholm, an analyst with Deacon Capital Corp.
"There certainly is a lot of scope to put money in there, but whether you can make a worthwhile investment is another thing," he said.
Analysts said investors are nervous due to the experience of other Canadian brewers in foreign markets.
Molson's arch-rival, Labatt Brewing Co. Ltd., pushed into Mexico with much fanfare in 1994, acquiring 22 percent of FEMSA Cerveza, the brewing unit of food giant Fomento Economico Mexicano S.A. de C.V. for C$720 million ($512 million).
Soon afterward, a Mexican currency crisis forced a large writedown on Labatt's investment. The Mexican deal and other diversification moves angered Labatt's institutional shareholders.
The Canadian brewer subsequently lost its independence after Belgian brewer Interbrew S.A. won a takeover battle for Labatt last summer.
FEMSA Cerveza has since performed better and Labatt has opted for smaller investments through joint ventures.
In China, Canadian brewer Noble China Inc. brews one of the country's most popular foreign brands, Pabst Blue Ribbon, in a joint venture with the Chinese government.
But the company has been hurt by a legal dispute with a former executive and market share in China has dropped due to smuggling of bootleg Pabst beer.
