A Canadian exploration company's claim to have made the biggest gold find this century were cast into doubt on Wednesday when its mining partner Freeport-McMoRan Copper &amp; Gold Inc. ( ) said tests of the Indonesian deposit showed insignificant amounts of gold.
Calgary, Alberta-based Bre-X Minerals Ltd. admitted that the test samples of the deposit on the Busang gold property, deep in the jungles of Borneo, may have been overstated.
Bre-X Chief Executive David Walsh, who has made millions from the discovery and now lives in the Bahamas, said in a statement that "there appears to be a strong possibility that the potential gold resources on the Busang project in East Kalimantan, Indonesia have been overstated because of invalid samples and assaying of those samples."
Freeport said in a statement that analyses of its own drilling results so far "indicate insignificant amounts of gold."
The news caused pandemonium on the Toronto Stock Exchange, where Bre-X has been the hottest story for months. Traders said the share price, which was last quoted at C$15.50, could collapse to C$2. The stock was halted in Toronto until further notice, the exchange said.
Bre-X had issued confirmed estimates that the Busang deposit held at least 71 million ounces of gold, worth about $20 billion at current gold prices.
At that level Busang would be the most significant gold find since the discovery of the Witwatersrand goldfields in South Africa the late 1800s.
Bre-X officials had even asserted that Busang deposit could contain as much as 200 million ounces.
Bre-X shares, which had traded at an all-time high of C$28.65 after a 10-for-1 stock split, sank last week after an Indonesian newspaper report quoted unnamed sources as saying New Orleans-based Freeport, which holds 15 per cent of the Busang deposit, had doubts about the size and viability of the deposit.    The rumors were fanned to a fever pitch by the mysterious
death, billed as a suicide, of Bre-X's chief geologist Michael de Guzman, who fell to his death from a helicopter en route to the Busang site last Wednesday.
Bre-X said De Guzman was depressed because he was suffering from a serious illness.
The Bre-X board assured shareholders on Monday that it had "absolute confidence in the integrity and accuracy of assay results and resource calculations."
Traders have described the complex Bre-X saga as a "soap opera" and are wondering who or what to believe.
"I've concluded the only person who could ever make a movie out of this is Alfred Hitchcock. It's become so bizarre that people have lost any tolerance for staying in," Goepel Shields analyst Rick Cohen said last week.
