David Walsh, the maverick Canadian bankrupt turned gold prospector now embroiled in a worldwide mining controversy, always dreamed of striking it rich.
Walsh, 51, has made millions of dollars and appeared on the covers of national magazines since his exploration company, Bre-X Minerals Ltd., made its fabulous Busang gold discovery in Indonesia.
"I'm nuts. I'm looking for the bucket of gold at the end of the rainbow," the beefy stock promoter who lives in the Bahamas, told a Canadian magazine recently.
The bubble burst on Wednesday when Calgary, Alberta-based Bre-X admitted that the find in Indonesia once thought to be the richest this century, might not even be economically viable.
"I would really be shocked if we find out that there is any funny business," said Jim Bentein, a veteran Calgary journalist who has covered Walsh since Bre-X's early days as a penny stock on the Alberta Stock Exchange.
He described Walsh as "a sophisticated trucker," who is as comfortable having a beer and a smoke in a bar as he is in financial circles.
"Don't misunderstand me. This is a sharpy. This is a guy who has been a broker and tried to run up penny stocks before. We're not talking about a babe in the woods here, but he strikes me as a straight shooter," Bentein said in a telephone interview.
As regulators sifted through the tangled Busang saga and jittery shareholders dumped the stock, Walsh defended the company's claims on Thursday and urged shareholders to ride out the storm.
"Like all the other trials and tribulations that we've gone through since discovering (Busang)...we'll be exonerated and the property will stand as we've indicated," he told reporters outside the company's head office in a toney section of Calgary.
Walsh rose from rags to riches in less than four years.
Raised in a wealthy suburb of Montreal, Walsh followed his father and grandfather into the stock business.
He joined a small trust company shortly after graduating from high school. In 1976, he moved to brokerage Midland Doherty Ltd. (now Midland Walwyn Capital Inc.) and rose to vice-president in its institutional equity sales department.
In the 1980s, Midland moved Walsh to Calgary, but he left the company shortly afterward to set up his own company, Bresea Resources Ltd.
After dabbling unsuccessfully in oil and gas, Walsh created Bre-X Minerals Ltd in 1989 and ventured into mining. But by 1993, his exploration efforts had dried up.
He and his wife declared bankruptcy in 1993 after they had accumulated almost C$60,000 ($43,800) in debt on 15 credit cards.
"We had these claims which were worthless, and no money," Walsh told Reuters in an interview earlier this year.
Almost broke, he scraped together C$10,000 ($7,300) to start exploring in Indonesia, pursuading friends to invest C$200,000 ($146,000) for a stake in the area now known as the central Busang in Indonesia's East Kalamantan province.
Walsh hit the jackpot with Busang and Bre-X quickly became the darling of the world's mining community. "There's nothing like success. Our other explorations have been zero. I had never imagined it would be this big," he said.
Walsh, his wife and other company officials added more than C$37 million ($27 million) to their bank accounts after they sold Bre-X shares at prices ranging from C$24.40 to C$28.40 between August and October.
But the sales were controversial because they occurred shortly after Bre-X learned that its preliminary license had been canceled by the Indonesian government, a development Bre-X did not reveal publicly until last October.
Last year, Bre-X was the target of an intense bidding war as several heavyweight mining firms battled for control of possibly the world's richest gold discovery.
Toronto-based Barrick Gold Corp., armed with an advisory board that included former U.S. President George Bush and former Canadian Prime Minister Brian Mulroney, initially dominated the negotiations.
Barrick's inside track ended when the government of President Suharto brought in Indonesian businessman Muhammad "Bob" Hasan in January.
Hasan swiftly brokered a deal that gave New Orleans-based Freeport McMoRan Copper &amp; Gold Inc. 15 percent of Busang and the right to mine the project.
The arrangement left Bre-X with 45 percent, down from an original 90 percent stake, and the rest to the Indonesian government and two Indonesian companies.
Investors complained that Bre-X received nothing for surrendering 45 percent of Busang, but Walsh said Bre-X never owned 90 percent and shareholders were wrong to believe so.
Shortly afterward, Bre-X's stock started a downward spiral as rumors swirled around the company and its grip on the discovery.
The stock sank to an all-time low last week after an Indonesian newspaper report said Freeport had doubts about the size and viability of the deposit.
The rumors were fanned to fever pitch by the death, billed as a suicide, of Bre-X chief geologist Michael de Guzman, who fell from a helicopter en route to Busang last Wednesday.
Meanwhile, Walsh hinted on Thursday that the chaos engulfing his company may have some other explanation.
"I personally believe there has been a hidden agenda coming up for about 10 months now and I guess we'll just have to play this out," he said.
