The fallout from news that Bre-X Minerals Ltd.'s Busang gold discovery may be nowhere near as rich as it projected rocked the mining world and Canadian markets on Thursday, with securities regulators scrambling to investigate.
Gold shares on the Toronto Stock Exchange, Canada's biggest equities market, tumbled more than 300 points or almost 3.0 percent in frenzied trading on Thursday, dragging down the entire market.
Canadian regulators were working closely with Toronto exchange officials to unravel the biggest mining controversy in decades.
"We're working with the TSE on this matter. I don't know what will come of that. There really isn't more I can tell you," said a spokesman for the Ontario Securities Commission, the province's securities regulator.
While other small mining stocks were hammered, Bre-X remained halted in Toronto and on Nasdaq as huge questions loomed over its claim to have made the biggest gold discovery this century.
Bre-X, which soared to C$250 from mere pennies before a 10-for-1 stock split, last traded at C$15.50 before it was halted on Wednesday. The company was expected to issue a further news release on Thursday, the Toronto exchange said.
Several Canadian mutual fund managers planned to write down their Bre-X holdings, while market players speculated the stock could re-open below C$2.
"We have Canadian funds marking it at C$1, C$2. Two dollars is C$500 million ($365 million) in market cap -- that's still a lot of money," a New York arbritager said.
Calgary, Alberta-based Bre-X admitted on Wednesday that test samples from the Busang gold property on the island of Borneo may have been overstated.
The news came just one week after the mysterious death of Bre-X's chief Busang geologist, who plunged out of a helicopter into the jungle in an apparent suicide.
Bre-X Chief Executive David Walsh, who made millions from the discovery, is believed to have returned to the Bahamas where he now lives.
Walsh earlier this week complained about rumors that the find may be overstated and even threatened legal action "against certain parties and publications."
But he admitted on Wednesday that "there appears to be a strong possibility that the potential gold resources on the Busang project in East Kalimantan, Indonesia have been overstated because of invalid samples and assaying of those samples."
New Orleans-based Freeport McMoRan Copper &amp; Gold Inc., Bre-X's partner in Busang, set off the alarm bells on Wednesday, saying that its own studies so far "indicate insignificant amounts of gold."
Shares in Freeport were up 50 cents to $30.125 on Thursday after sinking sharply on the New York Stock Exchange on Wednesday.
Toronto, Canada's financial capital, has been a major source of capital for small mining companies venturing abroad. Analysts predicted the Bre-X story would hurt Toronto's image and make it much harder to raise cash.
"No matter who ends up wearing the blame for Bre-X's woes...and there looks to be plenty of blame to go around...the integrity of all junior mining stocks has taken a serious hit," Toronto Globe and Mail columnist Andrew Willis wrote.
Bre-X earlier this year issued confirmed estimates that the Busang deposit held at least 71 million ounces of gold, worth about $20 billion at current gold prices.
At that level, Busang would be the most significant gold find since the discovery of the Witwatersrand goldfields in South Africa in the late 1800s.
Bre-X's head of exploration John Felderhof, who was recently honored at a mining conference in Toronto, asserted last month that Busang may contain up to 200 million ounces of gold.
Bre-X shares sank last week after an Indonesian newspaper report quoted unnamed sources as saying Freeport, which holds 15 per cent of Busang, had doubts about the size and viability of the deposit.
The rumors were fanned to fever pitch by the death, billed as a suicide, of Bre-X chief geologist Michael de Guzman, who fell from a helicopter en route to Busang last week.
Bre-X and its maverick chairman Walsh have been the envy of the international mining community since Walsh gambled the company's last C$10,000 ($7,280) in 1993 and struck gold in Indonesia's East Kalimantan province.
"There's nothing like success. Our other explorations have been zero. I had never imagined it would be this big," Walsh told Reuters in an interview last month.
