Shares in Canadian gold prospector Bre-X Minerals Ltd. resumed trading on Wednesday, but massive trading volumes again overwhelmed a creaky computer system on the Toronto Stock Exchange.
Bre-X's stock fell C65 cents to C$3.20 on the TSE on Wednesday before it was stopped in late morning due to heavy order volumes and "technical difficulties," the exchange said.
Despite an abbreviated trading session, Bre-X dominated the market with turnover of 11.7 million shares.
The stock was halted all day on Monday and resumed trading in Toronto for 22 minutes on Tuesday before it collapsed the 20-year-old computer trading system and was halted.
"This is brutal. They are not going to come away untarnished as an exchange," one trader said.
Shares in the Calgary, Alberta-based firm have traded for just two hours on Canada's biggest equity market since investors lopped almost C$3 billion ($2.19 billion) off Bre-X's market value last Thursday.
Bre-X has been under heavy fire since last week when its partner in Indonesia, Freeport-McMoRan Copper &amp; Gold Inc., revealed that early drilling samples performed during its due diligence process on the Busang gold property in the rain forests of Borneo turned up "insignificant" amounts of gold and "visual differences" from Bre-X's gold samples.
While the TSE experienced more computer headaches, Bre-X stock continued trading on Nasdaq and the Montreal and Alberta exchanges on Wednesday.
Bre-X closed down 19 cents at $2.315 on 9.4 million shares on Nasdaq. In Montreal, the stock fell C35 cents to C$3.15 on 6.2 million shares.
Analysts predicted more volatility. "All I see happening in the market right now is the battle lines have been drawn between the believers and non-believers and the salting and non-salting crowd. At the end of the day we'll have to see if its zero or the moonshot," Merrill Lynch analyst David Christensen said.
Bre-X Chief Executive David Walsh has insisted tampering with core samples was impossible and an independent audit would prove the company's findings.
Bre-X has claimed Busang has an estimated 70.95 million ounces of gold worth $20 billion.
Strathcona Mineral Services Ltd., an independent mining consultant hired by Bre-X, was expected to begin analyzing its samples from independent drilling at Busang by mid-April, industry sources in Jakarta told Reuters.
"The (drilling) program should be finished by mid-April and the cores flown together to Perth (Australia) around 12 or 15 of April. Everyone is hoping for the results by the end of the month," one source said.
Meanwhile, Freeport said on Wednesday it would not comment on reports that its next round of Busang drilling results could be delivered to Bre-X soon.
"We just don't know what the timetable is," Freeport spokeswoman Kristen Lemkau said in a telephone interview.
