Royal Bank of Canada said on Thursday it plans a massive share buyback to boost shareholder value and offset the dilutive impact of acquiring brokerage firm Richardson Greenshields of Canada Ltd.
Royal Bank, Canada's largest bank, said it may repurchase up to 10 percent of its 313 million outstanding common shares over the next 12 months.
The bank's stock soared C$1.05 (76 cents) to close at C$36.20 ($26.40) after earlier hitting a 52-week high of C$36.25 ($26.45) on the Toronto Stock Exchange.
Based on the current share price, the buyback is worth about C$1.1 billion ($800 million).
"Given the projections for internal capital generation going forward, we concluded that this was in the best interest of our shareholders," Matthew Frank, Royal Bank's manager of capital and term funding, said in a telephone interview.
Royal Bank recently surpassed the C$1 billion ($729 million) mark in net profit for the first nine months of fiscal 1996, putting it on track for a third straight year of record earnings.
It is the third major Canadian bank to announce a huge share buyback in the past year.
In July, Toronto-Dominion Bank, the country's fifth-largest bank, said it will repurchase up to 10 percent of its common shares, valued at C$720 million ($525 million).
Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, Canada's second-biggest bank, announced plans to buy back about 5 percent of its shares last November.
"I think it's possible that you will get additional buybacks," an industry analyst said, noting that all six major banks have posted record results this year.
Royal Bank said the share plan will offset any dilution arising from the bank's proposed C$480 million ($350 million) acquisition of Toronto-based Richardson Greenshields which is to close Nov. 1.
The bank is offering Richardson Greenshields shareholders up to C$240 million ($175 million) in cash with the balance payable in shares exchangeable for Royal Bank common shares.
Analysts said the share repurchase will more than offset the dilutive effect of the brokerage deal.
"It's a bit more than they need, but I guess if you're sitting on capital why not get a little more bang for your buck," another banking analyst said.
The big buyback will not affect the bank's future acquisition strategy, bank officials said.
Royal Bank, which listed its shares on the New York Stock Exchange last year, has said it is interested in a U.S. acquisition, but at the right price.
Last month, the bank was mentioned in U.S. media reports as a potential bidder for U.S. mutual and pension-fund manager Columbia Management Co.
