Shares in Bre-X Minerals Ltd. dominated the actives list on the Toronto Stock Exchange on Friday as exchange officials said problems that have hampered recent trading in the stock were now fixed.
Bre-X finished its first full session since last week on the TSE -- Canada's biggest stock market -- closing down C25 cents at C$3.18 in massive turnover of eight million shares. On Nasdaq, Bre-X fell 25 cents to $2.375.
The stock earlier hit a session high of C$3.78 amid market rumors that early test results of the Busang gold site by an independent mining consultant looked positive.
"I heard it was rumors around Strathcona that got them up today, but those rumors petered out so that's why it is down," one analyst said.
Toronto-based mining consultant Strathcona Mineral Services Ltd. has remained silent since it was hired two weeks ago by Bre-X to conduct an audit of the Busang gold site.
The final results of Strathcona's review are not expected until early May.
Bre-X has been under siege since last week when its partner in Indonesia, New Orleans-based Freeport-McMoRan Copper &amp; Gold Inc., revealed that early drilling samples performed during its due diligence process on the Busang gold property in the rain forests of Borneo turned up only tiny amounts of gold.
Frantic trading in Bre-X shares forced the TSE to stop trading in the stock on Thursday -- the third time this week that the TSE halted Bre-X because of heavy order volumes and an outdated computer system.
TSE President Rowland Fleming said on Friday that the exchange fixed the problem by rewriting a section of computer code.
"(It was) easily rectified. I'm confident we will not (have any more problems)," Fleming told Reuters.
He dismissed suggestions that the TSE's reputation had been tarnished by the trading interruptions. "Every exchange from time to time with this kind of sophisticated technology has difficulties," Fleming said.
He said the TSE was cooperating with the Ontario Securities Commission, which confirmed on Thursday that it has launched a probe into whether Bre-X violated insider trading and disclosure laws.
Bre-X Chief Executive David Walsh, his wife and other company officials added more than C$37 million ($26.6 million) to their bank accounts after they sold Bre-X stock at prices ranging from C$24.40 ($17.57) to C$28.40 ($20.45) between August and October.
The sales were controversial because they occurred shortly after Bre-X learned that its preliminary license had been canceled by the Indonesian government, a development the company did not reveal publicly until last October.
"Mr. Walsh and all of the others...are perfectly entitled to buy and sell their stock as they see fit, and make money or lose money as the case may be, as long as they do not do that using insider information," Fleming said.
He said there was no evidence to date that Bre-X officials had acted improperly.
