David Walsh, the maverick chief executive of beleaguered Canadian gold prospector Bre-X Minerals Ltd., said on Thursday Bre-X has the money to weather the storm over the Busang gold discovery and vowed an audit will prove he made the century's richest gold strike.
Under siege since last month's stunning news that Busang may be a bust, a plainly fatigued Walsh dismissed the conspiracy and tampering theories that have dogged the Calgary, Alberta-based company. He rejected fresh reports about the mysterious death of its chief geologist at Busang.
While Canadian regulators probe Bre-X and its top officials for possible violation of insider trading and disclosure laws, lawyers in Canada and the United States are forging ahead with at least eight class action lawsuits.
"The last two weeks have been an unprecedented bout of stress and workload. I don't thing anyone in this company has been under the microscope like this," said Walsh, who needed occasional prompting from Bre-X officials during a telephone interview with Reuters.
"We have more than sufficient resources to weather the storm," Walsh said.
Bre-X has been in the eye of the storm since preliminary tests by its partner Freeport-McMoRan Copper &amp; Gold Inc on the Busang gold property indicated the deposit may contain "insignificant" amounts of gold.
The announcement prompted panic selling of Bre-X shares last month, lopping almost C$3 billion ($2.2 billion), or more than 80 percent, from the company's stock market value.
Bre-X firmed C40 cents to close at C$2.67 on the Toronto Stock Exchange on Thursday,
Walsh said an independent audit of the Busang project by Toronto-based Strathcona Mineral Services Ltd. would confirm Bre-X's estimate of 71 million ounces of gold, potentially the richest in the world.
"We're sticking by our numbers that we have announced so I don't really want to speculate. What happens if they come in at 80 million (ounces of gold)? I'm not really going to speculate on that," he said.
Walsh declined to confirm reports that the Busang partners would receive the test results on April 29. "We're saying hopefully the first week of May. So we're splitting hairs. I don't think one can be given an exact date because of the procedure Strathcona is going to be utilizing."
The newly drilled core samples to be used in the audit are under tight security and will transported to Perth, Australia by chartered jet, Walsh said. Three independent labs will conduct tests of the core samples in three countries.
Strathcona was hired by Bre-X immediately after it received the preliminary findings from Freeport.
Bre-X's chief Busang geologist, Michael de Guzman, was en route to a meeting with Freeport officials on March 19 when he fell out of a helicopter in an apparent suicide.
The death of a co-discoverer of Busang, coupled with leaked reports in the Indonesian press about Freeport's findings, sparked a selloff in Bre-X shares the following day.
The geologist's death has been the subject of wild rumors and media reports, including an Indonesian newspaper article on Thursday suggesting the corpse buried at de Guzman's funeral last week in the Philippines was not de Guzman.
Walsh said he still believed de Guzman committed suicide. But he added: "We have not received official autopsy reports and we have no comment on Mike's tragic death."
Bre-X's head of exploration, John Felderhof, has assumed de Guzman's responsibilities at Busang, but the company officials in Calgary have had trouble communicating with him.
"We've had very little communication with him. For some reason our satellite communication is not functioning properly and faxes that come out are garbled," Walsh said.
With billions of dollars in limbo and Strathcona's report weeks away, financial markets have been awash with theories that tampering occurred with the Busang drilling samples.
But Walsh said a step-by-step report of Bre-X's sampling and assay methods released on Wednesday would quash speculation that the samples were tampered with at the site.
But some analysts said the focus was shifting toward the assay method used.
"That is highly unlikely considering the credibility of the lab (PT Indo Assay), which has been in existence for a number of years and used by major mining companies in the country," Walsh responded.
He declined to comment on increasing attention being paid to personal trades by himself, his wife and other company officials, which netted them about C$77 million ($55 million).
The Ontario Securities Commission is probing Bre-X for possible violations of insider trading and disclosure laws.
Some trades by Walsh and others in 1996 were controversial because they occurred shortly after Bre-X learned that its preliminary license had been canceled by Indonesia, something the company did not make public until last October.
Walsh said he considered the revoked license "non-material information" because Bre-X's claim to Busang was in good standing. "At no time was the ground not legally held and the revocation was a non-material fact," he said.
The Indonesian military is closely watching the testing at Busang and the government has announced plans to investigate.
Walsh said the controversy would not threaten Bre-X's 45 percent stake in the project because it has a binding agreement with its partners. "We see absolutely no reason for any further changes. What's going right now is not of our making and there is no reason there would be any changes to the binding agreement," he said.
