Canada's top securities regulator and its biggest stock exchange said on Friday they are working on tougher rules for Canada's mining sector -- tarnished at home and abroad by the Busang gold saga.
The Ontario Securities Commission (OSC) and Toronto Stock Exchange have been under fire since news that Busang may not be the century's richest gold find, rocked the mining world.
In a joint statement, the OSC and TSE said a special task force would examine setting new standards for how companies conducted exploration programs and how the results were reported.
"We haven't concluded that (new standards are needed), but we feel it's appropriate at this stage to look at the situation," said OSC Chairman Jack Geller.
The TSE is also considering tightening procedures for listing new companies. Questions have been raised about the due diligence the exchange performed on Bre-X Minerals Ltd. before including it in the key TSE 300 and TSE 100 indices.
Critics say the controversy swirling around Calgary, Alberta-based Bre-X, the discoverer of Busang, has given Canada a black eye.
Bre-X has been under pressure since preliminary tests by its partner Freeport-McMoRan Copper &amp; Gold Inc. on the Busang gold property indicated the deposit may contain "insignificant" amounts of gold.
The announcement prompted panic selling of Bre-X shares last month, lopping almost C$3 billion ($2.2 billion), or more than 80 percent, off the company's stock market value.
Bre-X has commissioned an independent audit of the Busang project and stood by its estimate of 70.95 million ounces of gold. While investors anxiously await the test results expected in early May, attention has turned to the personal stock trades of top Bre-X officials.
The OSC, which is probing Bre-X for possible violation of insider trading and disclosure laws, said on Friday that no Bre-X insiders reported trades last month when the stock collapsed. The Alberta Securities Commission on Friday also reported no activity by Bre-X officials in March.
As the OSC/TSE task force gets down to work with a report due in autumn, some foreign miners are already trying to distance themselves from Canada's tarred image.
In a statement issued shortly after the Bre-X selloff, U.S.-based Nevada Pacific Mining Co. Inc. said it "wishes to advise that it has no association with any Canadian based brokerage house, investment bank, or mining analyst, no Canadian based shareholders on its share register, nor is it planning to list on any Canadian stock exchange."
Australian mining officials said earlier this week the Bre-X situation may not have happened if Canada had adopted mining reporting standards similar to Australia's.
Canada was the only country "dragging its feet" in efforts to have it and the United States, Australia, South Africa and Britain adopt a uniform reporting code, Norman Miskelly, head of an Australian industry reporting standards committee, told Reuters on Tuesday.
The OSC's Geller said he doubted Australian standards would have prevented a situation like Bre-X, but acknowledged they needed improvement.
"They are somewhat out of date and they are being brought up to date," he said.
Geller rejected criticism that fragmentation among Canada's provinces has made it difficult to get an agreement between the country's five stock exchanges and several securities commissions. Canada has tried for several years to set up one national securities commission.
Meanwhile, the negative impact on Canada's reputation as an international mining finance center will be short, some analysts predicted on Friday.
"Certainly there will be a sting, but Canadian institutions and markets were doing well before Bre-X and they will do well after Bre-X," said John Ing, president of Maison Placements Canada in Toronto. "That Australia is pointing the finger is more boosterism than anything else."
Meanwhile, federal officials said there is no pressure for a federal inquiry into the Busang/Bre-X affair.
Canada's last major mining inquiry was a Royal Commission probe in the 1960s in which a mining promoter was jailed briefly for stock manipulation linked to worthless samples from a Northern Ontario drill site.
"There is absolutely no indication in any way that the federal government has started any investigation," said Dale Hull, a department of natural resources official.
