Shares in Bre-X Minerals Ltd. soared on the Toronto Stock Exchange on Wednesday as rumors continued to swirl around the Busang gold deposit and analysts sifted through drill results from the site.
The Calgary, Alberta-based company's stock jumped C$1.22 to close at C$3.62 on massive turnover of 17 million shares on Canada's biggest stock market.
Frenzied late afternoon trading pushed the volatile stock to a session high of C$5.75.
Bre-X has been embroiled in controversy since preliminary tests by its partner, Freeport-McMoRan Copper &amp; Gold Inc., on the gold property indicated the deposit may contain "insignificant" amounts of gold.
The announcement prompted panic selling of Bre-X shares last month, lopping almost C$3 billion ($2.2 billion), or more than 80 percent, from the company's stock market value.
Reports on Wednesday that Freeport recently received the first independent tests of the Busang deposit by a Canadian firm were challenged by Freeport and Bre-X officials.
The reports said Freeport received the tests while Freeport Chief Executive Jim Bob Moffett was in Indonesia and held meetings with President Suharto.
"The testing is still going on and Freeport has not been informed of any assay results," Freeport spokeswoman Kristen Lemkau told Reuters by telephone.
Bre-X commissioned Toronto-based Strathcona Mineral Services Ltd. last month to conduct an audit of its Busang project. The results are expected in early May.
"The audit was commissioned by Bre-X and it is going to be submitted to Bre-X," said Bre-X spokesman Richard Wool, adding that it was Bre-X that would release the audit results.
Bre-X late on Tuesday released drill results from 22 holes at the Busang property that were not included in its resource calculation of 70.95 million ounces of gold released on February 17.
Bre-X said 16 holes produced values ranging from 1.05 grams per tonne to 7.58 grams per tonne, while six holes showed no significant amount of gold.
"They were sort of old holes, but I think investors are taking it positively," said one mining analyst.
John Kaiser, editor of the Kaiser Bottom-Fishing Report, said the drill results released on Tuesday were positive, but not enough to quash the controversy surrounding Busang.
He said the final word on Busang was still up to two weeks away.
"We need to know what the numbers for this deposit run as produced by strictly controlled sampling, drilling and assaying procedures. Until we get a batch of results where we know that there is nothing screwy along the way, everything is uncertain," Kaiser said.
The Busang saga took another curious twist on Wednesday when an Indonesian company linked to President Suharto raised its stake in the Busang property.
Nusamba Group, 80 percent-owned by three foundations headed by President Suharto, raised its stake in the main Busang II section to 25 percent. Pt Askatindo Karya Minerals reduced its stake to five percent from 15 percent, said a spokesman for the family-owned company.
Bre-X has a 45 percent stake in Busang, Freeport has 15 percent and the Indonesian government 10 percent.
