Several days before a key report on the Busang gold controversy, a major partner confirmed on Thursday it had still not found significant gold at the site deep in the jungles of Indonesia.
Since it reported finding "insignificant amounts" of gold from preliminary tests of Busang last month, New Orleans-based Freeport McMoRan Copper &amp; Gold Inc. has continued testing its original seven drill cores taken from the site.
"We have continued analysis of those same cores and our previously announced findings are unchanged. We have not done any additional drilling beyond those core holes," Freeport spokesman Kristin Lemkau told Reuters in a telephone interview.
Freeport mentioned the continued testing of the drill cores in its first-quarter results released on Tuesday, but gave no further details.
"They are probably making sure that they have turned over every stone to just establish if there is gold or not. They also may be getting variances and they're trying to clear that up," a Canadian mining analyst said.
Freeport's announcement on March 26 prompted panic selling of shares in Bre-X Minerals Ltd., which discovered the Busang site and heralded it as the century's biggest gold find.
Since losing almost C$3 billion ($2.2 billion) of its stock market value last month, Bre-X shares have traded on the wildest of rumors while investors await an audit from Toronto-based Strathcona Mineral Services Ltd.
Bre-X stock slipped C2 cents to C$3.60 in heavy turnover of 10.3 million shares on the Toronto Stock Exchange on Thursday.
The stock jumped to a high of C$5.75 on Wednesday amid incorrect rumors that Freeport Chief Executive Jim "Bob" Moffett resigned and that Freeport received preliminary results from Strathcona's audit of the Busang site.
The reports were quickly rejected by Bre-X and Freeport officials. Lemkau also declined comment on reports that Moffett was in Indonesia and had held meetings with President Suharto, saying that Freeport did not release the specific travel plans of its officials.
Analysts said Wednesday's rumors started on the Internet and quickly jolted Bre-X's stock out of its recent slumber.
"It amazes me that everyone is calling for higher forms of regulation and then everybody is relying on rumors and Internet chat lines. It's ridiculous," said John Ing, president of Toronto-based brokerage Maison Placements Canada.
Analysts expected more frenzied trading ahead of Freeport's annual shareholders meeting in New Orleans next Tuesday, April 29. Freeport has warned media that company officials would be reluctant to answer questions on the "Bre-X matter".
"Everybody is hoping that we'll have some information out around the Freeport annual meeting," another analyst said.
Some reports have suggested April 29 was also the date that Bre-X would receive Strathcona's report. But Bre-X has said it may not get the report until early May.
Whenever the Strathcona audit is released, analysts expect Freeport to follow quickly with a statement on its plans regarding the Busang project.
Meanwhile, officials with Barrick Gold Corp. and Placer Dome Inc. declined comment on reports that they were released from confidentiality agreements with Bre-X.
Some analysts have said Barrick and Placer -- once rival bidders for a share of the Busang site -- have information that could shed light on the mystery.
"We're not going to comment at all. All we can say is we would cooperate with any authorities investigating the matter," said Barrick spokesman Vince Borg.
The Ontario Securities Commission, Canada's top securities regulator, is probing Bre-X for possible violations of insider trading and disclosure laws.
The OSC also declined comment on the report.
