Canadians were stunned Sunday after a heartbreaking loss to the United States in the World Cup of Hockey dealt a crippling blow to the nation's pride.
Canada's "dream team" -- a galaxy of National Hockey League stars including Wayne Gretzky, Mark Messier and Eric Lindros -- fell to an upstart American squad in a gripping finale to the World Cup championship Saturday.
Team USA, led by superb goaltending, defeated the Canadian squad 5-2 to win the best-of-three series in Montreal.
Canadians -- who consider hockey more of a religion than a sport -- mourned the country's worst loss in international play since 1981 when the Soviet Union handed Team Canada a crushing defeat in the Canada Cup -- the precursor to the World Cup.
Saturday night's loss has also rekindled fears of a further Americanisation of Canada's sacred game.
"I feel terrible, just terrible. That's why I'm here," Circiaco Deluca said as he quaffed a pint of beer in Wayne Gretzky's bar in Toronto, surrounded by mementos of past Canadian hockey glory.
Gretzky, known as the Great One, summed up the feelings of most of his countrymen after Saturday's game.
"This is a crushed locker room right now and probably a crushed country. It's devastating," Gretzky told reporters.
The disastrous outcome dominated the front pages of Canadian newspapers Sunday.
"DAMN YANKEES," screamed the Montreal Gazette newspaper.
"AMERICA'S GAME," cried the Toronto Star, Canada's largest newspaper.
"The U.S. roared into Canada like a mayhem-minded mob of Hell's Angels and left with a major chunk of our national heritage," wrote Star hockey columnist Damien Cox.
The tabloid Toronto Sun featured a cartoon of the Statue of Liberty with a hockey stick in one hand and the World Cup trophy in another.
Canada's defeat comes at a time when many fans are lamenting the steady Americanisation of their game.
Computer-enhanced pucks, flashy uniforms with cartoon characters, and the NHL's expansion into non-traditional markets like Phoenix and Nashville have made hockey purists cringe.
A Canadian-based team has not won the NHL's championship Stanley Cup since 1993 and appears likely to extend the losing streak for another year.
Small market clubs in Calgary, Edmonton and Ottawa are struggling to stay alive in the face of skyrocketing costs. Quebec City and Winnipeg have already seen their franchises flee south to wealthier markets.
Frank Diponzio, a tourist from Rochester, N.Y., said hockey's future will depend on it growing in the bigger U.S. market.
"It's not as popular as baseball or football, but it's getting bigger. Beating Canada at home will help," he said in an interview.
Some Canadian fans were bitter that Canadian-born Brett Hull, the son of hockey legend Bobby Hull, scored twice in Saturday's game -- for the United States.
Hull, who has dual citizenship, played most of the game to chants of "Brett Hull sucks" from the partisan crowd in Montreal's Molson Centre.
"I think he should have played for Canada. It just shows a lack of respect for the country," said Trevor Murray, an 18-year-old student sporting a Toronto Maple Leafs sweater.
But others said the younger, faster U.S. team deserved credit for a gritty performance.
"It's not a national catastrophe. They played a great game and we'll be back," said Jack Porter of Sudbury, Ontario.
