U.S. mining giant Freeport-McMoRan Copper &amp; Gold Inc. has extended its review of a controversial Indonesian gold mining project until June 30, Canadian gold prospector Bre-X Minerals Ltd. said Wednesday.
New Orleans-based Freeport, a partner in the Busang project in Indonesia, requested the extension "to allow for consideration of the findings of the Strathcona audit," Bre-X said in a statement.
Toronto-based Strathcona Mineral Services Ltd. is expected to deliver a key report on Busang to Bre-X on Thursday or Friday. Bre-X has said it will issue a press release on the report before North American financial markets open on Monday.
Rumours have swirled around Busang since what has been called the century's biggest gold find was cast into doubt on March 26 when Freeport-McMoRan said its preliminary tests found "insignificant" amounts of gold.
Bre-X has estimated Busang contains about 71 million ounces of gold, potentially the largest in the world.
Panic selling of Bre-X shares lopped almost C$3 billion ($2.1 billion) from the company's stock market value last month, wiping out 80 percent of its market worth.
Freeport spokeswoman Kristin Lemkau said on Wednesday the request for the extension was made within the past week.
"The original agreement with Bre-X signed on February 26 said that FCX's due diligence expired on April 30. This is really just to announce that we had pushed that date to June 30 to allow time for completion of the independent audit by Strathcona," Lemkau said in a telephone interview.
Lemkau declined to comment when asked if Freeport planned any further drilling at Busang over the next two months.
Bre-X shares led fell 32 cents Canadian (23 cents) to C$3.48 ($2.52) in heavy trading on the Toronto Stock Exchange.
Some investors on an Internet chat page speculated that Freeport's extension was favourable to Bre-X, but mining analysts cautioned against reading too much into the announcement.
"I don't think we should read into the request, although obviously investors are," said John Ing, president of Maison Placements Canada Inc.
"Everybody is reading a lot into the rumours. But really they are just rumours right now," another Canadian mining analyst said.
An Indonesian newspaper, citing unnamed sources, reported earlier this week that leaked results of Strathcona's drill tests showed "cheerful" grades of gold.
But in a report in the Calgary Sun newspaper on Wednesday, Strathcona President Graham Farquharson said it was unlikely that his company's findings had been leaked.
"I still haven't seen the results myself -- the assays are still under way. So I have to doubt the claim," Farquharson was quoted as saying by the Sun. "To the best of my knowledge there've been no leaks," he said.
Strathcona said last week it would maintain tight security over the assaying of its core samples at laboratories in Canada, Indonesia and Australia.
Only one or two persons in management at each laboratory would have access to the final assays and the results would not be reported until all the lab work was finished.
Strathcona has said its final report to Bre-X would be delivered about six weeks after an interim report.
