Canadian gold prospector Bre-X Minerals Ltd said on Tuesday a key report on the Busang gold mystery will be released before North American financial markets open on Monday.
Strathcona Mineral Services Ltd., the consulting firm hired by Bre-X to audit the project, is expected to issue an interim report on its findings to Bre-X by Friday.
"Bre-X expects to release the interim report next Monday morning prior to the opening of financial markets in North America," Bre-X spokesman Richard Wool said in a telephone interview on Tuesday.
Wool said reports were wrong that Bre-X was preparing an elaborate press conference in Toronto for the announcement.
Rumors have swirled around Busang since the century's biggest gold find was cast into doubt on March 26 when partner Freeport-McMoRan Copper and Gold Inc. said its preliminary tests found "insignificant" amounts of gold.
Panic selling of Bre-X shares lopped almost C$3 billion ($2.1 billion) or 80 percent from the company's stock market value. Since then investors have anxiously awaited Strathcona's findings from Busang, once estimated by Bre-X to contain 71 million ounces of gold.
Bre-X closed up C15 cents at C$3.80 on 5.6 million shares on the Toronto Stock Exchange on Tuesday.
Freeport chief executive Jim Bob Moffett said on Tuesday the U.S. mining giant is hoping the Strathcona report will "add more light" to the Busang mystery.
"Freeport's participation is predicated on the fact that we will go forward and join only if we can confirm an economic deposit," Moffett said during the company's annual meeting.
The meeting was held under tight security at Freeport's New Orleans headquarters, where shareholders were screened by metal detectors and reporters were sequestered in a seperate room to view the proceedings on closed-circuit television.
While all eyes are on tiny Toronto-based Strathcona, some analysts said its report may only lead to further drilling at the Busang site.
"For anything definitive, one would expect a due diligence process that would take more than just six holes drilled by Strathcona and the seven holes (by Freeport). A lot more will have to be done before one has an idea of what is there and what isn't there," said John Ing, president of Maison Placements Canada Inc.
Analysts were divided on whether the granting of Indonesian contracts of work (COW) to two companies related to Bre-X was a good omen for the embattled company.
Bre-X shares soared briefly on Monday after Bro-X Minerals Ltd and Bresea Resources Ltd signed contracts to develop two copper-gold projects.
The Indonesian government has put Bre-X's COW for Busang on hold until it completed a review of the company's drilling activities.
"I know a lot of people say its irrelevant, but I just can't believe that if the Indonesians felt there was a problem with Bre-X that they would have granted them (Bro-X and Bresea) contracts of work," said Norm Duncan, a broker with Vancouver-based C.M. Oliver and Co.
Analysts questioned the accuracy of an Indonesian newspaper report on Tuesday which said leaked results of Strathcona's drill tests showed "cheerful" grades of gold.
Strathcona said last week it would maintain tight security over the assaying of its core samples at laboratories in Canada, Indonesia and Australia.
Only one or two persons in management at each laboratory will have access to the final assays and the results would not be reported until all the lab work was finished, Strathcona said last Friday.
