Ontario Finance Minister Ernie Eves said on Thursday the government was ahead of its revised deficit target for 1996/97 and may balance the province's books before the turn of the century.
In a pre-budget interview, Eves said he did not feel obligated to speed up the timetable for the next stage of the government's planned 30 percent income tax cut.
The Conservative government will deliver on May 6 its second full budget since sweeping to power in 1995.
Last February, Eves revised the 1996/97 deficit down to C$7.67 billion from an original forecast of C$8.2 billion.
"We might be slightly better than that. The economy performed pretty well," Eves said.
He declined to comment on economists' predictions that the 1996/97 deficit would drop below C$7 billion. Some analysts have speculated that the government could wipe out the deficit by fiscal 1999/2000, one year ahead of plan.
"It's not impossible, but it isn't a slam dunk by any stretch of the imagination. There has to be some pretty significant growth," Eves said.  
In a pre-budget commentary on Wednesday, Toronto-Dominion Bank economists said Ontario could reach its deficit goal faster if the economy remained favorable.
Eves said it would be possible to balance the budget ahead of schedule if the economy grew around four percent annually for three straight years.
"If you had those types of growth numbers of around four (percent) or just under four (percent) for three consecutive years, I think it's possible that you could achieve that," he said.
But Eves said he would continue to use conservative economic forecasts in next week's budget.
"We would be more than happy to overachieve our targets and more than happy to get to our goal earlier than planned, but I'm not counting on it," he said.
Some economists have speculated that Ontario's stronger economy and improving deficit outlook might allow Eves to speed up delivering the next stage of a promised 30 percent tax cut.
About half the tax cut has been implemented, with the remaining 15 percent due by 1999.
"We said...we would provide half of the cut in our first budget and we did that. We (said) would provide for the next half over two years and I don't see any reason to change course," Eves said.
Since taking power in 1995 promising a "Common Sense Revolution", the Conservatives have outlined deep spending cuts through the end of the decade.
Eves said most of the cost-cutting had been put in place and Tuesday's budget would include spending on infrastructure and restructuring of public services.
"We always said -- in the the health care field especially -- that as we found savings and efficiencies, we would reinvest," he said.
Despite its deficit-cutting efforts, Ontario has not won a major rating upgrade from influential bond rating agencies.
"Sure you would like to see that recognition in the marketplace," Eves said, but he declined to comment when asked if Ontario deserved an upgrade.
"There have been a couple of upgrades in the Ontario's short-term ratings, but nothing substantial. Although we are borrowing money as if we had a better rating," Eves said.
((Reuters Toronto Bureau (416) 941-8100))
