Canada's Barrick Gold Corp, the world's second largest gold producer, said on Thursday Indonesia and Canada's mining sectors are innocent casualties of the Busang gold controversy.
Peter Munk, chairman of Barrick and a former bidder for Busang, said the saga of Bre-X Minerals Ltd and its Indonesian gold project has tarnished the reputations of both countries among foreign investors.
"This Busang affair. The Bre-X affair. Now more a soap opera belonging to the movies than to the boardrooms, has created an awful lot of backlash," Munk told the company's annual meeting in Toronto after returning to Canada from a recent business trip to Europe.
But Munk said the success of other Canadian mining companies should not be tarred by controversy swirling around one junior gold prospector.
"Our mining industry is second to none," Munk said. "And no single rogue operation and no single deviant member can change these fundamentals."
Later speaking to reporters, Munk said his "rogue" comment did not imply that he believed there was no gold at Busang.
Rumors have swirled around Busang since what has been called the century's biggest gold find was cast into doubt on March 26 when partner Freeport-McMoRan Copper and Gold Inc. said its preliminary due diligence tests found "insignificant" amounts of gold.
Bre-X, the discoverer of Busang, has estimated the site contains about 71 million ounces of gold, potentially the largest in the world.
After Freeport's announcement last month, panic selling of Bre-X shares lopped almost C$3 billion ($2.1 billion) from the company's stock market value, wiping out 80 percent of its market worth. Shares in other Canadian gold miners plummeted as well.
Bre-X shares have continued to trade furiously as anxious investors await a key report due on Monday which may clear up the Busang mystery.
Bre-X has hired an independent consultant, Toronto-based Strathcona Mineral Services Ltd, to review the Busang project.
The stock closed down C44 (US32) cents at C$3.04 ($2.20) in heavy turnover of 7.1 million shares on the Toronto Stock Exchange on Thursday.
Munk, who lost a battle for control of the Busang site earlier this year, said he still had faith in Indonesia and its mining laws.
Let me tell you...that what happened in this fiasco, what happened in the publicity field is not the fault of Indonesia or Indonesian laws," he said.
Munk said Indonesia's economy is booming and Barrick will continue to seek gold projects in the country. He noted other major international firms, including Canadian nickel giant Inco Ltd, have operated in Indonesia for years "within the law and protected by the law."
Last year, Bre-X was the target of an intense bidding war as several heavyweight mining firms battled for control of the gold discovery deep in the jungles of Borneo.
Barrick initially dominated the negotiations, but it lost the inside track when President Suharto's government brought in Indonesian businessman Muhammad "Bob" Hasan in January.
Hasan swiftly brokered a deal giving New Orleans-based Freeport McMoRan 15 percent of Busang and the right to mine the project. The arrangement left Bre-X with 45 percent, down from an original 90 percent stake, and the rest to the Indonesian government and two Indonesian companies.
Munk said before Busang he had never expended more energy in pursuing an acquisition. But he lost interest in Busang when it became clear that Barrick could not get complete control of the project, a condition it considers critical for all its mining operations.
"You would not want us to have a billion or a billion and a half dollars in Indonesia or anywhere else -- outside of our control," Munk told shareholders.
