The big U.S. mining company Freeport-McMoRan Copper &amp; Gold Inc. pulled out of the now worthless Busang gold project on Monday as Canada's mining community reeled from the biggest fraud in mining history.
New Orleans-based Freeport said a damning independent report on Busang released by Canada's Bre-X Minerals Ltd. late on Sunday confirmed its own poor test results from the site.
"Consequently, (Freeport) will notify Bre-X that it is withdrawing from the Busang project pursuant to the terms of its contractual agreement," the company said in a statement.
The Busang discovery  -- touted by Calgary, Alberta-based Bre-X as the richest find of the century -- was falsified on a scale "without precedent in the history of mining" according to the report by consultant Strathcona Mineral Services Ltd.
Strathcona said it found evidence of tampering with Bre-X's core samples and that Strathcona's own tests discovered only trace amounts of gold at the Busang site where Bre-X claimed to have found 71 million ounces of gold.
The report said a gold deposit worth mining was unlikely to be found at the site.
"We are very disappointed that the apparent opportunity for (Freeport) to develop the Busang property has been eliminated by (our) findings ... as now confirmed by the Strathcona audit report," said Freeport Chief Executive Jim Bob Moffett.
In Jakarta, an Indonesian company linked to President Suharto said it also was withdrawing from the Busang project. Nusamba Group, chaired by businessman Muhammad "Bob" Hasan, is 80 percent-owned by three charities headed by Suharto and 10 percent each by Hasan and Suharto's eldest son.
In a separate statement, Bre-X's chief of exploration, John Felderhof, said he was shocked and dismayed by the Strathcona report.
"I know that I was not involved in a fraud. I also find it very hard to believe that anyone on my staff was involved in a fraud," Felderhof said in a statement faxed from the Cayman Islands late on Sunday.
Felderhof's Busang staff included Michael de Guzman, a Bre-X geologist who allegedly jumped to his death from a helicopter on March 19 while en route to a meeting with Freeport officials in Indonesia.
On March 26, Freeport said that its preliminary tests found "insignificant" amounts of gold.
After the Freeport announcement, Bre-X immediately hired Strathcona, a well-respected Canadian mining consulting firm, to review its Busang project.
The announcements sparked panic selling of Bre-X shares, wiping almost C$3 billion ($2.1 billion) from the company's market value when the stock plummeted to C$2.50 ($1.80) from around C$15 ($11).
Bre-X's stock was halted on the Toronto Stock Exchange on Monday after Sunday's stunning report. But shares in other small Canadian mining companies tumbled as the Bre-X scandal reverberated through the mining community.
Barry Allen, a mining analyst at Gordon Capital in Toronto, said investors would be very sceptical of future unproven discoveries by Canadian prospectors.
"Everyone will go back and re-value and re-look at everything, starting from the ground up," Allen said.
Freeport and Bre-X agreed to develop the Busang site in January after an intense bidding war by several big mining companies for control of the project.
In a deal brokered by Indonesian businessman Hasan, Freeport received a 15 percent stake and the right to mine the project. The arrangement left Bre-X with 45 percent, down from an original 90 percent stake, and the rest with the Indonesian government and the Indonesian companies.
Meanwhile, the mystery of what happened remains.
The reports of a huge gold find came from samples submitted by Felderhof and his team of geologists, including de Guzman. The last estimate of 71 million ounces of gold was calculated by assay firm Kilborn SNC Lavalin, which has already said it was not responsible for sampling.
"I personally still believe that there are significant amounts of gold at Busang," Felderhof said in his statement, adding he would cooperate with authorities investigating the case.
Disgruntled shareholders have already launched at least eight class-action lawsuits against Bre-X and the Ontario Securities Commission is investigating Bre-X for possible violations of trading and disclosure laws.
Several books are being written about the Bre-X saga and a movie is being planned.
