The big U.S. mining company Freeport-McMoRan Copper &amp; Gold Inc. pulled out of the now worthless Busang gold project on Monday as Canada's mining community reeled from the biggest fraud in mining history.
The Busang discovery  -- touted by Calgary, Alberta-based Bre-X Minerals Ltd. as the richest find of the century -- was falsified on a scale "without precedent in the history of mining," according to a report issued late on Sunday by consultant Strathcona Mineral Services Ltd.
New Orleans-based Freeport said the report confirmed its own poor test results from the site.
"Consequently, (Freeport) will notify Bre-X that it is withdrawing from the Busang project pursuant to the terms of its contractual agreement," the company said in a statement.
For his part, Bre-X Chief Executive David Walsh vowed investigators would "get to the bottom" of the scandal.
Strathcona said it found evidence of tampering with Bre-X's core samples and that Strathcona's own tests discovered only trace amounts of gold at the Busang site where Bre-X claimed to have found 71 million ounces of gold.
The report said a gold deposit worth mining was unlikely to be found at the site.
"We are very disappointed that the apparent opportunity for (Freeport) to develop the Busang property has been eliminated by (our) findings ... as now confirmed by the Strathcona audit report," said Freeport Chief Executive Jim Bob Moffett.
In Jakarta, Nusamba Group -- an Indonesian company linked to President Suharto -- said it was withdrawing from the Busang project. Analysts said the scandal embarrassed the Indonesian government in the midst of an election campaign.
Bre-X has hired accounting firm Price Waterhouse, Forensic Investigative Associates and other advisers to find out how the data could have been falsified.
"Investigators will get to the bottom of this," Walsh told reporters before entering the company's headquarters in Calgary on Monday. He had no further comment.
The Royal Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP) said investigators from its commercial crime unit are studying the Strathcona report.
"Bre-X has given us a copy of the report and our investigators are reviewing that (report)," RCMP spokeswoman Deleen Schoff said in a telephone interview.
"I can't speculate on what they're going to do after they read the report," Schoff said.
In a separate statement, Bre-X's chief of exploration, John Felderhof, said he was shocked by the Strathcona report.
"I know that I was not involved in a fraud. I also find it very hard to believe that anyone on my staff was involved in a fraud," Felderhof said in a statement faxed from the Cayman Islands late on Sunday.
Rumors about Busang began to circulate in March when Michael de Guzman, Bre-X's chief geologist at the site, allegedly jumped to his death from a helicopter on March 19 while en route to a meeting with Freeport officials in Indonesia.
On March 26, Freeport said that its preliminary tests found "insignificant" amounts of gold.
After the Freeport announcement, Bre-X immediately hired Strathcona to review its Busang project.
The announcements sparked panic selling of Bre-X shares, wiping almost C$3 billion ($2.1 billion) from the company's market value when the stock plummeted to C$2.50 ($1.80) from around C$15 ($11).
Freeport and Bre-X agreed to develop the Busang site in January after an intense bidding war by several big mining companies for control of the project.
The Bre-X fiasco has tarnished Canada's mining reputation at home and abroad. But Canadian Prime Minister Jean Chretien said it should not be judged by the actions of one company.
"There might have been a bad situation in the case of Bre-X ... but the Canadian mining sector is considered the most capable and most competent in the world," Chretien said on Monday while campaigning during Canada's federal election.
Bre-X's stock was halted on the Toronto Stock Exchange on Monday, but shares in other small Canadian miners tumbled as the Bre-X scandal reverberated through the mining community.
"I would say this year is largely a writeoff in terms of an overall junior resource bull market," said John Kaiser, editor of the Kaiser Bottom-Fishing Report, a mining newsletter.
Meanwhile, the mystery of what happened remained.
The reports of a huge gold find came from samples submitted by Felderhof and his team of geologists, including de Guzman. The last estimate of 71 million ounces of gold was calculated by assay firm Kilborn SNC Lavalin, which has already said it was not responsible for sampling.
"I personally still believe that there are significant amounts of gold at Busang," Felderhof said in his statement.
Disgruntled shareholders have launched at least eight class-action lawsuits against Bre-X and the Ontario Securities Commission (OSC) said on Monday it would continue probing Bre-X for possible violations of trading and disclosure laws.
