While Bre-X Minerals Ltd's maverick chief executive and senior geologist were crowned Canada's top prospectors in March, a major Busang partner got its first inkling that the gold find of century was bust.
The big U.S. mining company Freeport-McMoRan Copper &amp; Gold Inc pulled out of the now worthless Busang gold project on Monday after a damning consultant's report concluded Busang was the biggest fraud in mining history.
New Orleans-based Freeport said the report confirmed its own poor test results from the site.
Freeport chief executive Jim Bob Moffett said on Monday the first sign that something was wrong at Busang came when its assay lab -- PT Indo Assay Laboratories in Balikpapan, Indonesia -- could not find significant amounts of gold in Freeport's samples.
"We had a preliminary indication from the Indo Assay labs that the samples were not checking out," Moffett said in a conference call with reporters on Monday.
Moffett said he tried to contact Bre-X Minerals Chief Executive David Walsh and the company's Chief of Exploration, John Felderhof. Both were in Toronto in mid-March to receive awards from their peers at a gala ceremony hosted by the Prospectors and Developers Association of Canada.
Bre-X's chief geologist, Michael de Guzman, also attended the conference in Toronto.
The Busang discovery  -- touted by Calgary, Alberta-based Bre-X as the richest find of the century -- was falsified on a scale "without precedent in the history of mining," according to a report issued late on Sunday by consultant Strathcona Mineral Services Ltd.
"I notified them that they needed to get some senior people back out (to Indonesia) because we needed some help to try to understand what was going on," Moffett said.
De Guzman was en route to a meeting with Freeport officials in Borneo on March 19 when he allegedly jumped to his death from a helicopter. Rumors began to swirl around the Busang project after de Guzman's death.
"Mr. de Guzman was aware that there were problems with the assays. I don't know how much detail he was told," Moffett said.
About a week after de Guzman's death as rumors about Freeport's findings pounded Bre-X's stock, the Toronto Stock Exchange asked Freeport to issue a statement.
Freeport stunned investors on March 26 when the company said its preliminary tests found "insignificant" amounts of gold. Bre-X immediately hired Strathcona to audit the project.
The announcements sparked panic selling of Bre-X shares on March 27, wiping almost C$3 billion ($2.1 billion) from the company's market value when the stock plummeted to C$2.50 ($1.80) from around C$15 ($11).
In its report, Strathcona said it found evidence of tampering with Bre-X's core samples and that Strathcona's own tests discovered only trace amounts of gold at the Busang site where Bre-X claimed to have found 71 million ounces of gold.
The report said a gold deposit worth mining was unlikely to be found at the site.
Moffett said Bre-X's warehouse near the Borneo town of Samarinda was the most likely spot for any tampering of Bre-X's core samples.
"We felt that way because those samples sat there for such a long period of time before they actually went to lab in Balikpapan," Moffett said.
"It appeared to us that the samples that went to Samarinda ended up with gold in them. The ones that didn't go to Samarinda ended up with no gold in them," he said.
Moffett said the theory about tampering at Samarinda is outlined in the full interim Strathcona report which will be released publicly on Tuesday.
He said it is up to authorities to discover who exactly tampered with Bre-X's samples.
Despite the fallout from the Busang debacle, Moffett said prospects for mining investment remain strong in Indonesia, where it has major operations.
"I have a lot of confidence that there is going to be other gold and copper found in the Pacific Rim, especially in the rest of Indonesia and into the Phillippines," he said.
