The saga of Canada's Bre-X Minerals Ltd. and its now-worthless Busang gold find adds another chapter to a Canadian mining history rich in wealth and fiascos.
Canada has seen its share of scandals over the years -- from the 1960s Windfall affair to recent smaller busts -- but Bre-X is the most devastating to date.
The Busang discovery  -- touted by Calgary, Alberta-based Bre-X as the richest find of the century -- was falsified on a scale "without precedent in the history of mining," said a report by consultant Strathcona Mineral Services Ltd., released by Bre-X late Sunday.
"I think it's one of those things like Windfall. People will talk about it for years," veteran mine promoter Patrick Sheridan said in a recent interview.
Until now, Canada's biggest national mining scandal was the Windfall Oils and Mines Ltd. affair in the 1960s.
During a copper and zinc rush in northern Ontario, mining promoters George and Viola MacMillan acquired claims rumored to have tremendous potential.
Fueled by rumors, Windfall's stock soared to more than C$5 ($3.60) from pennies in less than a month. Authorities pressured the MacMillans to release their drilling results.
The results showed the grand deposit as a dud. The stock collapsed, and Canada's government launched a royal commission to investigate.
The Kelly Commission found no evidence the MacMillans, who carted the drill samples around in their Cadillac, were the source of the rumors. But their actions promoted a belief by investors that the samples were valuable, the commission said.
Viola MacMillan went to jail briefly for stock manipulation.
Sheridan said the panel came up with a good report on how another Windfall could be avoided. But, like many government reports, it was shelved.
The earliest dashed mining hope in Canada was in 1575 when English explorer Martin Frobisher found what he believed to be gold on Baffin Island in the far north.
When he returned to England with 1,500 tons of ore, the royal assayer told Frobisher he had worthless iron pyrites, also known as "fool's gold."
More recent mining embarassments involved Timbuktu Gold Corp. and Cartaway Resources Corp.
Last year, Timbuktu stock soared on a reported gold find in West Africa. But a new management team revealed the assays had been salted, or doctored, by unknown parties.
When investors got the news, the stock plunged around C$23 ($16) to C$1.75 ($1.27).
Cartaway stock skyrocketed in April 1996 after it announced a copper-nickel find in Labrador, Newfoundland.
The news came amid the fever over the huge Voisey's Bay nickel and copper find, which Canadian nickel giant Inco Ltd. acquired for C$4.3 billion ($3.1 billion).
Cartaway's report, however, was based on a visual inspection of just one core sample by a geologist at the site. The stock sank more than C$20 ($14) to about C$2.80 ($2).
Rich deals such as Inco's takeover of Diamond Fields Resources Ltd. and Barrick Gold Corp.'s $800 million acquisition of Arequipa Resources Ltd. fueled investor enthusiasm for mining plays. But analysts said it also might have impaired the market's judgment.
"It's a symptom of the times. There is a high degree of greed in the markets, not only in the mining industry but with regard to others, and investors tend to get complacent during these times," said John Ing, president of brokerage Maison Placements Canada in Toronto.
Another Canadian mining scandal eerily similar to Bre-X involved New Cinch Uranium Ltd. and its New Mexico gold find in the 1980s.
Willroy Mines Ltd. bid for New Cinch after its stock rallied on rich assays performed by a U.S.-based lab, Chem-Tec.
But rumors about poor test results by another assayer sent the stock on a wild ride. The mob-style murder of a former Chem-Tec employee added to the intrigue.
After a negative independent audit, New Cinch admitted the samples were contaminated and several lawsuits ensued. Willroy pulled out of the project.
Today, investigators are probing the Bre-X embroglio as Canada's mining community tries to repair its tarnished image at home and abroad.
Some said the past success of Canada's other mining companies should not be tarred by controversy about one small miner.
"Our mining industry is second to none," Peter Munk, chairman of Barrick, the world's second biggest gold miner, said recently. "And no single rogue operation and no single deviant member can change these fundamentals."
