A key consultant's report on Tuesday shed more light on how tampering occurred at the worthless Busang gold project in Indonesia, once touted by Canada's Bre-X Minerals Ltd. as the strike of the century.
While shareholders bailed out of the former stock market darling on Tuesday, investigators and analysts were trying to figure out how the country's biggest swindle could have happened.
Strathcona Mineral Services Ltd., the firm hired by Bre-X that delivered a devastating audit of Busang on Sunday, gave some clues in its full interim report released on Tuesday.
Strathcona said its experts initially found it hard to believe that tampering could have happened on such a grand scale. Bre-X's last resource estimate of 71 million ounces of gold at Busang was based on data pulled from 16,400 samples.
But after a month-long study, Strathcona said "there appears to be little alternative but to conclude that virtually all the gold in the samples submitted by Bre-X for assaying has originated from some other source."
Bre-X's storage warehouse near the Borneo town of Samarinda, where core samples were kept for a lengthy period of time, was the most likely spot for any tampering, the report said.
Under Bre-X's system, the core samples from the Busang site were shipped by boat to Samarinda and then trucked to Balikpapan for assaying. The samples spent several weeks at Samarinda before they were sent to Indo Assay Laboratories in Balikpapan.
Strathcona said the precision of tampering was impressive. It suggested those involved had detailed knowledge of the region and how to add the right amounts of gold to match the site's geology.
"We can only suggest that somewhere enroute, probably at Samarinda, there has been a laboratory or facilities established that have allowed very precise additions of the foreign gold," the report said.
The report also revealed that Bre-X officials had studies last November that showed serious abnormalities in its Busang gold find.
During its audit, Strathcona reviewed a feasibility review by Kilborn SNC-Lavalin Inc. and a metallurgical study performed by Australia's Normet Pty Ltd. Both studies were commissioned by Bre-X.
Strathcona said it was "struck by" Normet's statement that more than 90 percent of the gold in Bre-X's Busang samples were consistent with alluvial, or river, gold. Busang is considered a bedrock deposit.
Before Sunday's devastating news, Bre-X Chief Executive David Walsh had dismissed doubts about Busang that had dogged his company since March. He said he was shocked by Strathcona's report and vowed to find the culprits.
The Royal Canadian Mounted Police has investigators from its commercial crime unit studying the Strathcona report, but no formal probe had been launched, it said.
Rumours about Busang surfaced in March when Busang chief geologist Michael de Guzman allegedly jumped it to his death from a helicopter while flying to a meeting with Bre-X partner Freeport-McMoRan Copper &amp; Gold Inc., a big mining company based in New Orleans.
Freeport had summoned de Guzman to explain why Bre-X's estimates of 71 million ounces of gold at Busang did not match Freeport's findings.
About a week after de Guzman's death, as rumours about Freeport's findings pounded Bre-X's stock, the Toronto Stock Exchange asked Freeport to issue a statement.
Freeport stunned investors on March 26 when the company said its preliminary tests found "insignificant" amounts of gold. Bre-X immediately hired Strathcona to audit the project.
The announcements sparked panic selling of Bre-X shares on March 27, wiping almost C$3 billion ($2.1 billion) from the company's market value in one day.
Freeport and an Indonesian company said on Monday they planned to pull out of the Busang project.
Bre-X's stock plunged C$3.17 to C6 cents in frenzied action after it resumed trading on the Toronto Stock Exchange (TSE) on Tuesday. Bre-X's stock value had once topped C$6 billion ($4.4 billion).
"Investors are very disenchanted. Very disappointed and they're selling it just to get it off their backs," Ira Katzin, an investment advisor with RBC Dominion Securities, said on Tuesday.
The legal fallout from the Busang bust continued on Tuesday with another class action suit filed against Bre-X Minerals, raising the number of suits against Bre-X to at least nine.
New York law firm Wechsler Harwood Halebian &amp; Feffer LLP said it was seeking to recover damages for shareholders hurt by the Bre-X selloff.
