TNT Express Worldwide is to double the number of staff it employs in China and open five new branches within the next year, general manager for Hong Kong Bryan Chan told Reuters.
The express freight firm said it has also applied for full landing rights at Shanghai and Xiamen to extend its dedicated Asian Air Express freighter service. TNT uses two British Aerospace 146 and a Boeing 727 freighter in an overnight delivery service between Manila, Hong Kong, Singapore, Jakarta, Taipei and Seoul. Industry observers point out that it took TNT five years to gain rights for the six existing destinations, so permission for the Chinese destinations is expected to be a slow process.
"We realise it may take time but Shanghai is a very good point to connect to the Philippines and gives us more options to eventually allow us to close the loop in our Asian network," Chan said in an interview.
He said a main task for Eric Wong, newly appointed general sales manager for Hong Kong, will be to promote expansion of the air network.
TNT currently has nine China branches in Beijing, Shanghai, Tianjin, Dalian, Shenzhen, Qingdao, Nnnjing, Hangzhou, Guangzhou in a joint venture with the state monopoly Sinotrans Group. TNT plans to open new offices in Xiamen, Shenyang, Xian, Wuhan and Ningbo employing 300 more staff some of whom are due to arrive in Hong Kong this month to begin training, Chan said. TNT currently employs 273 staff in Hong and 300 employees in its China branches, he added.
TNT will also be focusing its expansion programme on southern China and the Pearl river delta.
"There is a big need for logistics and value added services in southern China including warehousing, documentation and pick and pack. With the increase in volume we need more staff and more infrastructure. We will try to offer the same 'one stop shop' service as we offer in Hong Kong," he added.
TNT said it expects its profits in Hong Kong to increase by 43 per cent this year after a 30 per cent increase in revenue along with a 20 per cent increase in China revenue. - Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542 5017 Fax+44 171 542 5017
