Several European airlines have removed a fuel cargo surcharge but plan to replace it with an increase in their published rates, industry sources told Reuters.
The removal has been made by nearly all the airlines who originally imposed it and comes after a warning from the Hong Kong government that surcharges cannot be imposed nor rates lifted without government approval.
To add to what observers say is a confusing situation, one of the territory's biggest carriers - Lufthansa Cargo - said it is not withdrawing the surcharge. The airline's general manager in Hong Kong, Frank Berweger, said he does not think a surcharge is illegal.
"We still believe that it is legal. We are showing on the airway bill that there is an extra charge which will be dropped when the price of fuel comes down again. We are still in discussion with the CAD about what happens next," Berweger said.
The 80 Hong Kong cents a kilo surcharge was informally agreed by some carriers earlier this month to compensate for jet fuel prices which they said had leapt by around 50 per cent between July and October.
The Hong Kong Shippers' Council, an umbrella organisation representing trade bodies, freight forwarders and business leaders, protested to the Government that any surcharge is illegal unless it is first approved by the Civil Aviation Department.
A department spokeswoman said they had investigated the issue and sent a warning letter to airlines reminding them that permission to impose a surcharge must be obtained first.
Alitalia, KLM, Martinair and Cargolux said they quickly heeded the warning.
"We have withdrawn the surcharge after the warning. Instead we are putting up our rate to compensate for the much higher cost of fuel," said a spokesman for Alitalia cargo in Hong Kong. No details of such an increase have yet been published.
A spokesman for Dutch cargo airline Martinair said it would abide by the proper procedure and also withdraw the surcharge. But he said rates may be increased to compensate.
A Cargolux spokesman said the situation was confusing but it had agreed to also withdraw the surcharge.
Hong Kong Shippers' Council Executive Director Clement Yeung said he was pleased the surcharge had been mainly withdrawn but the situation is "certainly confusing."
"Some airlines are sticking to their guns but we believe that they should go by the book. Imposing surcharges sets a precedent which we do not want to see. If airlines now want to raise their published rates instead then we cannot complain about that," Yeung said.
-- Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542 7706 Fax+44 171 542 5017
