A report into the emergency evacuation of a Cathay Pacific Airways 0293.HK Boeing 777 on June 23 which injured several passengers has recommended design examinations of the cargo hold smoke detection system and emergency slides, a Cathay press release said.
It said results of an investigation by Cathay and the territory's Civil Aviation Department into the evacuation of the Cathay 777-200 lists five main conclusions and three recommendations.
The newly-introduced twin jet had just landed at Hong Kong's Kai Tak airport after a flight from Bangkok when there was a smoke warning in the forward hold which contained wet cargo and high humidity levels.
The captain ordered the evacuation of all 306 passengers and 15 crew. Several people were injured when they hit the ground. The alarm turned out to be false, the report said.
The report recommends Boeing examine the design of the cargo smoke detection system. It also calls on the U.S. manufacturer to investigate the effectiveness of the escape slide deceleration features.
A third recommendation suggests the Civil Aviation Department and the airport fire services make it easier for airline crew members to identify the leader of the rescue mission and his command vehicle.
In a statement, Cathay Pacific managing director Rod Eddington said the commander's decision to evacuate was correct.
"There was no suggestion by the investigation that either the cockpit crew or the cabin crew acted in anything other than a highly professional manner," Eddington said.
Cathay said that to prevent further false alarms it will shortly begin modifying the 777's smoke detection system to prevent condensation building up on the sensing surface.
Until modifications are complete by the end of the year, Cathay will ban wet cargoes, the statement added.
Cathay said the experience gained when 777 slides were used for the first time under true emergency conditions might be used by Boeing to refine future designs.
"There is no suggestion the slides are unsafe. They functioned as designed and the aircraft was empty in less than two minutes. However, the report does recommend examining ways to improve the deceleration of people as they come down the slides in wet conditions and we are discussing this with Boeing and the Civil Aviation Department," Eddington added.
Cathay currently has a fleet of four 777-200 aircraft with a firm order for seven 777-300s and 10 options.
The report in no way undermined Cathay's confidence Cathay in the aircraft, Eddington stated.
"Apart from this one incident, it has had an outstanding entry into service, with the best serviceability of any aircraft we have ever operated and we are delighted with its performance," he said.
- Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542 7706 Fax+44 171 542 5017
