Air Foyle is due to fly flight simulators into China next month as part of its targetted future business growth, sales director with special responsibilities for Asia and China, George Short told Reuters.
The specialist outsize cargo carrier said one of its Antonov AN-124 freighters has been contracted to transport two flight simulators and associated equipment from Tulsa, Oklahoma to a new training centre being built by the aviation training company FlightSafety International at Kunming in Yunnan Province. Air Foyle is the worldwide general sales agent for Russia's Antonov Design Bureau. The Antonov 124 aircraft can carry loads of more than 140 tons, Short said.
"We are due to fly the first Antonov flight into Kunming around December 18 with a 737 and 757/767 simulator. We are also due to do another flight for Volkswagen's new car plant being built under licence near Shanghai. There are so many projects going on within China and the Antonov is the ideal vehicle for moving a lot of the heavy industrial machinery that is needed in the development which is going in the nether regions of China which don't have sophisticated ground handling facilities," Short said in an interview from his airline's headquarters at Luton in England.
Demand from China has been increasing dramatically, the airline said. Recent flights have moved satellites, locomotives, power generation equipment, car assembly line equipment and Pitts Special aerobatic aircraft for China's first airshow earlier this month at Zhuhai.
One Antonov flight to Urumqi in western China flew heavy power generation equipment from Italy in 36 hours. If the equipment had arrived by sea, it would have taken 22 days to travel overland from the Chinese coast, Short said.
The executive said he was in Hong Kong last week to develop further business contacts in Asia and especially within China.
"I try to go to China about every three months. We are working within the different regions in China to work with suitable marketing partners. It's an interesting market because 70 percent of cargoes are oversize or heavyweight cargoes. We are not a threat to conventional airlines but the shipping lines."
"Dealing with Chinese officials now is so much easier. Instead of just saying 'No' like they used to, their attitude is now to say 'how can we do this', " Short said. He also praised British Embassy commercial staff for making it easier to do business in China. -- Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542 7706 Fax+44 171 542 5017
