HONG KONG, Dec 2 -(Reuter) Eighty percent of space at Hong Kong's new Airport Freight Forwarding Centre (AFFC) has now been leased, its managing director Paul Tsim told Reuters in an interview.
The 1.29 million square foot centre at Chek Lap Kok is expected to be fully booked by the end of the year, he added. Because of extra demand created by the recent go ahead for a second runway, Tsim said he thinks the AFFC will soon be expanded beyond its initial design.
"It all depends on market forces and demand over the next few months but I think the chances of the centre being expanded are very strong. The new runway will mean more capacity for air cargo and for consolidation and de-consolidation facilities. We will make a decision to expand at the appropriate time," he added.
"We are still marketing phase one but I think demand is showing that fears about 1997 may not be too much of an issue for freight forwarders," he added.
However the Hong Kong Air Freight Forwarders Association (HAFFA) has told Reuters many smaller firms have already ruled out a move to the AFFC because of the high costs involved and will be investing in new, off-airport sites instead.
Well-known firms which have already signed letters of intent for space at the AFFC include DHL Worldwide, Emery, K-line, Kintetsu, Baltrans Ltd, Burlington Air Express Limited, Tsim said.
Structural work is now underway, he added.
One of AFFC's biggest tenants is expected to be MSAS Cargo International Far East Limited. In an interview, the company's general manager for Hong Kong, Peter Tang, said the group was making a major investment of more than HK$10 million and doubling its current office and warehousing capacity. MSAS has contracted to take more than 44,000 square metres of space in the AFFC, he added.
The AFFC is expected to become the world's biggest freight forwarding centre when it opens along with Hong Kong's new airport due in April 1998.
AFFC is a consortium led by Sun Hung Kai Properties Ltd. Industry sources say AFFC has the largest land bank in Hong Kong and has a HK$1.9 billion agreement with the Airport Authority for a 20 year sub-lease to build and operate the centre.
- Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542 7706 Fax+44 171 542 5017
