The possibility that landing fees at Hong Kong's new Chek Lap Kok (CLK) airport could be the highest in the world are a matter of concern for the International Air Transport Association (IATA), its director general Pierre Jeanniot said on Tuesday.
He told Reuters that he hoped the increases in fees over those at the existing Kai Tak airport would be reasonable and would "consider the economic impact on both airlines and Hong Kong".
Jeanniot was speaking following a speech to the Hong Kong International Aerospace Forum which included key representatives from the territory's Airport Authority.
Last week, Hong Kong IATA representative Gilbert Chow said new research showed that fees at CLK, which is due to open in April 1998, could be up to four times higher than at Kai Tak.
If confirmed this would bring landing fees to around US$12,000 for a Boeing 747, industry sources said.
The research was based on revenue forecasts and the expected numbers of flights in and out of CLK, extracted from the business plan suuplied to IATA by the Airport Authority, Chow added.
The Authority has repeatedly said charges for landing and aircraft parking will not be announced until next year after full consultations with the airlines.
"They may be higher than existing charges but it is premature to speculate on their level. The Authority is committed to completing and operating a cost-effective airport according to prudent commercial principles," an airport statement said.
Later on Tuesday, IATA's director of corporate communications, William Gaillard, who was accompanying Jeanniot, said Hong Kong could become the most expensive airport in the world and a quadrupling of fees was "obviously crazy."
"We appeal to the Authority to be reasonable when they come to setting the new fees. The damage that could be done is tremendous. We realise there may be an increase but it should be gradual and by a small amount," Gaillard told Reuters.
Hong Kong's Civil Aviation Department said current landing fees for a Boeing 747 are about US$3,000. IATA said the most expensive landing fee is currently US$9,000 at Japan's Kansai airport.
Hong Kong IATA representative Gilbert Chow, who is also station manager for Northwest Airlines, said he would like to be proved wrong by the authority.
A meeting due to be held this week with authority executives has been postponed. The next meeting is due to be held in February, Chow said.
"This is a major concern to us and we are making the appeal -- don't hit us from day one. The airline business is very competitive but on the other hand it brings a lot of economic benefit to the entire territory. If the increase is so dramatic, then airlines will not be able to cope and the increase wil have to be passed onto the consumer," Chow told Reuters.
Industry sources said the Airport Authority, under pressure to recoup massive construction costs, is also under increasing pressure from a growing lobby of airlines which see future profit margins under threat from higher fees.
There have already been previous warnings about fees doubling which have alarmed airline groups including the Orient Airlines Association.
One of the main users of the new airport, Cathay Pacific Airways Limited also recently voiced its alarm and warned that Hong Kong's economy risked being damaged if airport fees were set too high.
- Tel+44 171 542 7706 Fax+44 171 542 5017
