Hong Kong Air Cargo Terminals Limited (HACTL) said its new SuperTerminal 1 will be only 50 percent operational when Hong Kong's new Chek Lap Kok(CLK) airport is due to open in April 1998.
HACTL managing director Anthony Charter told reporters during a construction site visit to the facility -- now about 25 percent complete -- that meeting the Airport Authority's opening deadline date was causing major concerns.
The new cargo terminal is due to cost HK$7.8 billion and is planned to be the world's biggest air cargo facility.
"It's a tall order when you see the size of the building. We will have something ready in April 1998, although we are not contractually due to open until August. The builders are working under severe pressure and we are doing our best but whether we will be able to cope in April, I cannot say," Charter said.
"If the airport opens in April we will have 50 percent of capacity available but 75 percent from June 30," Charter said.
SuperTerminal 1 is expected to be able to handle 1.2 million tonnes a year from June 1998 which is less than the 1.5 million tonnes Kai Tak handles now and does not take into account growth rates. A second, smaller cargo terminal is also being built.
Industry sources said it is vital that the cargo complex, one of the most technologically advanced of its kind, works perfectly on opening to prevent a logistical nightmare and an enormous traffic jam at the HK$49.8 billion new airport.
It is currently planned to close Kai Tak and open the new airport the following morning but Charter said he would like to see a "soft" opening to ensure a smooth start.
That could mean some cargo aircraft using the new airport during the night to test the highly automated cargo handling systems.
He also raised the possibility of Kai Tak remaining open while CLK gradually built up. A 24 hour embargo on cargo being delivered to the new facility might also have to be imposed, he added.
There had also been a two month delay to an already very tight schedule because of problems with concrete form work by the main contractor, Charter said.
An industry source told Reuters that the infamous baggage handling delays suffered by Denver's new airport showed how vital it was that everything work before opening.
He said it was rare for a new airport to open on time and increasing financial and political pressure was being put on contractors to ensure the opening deadline for CLK was met.
- Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542 7706 Fax+44 171 542 5017
