Hong Kong's air cargo industry has been continuing to enjoy its busiest peak period for many years with demand for space especially on Europe-bound flights showing no signs of easing, Reuters research shows.
While trans-Pacific demand has once again failed to be sustained after the traditional Thanksgiving peak, cargo bookings for Europe-bound flights are predicted by market analysts to be strong into January and, remarkably, even extending until Chinese New Year.
One leading airline cargo manager summed up what has been a year of extremely fluctuating fortunes for both airlines and their customers.
"The first six months of the year were the worst for 10 years but the last six months have been the best," he said.
Hong Kong's dominant airline, Cathay Pacific, set a new cargo revenue record during the week November 17-23 for which a 19.4 percent increase over the same week last year was recorded, its in-house newspaper reported. It said that exceptional performances were achieved in in Hong Kong, the U.S., Canada, London and Frankfurt.
James Barrington, Cathay's general manager cargo was in a bullish mood.
"It has been a great three or four weeks for us. Europe seems to be going longer and stronger than previously predicted, which is good news for us and hopefully for everyone else. Forwarders are telling us that for the first couple of weeks in January, which is traditionally a bad time for us, things are looking quite strong and so the indications are good," Barrington said.
He also hinted that rates, which are already firm, could rise.
"Although nothing is decided yet, in a booming environment it's not impossible that we may see some more rate increases." he said.
After a frantic few weeks, trans-Pacific rates are now reported to have dipped back below HK$20 per kg for a 100kg shipment as demand for space eases.
"It has been the busiest peak period in the last five years," said David Sung, Hong Kong sales manager for one of the biggest trans-Pacific cargo carriers from Hong Kong, Polar Air Cargo.
Like some other trans-Pacific operators, Polar is also cutting capacity as demand has been dropping by eight to 10 percent every week since the end of November, Sung said.
The U.S.-based carrier, which took delivery of its latest Boeing 747-200 freighter in Hong Kong within the past month, said its five flights per week schedule to the U.S. east coast will be reduced to one or two between from December 16 until the new year.
"The rush is over. Things are much calmer now on the trans-Pacific after a lot of panic to get goods to the Christmas shops on time," said one experienced Hong Kong airfreight forwarder. Unlike recently, when U.S.-bound cargo was taking a few days to clear, trans-Pacific cargo is now being sent on time, he added.
But demand for air cargo products in Europe continues apace and the industry is reporting exceptionally good business and backlogs to clear.
Rates to Europe are reported to be holding at around HK$23 to HK$24 per kg for 100 kg, which has pleased airlines ever anxious about disappointing yield levels and which have now managed to restore rates at least to last year's levels.
Air France Cargo also said the outlook for January is unusually healthy as demand refuses to show signs of flagging.
"The situation is very good and I do not understand why. Usually the market goes down in mid-November and is very weak by the start of December," said the carrier's regional manager cargo Phillipe Bour.
"But we still have a backlog to clear so the market is still there and very strong. And the forecast is very good. It's a nice situation to be in," he added.
Air France Cargo offers three weekly HK-Paris freighter flights a week in addition to daily Boeing 747 Combi services.
Bour said he was pleased to see cargo rates were now for the first time at the same level in 1996 as they were they were in 1995.
The chairman of the 260-member Hongkong Association of Freight Forwarding Agents (HAFFA), Sam Chung, also said he could not understand the reason for the current high demand to Europe, which he predicted would extend into January and onto Chinese New Year in early February.
"Traffic to the U.S. is slowing down, which is to be expected because in the past few years it has never been able to cnntinue after the Thanksgiving holiday. But the peak is very strong for Europe and the UK where backlogs exist," he said.
Lufthansa Cargo, which operates a joint freighter service from Hong Kong to Germany with Cathay, said that while an extra Boeing 747 flight introduced had helped with capacity, but demand remained high.
"The market is very strong -- stronger than the last two years," said Lufthansa Cargo's managing director for China, Hong Kong and Taiwan, Christian Sedelmaier.
"Chinese exports are strong I think because there seems to be quota problems and they want to get goods shipped as quickly as possible," he noted.
"Another factor is that department stores in Germany, which reduced initial orders, had to use air freight when they re-ordered to get to the shops in time for Christmas. Flights to Europe are full and we have some backlog. Demand is very high and I think the peak will last for another two weeks," Sedelmaier said.
A spokesman for Cargolux, which operates twice-weekly freighters from Hong Kong to Luxembourg via Bangkok and Abu Dhabi, said demand for space is critical with business this year better than last.
One factor driving up demand for space has been the sudden cancellation of some flights, he said.
British Airways said it has been able to offer more cargo capacity because of the newly inaugurated, shorter air route to Europe over China which allows less fuel and more cargo to be carried.
"Europe is still very, very strong. The last quarter has been extremely strong for BA out of Hong Kong and we are very pleased. We were well above our forecast for November and December is looking very good as well. We see things carrying on all the way up to the Christmas season and after that we'll wait and see how January turns out to be," said BA's Pacific regional cargo manager Chris Humphrey.
Hongkong Air Cargo Terminals Limited (HACTL), which handles all air cargo to and from territory, reported setting a new handling record of 5,700 tonnes in one day at the end of October.
HACTL managing director Anthony Charter also told Reuters that initial figures showed there had been a 16 percent increase in year-on-year growth with total throughput during November of 150,000 tonnes. Export growth for November's was 18 percent and imports increased by 12.8 percent, he said.
But traffic is not booming on all routes. The key intra-Asian route from Hong Kong to Japan is reported to have slowed dramatically after years of robust growth, with Japanese airlines badly hit.
"Unlike previous years, there has been zero growth (for us) in the cargo market between Hong Kong and Japan this year. It is not so busy," said Michael Wu, assistant manager cargo sales and reservations in Hong Kong for Japanese carriers All Nippon Airways and all-cargo sister airline Nippon Cargo Airlines (NCA).
He blamed the relative weakness of the Japanese yen and that of the country's economy. He also said some Japanese companies have shifted their production from China to other Asian countries, thereby reducing the demand for ex-Hong Kong airfreight.
NCA operates four weekly Boeing 747-200 freighter flights from Hong Kong to Japan -- two to Tokyo Narita and two to Osaka.
NCA has also operated 10 extra charter flights over recent months.
Wu said 70-80 percent of the NCA air cargo carried is in transit for trans-Pacific destinations with the remainder bound for the Japanese domestic market.
For ANA's daily passenger flights to Tokyo and Osaka, Wu said the situation is reversed, with 70-80 percent of bellyhold cargo destined for the Japanese market.
His rates to Japan were stable at between HK$14-15 per kg, which had been unchanged since October, he said.
He added that he hoped there might be a rush just before Christmas and before the traditional New Year holiday in Japan.
Fuel surcharges continue to cause controversy in the territory about whether or not they are legal.
Some airlines, such as Lufthansa Cargo and Air France Cargo, insist the 80 Hong Kong cents a kilo surcharge is legal and have refused to withdraw it.
But other airlines heeded a warning letter from Hong Kong's Civil Aviation Department after protests from the Hong Kong Shippers' Council, which said any surcharge should be outlawed.
The French government is reported to have intervened on behalf of Air France Cargo to obtain a clear ruling from the Hong Kong government.
Amid all the confusion, many airlines said they have raised their market rates instead.
-Air Cargo Newsroom Tel +44 171 542 7706 Fax+44 171 542 5017
