A campaign is being launched to recruit Hong Kong workers to help complete the territory's new airport at Chek Lap Kok (CLK), a government statement said.
The recruitment campaign from December 16 to December 31 is being organised by the Hong Kong government, the Airport Authority and the Mass Transit Railway Corporation. A special telephone hot line is also being set up, the statement added.
The new airport, offshore of Lantau island is due to open in April 1998.
There have been several warnings recently that a skills shortage, especially of mechanical and electrical engineers, is threatening to delay completion of key projects.
But plans to import more workers from outside Hong Kong has been met by opposition from some trade unions in the territory who said local workers should be given first choice.
The government statement said the purpose of the campaign is to enable contractors to make an extensive trawl for suitable workers for job vacancies which have to be filled within three months to meet tight schedules.
If local workers can't be found, applications for imported labour will be hurried through, the statement said.
"On the basis of the results of this recruitment campaign, the government will give expeditious approval for imported workers to fill any particular shortfall of labour established through the two-week recruitment excercise during this campaign," the statement said.
The Airport Authority welcomed the government initiative.
"Given their pressing needs, it is essential that contractors have adequate numbers of workers with the right skills and experience to meet the tight programme to which we are all now working," Douglas Oakervee, the authority's project director said in a statement.
"While it is right to continue to give priority to suitable local labour, where available, it is also vital to the airport project that overseas labour can be imported quickly wherever needed," he added. - Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542 7706 Fax+44 171 542 5017
