Illegal mobile phone use across the Chinese border is continuing to interrupt air traffic control communications with airline pilots flying in and out of Hong Kong but cross-border action to try and solve the problem appears to be working, industry sources told Reuters.
The Hong Kong Aircrew Officers' Association said Radio Frequency Interference (RFI) is a persistent problem with pilots complaining of a loud buzzing in their ears which forces them to quickly change to another frequency to maintain contact with air traffic control.
Hong Kong's Kai Tak is already regarded as one of the world's most difficult airports to land at, and the sources say RFI is an unwelcome addition to a pilot's workload. RFI is widely blamed on mobile phones and pagers being used on illegal frequencies in neighbouring Guangdong province.
One Hong Kong-based Boeing 747 freighter pilot, who did not want to be identified, said the problem caused safety concerns.
"It happened to me the other day just after take-off. But the interference is not consistent and they seem to have a problem in tracking it down. It means we sometimes get incomplete radio messages which causes a headache when you least need it. It takes time to change to the back-up frequency and at peak times the airwaves are very crowded. I know of quite a few captains who have filed an occurrence report because of the safety issue involved," he said.
The aircrew officers' association general secretary, John Findlay, agreed RFI was a concern but said remedial action appeared to be working.
"It has been a problem but pilots I've been speaking to say the situation has very much improved recently," he said.
In a statement, the Hong Kong government's Civil Aviation Department said RFI had been under "urgent investigation" by the territory's Office of Telecommunications Authority (OFTA) which had been liaising with the relevant authorities in China.
"It is understood that a team has been established in China to tackle the RFI issue. It appears recently that the extent of RFI has been reduced and the situation is being closely monitored. With assistance from the Chinese authorities, it is anticipated that the RFI problem could eventually be eliminated," the statement said.
The department also said it had deployed spare back-up frequencies as interim replacements when RFI occurred and until the effect on air traffic operations was overcome.
OFTA said in a statement it expected its counterpart in China, the Guangdong Radio Management Committee Office, to take urgent action to remove the interference, and that some channels had already been cleared.
--Air Cargo Newsroom  Tel+44-171-542-7706 Fax+44-171-542-5017
