Cathay Pacific and the Hong Kong government's Civil Aviation Department (CAD) are at odds on the reason for delays at Hong Kong's Kai Tak's airport.
Cathay time performance manager Peter Li blames  delays on Cathay's increasingly congested home airport and "air traffic control" - a charge rejected by Hong Kong's Civil Aviation Department (CAD) which told Reuters congestion and not air traffic control was the true cause.
Cathay which is one of the main users of Kai Tak defines a delay as more than 15 minutes after scheduled arrival or departure. Departure delays rose in 1996 rose to 61 percent of flights from Hong Kong compared to 48 percent in 1995 with arrivals similarly affected, Li said in the airlines in-house newspaper.
Cathay does not publish more details on the extent or number of delays.
Other airlines which also fly into Hong Kong are also frustrated by Kai Tak's constraints which cannot be overcome until its new airport at Chek Lap Kok is due to open in 15 months time, industry sources said.
"In addition to these factors we have to fight against constraints such as slot availability, tight crew scheduling, high fleet utilisation, new products, new routes and new engines on new fleet," Li said.
He said action has been taken at both managerial and operational level to meet the on time performance target including reviewing routes to support re-design of better schedules.
CAD said delays are bound to occur when demand exceeds capacity and when aircraft are bunched together. It added the reason for the apparent increase in delays suggested by Cathay's statistics can be explained by the way delays are defined by the airlines. Because Kai Tak has limited apron space, aircraft occasionally have to be held in their parking bays which counts as a delay unlike at other busy airports, the CAD said.
The CAD has been actively reviewing ways of enhancing capacity to handle ever increasing demand, the CAD statement added. -- Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542 7706 Fax+44 171 542 5017
