Major airlines including Lufthansa Cargo and Air France Cargo have raised their ex-Hong Kong air cargo market rates to European destinations by HK$1 per kilo, industry sources told Reuters.
The rate rise from January 1 is in addition to the controversial 80 HK cents a kilo fuel surcharge which some airlines imposed before Christmas, to cover big increases in aviation fuel costs.
The surcharge issue led to a protest by the Hong Kong Shippers' Council, which also represents the territory's air freight forwarders. The council lobbied the Hong Kong government's Civil Aviation Department to declare the surcharge illegal and, after warning letters were issued, some airlines quickly agreed to withdraw the fuel surcharge but raise market rates instead.
These airlines have increased ex-Hong Kong rates by HK$1.80 per kilo and include Alitalia, Emirates, Cargolux, Virgin Atlantic Martinair, Swissair and Air Hong Kong
Lufthansa Cargo, which had refused to withdraw its surcharge, raised its rate by HK$1 from January 1 and is also maintaining a separate 80 cents surcharge imposed before Christmas, according to an airline source. ...."We have informed the agents that we will increase our rates by one dollar and the 80 cents fuel fee or surcharge will be maintained but no longer shown on the airway bill which we think should solve the problem," the source said.
One of the leading advocates of a surcharge, Air France Cargo, raised its market rate by HK$1 from January 1 and is continuing with its 80 HK cents fuel surcharge, the airline's Hong Kong regional manager Philippe Bour told Reuters.
"The bottom line is the same with a HK$1.80 rise but we respect our commitment and have to be fair to our customers. As soon as the fuel price drops then we will cancel the fuel surcharge," Bour said.
Hong Kong's home carrier, Cathay Pacific Airways Limited which did not impose any fuel surcharge, raised its rate by HK$1.50 from January 1, the airline's general manager cargo, James Barrington said.
One airline cargo manager, who asked not to be named, said the fuel surcharge issue was a "very touchy subject" but it was not worth provoking more confrontation with the Hong Kong government.
Sam Chung, chairman of the Hong Kong Association of Freight Forwarding Agents, which represents more than 260 of the territory's agents, said all major airlines had raised rates apparently in anticipation of heavy demand before Chinese new year early next month.
"The fuel surcharge which we thought was illegal has gone and the airlines have raised their rates instead which we can't argue about."
British Airways, a major cargo carrier to Europe with twice daily passenger flights and dedicated freighter flights, said it would "wait and see" before deciding on any rate rise.
-- Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542 7706 Fax +44 171 542 5017
