Cathay Pacific Airways Limited said its Boeing 747-400 freighters will become the world's first cargo aircraft to utilise Future Air Navigation System (FANS) routes expected to be pioneered by the Hong Kong airline later this year.
"We are leaders in this field and we have the first FANS equipped cargo aircraft. They are ready and waiting for the go ahead on any routes that are available," Cathay's international operations manager, Paul Horsting told journalists.
The revolutionary air traffic control system allows aircraft to use Global Positioning System (GPS)satellite navigation instead of radar ground stations for more direct routings and more efficient use of airspace. Airlines expect major benefits such as shorter flight times, reduced fuel costs and greater payloads.
Explaining how Cathay is exploiting the FANS technology potential, he said 18 of the carrier's 21 Boeing 747-400s, including two freighters, have been fitted with Communications Navigation/Air Traffic Management (CNS/ATM) equipment.
Cathay's entire 747-400 fleet is expected to be fully fitted by March and investigations are underway to fit the airline's Airbus A340-300 long range aircraft too. All 747-400 cockpit crew have already undergone training, he said.
Cathay has been one of the "gang of four" airlines - along with United Airlines, Air New Zealand and Qantas - which has pioneered the development of FANS technology and been conducting trials in the North Pacific.
Hong Kong's Civil Aviation Department has given engineering approval to the new system and operational approval is "imminent," Cathay said. The Hong Kong government has also invested in FANS ground equipment which allows air traffic control messages to relayed to pilots via datalink instead of by voice.
Los Angeles to Hong Kong is expected to be the first FANS approved route later this year with others to European destinations expected around the same time or early next year.
Horsting said it was difficult to detail how much Cathay has invested in the new technology either in total or cost per aircraft.
"The saving is not just on navigation and more direct routes for aircraft. Passengers also get much better benefits by being able to use satellite phones and faxes. There is a saving otherwise we would not be doing it but it is very hard to quantify," Horsting said. - Reuters Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542 7706 Fax 5017
