Some airlines and freight forwarders say they anticipate a traditional mini-boom in the lead-up to the Chinese New Year holiday starting on February 6, and despite space being available, rates are firmer than might be expected, a Reuters survey shows.
But industry sources also generally expect trans-Pacific rates to stay flat for the next couple of months.
Following what was reported to be one of the busiest pre-Christmas peak periods seen in Hong Kong for many years, the start of 1997 has seen the trans-Pacific air cargo market slump back into familiar January doldrums.
But both airlines and freight forwarders say they are pleased to report that last year's "disastrous" January, which many said was the worst they had ever experienced, has not been repeated.
Industry spokesmen said many factories in China which airfreight their finished goods out of Hong Kong are awaiting a new round of export licences. As soon as they are granted in the next few days, both airlines and freight forwarders expect a rush from manufacturers anxious to complete shipments before factory production comes to a virtual standtill for the two week long holiday or more.
More than one freight forwarder complained that, despite the seasonal drop in demand, cargo rates have not dropped as much as had been expected.
One well known freight forwarder in the territory said airlines are unusually keen to do deals on rates which indicated they have space to fill. He was happy doing business for a 35 tonne shipment to Los Angeles earlier this week which cost around HK$15 per kilo.
"Airlines which never normally do deals are very keen this month which indicates there is spare capacity around," he said.
"The market is reasonably busy and there is quite a bit of freight around," he added.
Yoichi Tanaka managing director of freight forwarding firm Kintetsu World Express (HK) Ltd said despite a softening of demand, ex-HK rates to Japan were being deliberately held firm by airlines "who think they can still make money from the current market."
"The market has seen its normal slow down both to Japan and trans-Pac compared with the peak season. Overall, for both air freight exports and imports, the market is better than last January," said Tanaka who is "optimistically" forecasting four to five cent growth over the next six months.
Yang Seung Joo, general manager for Korean Airlines Cargo in Hong Kong, was one airline executive who said that he was keen to maintain rate levels.
"We are trying to keep our prices as high as they were at the end of the year (during peak season). This year we will keep prices for all destinations a little bit higher than last year to protect our interests," he said.
KAL has three freighters a week - two Boeing 747s and one Airbus A300 - from Hong Kong to Seoul plus a joint venture flight with Cathay Pacific Airways Ltd.
Yang said demand was slack but business this year is better than last January which was the "worst" he had ever known. He "cautiously" expects this year to be better than last.
Strike action in South Korea had not caused any disruption to KAL's cargo flights, Yang said.
Another key player on Japanese and trans-Pacific routes, Cathay Pacific said the market had "softened" but was still "healthy". Compared with Cathay's cargo services to Europe, the west-bound market was not as strong, Cathay Cargo's marketing and sales manager Ray Jewell said.
"We are pretty optimistic about trans-Pacific which finished the year very strongly and the fact that the market has now weakened is nothing unusual. What is unusual is the European market staying so bouyant. Overall we are looking pretty good for the start of the year," he said
Cathay said there will undoubtedly be a pre-Chinese New Year boom in business but any indication of how strong the market really is will not really be known until after the holiday
David Sung, Hong Kong sales manager for Polar Air Cargo, which operates only trans-Pacific services from Hong Kong to Chicago, Colombus and New York, said the market had followed its traditional pattern and slumped after early January. Flights have been cancelled because of lack of demand.
But he said he was hopeful of a "mini-peak season" in the coming fortnight as factories in China rush to dispatch orders.
"The market is slowly picking up after being dead slow right after western new year. Chinese New Year is coming soon this year in early February and we expect a rush next week when we will operate a full schedule of five flights a week and are ready to put on additional flights if needed because we have aircraft available," Sung said.
He did not anticipate a rise in trans-Pacific rates in the lead-up to Chinese New Year.
A spokesman for All Nippon Airlines Co Ltd and its subsidiary Nippon Cargo Airlines (NCA) was also anticipating a rush before Chinese New Year as mainly garment manufacturers in China are awarded export licences.
"I think the market will pick up next week as manufacturers hurry to get their orders out. Last January was terrible but this year it is better and we expect a rush," the spokesman said.
He also said the outlook on both trans-Pacific routes and those to Japan during spring was reasonably optimistic.
But Northwest Cargo, which said it is the largest US trans-Pacific carrier, was not anticipating any major rise in demand leading up to Chinese new year.
After the pre-Christmas dash to meet year-end quotas the market has died down but, thankfully, not as much as last year. Northwest also cancelled flights in early January due to lack of demand.
"After the peak, rates have dropped but not substantially. I would say they are normal for this time of year. Concerning volumes, it's a case of so far so good," the Northwest spokesman said.
He also said there is currently a trade imbalance with exports far exceeding imports and demand for traffic to the U.S. East coast markedly higher than to the West coast.
Thomas Miu, general manager of the air freight division of Jardine Freight Services, was also pessimistic about a pre-holiday 'mini-boom'.
"I doubt very much whether we will see a little bit of a rush before Chinese New Year which is just two weeks away. I don't see any sign yet. I'm hoping we will have a boom before Easter," Mui said.
A leading freight forwarder who uses a variety of airlines said space on flights from Hong Kong to New York was "wide open" with rates generally around HK$20.50. For destinations to the US west coast, average shipment prices were reported to be around $19.50.
Rates to Japan on so-called first-class carriers such as Cathay Pacific and Japan Airlines Co Ltd are reported to be around $14 with around a $2 reduction at $12 for 'second tier' carriers such as United Airlines with no restriction problems on space.
Another trans-Pacific airline operating from Hong Kong, U.S.-based Evergreen International Airlines Inc, is operating a full schedule of four trans-Pacific freighter flights a week until Chinese New Year when, like many other carriers, all flights will be stopped as demand evaporates.
"The market is picking up after being a little bit slow which it usually is while people renew their export licences," reported Kersti Krepp. Trans-pacific rates remain firm, she added.
Japan Airlines is not yet "in full swing" after the early January lull but is another optimistic airline expecting another busy period before Chinese new year. JAL offers four freighters per week to Tokyo's Narita airport in addition to at least five daily passenger flights to Narita and Osaka offering around 15 tonnes belly capacity each with trans-pacific connections.
"Rates to Japan are holding steady, very stable. Trans-pacfic rates are negotiatable with different deals being done. Exports from Hong Kong are also exceeding imports," a JAL spokesman told Reuters.
The importance of the Japanese and trans-Pacific markets to Hong Kong's economy can be seen from the latest cargo statistics for November from the territory's Civil Aviation Department.
They show more than 21,000 tonnes of air freight exports to the U.S. while imports amount only to less than 5,500 tonnes. New York's JFK airport accounts for 4,400 tonnes of exports, Los Angeles 3,225, Columbus Ohio 3.071, Chicago 1,800 tonnes and San Francisco 985 tonnes.
For Japan, the statistics show Tokyo's Narita airport is the second most popular export destination from Hong Kong after Taipei. 9,016 tonnes was airlifted to Tokyo compared with 9,441 tonnes to Taipei during November. But only 4,502 tonnes of cargo was airlifted from Tokyo to Hong Kong. Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44-171-542-7706 Fax +44-171-542-5017
