China's foreign currency B share markets are expected to recover in 1997 thanks to the improving national economic outlook, but the fundamentals of most B share firms remain poor, analysts said on Monday.
The B share markets in both Shanghai and Shenzhen have rollercoastered in the past few weeks in often feverish speculative trading, and are about 50 percent up on their low points of a couple of months ago.
Additional solid gains are expected in 1997 once 1996 results are released by the end of April which, if conditions are right, could push the indices to records, analysts said.
But the basic problems with the B share markets -- poor quality companies and low liquidity -- are unlikely to be resolved in 1997, they added.
"The markets are likely to recover next year," said a Shanghai stock analyst with a Chinese brokerage. "I would expect Shanghai's B share index to breach the 105-point historical high. The key factor will be the improved national economy."
Most of the 1996 results, to be posted in April, are unlikely to be much of an improvement over the dismal 1995 results, analysts said. Shanghai B share firms as a whole posted net negative profit growth of 16.3 percent in 1995.
"Any rally in the B shares before the 1996 results come out will not be sustainable," said Edmond Huang, an analyst with ING-Barings in Shanghai. "The recent gains have been driven by liquidity, not by fundamentals."
"But the macro-economic environment is positive and most of these companies have bottomed out, so 1997 should be good for them," Huang added.
Brokers in Shenzhen also said they expected to see the B share market performing strongly in 1997.
"Listed firms will see their operations greatly pick up in 1997 due to the two cuts in interest rates this year," a broker at Shenzhen J&amp;A Securities said.
Year-on-year retail price inflation is expected to be about 6.0 percent in 1996, down from 14.8 percent in 1995 and well below a government target of 10 percent, figures issued by the State Statistical Bureau on Monday said.
The slowdown of inflation rises prompted Beijing to cut bank interest rates in May and August this year, relieving the burden of listed firms. Analysts expect the People's Bank of China to cut interest rates again in the first half of next year.
"Company performance has been improving since the second half of this year," said an analyst. "This will be a major factor to support the markets next year."
All China's B share firms were formerly state enterprises and many suffer from poor management and heavy debt loads which have made it difficult for them to cope with the tight credit policies in force since 1993.
"The long-term development of the B share markets lies in listing more high-quality companies," said one trader. "But this problem is unlikely to be solved in one year."
"With more such companies listed in Shenzhen, the market's liquidity will improve and investor confidence strengthen," a broker in Shenzhen said.
Combined capitalisation of the Shanghai and Shenzhen B share markets is only about 35 billion yuan ($4.2 billion), with 42 B share companies listed in Shanghai and 43 in Shenzhen.
"The markets are too small with investors having little choice of which firms they would like to invest in, and institutions are able to easily manipulate the markets," said a trader. ($=8.3 yuan)
