China announced on Tuesday a preferential tax rate of 15 percent for foreign banks doing local yuan business but limited them to dealing with foreign-funded firms registered in Shanghai.
Foreign bankers expressed surprise at the rate, which is the same as that at which their foreign currency business is taxed, and much lower than the 33 percent rate for Chinese banks doing the same business with the same clients.
But bankers with local Chinese commercial banks said they were not worried about the decision, saying the scope of the local currency business that foreign banks would be allowed to conduct would be highly restrictive for years to come.
The official Xinhua news agency said in a report that the four foreign banks chosen by the People's Bank of China to do local currency deposit and loan business would be taxed at the same rate as their current foreign currency business.
"Their (foreign banks) income tax rate will remain the same, 15 percent as before," the agency said. "Their clients can only be foreign-funded enterprises registered in the city, and they should open RMB (renminbi or yuan) accounts in the central bank's Shanghai branch," it added.
The four foreign banks are the Hongkong &amp; Shanghai Banking Corp, Citibank, Tokyo-Mitsubishi Bank and the Industrial Bank of Japan.
"It sounds too good to be true," said a banker with one of the four foreign banks chosen to begin yuan business. "It's especially strange because many foreign bankers have at least implied that they would be willing to accept a higher tax rate. It's very surprising."
A second foreign banker said the major restriction on the foreign banks would be local currency funding, especially given the ban on the banks taking on individual retail deposits in yuan.
"The key issue seems to be funding," he said. "If the funding sources are limited you have no local currency to expand your business."
All foreign banks in China are currently restricted to doing business in foreign currency and have been eager to gain a share of the huge local market for yuan deposits and loans.
"The announced tax is not going to greatly impact on our business in the short term," said an official with a major Chinese bank. "Foreign banks are now restricted in the companies and location of their local currency business and further development is expected to be very slow."
But another local banker said the opening of yuan business to foreign banks would inevitably put pressure on Chinese banks.
"In the past, competition has been only among ourselves and no matter whether our services are good or bad, we survive at the expense of depositors," the banker said. "In the long run, we have to improve ourselves."
Xinhua said that about 10 foreign banks had applied to the central People's Bank of China for the right to start yuan business.
According to rules issued by the central bank, foreign banks can only accept yuan deposits from foreign-funded firms or from foreign individuals or deposits from Chinese enterprises derived from the banks' loans to them.
The banks can supply yuan loans only to foreign-funded firms or Chinese enterprises who have previously obtained foreign currency loans from the banks, the rules said.
