China's domestic A share markets will rise strongly in 1997 due to the improving national economy but the pyrotechnics of 1996 will not be repeated with Beijing insisting on steady development, analysts said on Tuesday.
The official crackdown two weeks ago on rampant share speculation has made the markets much more wary, but there is still plenty of money in China looking to get into the country's two stock markets in Shanghai and Shenzhen, they said.
Bank deposits are continuing to surge at about 30 percent a year and the government has purposefully closed off many other investment channels in the past few months, they said.
The government has also pledged to flood the share markets with new scrip to prevent the sort of volatile surges experienced in 1996.
"Company results for 1996 are expected to improve a great deal (over 1995) largely due to the recovering national economy and the two interest rates cuts over the past year," said a stock analyst with China Finance Trust and Investment Co.
"This will be a trigger for the A share indices to top the highest levels reached in 1996, sometime around the time listed firms post their annual reports in April 1997," he said.
Shanghai's A share index hit a 1996 high of 1,313.917 points on December 12 and its Shenzhen counterpart a record of 502.77 points on the same day.
Analysts said they believed share prices would not move as dramatically in 1997 as they did in 1996 with Beijing having made it clear it requires the markets to progress steadily.
The central government said in April 1996 that it wanted to develop China's fledgling stock markets to make them a major means for Chinese companies to raise money, thereby relieving the debt burden on state-run banks.
The statement sent Shanghai's A share index up more than 100 percent and Shenzhen's A share index up more than 300 percent in the months that followed.
But in mid-December, Beijing launched a crackdown on the stock markets due to alarm over growing volatility and speculative trading, and share prices have since plunged around 30 percent.
"The crackdown has sent strong warnings to retail investors, preventing them from blindly rushing to the stock markets for quick profits," said an A share trader. "This will prevent the markets from being so volatile again in 1996."
"After the powerful correction triggered by the crackdown, prices of most shares are now closer to their real value," said a second trader. "We believe the indices have about touched bottom which has laid the foundation for rises next year."
Analysts said liquidity for the markets would be ample in 1997, with China's individual bank deposits estimated to be 3.8 trillion yuan ($457.8 billion) at the end of 1996, against a total A share market capitalisation of around 1.2 trillion yuan.
"There are few investment channels," said a broker. "As long as the markets are developing healthily, investors are likely to make the stock markets their choice."
Beijing recently announced a quota for new A share issues in 1997 and beyond of 10 billion shares, almost double the 5.5 billion share quota announced a year ago.
The big increase was aimed squarely at stabilising the markets, analysts said.
($1=8.3 yuan)
