Key companies on China's foreign currency B share markets were expected to report slightly better results for 1996 after a dismal 1995, with more progress seen for 1997, analysts said on Monday.
The B share companies were generally lagging far behind the booming growth of China's economy, and gains in 1996 would be followed by a stronger performance in 1997 based on two interest rate cuts last year and sharply lower inflation, they said.
"We do expect things to get better, but it's not here yet," said Bruce Richardson, chief analyst for HG Asia in Shanghai. "Market sentiment is quite strong, people see some hope."
Shanghai property developer Lujiazui Finance and Trade Zone Development Co Ltd, a key market barometer, expected 1996 post-tax profits of 590 million yuan, slightly up from the 585 million yuan in 1995, a company official said on Monday.
Other major companies including Shanghai Diesel Engine Co Ltd and Shanghai Tyre and Rubber also expected improved results in 1996 compared with 1995, officials said but declined to give details.
"The B share companies are expected to perform slightly better than in the past two years thanks to an improvement in the national economy," said Jiang Dengfu, a senior B share analyst with Shenyin &amp; Wanguo Securities.
"But improvements in the companies' results are lagging behind the better national economy. A full recovery is expected to start this year," he said.
Shanghai's B share firms posted a net year-on-year fall in profit of 13.8 percent in 1994 compared with 1993, and 16.3 percent in 1995 over 1994.
Analysts attributed the dismal results, when the Chinese economy as a whole was growing at more than 10 percent per year, largely to poor company management and Beijing's tight credit policy in force since mid-1993.
However, bank interest rate cuts in May and August last year were seen as having relieved much of the pressure.
"The firms began improving this year thanks to the bank interest rate cuts," said a second analyst. "Key companies such as Lujiazui also won big loans from the government."
Brokers in southern Shenzhen said they didn't expect a remarkable improvement in the 1996 results of locally-listed B share companies.
"But listed firms, especially those with heavy liabilities, may see their operations this year significantly helped by the lower rates because they will lead to lower finance-related costs," said one Shenzhen share analyst.
The exceptions would largely be firms that ignored the rules and traded heavily and successfully in their own shares, Shenzhen brokers said.
"Some public companies reaped huge profits from trading their own shares last year and part of the profits will be calculated into their 1996 profits," a broker with Shenzhen J &amp; A Securities Co Ltd said.
Not all analysts were optimistic of a turnaround in 1996 results.
"The results are going to be lousy on balance," said stock analyst Alex Conroy with ING-Barings in Shanghai. "Very few if any of the companies will be able to pull off good results."
