China's decision to dramatically expand the number of companies listed on its B shares markets will help to finally make them a serious prospect for foreign investors, brokers said on Wednesday.
The securities authorities on Tuesday unveiled a list of 33 companies given approval to offer foreign currency B shares and list them on the two domestic stock markets in Shanghai and Shenzhen.
Last month, the authorities also named 38 companies for listing on overseas stock markets, most of which are expected to be listed as H shares in Hong Kong.
"They won't be able to list them all by the end of 1997, the volume is just too big," said Hoong Yik Luen of ING-Barings in Shanghai.
"But by mid-1998 if all goes well, the market capitalisation for B and H shares will be doubled or even tripled. Then the China market will become a serious market for international institutional investors," he said.
John Crossman, chief representative of brokers Jardine Fleming in Shanghai, said that while the quality of the companies proposed for listing was not yet clear, the plan to speed up listings was at least a step in the right direction.
"The only way for this market to go forward is for there to be a bunch of new listings, to get the B share markets up to 200-330 listings, and get capitalisation up to $20-30 billion, somewhere where people will pay attention to it," he said.
There are now 86 companies listed on the B share markets in Shanghai and Shenzhen, with total market capitalisation of about US$3 billion.
The new list, approved by the Securities Commission of the State Council (cabinet), includes refrigerator maker Qingdao Hai'er, Benxi Steel, Shenyang Petrochemical and Dalian Refrigerator.
The companies selected are mostly large state-run industrial enterprises from sectors including electric power, transport, electronics, telecommunications, petrochemicals, textiles, light industry and pharmaceuticals.
A local analyst with another foreign brokerage said the list of companies included no surprises and quite a few weak players.
"Bringing more companies to market is positive news but the companies have got to be good quality," he said. "I'm personally not so satisfied with the candidates."
The B shares, denominated in U.S. dollars in Shanghai and Hong Kong dollars in Shenzhen, are reserved for foreign investors, but a large proportion are held and traded by local Chinese investors operating through a variety of loopholes.
A spokesman for the Securities Commission was quoted as reaffirming the ban on local investors from holding B shares.
"I think people are saying it because it's the rules and the rules are to be respected," said a foreign brokerage analyst. "But I don't think there will be vigorous enforcement."
