Foreign airline executives on Tuesday called for Shanghai's new airport to handle a mixture of international and domestic flights and for early consultations with foreign airlines before its 1999 scheduled opening.
Construction work on the new airport in Pudong, which will eventually be the biggest in China, begins this month in the Pudong zone to the east of Shanghai city. It will supplement the existing airport at Hongqiao to the west.
But airline representatives said there was no indication which airport they will be required to operate from after 1999 or what arrangements will be made for them.
Many said they understood the Pudong airport, 30 km (18 miles) from the city centre, would handle international flights and Hongqiao domestic ones.
"But I think that, from an airline perspective, it would not be wise to limit either airport to solely international or domestic traffic," said one airline executive who asked not to be named.
"I know they have plans for new infrastructure but I'm not going to hold my breath for some sort of rapid transit route from Pudong to Hongqiao," he said.
Traffic in Shanghai is very congested, although city officials say the problem will be eased by a network of elevated highways being constructed around and through the city.
Lu Jianhua, an official with the Pudong airport planning office, said the current plan was to have both international and domestic flights operating from both airports, but that final arrangements had not been settled.
"The specifics of flight assignments to the two airports still need to be decided," Lu said.
The first phase of Pudong airport will include a 4,000-metre runway and a 150,000 square metre main building, costing a total of 12 billion yuan ($1.46 billion).
The airport at that point will be able to accommodate 20 million passengers and 750,000 tonnes of air cargo, more than double the present capacity of Hongqiao.
The whole Pudong airport project, to be completed in 15-20 years, calls for four runways and an annual capacity of 70 million passengers and five million tonnes of air cargo.
Lu said a new unified administration would be created to manage both Hongqiao and Pudong airports. They are currently two separate entities and foreign airline executives said they sensed a competitiveness between the two.
Asked which airport he would prefer to operate from, one airline representative said: "We're not going to be given a choice, we will go where they tell us to go.
"But I don't know anything about Pudong. I haven't seen any drawings. We haven't been asked to participate in the design, although we have offered," he added.
Design of the airport terminal has been won by a French consortium, Aeroports de Paris, but the representative said the foreign airlines wanted to have input into the design as early as possible.
"We are concerned because Hongqiao airport is massively inadequate today, despite the fact that it's as good as any large airport in China. We are concerned that, without some input from us, we may end the same way in Pudong," he said.
