A two-year campaign by China's financial overlords to force state banks out of the stock markets has succeeded, reducing bank risk and widespread irregularities, analysts said on Wednesday.
The campaign, launched in early 1995 to force banks to close or hive off their stock trading subsidiaries and investment firms, had been effective in stopping the use of state assets for gambling on the stock markets, bankers said.
"The process of separating banks from the stock and trust and investment businesses has largely been completed," said a banker with the Bank of China, reached by telephone in Beijing.
"This has greatly reduced the risks caused by banks trading on the volatile stock markets."
In early 1995, Chinese state-run banks owned more than 1,000 securities offices with combined assets of more than 40 billion yuan ($4.8 billion), most of them set up during the stock fever that followed the launch of China's stock markets in 1990.
By the end of 1996, most of the offices had either been sold to securities houses, closed or made independent, bankers said.
Bank shares in securities brokerages had largely been sold to the brokerages and major industrial and commercial firms, they said.
Chinese bankers said they generally welcomed the move, in particular given the losses their securities subsidiaries suffered in the long market slump from early 1994 to mid-1996.
In mid-1995, China promulgated the "Commercial Bank Law", which bans banks from trading in stocks or doing trust and investment business, giving the central bank a legal basis for the clean-up campaign.
"The separation has effectively driven bank money away from the highly risky stock trading," said a banker with the Shanghai-based Communications Bank. "It has also eradicated some sources of irregularities on the stock markets."
One problem was the temptation for banks to make funds in their control available to securities subsidiaries for stock trading on credit.
Branches of all major Chinese banks and securities houses were also fined or publicly criticised in late 1996 by financial authorities for illegally feeding credit into initial public offerings on China's domestic A share markets.
"Many bank securities branches have been acquired by major securities brokerages and continue their business under different company names," said one executive with a major Chinese securities house. "This has given the large securities companies an easy way to expand."
The official Xinhua news agency reported last week that by the end of 1996, China's four largest state-owned banks had largely pulled out of the trust and investment business.
Of a total of 186 trust and investment firms formerly owned by the banks -- the Industrial and Commercial Bank, the Agricultural Bank, the Bank of China, and the Construction Bank of China -- 148 now operated separately while the remainder were in the process of becoming independent, the agency said.
