Foreign banks in Shanghai do not expect to start local Chinese yuan business for several months due to regulatory uncertainties and the requirement that they move operations to Pudong first, bankers said on Thursday.
Four banks have been given approval to do local currency business, and the Business News reported on Thursday that other banks, starting with Hong Kong and European banks, will be added to the list during the year.
For now, the four banks chosen to lead the experiment -- the Hongkong &amp; Shanghai Banking Corp, Citibank, Tokyo-Mitsubishi Bank and the Industrial Bank of Japan -- are still largely in the dark, bankers said.
"It will take more time to organise," said a senior manager with one of the four banks. "The regulations issued so far are very general. We need much more specific rules, and I'm not sure they have even started to write them yet."
The manager said he expected local currency business to begin by the middle of the year.
The manager of a European bank waiting in the wings to enter local currency business said he thought the first trading would not come until at least March.
"In terms of the technical points it is now clear that the announcement (on the foreign banks doing local currency business) was premature," he said.
He said the People's Bank of China, the central bank, had made it clear that banks would not be allowed to start up until their main operations are physically located in the Pudong development zone across the river from central Shanghai.
The requirement that the banks not only have an office registered in Pudong but also locate their main operations there, only made clear recently, has led to a sudden scramble for office space in Pudong, a real estate broker said.
"People have been charging over there, looking for places, while three months ago no one would touch it," the broker with a foreign real estate firm said.
A senior manager with another of the four chosen banks said the requirement to move to Pudong was a major headache in getting local currency business going.
"Just working out the wiring in the Pudong office is taking a lot of time, this can't be done in one day," he said.
Another key issue is the need to train up staff to handle the local business, the European bank manager said.
Major foreign banks in Shanghai, currently restricted to doing business in foreign currency, have staff on training courses organised by the central bank to help them learn the procedures for local currency business, he said.
But one of the bank managers said that beyond the technical issues, the major problem facing the foreign banks was one of how to get hold of enough Chinese yuan to lend out.
The banks have been told they can basically only lend and borrow to foreign-invested enterprises registered in Shanghai, which generally speaking do not have large surpluses of Chinese yuan on hand, bankers say.
"Funding is going to be the major problem," said the bank manager.
