A meeting of China's bankers in Beijing next week is expected to work out plans to tighten controls on the country's immature financial markets to curb widespread irregularities, bankers said on Friday.
They said officials were likely to put forward comprehensive proposals against inside trading and institutional manipulation of the markets.
It is also expected to consider whether further cuts to bank interest rates should be made this year, following two cuts in 1996, the bankers said.
"The meeting will look at this year's plan for reforming the bank sector and the financial markets," said one Shanghai-based banker who will participate in the meeting. "Standardisation will be one of the key topics."
"One of the focuses will be strengthening supervision of the financial markets," said an executive with a major Chinese brokerage. "As an annual meeting, it will also tackle issues such as whether bank interest rate cuts are needed this year."
Another issue expected to be addressed is the theoretical ban on domestic investors trading foreign currency B shares, re-affirmed again by the securities authorities this week.
Brokers said they expected specific measures to be worked out, including possibly a demand for brokerages to check all accounts to uncover those held by domestic investors, who are estimated to account for about half of all B share trading at present.
At the end of last year, the authorities launched a crackdown on the illegal use of credit to bid for shares in initial public offerings.
This year, the emphasis is expected to be on irregularities in the secondary share markets, particularly inside trading, analysts said.
Widespread irregularities also exist in China's state debt repurchase trading and experimental local currency interbank market including unauthorised direct transactions among financial institutions to avoid supervision, traders said.
China's modern financial markets were established only in the early 1990s to help push the country in the direction of a market-driven economy, but many quickly turned into casinos, causing huge losses for the state.
Analysts said the lack of comprehensive regulations governing the markets was a key problem along with the prevailing get-rich-quick mentality, but Beijing now seems more determined than ever to clean things up.
"With the response of the markets so far not satisfactory, the central government has indicated it will look for further measures to regulate the markets," one stock analyst said.
"But in the short term, new measures are unlikely to have a great impact because they are expected to do something," he added. "But in the long run, they could prove effective by helping to standardise the markets."
The meeting is also likely to re-affirm a policy of tight control over the development of commodities futures markets with Beijing still looking for an effective means of controlling over-speculation and institutional manipulation of futures contracts, traders said.
