A Chinese court sentenced a U.S. businessman on Monday to 10 years in jail for smuggling garbage, fined him 500,000 yuan ($60,000) and ordered him to be deported, the official Xinhua news agency said.
William Ping Chen had confessed to charges of smuggling banned goods, including 238 tonnes of garbage and a small amount of waste medical items, between July and December 1995, Xinhua said.
The Shanghai Number One People's Intermediate Court sentenced Chen to 10 years in jail and ordered his expulsion from China after finding him guilty of smuggling "foreign garbage" for profit, the news agency said.
Chen still has the right of appeal, but is likely to be deported swiftly if he waives that right.
"We place the highest priority on looking after U.S. citizens in this sort of situation," a U.S. consulate official said, adding that officials had requested permission to visit Chen in jail.
Chen, 56, who was arrested in June last year, was sentenced following an open hearing on December 2 at which he was defended by two lawyers, Xinhua said. The hearing was attended by an official from the U.S. consulate in Shanghai, it said.
Chen had insisted on going ahead with imports of banned waste items despite warnings from officials of the Shanghai municipal environmental protection bureau and the Chinese partners in his Shanghai United Paper Works Co Ltd, it said.
Chen had evaded customs supervision to illegally import the garbage from the United States and "had caused serious damage to the environment of China", the court verdict said.
The court also ordered Chen to pay the 500,000 yuan fine, Xinhua said.
Chen's arrest came during a furore in China over several illegal shipments of U.S. rubbish -- old clothes, rubber gloves, disposable syringes and medical nappies found mostly in shipments listed as waste paper for recycling -- and which escalated into an issue of national pride.
Chinese officials whipped up a nationalistic campaign over the garbage, with Shanghai customs describing itself as the "front line, a steel Great Wall guarding the motherland".
Last year, China turned back more than 200 ships from its ports carrying foreign waste or dangerous materials and issued new regulations to curb imports of foreign garbage.
The rubbish issue touched a nerve in China and also served as a timely tool for Beijing to wave in the face of U.S. attacks on its copyright violations and human rights record.
Chen's sentencing was the first in China of a U.S. citizen since human rights activist Harry Wu was detained in June 1995, convicted of spying and sentenced to 15 years in jail.
Wu was deported to the United States within hours of his sentencing after he decided not to appeal.
Four U.S. citizens are currently serving sentences in jails in China, but officials have declined to give details of the length of their terms or their offences.
