China is building a network of major toll highways to supplement its overloaded railway system, and plans to float stock for many of the roads to fund the expansion, companies and analysts said on Monday.
But some brokers questioned the decision to use equity to finance the highway construction programme, saying it would make more sense to raise money by issuing debt.
Chinese officials estimate the country will need around $65 billion for highway construction in the next five years but funding shortfalls are expected to be as large 15 to 25 percent of the total.
China's first international-standard highways only started appeared at the beginning of this decade, but by the end of 1996, the country had 3,258 km of express highway.
There are plans to add a further 900 km in 1997, almost all of it toll road.
Two of the China highways have already listed shares on stock exchanges with more still to come.
The successful Hong Kong listing last November of Anhui Expressway, which runs a 134-km toll highway between Hefei and Nanjing, has encouraged officials to list more highways as a means of raising cash.
Meanwhile, Guangdong Express Highway Development Co, which runs a toll road and a toll bridge in Guangdong province, listed B shares on the Shenzhen stock exchange last August to raise funds for another toll highway.
Four other China highway companies have received approval from the central securities authorities for overseas listings.
Hangyong Express Highway Development Co last year opened a toll highway linking the cities of Hangzhou and Ningbo to the south of Shanghai and hopes to list its shares in Hong Kong.
A Hangyong official, contacted by telephone, said the growing highway network was crucial to China's future.
"Express highways have the advantage of being able to handle greater flows of traffic with a lower rate of accidents than traditional roads," the official said. "They are more convenient and faster than trains, and less expensive for freight."
Foreign brokers in Shanghai said it would almost certainly be cheaper for China to fund its highway expansion through the issue of bonds and sovereign debt rather than equity issues.
"But the local communities want to get these toll roads built and they can't get debt quota," said Brewer Stone, Shanghai representative of Prudential Securities.
He said toll roads posed a risk for investors in spite of the rosy outlook for growth of the Chinese economy.
"I think historically toll roads have often been a dicey proposition because it's extremely difficult to accurately forecast traffic flows," he said. "Drivers can prove to be extremely ingenious in find alternative routes."
But an official with the Guangdong Express Highway Development Co said all construction had to fit in with the master national plan prepared in Beijing to prevent competing projects by different highway developers.
