China's stock exchanges remain the most open and most market-driven financial markets in the country despite recent official pressure to rein them in, analysts said on Tuesday.
The foreign exchange, interbank and treasury bill repurchase markets are kept under incredibly tight control by the Beijing authorities, with even tiny movements achieved only with official approval.
"Unlike the stock markets, the funds moving on the money markets are directly linked to China's currency stability and money supply," said one interbank market trader.
"The central bank is afraid that any chaos on the markets could result in financial turmoil at either a national or local level," he added.
China's futures markets, once home to frenzied, casino-like trading, have been ruthlessly brought to heel over the past year with the authorities forcing speculative funds out to the stock markets, analysts said.
"Stocks are the most open of all China's financial markets," said a stock analyst with a major Chinese brokerage. "There was the crackdown in late 1996, but in fact the central government rarely intervenes in the markets."
China's stock markets in Shanghai and Shenzhen plunged in mid-December after the official People's Daily published an article warning of over-heating. Prices are now about 30 percent below their mid-December levels.
Current rules allow for a maximum 10 percent rise or fall in a share price over one trading day, but information flow, while still behind the standards of advanced stock exchanges abroad, is relatively free, analysts said.
On the nation's interbank foreign exchange trading market, by contrast, the People's Bank of China intervenes heavily on a daily basis to keep movements in the Chinese yuan against other currencies within very strict guidelines.
The central bank has its own trading room on the market, which has access to all transaction details, while dealers from other players on the market can only see trades done by their own bank.
Daily volumes are not posted on the market and rate movements of the Chinese yuan against other currencies are strictly limited, traders said.
"We feel very much that we are in an infair position with the central bank knowing everything and us knowing so little," said a Chinese foreign exchange trader.
"The tendency therefore is for us not to bother to think or analyse the markets too much. Most of the trading is done in the dark with us just guessing at the central bank's intentions," he added.
Traders said the same situation existed on the Chinese yuan interbank market, launched just one year ago, and on the nation's state debt repurchase markets.
They said another factor was that the bulk of funds moving on the money markets were state assets.
"The central bank will not stand by and let them get lost in uncontrolled trading," said one trader.
