China's first and only non-state bank, the China Minsheng Banking Corp, is planning major growth in 1997 but will always be a niche player beside the country's huge state banks, a senior official said on Thursday.
Minsheng was founded in Beijing a year ago, opened Shanghai and Guangzhou branches last month, and plans to open branches in at least six other Chinese cities over the next 12 months, Shanghai branch manager Lu Jiashan said.
"The plan is to set up branches in Shenzhen, Dalian, Hangzhou, Wuhan, Chengdu and either Qingdao or Jinan. If it's completed, the scale of the bank by the end of 1997 will be quite significant," Lu said in an interview.
But he said the bank's ambitious growth plans posed no threat to the state banks that dominate the country's banking sector.
"We will grow fast, but we are in a weak position compared to the state banks, we're no threat to them at all," he said. "The private banks will always be small players."
The Minsheng Bank is an anomaly in China's tightly controlled banking system.
The bank doesn't seem to quite rate the title "private", but it has 59 shareholders, mostly private Chinese firms including the Hope Group, a feed grain producer based in Sichuan province, and the Xiamen Fuxun Group based in Fujian province.
Lu said that the bank had complete freedom to make loans, in terms of both recipients and amounts, a huge difference from the state banks who have strict loan quotas they must stick to, and instructions on how much they must lend state enterprises.
"All our loans are based purely on commercial considerations, there are no quotas, no administrative interference in the loan process at all. There are also no policy loan responsibilities," he said.
Lu said the central bank viewed the Minsheng Bank as an experiment.
"Whether there will be more non-state banks or not is not for me to answer, but one thing we can be sure of is that there will be a lot more banks in China in the future, and many of them will be share-based companies," he said.
The bank announced a small profit of 11 million yuan for its first year of operations and already has more than seven billion yuan in assets, Lu said.
"We have been open in Shanghai for only 18 days, but we already have assets of one billion yuan, which is much better than my expectations. We have 150 to 160 enterprises that have opened accounts with us," he said.
He said the bank's target was to triple the assets of the Shanghai branch to three billion yuan by the end of 1997 and open several branch offices around the city.
The bank's main focus, he said, would eventually be loans to private companies, although at this point only 10 percent of its customers are private firms with state enterprises and listed companies making up the lion's share.
"In the past, it has not been so easy for private firms to get banking support," Lu said. "Now there is a bank specialising in this sector, helping them with their businesses, which I am sure will give a boost to the economy as a whole."
He said the branch had so far made 12 loans of which three were to private companies.
"There are risks involved, and we need to make the right choice of companies that will promote the market economy as a whole, so we don't invest blindly," he said.
