China's central bank is ordering state banks to gradually pull out of the state debt markets to help stop the flow of speculative "hot money" into the volatile stock markets, industry sources said on Thursday.
The People's Bank of China wants the banks to use their surplus funds to help out the many debt-ridden state enterprises rather than parking it in the state debt repurchase market where they can be used for short-term share plays, the sources said.
"Central bank officials met representatives of the state banks and major securities houses in Beijing early this week and told them the banks will be gradually banned from the state debt secondary market," a Shanghai state debt trader said.
"The banks were told that they must not build new positions but can phase out their existing positions," he added. "A deadline for clearing all positions has not been set."
A state debt analyst with a major Chinese securities house said the bulk of money supply on China's T-bill secondary market currently came from the Chinese state banks, which liked to lend short-term money to securities institutions for high returns.
"By clearly stating that commercial banks will be driven away from the state debt markets, Beijing is aiming to cut off money supply to the stock markets," one executive with a major Chinese brokerage said.
"The central government seems determined to check the trend of state money flowing into stocks," he said. "It doesn't want to see the stock markets sky-rocketing and becoming casinos."
Instead, Beijing wants the money to be used to offset the effects of the tight credit policy in force in 1993, restricting the flow of loans to the poorly-managed state enterprises and making them perform even worse, one analyst said.
State debt traders said they expected turnover on the T-bill repurchase and spot markets to decline sharply over the next few weeks as a result of the decision.
Daily turnover for repurchase papers on China's largest state debt market in Shanghai could drop to around two billion yuan ($240 million) from an average of around 10 billion yuan in the past few months, they said.
Industry sources said Beijing was establishing a national state debt clearing market, where the banks can trade state debt with the People's Bank of China in its open market operations as a key outlet for the banks to clear their existing positions.
The central bank kicked off open market operations in April 1996, trading short-term state debt with 14 major commercial banks as a means of indicating Beijing's monetary policy and indirectly controlling money supply.
But trading has so far been very light as the central bank regards the operations only as an experiment, the sources said.
Only about four billion yuan in state debt was traded in the open market operations in 1996, one source said.
