China's securities authorities are trying once again to ban domestic investors from the foreign currency B share market, but brokers said on Friday that the drive had little chance of success.
Chinese brokerages in Shanghai and Shenzhen this week started re-registering investor accounts to weed out domestic investors who are trading B shares, theoritically reserved for foreigners only.
But stock analysts said the painstaking process of driving locals from the B shares seems to have resulted in a compromise with the securities authorities, in fact trying to find an indirect way to legalise those already in the markets.
"The impact on the market will be minimal," said a Shanghai broker. "Many investors are trying one way or another to find a trustee, and we believe most of them will be able to do so."
Brokers said domestic investors with B share accounts had to find a foreigner, or someone with right of residence outside China, to write a certificate to say that he or she entrusts the local person to trade B shares.
"It seems that in Shanghai it is just a matter of walking in with your cousin's passport, but in Shenzhen I understand they are seriously trying to cut back on accounts opened with just an identity card," said Bruce Richardson of HG Asia in Shanghai.
Those who manage to obtain the trading certificate will be able to retain their accounts and can continue to legally trade B shares in their own name. Those that fail will be banned from buying new shares from April 1, brokers said.
"This is nothing more than a compromise," said a broker with a Chinese brokerage in Shanghai. "The overwhelming majority of domestic investors will be able to find a trustee."
The B shares were created in 1992 to attract foreign investment funds into China, but as a result of a market slump that began in 1994, many foreign investors have pulled out.
Their place has been taken by domestic investors, attracted by the large gap in price between B share prices and the much higher prices on the domestic A share market.
Brokers estimate that domestic investors have accounted for at least half of B-share trading in recent months, and concerns that the authorities really mean business about pushing the domestic investors out has been a major negative factor.
In mid-1996, a rush to B share trading by domestic investors pushed Shenzhen's B share index up more than 100 percent and the Shanghai index up 50 percent in just a few weeks.
"The China Securities Regulatory Commission has the tools if they want to really shut down every local B share investor, but I don't think they'll do it, it would be too costly," said HG Asia's Richardson.
"If you took local funds out of the market, or froze them, the market would go back to where it used to be, which I don't think anyone wants," he said.
He said that the CSRC was about the only player that wanted the locals out of the market -- the stock exchanges, brokerages and foreign investors all basically welcomed them because of the extra liquidity they bring to what is still a very small market.
