China's securities authorities on Saturday publicly punished a listed company for trading its own shares, opening a new phase in a crackdown on securities industry irregularities.
The Shanghai Securities News said the Shenzhen-listed A share firm Zhangjiajie Tourism Development Co Ltd had been fined two million yuan ($241,000) and ordered to hand over all its profits from the illegal share trade.
Shanghai brokers said it was apparently the first time that a listed company had been publicly punished for trading its own shares, something many Chinese companies are known to do.
The company was accused of buying more than two million of its own shares from September to November last year, then selling part of the shares just before announcing a bonus issue on November 22, making a profit of 11.805 million yuan.
The authorities also ruled that the Hunan Securities Trading Centre had violated the rules by allowing Zhangjiajie to illegally trade its own shares, and fined the centre 750,000 yuan, the newspaper said.
The national watchdog body, the China Securities Regulatory Commission (CSRC), decided to confiscate Zhangjiajie's profits from the illegal trades and ordered the firm to sell the shares it still held within two months, the newspaper said.
The CSRC also ordered the company to convene quickly a shareholders' meeting to discuss the dismissal of general manager Yang Zhezhong and deputy general manager Li Jianzhang, who are responsible for the illegal trading, it said.
China's securities authorities late last year launched a crackdown on banks and securities houses for illegal transactions involved with share issues.
"The public punishment of a listed company signals that the crackdown has now spread to the secondary (public trading) market," said one broker.
"Market rumours say that the central government is conducting a large-scale investigation into irregularities on the secondary market," a second broker said. "We are expecting the exposure of more irregular transactions."
China's Company Law and securities trading rules ban listed firms from trading their own shares.
"The company's action of buying its own shares and then selling them just prior to a bonus issue was an instance of insider trading," the Shanghai Securities News quoted a CSRC circular as saying.
($1 = 8.3 yuan)
