China has begun to issue a stream of new stock trading regulations to bring some order to its share markets, despite top-level wrangling over the long-awaited Securities Law, industry analysts said on Monday.
They said it appeared as if the authorities had decided to first issue the non-controversial sections of the Securities Law rather than wait for agreement on the entire piece of legislation.
China's two stock markets are growing fast and the need for detailed regulations covering the issue and trading of shares is becoming more urgent all the time, the analysts said.
"These new rules are expected to form part of the future Securities Law, but they can't get the law out any time soon," said an executive with a Chinese securities house.
"So they have been prompted to do this by the need to more effectively regulate the markets."
Since late last year, around a dozen new sets of regulations have been issued by the central securities authorities, including rules announced on Monday which set up a system of annual checks into the operations of listed companies.
Other rules have covered initial public offerings, company information releases, foreign currency B share trading, exchange and brokerage risk control, daily stock price movement limits as well as business by trust and investment companies.
"With securities trading becoming ever more active, the central government wants to prevent irregularities from spreading," said a second executive. "They can piece together the separate rules later, making the formulation of the Securities Law easier."
China began to draft the securities law in 1992 but disputes over who should have the final say on the markets, in addition to some questions over trading procedures, has delayed the law time and again, industry sources said.
Responsibility for managing the stock markets is currently split between several powerful parts of the central government, including the People's Bank of China, the State Planning Commission and the State Administration of Foreign Exchange.
None of these bodies wishes to withdraw from the profitable industry, the analysts said.
The regulations governing the markets are also scattered, and include many issued directly by the Shanghai and Shenzhen exchanges.
"The rules as they currently exist are far from comprehensive, which means that many transactions put you in a legal no-man's land," said one trader. "With all the loopholes, irregularities are widespread."
The irregularities include the widespread use of credit for trading on both the primary and secondary markets and listed firms buy and selling their own shares illegally.
"The issue of so many new rules within a short period of time is part of the national campaign to clean up the stock markets," said a second trader.
