China is planning major reforms of its government debt markets in 1997 to make them more responsive to market forces and their rates more flexible, officials and analysts said on Tuesday.
Reforms this year will focus on creating a more market-driven secondary market after a series of measures taken last year to improve the primary market, including the introduction of a public tender for setting coupons, they said.
In a speech on this year's plans for state debt markets, a senior official said reforms in 1997 will aim to improve coordination between the primary and secondary markets, the Shanghai Securities News said on Tuesday.
"We will actively strengthen the role of underwriters as market makers on the secondary market to promote the coordinated development of the primary and secondary markets," Deputy Finance Minister Liu Jibin was quoted as saying.
Market makers -- major brokerages or securities houses -- would be required to invest consistently in the state debt market and help to stabilise prices when they fluctuate sharply, industry analysts said.
"A market maker system and off-floor trading will be introduced in 1997," the newspaper on Monday quoted Gao Jian, director of the ministry's state debt department, as saying.
China began state debt issues in the early 1980s with purchases made compulsory for many people such as government employees and staff of state-run enterprises.
By the early 1990s, purchases of government debt were voluntary, but state-run banks were still forced to underwrite whatever amount they were allocated by the authorities.
Real market forces did not come into play until 1995 when Beijing for the first time used a public tender system to set the coupon rate on a debt issue.
The system was used for all issues in 1996 -- an indication the primary market has been largely freed from administrative control, traders said.
"With the changes to the primary market now in place, reforms this year are expected to give more priority to the secondary market," said Lu Weiming, a state debt trader with China Guotai Securities.
"They are looking at reforms to the secondary market now largely because of the increasingly active trading there after three successive years of record debt issues," said a second trader.
China issued a record 195.2 billion ($23.52 billion) yuan worth of state debt last year and industry sources expect this year's issues to hit another record of 250 billion yuan.
In other reforms, the People's Bank of China at a meeting in Beijing last week ordered commercial banks to withdraw from trading on the state debt repurchase and spot secondary markets, traders said.
The banks, which have accounted for more than 80 percent of the money supply on the repurchase market alone, have been ordered not to build any new positions and to gradually offset their existing positions.
"The state debt market will gradually move to being dominated by securities brokerages as a result of the withdrawal of the commercial banks," said a trader with J &amp; A Securities.
Other significant changes will include more issues of treasury notes and bonds which pay interest on an annual basis instead of on maturity, officials have said.
The introduction of state debt paying annual interest will allow Beijing to one day open trading on the annual interest rate to pave the way for a possible start of financial derivatives, industry analysts said.
China issued two experimental batches of state debt paying annual interest in 1996.
($1 = 8.3 yuan)
