China named on Thursday four more foreign banks approved to handle local currency business, and bankers said they saw the accelerated timetable reflecting a desire to boost property prices in Shanghai's Pudong zone.
The China Daily said the four new banks were U.K.-based Standard Chartered Bank, Japan's Sanwa Bank and Daiichi Kangyo Bank and the Shanghai-Paris International Bank, a joint venture between France's Banque National de Paris and the Industrial and Commerical Bank of China.
The newspaper said the banks, and four others named earlier, would be able to take deposits and make loans in yuan, the Chinese currency, only after they had moved operations to the Pudong district of Shanghai.
"I see the whole thing as being real-estate driven," said a foreign banker. "To make Pudong a success, they need to get the foreigners over there, so there's no reason limiting the numbers."
The Chinese authorities want to make the Pudong development zone in eastern Shanghai the country's premier financial district, and have told foreign banks they will only be allowed to do local currency business from offices there.
"Before the banks were approved no one would touch Pudong, but now people are charging over there to try and sign something up," said a real estate broker.
Foreign bankers had originally assumed the authorities would wait until the first four banks had begun operations before approving any more.
The first four are Citicorp's Citibank unit, HSBC Corp's Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corp unit, the Industrial Bank of Japan and the Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi Ltd
Chinese banking sources said a number of other banks would also be approved for yuan business during 1997.
Foreign bankers said the faster they were allowed into the yuan business the better, regardless of the limitations placed upon them.
Approved banks can only accept Chinese yuan deposits from foreign-funded firms or from foreign individuals, or deposits from Chinese enterprises derived from the banks' loans to them.
The banks can supply yuan loans only to foreign-funded firms or Chinese enterprises who have previously obtained foreign currency loans from the banks.
"We won't be able to increase our customer base, but it's at least a start, another step forward," said a foreign banker.
"It's a very significant step," said a senior banker with one of the chosen banks. "If a bank can't do business in the local currency then it's only half a bank."
"We welcome this good news," said Lance Browne, Standard Chartered's chief executive for China. "It's a positive development for our business in China."
Another banker said specific regulations for the business had not yet been issued by the central bank, and training sessions for foreign bank staff were in progress nearly every weekend.
One banker said he did not expect yuan loans and deposits to begin for another three or four months, to allow all the various issues to be sorted out.
