China's central bank wants to boost open market operations in 1997, partly to soak up state bank funds banned from the state debt repurchase and spot public secondary market, bankers and analysts said on Friday.
But the People's Bank of China seems to have not yet made up its mind on how to do it, the key problem being the central bank's shortage of the short-term treasury bills used in the open market operations.
Under new rules, state banks are banned from the repo and public T-bill spot markets and are allowed to buy T-bills only on the primary market. They can sell them only to the central bank, which at the moment is not buying, bankers said.
They said the lack of liquidity would make it difficult for the market to absorb the state bank funds gradually being withdrawn from the secondary markets.
"By promising more activity in the open market operations, the central bank wants to offset part of the impact of the ban," said a state debt analyst with a Chinese brokerage. "But the central bank will have some difficulty keeping its promise."
The central bank kicked off open market operations on a trial basis in April last year, trading short-term T-bills of one year and less with 14 state banks to give an indication of the bank's policies and to help to control money supply.
But accumulated turnover so far has only marginally topped four billion yuan ($482 million), too small to give any clear clues to the state of China's money markets, analysts said.
"We expect turnover of the open market operations to be significantly increased this year," a central banker said on Friday but declined to give any details.
Last week, deputy governor Chen Yaoxian was quoted by the official media as saying Beijing intended to make the open market operations one of the major means of controlling China's money supply this year. He did not give any details either.
"The central bank is surely feeling the urgent need to expand the open operations now that it has banned state banks from trading on the state debt repurchase and spot secondary markets," said one banker with the Bank of China.
"All major state banks have stopped trading on the markets," she added. "But we have a lot of state debt in hand and the central bank must know we need to quickly find an outlet to prevent losses. We can't leave large sums just sitting there."
The central bank at a meeting last week told state banks to withdraw from the markets, offsetting existing positions gradually. The aim is to stop bank funds from leaking into the volatile stock markets, traders said.
"One key problem is that the central bank has not bought any state debt on the primary market," said the state debt analyst with a Chinese brokerage. "It has little state debt on hand to trade significant amounts of T-bills with the state banks."
"Trading in the open market operations so far has been unilateral with the central bank only buying state debt," said a banker with a major state bank. "Real open operations require the central bank to have a supply of state debt first."
Another difficulty is how to ensure the state banks make as much from the operations as they have off the state debt secondary markets, analysts said.
"We have made good returns on the state debt secondary markets," said the banker from the Bank of China. "We cannot expect the same returns in the open market operations, which will hurt our enthusiasm in trading with the central bank."
Currently, the open market operations involve the central bank buying a total of 40 to 50 million yuan in state debt once a week from the 14 designated banks, bankers said.
That is a minuscule amount compared to the billions of yuan worth of state debt the state banks are used to trading each week on the state debt secondary markets in a week, they said.
($1 = 8.3 yuan)
