China is setting up a national state debt trading market to link up all state debt trading floors around the nation to check widespread irregularities, industry analysts said on Monday.
The computerised market, the China State Debt Clearing System, would gradually take over the trading of all state debt in the country with the current markets, including the Shanghai stock exchange, taking a minor role, they said.
"Nearly all China's state debt trading is now regional," said a trader with China Guotai Securities. "An institution trading in Shanghai cannot have its positions cleared in Shenzhen, which is inconvenient.
"With the new market being opened, a trader can bid and ask on any market around the country through the computer network," he said.
Major players on China's state debt markets currently include state banks, securities houses, state enterprises and wealthy individuals looking for quick returns or for short-term cash for speculative investment elsewhere.
The bulk of China's state debt is traded through the Shanghai and Shenzhen securities exchanges, but there are dozens of other centres through which state debt can be traded.
"The primary purpose of the market is to check rampant irregularities," said one state debt investment analyst. "The most important aim is to eradicate credit trading."
China's securities rules ban the trading of state debt on credit but in practice many trading centres have accepted 20 percent margin requirements for state debt repurchase trading, traders said.
The state debt margin trading has led to huge losses for some state banks and other financial institutions, due to unrecoverable debts, traders say. The official media reported in mid-1996 that the Wuhan Securities Exchange Centre, the Tianjin Securities Exchange Centre and the STAQ system, which trades China's institutional shares, had accumulated debts on the repo market of up to 50 billion yuan ($6.02 billion).
Traders said some banks and brokerages had already started to put their state debt under the auspices of the new market but that formal trading on the system, based in Beijing, was not expected to start until the second half of this year.
"Once the national market begins full operations, financial institutions will be required to have all their state debt entrusted to it," said one trader. "This will effectively end credit trading."
Another reason for setting up the centrally-controlled computerised market was to enforce a recent ban on state banks trading on the state debt repurchase and spot secondary markets, analysts said.
The central bank at a recent meeting told state banks to phase out trading on the markets, not to build new positions and to offset existing positison only gradually, to ensure that bank money would not flow into the volatile stock markets.
"All we big four state commercial banks have to get out of the markets," said one banker with the Bank of China. "The new market will enable the central government to enforce the ban."
The big four are the Construction Bank, the Agricultural Bank, the Bank of China and the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China.
Industry sources said the People's Bank of China, the central bank, was preparing to play a major role on the new market to trade short-term treasury bills of one year and below with the state banks in its open market operations.
($1=8.3 yuan)
