The "Great Leap East" in Shanghai real estate has begun, with the property market in the Pudong zone beginning to look up, thanks to official pressure on foreign banks to move over there, property analysts said.
But the overall outlook for Shanghai's office property market remains grim from the developer's point of view -- vacancy rates are around 30 percent and likely to rise to 60 percent by the end of 1997 due to a forest of new buildings, the analysts said.
Pudong's Lujiazui district has been designated by the Chinese authorities as the future "Wall Street of Asia".
But the office space glut and transport difficulties have kept people away, until now.
"The great leap east is in progress," said Sam Crispin, senior manager with real estate firm First Pacific Davies in Shanghai.
"There's been a rapid shift in interest with the banks moving over there. The service sector will then follow," he said.
Leading the leap to Pudong are the foreign banks which have been bluntly told by the Shanghai city government that they will not be able to do local currency business unless they put their headquarters in Pudong.
Eight foreign banks have been given approval to do local yuan business in the past month, and they are busy setting up their Pudong operations, while other foreign banks with full branches in Shanghai are lobbying hard to gain the same privilege.
Crispin said Lujiazui's office vacancy rate was probably around 75 percent at present, and would probably remain at that figure for the rest of the year.
"I don't see any significant decline by the end of this year because there's significant amounts of stock coming onto the market," he said.
James Hawkey, research manager for Jones Lang Wootton in Shanghai, said that while vacancy rates in Pudong were high, the take-up rate was accelerating.
"The vacancy rate (in Pudong) is currently 69.7 percent, but that's to be expected for a newly-developed area," he said.
"There's a lot of new supply in 1997, but vacancy rates will probably start to move down," he said.
With supply far in excess of demand for the foreseeable future, the analysts said they saw Shanghai real estate prices overall sliding further.
The foreign banks are paying $20-24 per square metre per month for prime Pudong office space, compared to rates double that or more on the other side of the river in central Shanghai, analysts said.
"Rates (in central Shanghai) are likely to slide over the next couple of years. They may come down to about $30, but what the market is seeing now is that companies that want quality space are willing to pay for it," said First Pacific Davies's Crispin.
Another real estate broker said he saw the price floor for quality office space in Shanghai at somewhere close to $10-15 per square metre per month.
"The bottom of the pit is the limit, there's too many buildings," the broker said. "But there's still a shortage of really good properties."
A Chinese real estate broker said grade A real estate in Pudong was already renting for around $15 per square metre per month.
"The overall occupancy rate is about 30-40 percent, although some of the better buildings are over 50 percent. But it will be three to five years before Pudong property is really fully absorbed," the broker said.
