Trading on China's local currency interbank market has surged in the last few days following a directive to state banks to withdraw from the state debt secondary markets, traders said on Tuesday.
The increased trading volume fits in neatly with Beijing's intention to make the interbank market a major conduit for the nation's short-term funds and a barometer of money supply, they said.
The market's turnover surged 69.71 percent to 20.938 billion yuan ($2.523 billion) last week from the previous week.
Turnover was now averaging more than four billion yuan a day compared with an average daily turnover last year of around 2.5 billion yuan.
Lending by state banks on the market had risen noticeably, the Financial News said.
"Major banks have shifted to the interbank market for lending out their short-term surplus money," said one interbank market trader.
"They used to lend the money on the repurchase secondary market because rates there are higher than those on the interbank market, but they have been told to withdraw from the market," the trader said.
The People's Bank of China, the central bank, earlier this month ordered state banks to pull out of state debt secondary markets to prevent their funds being used for speculation on the stock market.
The government wants to force the banks to park their short-term funds in the interbank market, which was launched in January last year to give financial institutions an avenue for trading short-term money among themselves.
But the interbank market, still viewed as experimental by the authorities, has so far proved to be too small to provide a clear picture of China's money supply movements, analysts say.
"The trend towards the interbank market becoming more active will continue for the rest of this year," said a second trader.
"The central government has made it clear that it will be one of the main focuses of financial reform in 1997."
Greater liquidity on the interbank market would allow the authorities to look at expanding its membership, currently restricted to 19 state banks and 35 short-term financing centres, money brokerages run by the central bank, analysts said.
"The recent surge in volumes is healthy for the interbank market," said a banker with the Shanghai-based Communications Bank.
"It will gradually allow the central bank to consider adding more members to help the market grow and become a real barometer of China's short-term money movements."
Beijing intended to make the expansion of the interbank market a key task in 1997, central bank deputy governor Chen Yaoxian said recently.
"We will greatly expand the interbank market this year," Chen was quoted by state media as saying. "We will make it gradually become the key marketplace for commercial (state) banks to clear their positions."
