The yuan is expected to remain stable during the first half of this year, taking a break from its sharp rise over recent months, traders said on Wednesday.
The yuan will move in a tight range between 8.2800 and 8.3500 to the dollar with Beijing determined to cap its rise despite steady upward pressure, they said.
The yuan closed at a 20-month high of 8.2935 to the dollar on Wednesday on the Shanghai-based national foreign exchange interbank market, largely on the back of China's record high foreign exchange reserves of $105 billion at the end of 1996.
"We expect little movement in the yuan against the dollar in the first six months of this year," said a foreign exchange trader with a major Chinese bank.
"The economy is good with foreign exchange reserves hitting record highs, but this is being balanced by the higher cost of exports," he added. "The central bank will not allow the yuan to fluctuate sharply under these conditions."
The yuan has risen slowly but inexorably over the past year from around 8.3174 at the beginning of 1996 -- a rise of just 0.29 percent, making it one of the most stable currencies in the world against the dollar.
The rise reflects the overall improvement of the Chinese economy, but has added a slight extra burden to exporters.
With the currency's continued strength, the central People's Bank of China has been intervening on almost a daily basis in the market to check the yuan's upward trend, traders said.
One Shanghai foreign trade official said the average export cost of foreign exchange stood at 8.38 yuan for each dollar of exported goods in 1996, making exporters lose money when they turned trade surplus dollars into local currency.
The central bank has also bought much local currency on the interbank market in the past few months, partly to prevent over-supply of the yuan from fanning inflation, analysts said.
Overall, the central bank is buying in both dollars and yuan to dampen the market, they added.
China's retail price inflation fell to a year-on-year 6.1 percent in 1995 from 14.8 percent year-on-year in 1995.
But fixed-asset investment surged again in the second half of last year after Beijing cut bank interest rates in May and August, threatening to rekindle inflation, traders said.
"Despite the fall in inflation last year, the central bank is expected to continue to take a cautious approach," said a second foreign exchange trader. "Its intervention on the market to prevent sharp rises and falls of the yuan will continue.
"The central government has made it clear it will continue its tight credit policy to prevent a revival of inflation," he added.
