China's ban on state banks trading on the state debt secondary market is making state debt issues more difficult but Beijing is expected to take measures to offset the impact, analysts said on Friday.
The ban has made liquidity flow out of the markets, depressing prices and weakening investor confidence, making the response to this year's first issue much cooler than issues last year, they said.
But Beijing has already signalled that it wants to encourage individuals to stay in the state debt market.
The authorities announced this week that individuals would be allowed to open special state debt trading accounts for the first time. The service fee levied on trades by individuals was also cut to 0.2 percent from 0.3 percent.
Beijing has been chosen as the test site for the personal accounts, but individuals in others parts of China will be allowed to open such accounts if the experiment succeeds.
Analysts said they also expect Beijing to soon allow the establishment of state debt investment funds.
"Individual investors have responded more coolly to this year's first issue than to the last few issues," said one state debt analyst with a major Chinese brokerage.
"The ban is the major reason," he said. "It has depressed state debt prices on the secondary markets. With sentiment hurt, investors have become more reluctant to buy."
"State banks used to be major money suppliers on China's state debt market," said one trader. "Their withdrawal is depressing the market and making state debt issues more difficult."
The first batch of 1997 state debt, the 20 billion yuan ($2.41 billion) two-year discount treasury note, is being issued from January 22 to February 17.
But with China's financial markets basically all closed from this weekend until February 17 for the Chinese lunar new year holiday, the issue was basically completed by Friday afternoon. Some sales will also be made on the last day of issue.
For the first time, the top five underwriters of the treasury note issue are all securities houses rather than state banks because the banks no longer need to build positions for secondary market trading, traders said.
The People's Bank of China, the central bank, recently ordered commercial banks to withdraw from trading on the state debt repurchase and spot secondary markets. They are only allowed to offset existing positions and must not build new ones.
China issued a record of 195.2 billion yuan in state debt last year and is expected to issue another record of 250 billion yuan this year, industry sources said.
"Despite the lukewarm response from retail investors, institutions have still shown great interest in the latest issue," said a broker with a major underwriter.
"They widely expect the central government to take market-boosting measures," he said.
