China's stock markets, greeting the Year of the Ox on Monday after a two-week lunar new year break, are expected to perform well through the year but with trading more subdued than last year, analysts said on Sunday.
The analysts said the two main positives for the China share markets this year were the country's strong economy and Beijing's apparent desire to have the financial markets on an upswing to mark Hong Kong's return to Chinese control on July 1.
But the "Ox Year" enthusiasm of stock investors was tempered by the determination of the Chinese securities authorities to push speculative funds out of the markets and make them less casino-like, they said.
"The major factor for the stock markets in the Year of the Ox will be the improved national economy," said an executive with a major Chinese brokerage.
"But we don't expect to see any dramatic surges like last year. The central government is stressing market stability," he said.
"The Hong Kong takeover will have a great psychological impact on the markets," a stock analyst said. "I see most of (China's) share indices hitting record highs around the time of Hong Kong's return."
Some brokers said they believed there would be a correction in April and early May in response to the generally poor 1996 results expected from listed companies.
But they said the markets were expected to perform strongly from June through to August during the period of the Hong Kong handover, and the rises could be sustained through the rest of the year assuming China's economy remained strong.
On the last trading day of the Year of the Rat on January 31, Shanghai's A share index closed at 1006.362 points against an historical high of 1640.710, while the B share index was 66.894 points against an all-time high of 105.780.
Shenzhen's A share index ended at 372.54 points against a record of 502.77 and the B index was 157.06 against 201.87.
The official China Daily Business Weekly said on Sunday that the stock markets in Shanghai and Shenzhen could see an over-supply of share issues this year due to a big increase in listings combined with falling investor activity in equities.
The securities authorities set a new share issue quota at the end of last year of 10 billion yuan, double the previous quota.
"Demand for stocks was expected to wither after the market cooled down from excessive speculation," the newspaper quoted an expert as saying.
The authorities moved to rein in the share markets in mid-December after months of feverish trading which pushed prices up dramatically.
Many investors last year responded to two interest rate cuts by removing funds from their bank accounts to invest in the stock markets. But the China Daily said the impact of the rate cuts was fading.
The stock markets were also expected to suffer from the crackdown on the use of illegal funds to buy shares, particularly the use of credit, the newspaper said.
"Although there are no precise figures for illegal funds in the stock market, including overdrafts, corporation loans and banking deposits, the illegal money contributed significantly to the overheated market last year," it said.
