The jailing of one of the founding fathers of modern China's stock markets, announced this month, has sent a chill through the markets, with a clear message that no one is exempt, analysts said on Monday.
But they said the impact on prices from the sentencing of Guan Jiansheng, former head of top securities house Shanghai International Securities Co (SIS), would be minimal because of the careful timing of the announcement.
Official media announced on February 3, just ahead of the two-week Chinese lunar new year market holiday, that Guan had been sentenced to 17 years in prison for embezzlement and accepting bribes.
A Shanghai court convicted Guan of accepting 294,000 yuan ($35,000) in bribes and misappropriating 2.4 million yuan in public funds between 1992 and 1994, media reports said.
"Guan was one of the founders of China's modern stock markets and the heavy jail sentence has sent a chilly message to other major players on the stock markets," said an executive with a major Chinese brokerage.
"This is a warning to all brokerage officials intending to profit from illegal securities trading by taking advantage of their posts," said an analyst with China Guotai Securities in Shenzhen.
HG Asia's Shanghai respresentative Bruce Richardson said the Guan sentence was aimed at pulling the markets into line despite the relatively lax supervision.
"They're sending a message. There's a certain amount of bitterness among people who don't make a lot of money in China, and the heavy penalty shows these people that the government cares," he said.
A second Shanghai brokerage executive said Guan's sentencing fitted with the tougher attitude towards the stock markets being taken by the securities authorities in recent months.
"Beijing's crackdown on the stock markets recently makes it very clear that it is determined to bring them into line," he said. "Beijing has made it clear that it will excuse no one. Guan has been selected to serve as an example to warn others."
Guan, 49, was removed from his post as SIS president after the brokerage was implicated in a huge state debt futures trading scandal that rocked the Shanghai Stock Exchange in February 1995.
SIS took a bond futures contract position far exceeding the legal maximum and then tried to force down the market through massive dumping, which resulted in it suffering huge losses from selling short in a rising market.
The scandal prompted Beijing to ban state debt futures trading in May 1995 and SIS was later merged with the former Shanghai Shenyin Securities Co to form China's largest brokerage, Shenyin &amp; Wanguo Securities.
"Despite the severity of the sentence, the price impact on the markets will be minimal," said one Chinese stock trader. "The markets had long expected Guan to be jailed."
During the early 1990s, Guan helped make SIS China's top brokerage house and helped to work out the framework for China's modern securities markets, established in 1990.
Since late last year, the China Securities Regulatory Commission, the top securities watchdog, has taken tough and public action against around 30 branches of major Chinese banks and securities houses for illegal credit bidding on new issues.
It also fined Zhangjiajie Tourism Development Co Ltd for trading its own shares in the first such case in China's modern stock markets. ($1 = 8.3 yuan)
