Citibank NA on Monday started the move by foreign banks across the river to Shanghai's Pudong development zone, hoping to gain an early start in the local Chinese currency business.
But a senior Citibank executive at the formal opening of the Citibank branch office in Pudong said he saw only modest profit opportunities in the early stages of local currency operations.
John Beeman, Citibank's Country Corporate Officer for China told a news conference marking the branch opening that he expected the Chinese central bank to issue detailed regulations covering foreign banks doing Chinese yuan business in March.
"There will then be a thorough inspection of our branch premises and procedures. Assuming we pass the inspection, we hope to be able to offer (local currency) products and services in April," he said.
Citibank is one of eight foreign banks which have so far been given approval to do Chinese yuan business. Up to now, all foreign banks in China have been restricted to foreign currency transactions only.  
One of the main conditions attached to the right to do local business is that the chosen foreign banks must move their main operations to the Pudong district, which the Shanghai city government wants to develop into a financial centre.
Transport links to Pudong are currently undeveloped and the office vacancy rate in the main business area is estimated by real estate analysts at more than 70 percent.
Beeman said he did not expect much volume in local currency loans and deposits in the initial stages of Citibank's operations.
"On the scale (of the local currency business), our expectation at least for this year is that it will probably be relatively modest," Beeman said.
"On profitability, it depends how you do the accounting. But I would expect it to be profitable in terms of operating income almost from the beginning," he added.
Preliminary regulations issued by the People's Bank of China, the central bank, require the volume of Chinese yuan business be no more than 35 percent of the volume of a bank's foreign exchange business.  
They are also restricted to taking deposits and making loans to foreign-invested enterprises registered in Shanghai, and to Chinese firms that have obtained special approval.
Citibank is the only U.S.-based bank among the eight foreign banks so far granted permission to do Chinese yuan business.
Foreign bankers estimate that probably seven or eight other foreign banks with branches in Shanghai meet the financial and operational pre-conditions for applying to do local business.
But the requirement to move to Pudong presents significant problems for some banks in terms of dealing with their current office space, one European banker said.
"They have made it very clear that it is Pudong or nothing," the banker said. "There is no flexibility at all. They have to move, which for some may not be easy."
But Citibank's Beeman said he saw the Chinese banking authorities gradually relaxing restrictions and expanding the scope for foreign banks to do local currency business once they were satisfied with the way things were working.
"In China, it starts with a small group on an experimental basis until the authorities are satisfied things are running smoothly, then they expand it quite rapidly," Beeman said.
