Share markets in and around China have again shown how sensitive they are to the health of paramount leader Deng Xiaoping, but analysts said on Wednesday the issue was now emotional, with little economic significance.
Most stock markets in the China region gained ground on Wednesday after sharp losses on Tuesday sparked by a new bout of rumours that Deng's health was failing.
Beijing said there had been no major change in his condition.
"Old Deng's health is still the top political concern on the Chinese stock markets," said an executive with a major Chinese brokerage.
"The markets will continue to fluctuate sharply in the lead-up to his inevitable death," he said.
"Few investors (in the Chinese stock markets) expect his death will cause long-term social instability," he added. "What they worry about is a short-term power struggle which will leave the stock markets in the cold."
But foreign brokers in Shanghai said they saw the Deng factor as temporary, and weakening further as time went by.
"At this point, he is just an icon," said one foreign brokerage analyst. "The impact gets weaker every time these rumours come out. It's just an emotional issue. People are looking for an excuse to take profits."
Analysts in Taiwan agreed that the longer Deng lingered, the less the effect his death would have on the markets.
"It (the effect of his death) would depend on how Taiwan's markets themselves are doing at that time," said Allen Huang of National Securities. "If it's as bullish as it is right now, the actual death probably wouldn't be that big a deal."
"I don't believe his death will have a major impact because it has been written into people's equations for quite some time," said Richard Graham, representative of ING Barings.
"I would be surprised if it had much impact on the markets," he said.
Graham said foreign businesses were generally of the view that there were no signs of major political instability in China and that the current political leadership in Beijing led by President Jiang Zemin had a solid and stable hold on power.
In Shenzhen, a brokerage analyst said one result of the past couple of days could be a reduction in institutional activity on the stock markets until the situation became clearer.
"Investors are going to adopt a cautious stance towards trading amid worries over Deng's health," said an analyst with a major Chinese brokerage. "Institutional investors will be reserved about buying until Deng passes away."
Concerns about Deng's health continued to dampen sentiment in Hong Kong on Wednesday, where the Hang Seng index ended up just 3.38 points or 0.03 percent at 13,106.32.
"Until there is a clear confirmation about the political situation in China, I think the cautious sentiment will stay put," said Edward Chan, head of research at Amsteel Securities.
"Until investors have a better view on the political arena in China, I think the movement will be volatile," he added.
Analysts said the Hong Kong market could suffer a temporary slide if Deng died, but the reaction would be a symbolic, knee-jerk move and a further correction could become a buying opportunity.
