After an initial kneejerk fall in stock prices, China financial markets handled the death of paramount leader Deng Xiaoping calmly on Thursday, but analysts warned that trading could be volatile for some time to come.
Some foreign brokers predicted strong buying by foreign investors over the coming days with the removal finally of the shadow of the "Deng factor".
Nearly all Shanghai's shares opened in the morning at the 10 percent limit-down level with their Shenzhen counterparts also falling sharply on initial jitters over Deng's death.
But the markets quickly rebounded and by the end of trading, Shanghai's domestic A share index was up 0.28 percent at 1007.731 points and the foreign currency B share index edging down 0.7 percent to 64.675 points.
Shenzhen's B share index ended up 1.26 percent to 143.53 points while the A share index lost 2.11 percent to 350.59 points.
Alex Conroy, stock analyst with ING-Barings in Shanghai, said the sequence of a fall followed by a rebound in the aftermath of Deng's death had long been expected, but the speed of the reaction was surprising.
"It's happening a bit faster than I expected," she said.
Brokers said prices were supported by widespread bargain hunting and heavy support-buying by domestic institutions.
But they said investors would be watching Beijing for a clear indication that the final transition of political power to the next generation of leaders, led by Communist Party chief Jiang Zemin, was as smooth as most market analysts expect.
On China's largest state debt market in Shanghai, most treasury bill spot contracts ended up after an initial sharp loss with most investors expecting no big changes in policy despite Deng's death, traders said.
The foreign exchange market was unaffected by Deng's death with the central bank firmly in control of price movements, traders said. The Chinese yuan closed up at 8.2939 on Thursday from Wednesday's 8.2945 against the U.S. dollar.
China's commodity futures markets were also untouched with technical factors dominating, traders said.
"Despite the first day's calmness, we expect some volatile trading on thin volumes on the financial markets in the next few weeks," said a Chinese banker.
"The most important market stabiliser will be signs from the central government that the power transition is progressing smoothly," he added.
Deng died late on Wednesday from respiratory failure. He was 92.
