China's financial markets breathed a sigh of relief on Thursday as the death of paramount leader Deng Xiaoping removed a major element of uncertainty that had overshadowed them for years, analysts said.
The single most sensitive and volatile factor for the markets in and around China in recent years had been the health of Deng.
Suddenly, it's not there any more.
"The official announcement has finally removed the main disturbing factor in the markets for the past few years," said a Hong Kong stock analyst based in Shanghai.
"It's the start of a new era. The new focal point of concern will hopefully be more economic fundamentals," the analyst said.
Local Chinese brokers agreed that Deng's death late on Wednesday removed a key negative factor from the markets.
"His health has long loomed large on the markets," said one stock analyst in Shanghai.
Bruce Richardson, Shanghai representative of HG Asia, said traders were relieved the wait was over.
"For years, people have been saying that when he goes there will be a deep drop which will present a buying opportunity. I'm a little surprised that the markets have digested the event so quickly," Richardson said.
"It shows that people are taking a forward-looking attitude. sentiment is very positive all around," he added.
Stock markets in China, Hong Kong and Taiwan moved higher on Thursday after gyrating wildly at the opening after the news.
Hong Kong stocks had jumped 1.96 percent or 256.96 points, by midday after an initial loss of 92 points. The weighted index in Taiwan rebounded from an earlier fall to close 21.19 points, or 0.28 percent, higher at 7,678.04.
The Shanghai foreign currency B index was up 0.29 percent or 0.188 points at 65.318 while Shenzhen was up 0.63 percent or 0.89 points at 142.64.
Some analysts have predicted a power struggle in the wake of Deng's demise while others viewed the current leadership structure headed by Communist Party chief Jiang Zemin as being basically stable.
China markets would now be looking for signs to indicate which group of pundits was correct, analysts said.
"The main concern is political instability," said a broker in Shenzhen. "People will be watching to see what measures the government takes over the next few days."
