Foreign business people said on Friday they expected Deng Xiaoping's death to have almost no affect at all on either economic policies or the immense problems they face in making money in China.
Analysts said foreign money had now become an indispensible part of the government's efforts to keep unemployment down and the economy growing, and there was no prospect of any fundamental shift.
Lance Browne, Standard Chartered Bank's China manager, said he expected no change in policy toward foreign banks, nor in the speed and extent to which they can expand their business in China.
"It could hardly be any slower, and speeding it up, that's unlikely too," he said.
"Business people at this point see virtually no impact on their operations, either with regard to policy or the problems they face," said a Western diplomat in Shanghai.
Foreign businesses have been placed under ever-greater profit pressure in the past year as various preferential policies applied previously have been cut back or abolished to give domestic companies greater room to manoeuvre.
"There could be a further tightening of policy on the privileges applied, but that was going on before and has nothing to do with the death of Deng," the diplomat said.
Deng, China's paramount leader, died late on Wednesday aged 92.
An American businessman in the automobile sector in Shanghai said he saw no impact from Deng's death, but reported an increasing sense of concern among foreign business about the problems of getting approvals and making a profit in China.
"People are investing heavily, but there is a great sense of disappointment and unhappiness," he said.
"This has nothing to do with Deng, but it will be important to see how the leadership absorbs this," he said.
Hoong Yik Luen, investment analyst with ING-Barings in Shanghai, said foreign funds had become a key part of government efforts to keep the economy growing and unemployment down.
"They wouldn't be able to change the policy on foreign investment, they couldn't afford it," he said. "Unemployment would probably be 20 percent now instead of 15 percent if it wasn't for foreign investment."
An investment analyst based in Hong Kong said major foreign corporations were committed to investing in China almost regardless of what happens.
"The fact that there has been almost no impact on investment flows from the roll-back on the preferential policies shows how much momentum investment has, and there's no reason for the Chinese to shift their policy on taking in money," the analyst said.
"I see no change at all in the short term," said Standard Chartered's Lance Browne.
"There hasn't been a sense that the reforms are controversial inside the leadership for years. Had it been controversial, it would be different," he said.
But Chinese officials appear to be concerned about the topic.
One foreign businessman said he had been visited by officials asking for his view on the possible impact of Deng's death on foreign investment in the country.
"They are asking the same questions you are asking -- what effect Deng's death will have on investment decisions," the businessman, who declined to be named, said.
"I told them the feeling was that there would be no effect," he added.
"But of course it could be the calm before the storm. We'll have to see how strong the leadership looks in six months. There are always people in the wings who would like to replace them," he said.
