China's stock markets began returning to normal on Friday with all indices closing up in steady trade after the negative impact of the death of Deng Xiaoping faded from view, analysts said.
Retail investors and institutions began building positions reflecting the sentiment that Deng's death would actually benefit the markets in the longer term by removing a major negative factor, they said.
At the close on Friday, Shanghai's foreign currency B share index rose 0.894 points, or 1.38 percent, to 65.569 points while the domestic A share index closed at a year high of 1,063.276, rising 55.545 points, or 5.51 percent.
In Shenzhen, the B share index rose 7.43 points, or 5.18 percent, to 150.96 and the A share index zigzagged up 8.68 points, or 2.48 percent, to 359.28.
"Trading has returned to normal," said one Shanghai trader. "Investors don't believe there will be any major policy change after Deng's death."
"Some investors believe Deng's death will benefit the markets by removing a major negative factor for good," he said.
"The bad news has been digested," a Shenzhen-based analyst with Central-South Securities said. "The Shanghai stock market performed well because investors can see a smooth leadership transition taking place."
"People feel today that there is a stable political transition and the government is gaining credibility," another Shenzhen analyst said. "Medium and long-term investors are beginning to pour in funds."
Shanghai brokers said securities houses in the city convened meetings on Thursday which agreed on the necessity to keep the markets moving normally, but decided not to intervene to support the markets.
But some analysts said they suspected the markets were in one way or another receiving support from institutions under instructions to ensure no major market movements in the aftermath of Deng's death.
"I still think there may be some government support in this," said an analyst with a foreign brokerage in Shanghai. "The official intention is to ensure that normalcy is maintained."
Analysts said the relatively short mourning period before Deng's funeral on Tuesday indicated China wanted to dispel the gloom as quickly as possible, helping to creating favourable investment conditions.
"The stock markets in China are very sensitive to political conditions," said another Shanghai trader. "The impression that China is on the right track towards a smooth transition has helped the markets to recover swiftly."
Other brokers have warned that there was still potential for market volatility in the short term.
"I will have to wait until the end of the mourning period to see clearly where the market is heading," the Shenzhen-based analyst said.
