Reform of China's non-equity capital markets is expected to push ahead over the next year with little or no impact seen from the death of paramount leader Deng Xiaoping, industry analysts said on Friday.
Trading on the state debt and local currency interbank markets has been hardly affected by Deng's death and the analysts said they believed Beijing would not postpone their development, particularly efforts to greatly expand the interbank market.
"Trading has been normal although volume has dropped a little in the past few days," said one Shanghai-based interbank trader. "We can see no major policy changes likely to affect the markets in the medium term."
"The markets see signs that there will be a smooth transition of leadership," said a state debt trader. "This belief has helped prices of state debt spot contracts to stand firm in the past two days despite Deng's death."
But a senior China analyst for a brokerage in Hong Kong said she saw the death of Deng possibly leading to a slowdown in the pace of reforms of the capital markets.
"This is a big year for them -- they have the return of Hong Kong, the 15th Communist Party Congress and now absorbing the death of Deng to deal with," she said.
"That's a fairly heavy programme already. So this is not the year when you are going to institute major banking reform, for instance," the analyst said. "Stability is the buzzword at the moment."
On China's largest state debt market in Shanghai, most treasury bill spot contracts closed up for successive days on Thursday and Friday after brief losses in early trading on Thursday on Deng's death.
Daily turnover on the Shanghai-based China national local currency interbank market has been light, with institutions reluctant to build heavy positions on Deng's death.
But interest rates on the market have not changed much, indicating a confidence in medium-term prospects, traders said.
"Despite Deng's death, most investors are confident that the government will have no problem at all to redeem the state debt on maturity," said a second state debt trader.
"They also expect future state debt issues to have lower interest rates because of China's falling inflation on the back of the improved economy," he said. "These factors have pushed up the existing state debt spot contracts in the past two days."
Retail price inflation fell to a year-on-year 6.1 percent in 1996 from a year-on-year 14.8 percent in 1995.
Traders said the state debt repurchase markets in China had also performed well in the past few days despite Deng's death with normal trading on the nation's domestic A share markets backing up rates and volumes on the repo market.
On Tuesday, a day ahead of Deng's death, the Finance Ministry announced it would issue a total of 123 billion yuan ($14.8 billion) treasury notes from March 1 to October 20, the largest single batch of state debt issue ever announced since China resumed such issues in the early 1980s.
"The timing of the announcement has indicated that the state debt market will continue as planned," said a securities analyst. "It has also signalled that other financial reforms promised will be implemented."
These include a plan to drastically expand the nation's local currency interbank market, possibly by admitting major securities houses as market members, analysts said.
The market now has only 19 state banks and 35 short-term financial centres, money brokerages run by the People's Bank of China, the central bank, as its members.
Turnover on the market is currently only around three billion yuan per day, far below the level at which the market can attain the official goal of being a barometer of national short-term money movements, traders said.
($1 = 8.3 yuan)
