The Chinese yuan will remain stable despite the death this week of paramount leader Deng Xiaoping, dealers said on Friday.
They said the currency would likely stay steady not so much because of the growing sense China will remain politically stable but because of the central bank's complete dominance of the market.
The current trend in the Chinese currency is as it has been for the past year and more -- slow but steady strengthening against the U.S. dollar on the back of China's growing trade surplus and heavy flow of foreign investment dollars, they said.
The yuan closed little changed at 8.2940 on Friday from Thursday's level of 8.2939 against the U.S. dollar on the Shanghai Foreign Exchange System.
"There will be little change in the central government or in economic policy as Deng has not really been in power for a long time," said one dealer.
"People had been prepared for the news for a long time, so there was no strong response visible on the market," he added.
Another dealer said that any sense of political uncertainty could give rise to greater selling of the yuan by foreign companies.
"But even in the case of some political instability, the possibility of which is pretty small, the Chinese yuan will still be stable given the full control of the central bank," he said.
Trading volumes on the Shanghai Foreign Exchange System, through which the yuan's rate against the U.S. and Hong Kong dollars and the Japanese yen is reflected, are very small, amounting to only $200 million to $300 million each day on average.
"Given the foreign exchange reserves, the central bank has ample ability to control the market trend, said one trader.
The latest figures released by the People's Bank of China, the central bank, show the country's foreign exchange reserves stood at $105 billion at the end of 1996.
Dealers said the yuan's gradual rise was likely to be contained within a range between 8.2800 to 8.3100 to the dollar over the next few months.
Zhou Xiaochuan, vice-governor of the People's Bank, said last month the central bank would step up intervention on the foreign exchange market to prevent the yuan from rising sharply.
"There is an oversupply of U.S. dollars on the market due to the trade surplus and continued in-pouring of foreign investment, but investor concerns over central bank intervention will curb its rise," said one dealer.
According to official figures, China posted a trade surplus of $12.24 billion in 1996 and it is expected to grow to $17.4 billion in 1997. Official forecasts put direct foreign investment in China in 1997 at $49.5 billion, up 15 percent from last year.
China's exports in January 1997 rose 27.5 percent to $11.69 billion while imports fell 1.29 percent to $9.98 billion, creating a trade surplus of US$1.71 billion against a deficit of $938 million in January 1996, customs figures showed.
Dealers said the average export cost of foreign exchange stood at around 8.38 yuan for each dollar of exported goods in 1996, making exporters lose money when they turn trade surplus dollars into local currency at the current exchange rate.
"If the exchange rate rises further, exporters will lose more, which is a key factor for curbing the yuan's rise," said one dealer.
