China's stock markets began returning to normal on Friday with all markets up in steady morning trade as the negative impact of the death of Deng Xiaoping faded from view, analysts said.
Both retail investors and institutions began building positions reflecting the sentiment that Deng's death would actually benefit the markets in the longer term by permanently removing a major negative factor, they said.
By midday on Friday, Shanghai's foreign currency B share index was up 0.666 points or 1.03 percent to 65.341 points and the domestic A share index was up 31.437 points or 3.12 percent to 1039.168.
In Shenzhen, the B share index rose 3.97 points or 2.76 percent to 147.50 points and the A index was up 2.45 points or 0.7 percent at 353.05 points.
"Trading has returned to normal," said one Shanghai trader. "Investors don't believe there will be any major policy change after Deng's death."
"Some investors believe Deng's death will benefit the markets by removing a major negative factor for good," the trader added.
"People feel today that there is a stable political transition and the government is gaining credibility," a Shenzhen analyst with China Guotai Securities said. "Medium and long-term investors are beginning to pour in funds."
Shanghai brokers said securities houses in the city convened meetings on Thursday and agreed on the necessity to keep the markets moving normally but decided not to intervene to support the markets.
But some analysts said they suspected the markets were in one way or another receiving support from institutions under instructions to ensure no major market movements in the aftermath of Deng's death.
"I still think there may be some government support in this," said an analyst with a foreign brokerage in Shanghai. "The official intention is to ensure that normalcy is maintained."
Analysts said the relatively short mourning period before Deng's funeral on Tuesday indicated China wanted to dispel the gloom as quickly as possible, helping to creating favorable investment conditions.
"The stock markets in China are more closely related to political conditions," said another Shanghai trader. "The impression that China's is on the right track of a smooth transition has helped the markets to recover swiftly."
Other brokers have warned that there was still potential for markets volatility in the short term.
"I will have to wait until the end of the mourning period to see clearly where the market is heading," the Shenzhen-based analyst said.
