China's growing army of young urban professionals, mobilised by the reforms of deceased leader Deng Xiaoping, are fighting for wealth and success in a world undreamed of by their communist forebears.
Their weapons are the cellphone, the well-cut suit and the right accessories. Their goal is a better life -- or at least a better apartment.
"Making more money and seeking personal success is everyone's target, and no one feels any reluctance about admitting it," said a twenty-something university graduate working for a foreign insurance company in Shanghai.
They would have done in the days before Deng, who broke China out of its isolated and poverty-stricken Maoist mould.
But where capitalist-style self-interest would once have earned anything from harsh criticism to labour camp, the rat race now has China's official endorsement.
Chinese yuppies -- university educated, better informed and more independent-minded than their parents -- are most visible in Shanghai, the heart of China's economic boom.
Suits and beepers are required accessories, although BMW cars are still some way off. In sparkling glass towers that rival those of Hong Kong and Singapore, China's new breed of urban professionals is plotting the future.
Many work for foreign companies, earning a monthly income of at least 2,500 yuan ($301), more than 10 times the average income of Chinese people.
"My salary is much higher than my parents but I still want to earn more money to become rich," said a computer engineer working with a foreign company.
In the days when the socialist planned economy ruled supreme in China, the only way for an ambitious young person to attain independent status and wealth was to go abroad. Things are changing.
"When I was in university, I thought going abroad was the only way to have a good career, but now I'd rather stay in China," said a young manager with a foreign bank in Shanghai.
"I want to be an expert in the banking industry, and my current job will allow me reach that target," he said.
The importance of this group of increasingly sophisticated and worldly professionals to China's future can hardly be over-estimated, analysts said.
"They are a very important group of people, the spearhead of development. It is they who are taking China into the new millennium," a European banker said.
He said young Chinese people were much less willing to take China's traditionally passive approach to dealing with authority.
"People are less compliant than several years ago. They have more to stand up for and more personal interests to defend," he said.
A decade ago, student graduates in China were assigned jobs by their university, and had little or no say in what positions they would move into. If they didn't like the work, they had to put up with it.
"In those days, if a person resigned from a job, it was hard to find another one," said a another mid-twenties yuppie working as a salesman with a British company.
"People thought that you would only quit a job if you had made some serious mistake. But now changing jobs is normal. It's got to the point where it is strange if you stick to one job for a long time, say over five years," he said.
Compared with the young people of a decade ago, members of China's current generation have immeasurably more freedom to plan their futures, and most put personal careers as their top priority.
"I found the job I have myself after graduating from university," said a secretary working with a Hong Kong-based company in Shanghai. "If I am not satisfied with it, I can quit and try to find another one."
