Trading on China's capital markets will be dominated this week by technical factors with the death of Deng Xiaoping last Wednesday already well discounted as a factor, analysts said on Sunday.
They said the unexpected calm and maturity of trading on the stock, state debt and currency markets on Thursday and Friday ensured smooth entry into trading on Monday.
Investors are watching for signs of shifts in the policies or leadership of the country, but there was a growing sense among analysts that in the short term at least, there is little chance of any political problems emerging to shake the markets.
"The markets will trade...without impact from Deng's death," said a stock analyst with a major Chinese brokerage. "I would say it will be at least a month before any new leadership appointments or changes are made in Beijing."
"During this period, trading volumes are expected to be low with investors reluctant to build heavy positons due to overall market uncertainties," he added.
A state debt trader said: "The markets had expected Deng's death to be this year's biggest negative impact, but it turned out that the impact was unexpectedly short-lived."
"We now believe the markets will be more affected by changes in financial policies, such as re-adjustment of bank reserve ratios, than by post-Deng politics," she added.
Both the Shanghai and Shenzhen stock markets rose on Thursday and Friday despite Deng's death, with investors seeing no signs of immediate political instability and expecting a continuation of Deng's reformist policies, analysts said.
Volumes on the state debt markets dropped a little, but trading was otherwise unaffected by Deng's death, traders said.
Spot contracts gained some ground late last week on rumours that the People's Bank of China, the central bank, would soon cut bank interest rates and bank reserve ratios.
Interest rates on China's local currency and foreign exchange interbank markets also saw little impact, traders said.
Some brokers said the stock market may be entering a phrase of consolidation in the near term.
"Technical charts indicate there will be a big correction around the middle" of this week, a stockbroker said. "This will be the key factor."
"The company reporting season is getting into full swing," said another broker. "The stock markets will have difficulty rising solidly in the near term with so many listed firms expected to post poor results for 1996."
The Finance Minstry announced last Tuesday it would issue a total of 123 billion yuan ($14.82 billion) in treasury notes from March 1 to October 20, the largest batch of state debt issued since China resumed such sales in the early 1980s.
Traders said the coupons for the latest batch had been set low due to falling inflation and this would become the major factor for the state debt spot market this week.
"The existing contracts have much higher yields against the new issue and they will rise..., brushing aside the Deng factor," one trader said.
A trader on the Chinese yuan interbank market said a possible cut in bank reserve ratio would be the single most important factor to affect the market in the next month or so.
"We believe there will be no more Deng impact over this period," he said.
($1 = 8.3 yuan)
