China looks likely to slow the pace of reform in its financial markets, the late Deng Xiaoping's most startling experiment, as his successors make stability their top priority this year, analysts said on Sunday.
China's leaders already have enough on their plates -- the return of Hong Kong from July 1, the ruling Communist Party's 15th Congress later in the year and task of consolidating their power in the aftermath of Deng's death last Wednesday.
Bold and ambitious new reforms in the financial sector are unlikely to occur before these more pressing items are out of the way, but pressure to move ahead will build during the year, the analysts said.
"I think for the coming months up to the Party Congress, the intention will be to keep things tight," said one European banker. "But once the congress is out of the way, they will want to speed it up again."
An analyst working with a Shanghai brokerage said the authorities could be expected to be cautious on issuing new regulations and initiating new changes in the foreseeable future, but added: "The main policy will not change."
"The development of the stock market will not change despite the news (of Deng's death)," said one trader. "But to maintain the stability of the market, the government will not announce any big changes in the immediate future."
The chance of a roll-back in the overall trend towards bigger, more sophisticated and regulated financial markets seems even more unlikely.
China's stock, futures and capital markets sprang out of Deng's comment in the early 1990s that capitalist-style markets might be worth trying.
"If, after one or two years of experimentation, they prove feasible, we can expand them. Otherwise, we can put a stop to them and be done with it," Deng said.
But as Deng probably guessed when he said it, once the markets' juggernaut got under way, it was probably impossible to do much more than guide it.
"The markets are still experimental to some extent, but closing them down is less and less of an option as time passes," the banker said.
The Beijing leadership is faced with a host of pressing issues related to the financial markets.
The markets are still waiting for the release of the long-delayed Securities Law, Futures Law and Investment Fund Law, all basic building blocks of the financial industry.
Foreign bankers and insurers are impatient about the snail's pace at which China's financial sector is being opened up.
The futures markets are so constrained by policy that they are scarcely able to fulfil their function -- the hedging of risk, traders say.
Stock brokers complain about the bureaucratic way in which companies are chosen for listing, resulting in too many poor quality firms being listed too slowly.
And the huge problem of heavily indebted state-owned enterprises is still there waiting to be resolved.
"The need is there, there is an enormous need to address the issues," the banker said. "But the political situation has not been stable enough for people to attack the knotty decisions."
"Stability is the top requirement for now. Any sign of weakness could trigger something unexpected," he added.
