China's entry to the World Trade Organisation (WTO) is likely to be one of the top issues for U.S. Secretary of State Madeleine Albright in Beijing as the two nations draw closer on trade issues, analysts said on Monday.
Albright, on the last stop of a nine-nation tour, will meet President Jiang Zemin, Premier Li Peng and other officials during her brief stay, cut short because of funeral arrangements for the late leader Deng Xiaoping, who died last Wednesday.
Discussions on China's admission to the global trade body, long delayed by disagreements over the terms, have gained momentum in recent weeks with U.S. officials saying China has indicated a willingness to drop more of its trade barriers.
"It's going to be one of the main items on the agenda, they're right in the middle of it," said a Western analyst in Shanghai.
"What people want is for the Chinese to sign on to the international standards of trade. It would be a very positive factor in relations (between China and the United States) if it was resolved," the analyst said.
Zhou Dunren, professor at Fudan University's American Centre, said WTO entry was the biggest problem facing China and the United States in the sphere of economic relations.
"But it looks very possible that China will gain entry to the WTO this year, even though it may be a conditional entry rather than full membership," he said.
"The U.S. attitude on China's entry was previously very tough, setting very high conditions. But now there appears to be basic support from the U.S. to China's entry, with the conditions being softened somewhat," Zhou added.
"There's no doubt that the middle ground is appearing and that that's attractive to everyone," said John Crossman, Shanghai representative for financial firm Jardine Fleming.
"I think we can look forward to a time when trade disputes aren't what drives the China-U.S. relationship. Now the contact is all negative," he said.
China has been seeking to join the world body on the easier terms offered to developing countries.
But the United States and other Western countries say the Chinese economy is too big, and that giving it preferential treatment would distort the global trading system.
U.S. officials declined to comment on the current state of discussions on China's WTO entry.
Professor Peng Fuyong of Shanghai's Finance University said China's eagerness to gain WTO membership had also diminished somewhat in recent months.
"One reason for the slowdown may be concerns that there are certain elements of the domestic economic structure which are not ready for WTO entry," he said.
"For instance, the state-run import-export firms and some industries are not at this point efficient enough to face the competition that would result from WTO entry," Peng added.
Zhou said bilateral trade overall was set to continue to grow strongly in the years ahead.
"When the Shanghai Communique was signed 25 years ago (setting the framework for normalising Sino-U.S. relations), trade between the two amounted to probably just a few million dollars a year. It hit $50 billion in 1996, and it looks like this trend will continue," he said.
According to U.S. figures, China's trade surplus with the United States swelled to about $38.9 billion in 1996, up from about $34 billion in 1995. Beijing's figures show a net trade deficit with Washington.
The main reason for the widely varying figures is that China does not count goods shipped through the British colony of Hong Kong in its U.S. trade data.
"The return of Hong Kong to China in 1997 provides an opportunity for the two sides to find a solution to this problem," said Zhou.
