The city of Wenzhou, a capitalist pioneer in socialist China, has decided the best way to mourn paramount leader Deng Xiaoping is to make more money, residents said on Monday.
"Without Deng, there would be no today's China and, especially, no today's Wenzhou," said advertising company manager Wu Hao.
Deng, who died on Wednesday aged 92, helped to steer China on its current economic course, wrenching it from purist Marxist policies that had brought the nation to the brink of starvation and industrial collapse.
Once a poor and backward city, Wenzhou has boomed since Deng's reform were launched in 1979, seizing new opportunities more aggressively than almost any other place in the country.
While top-level attention focused on four "special economic zones" such as Hong Kong's neighbour Shenzhen, which was created as a closely-monitored official experiment with capitalism, Wenzhou just went ahead and started making money.
Private firms in the city of seven million people on China's eastern coast, 350 km (217 miles) south of Shanghai, now account for 75 percent of Wenzhou's annual industrial output, compared to a national average of 10 percent.
"There is no way we could make as much money as we do, do so much business, if it had not been for Deng Xiaoping and the policy changes he pushed through," Zhou Ping, the owner of a small shoe factory, said in a telephone interview.
Another businessman in his twenties, asked about Deng's death, said getting rich was his top priority.
"It (Deng's death) has nothing to do with my business," he said. "What I should do is first make more money, then find a wife and finally have a son."
"Despite any possible changes in Beijing, there will be less control of the private sector at least in the short term, and there will be more opportunities for making money," he added.
Wenzhou's brand of freewheeling capitalism was born of poverty and desperation.
The city sits on the coast facing Taiwan, home of the Nationalist government which in 1949 fled to the island, now regarded by Beijing as a renegade province, after losing the civil war.
Fearing a continuation of the war, the new communist government neglected coastal regions, including Wenzhou which for many years received less than half the level of state investment other cities did.
When Deng's reforms were launched, Wenzhou embraced them with fervour -- so much so that the city was criticised for following a capitalist road instead of a socialist one.
But Deng's 1992 visit to the south of China in which he called for fast development of the market economy silenced the critics and allowed Wenzhou to charge ahead, said a Wenzhou businessman who was formerly an official with a state-run firm.
"It gave us the courage to do business whole-heartedly without having to worry about the political consequences," he said.
Local officials say that with the policies on private enterprise and the market economy increasingly stable on a national scale, Wenzhou is set for a "second surge of development".
"This new surge is making Wenzhou's private firms even bigger and more competitive," said the former official.
