China's stock markets rose calmly on Tuesday reflecting signs of political stability seen since paramount leader Deng Xiaoping died last week, analysts said.
Stocks rose in Hong Kong and fell in Taiwan, but for reasons that had little or nothing to do with politics in giant neighbour China, they said.
"Signs are clear during (China's) six-day official mourning period (from last Thursday to Tuesday) that political conditions are stable," said an executive with a major Chinese brokerage in Shanghai.
"The markets expect no sensational political news to shake them, at least for a few weeks," he added.
President Jiang Zemin on Tuesday offered unstinted praise for Deng during a funeral oration, saying the future lay with economic reforms pioneered by the strongman who died last Wednesday, aged 92.
Modern China's stock markets, established in 1990 under Deng's direction, only officially emerged from an "experimental" phase last year, with many investors still worried that Beijing could decide to close them down, brokers say.
"With Deng's death, investors are nervous about the continuity of policy," said the stock analyst. "Normal trading today serves to stabilise sentiment."
Shanghai's domestic A share index closed up 8.752 points, or 0.83 percent, at 1,063.83 while the foreign currency B share index ended up 0.589 points, or 0.9 percent, at 66.296.
In sothern Shenzhen, the A share index rose 6.02 points, or 1.66 percent, to 368.7 points while the B index edged up 0.14 points, or 0.09 percent, to 150.87.
"A sense of stability dominated the markets today partly due to the normal trading (hours)," said a senior B share dealer. "This helped the indices move up."
Trading on China's two stock markets continued through the funeral ceremony for Deng in the morning, although volumes dropped significantly as traders and investors alike watched the live television broadcast.
"The central government wanted to tell millions of investors on the stock markets that they were determined to let the markets continue as before even though their creator is gone," said a stock analyst. "All markets closed up today, which shows they succeeded."
Traders said share prices were likely to rise steadily for at least the next few weeks on strong national economic prospects.
"Technical factors will prevail in the coming weeks," said a broker. "Investors will buy blue-chip firms expected to post strong 1996 results. They have confidence in the national economy this year after its good performance last year."
In Hong Kong, share prices rallied on Tuesday, with the Hang Seng Index closing up 144.57 points, or 1.08 percent, at 13,520.26 mainly due to gains in HSBC Holdings.
Brokers said China-related shares continued to attract keen interest and investors had been encouraged by Jiang's vows to push ahead with market-oriented reforms.
"This morning Beijing reiterated the open-door policy will still be maintained," said Edwin Cheung, dealing director at Taiwan Securities.
In Taipei, analysts said Deng's funeral had no impact on stock trading, with the weighted index falling 21.25 points, or 0.27 percent, to 7,887.36.
"Nobody talked about it," said Allen Huang, fund manager for National Securities.
