China on Tuesday accused Japan of taking an irresponsible approach to a bitter sovereignty dispute over a group of uninhabited East China Sea islands, saying Tokyo must take action to avoid further damaging ties.
A festering row over the islands, known in China as the Diaoyus and in Japan as the Senkakus, has flared in recent months after Japanese rightwingers moved to buttress Tokyo's claim by building a lighthouse on one of the group.
"The Japanese government has taken very irresponsible actions, particularly by encouraging illegal landings on the Diaoyu islands by rightwing groups, hurting Sino-Japanese relations," Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Shen Guofang said.
Tokyo should take action to prevent further damage to ties, Shen told a news briefing in Beijing.
Tension over the potentially resource-rich islands soared on Monday when Hong Kong and Taiwan activists pierced a Japanese cordon and planted Chinese and Taiwan flags on one of the islets, claimed by Tokyo and by both Beijing and its arch-rival Taipei.
The brief landings by a handful of the around 300 Hong Kong and Taiwan protesters aboard a 50-boat flotilla were the first time activists had managed to break Japan's maritime blockade.
An earlier attempt ended in failure when Hong Kong activist David Chan drowned after leaping into stormy waters to protest Tokyo's control of the group. A Japanese coastguard medical team failed to revive Chan but saved the life of a fellow protester.
Japan has lamented what it calls the illegal landings and has not ruled out arresting future landing parties. A foreign ministry spokesman said on Tuesday that Tokyo had asked China and Taiwan to prevent further attempts to land on the islands.
Chinese spokesman Shen said Japan was responsible for the revival of the row over ownership of the islands, which Beijing says it has claimed for centuries.
Tokyo's claim dates to 1895 when it defeated imperial China in a war and seized control of a number of Chinese territories.
"The Japanese government didn't take any action to stop the damaging of Sino-Japanese ties by rightwing groups who offended against Chinese sovereignty," Shen said. "This has aroused the strong anger of the Chinese people.
"The will of the people cannot be bullied," he said.
Gains by Japanese rightwing forces would force victims of past Japanese aggression in Asia to question the future role Tokyo would play in the region, he said.
Outrage over the Japanese rightwingers' construction of the makeshift lighthouse on the islands has united nationalist sentiment in China, political rival Taiwan and the British colony of Hong Kong, which reverts to Beijing rule next year.
Shen's accusations of Japanese irresponsibility represented some of China's strongest diplomatic language yet in a dispute that both Beijing and Tokyo have sought to put behind them.
Analysts say China has been forced to walk a diplomatic fine line between retaining its nationalist credentials and damaging ties with a vital economic partner.
Shen said China would strengthen security to protect its citizens after Beijing's de facto embassy in Hong Kong reported receiving a threatening letter from Japanese righwingers.
"The Chinese side will take action at home to strengthen our security," he said, adding that he hoped other "relevant" countries would also protect Chinese citizens.
