A senior U.S. official on Wednesday praised Beijing's approach to international arms control but hinted at continuing concerns over the possible proliferation of Chinese nuclear and missile technology.
The rebirth of an arms control dialogue stalled by Sino-U.S. disagreements over Taiwan over the last year was a major step to bridging differences between Washington and Beijing, said John Holum, director of the U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency.
"Chinese positions have evolved in a very constructive direction," Holum told a news conference in Beijing on the third day of a five-day visit to China.
"China genuinely has been playing a much more active and very constructive role in arms control negotiations," he said, citing Beijing's role in negotiations towards a global nuclear test ban and for a cut-off of production of nuclear fissile material.
Holum's meetings with Chinese officials are part of a series of high-level talks intended to buttress Sino-U.S. ties, chilled by a 1995 visit to the United States by Taiwan President Lee Teng-hui and by rows over copyright, trade and human rights.
Cross-Pacific relations hit a new low last March when China carried out missile tests and military exercises in the seas near Taiwan, which Beijing considers a rebel province, prompting Washington to send two aircraft carriers to the area.
A July visit to Beijing by U.S. national security adviser Anthony Lake was seen by analysts as a vital step to restoring some sense of stability to a vital diplomatic relationship.
The Sino-U.S. disputes had restricted talks on arms control and proliferation issues, Holum told reporters.
"We've obviously had an interruption of our dialogue in these areas as a result of the Lee visit and the missile activities and so on," he said. "We are starting to get past that and to renew the strategic dialogue."
Talks with Vice Foreign Minister Li Zhaoxing and other officials had touched on alleged sales of Chinese missile technology to Pakistan and Beijing's civil nuclear cooperation with Iran, he said.
The Washington Post in August said U.S. intelligence officials had concluded Pakistan was secretly building a factory to make medium-range missiles using Chinese blueprints and equipment.
The report was the latest allegation of Sino-Pakistan military cooperation to raise hackles in Washington, which has in the past imposed sanctions on both for alleged missile transfers.
"There have been reports in the press and elsewhere of further missile transfers of technology," Holum said.
"We have not made the determination, based on the information that we have, that any further sanctions are warranted, but we routinely raise our concerns about these issues with the Chinese," he said.
U.S. concerns over nuclear exports to Pakistan had been much relieved by Beijing's commitment in May not to provide assistance to unsafeguarded nuclear facilities, he said.
Washington continued to believe that no country should share nuclear technology with Iran, a view China did not share, he said, adding that his talks had brought progress in harmonising Chinese and U.S. positions but no concrete deals.
"I didn't come here expecting any specific agreements, I was expecting we would close the gap," he said. "The contact and the discussion is important because it creates a venue and an opportunity for resolving the issues."
