China on Thursday said it was willing to cooperate with other countries to maintain peace on the troubled Korean peninsula, where tensions are high as South Korean troops hunt for infiltrators from the rival North.
"We are paying great attention to the situation on the Korean peninsula," Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Shen Guofang told a briefing in Beijing.
"China is willing to cooperate with other countries to bring into play positive and constructive action to uphold the peninsula's peace and stability," Shen said.
Frosty relations between Seoul and Pyongyang worsened last month when 26 North Koreans landed in the south from a stranded submarine.
Southern troops have since killed or found dead 22 of the infiltrators, have captured one and are carrying out a huge hunt for the remaining three.
Pyongyang has threatened "merciless retaliation" for the deaths of its soldiers and demanded Seoul return the submarine along with any survivors and bodies of the dead crew.
Seoul says any provocation will meet "stern punishment" and has raised security at airports, ports, diplomatic missions and five vulnerable west coast islands.
China backed the north in the 1950-53 Korean War and remains one of communist Pyongyang's few diplomatic allies, but also considers Seoul an important trading partner.
Shen gave no details of what kind of cooperation China hoped would bolster peace on the heavily-militarised peninsula, where southern forces face a hostile north suffering near-famine after disastrous floods.
South Korea and the United States in April called for four-nation peace talks with the north and China to replace a truce that ended the Korean conflict but left Seoul and Pyongyang technically still at war.
Pyongyang has insisted on bilateral talks with Washington to seek an accord, saying Seoul was not a party to the 1953 truce. China has yet to take a clear stance on the four-way talks.
Beijing had no private interest in the Korean peninsula and only wanted peace and stability, Shen said.
Both North and South should take action to ensure peace, he said but gave no details.
