The family of detained Chinese dissident Wang Dan have found a lawyer willing to defend the leader of 1989 student protests in Beijing's Tiananmen Square at an expected trial, a close relative said on Friday.
Chinese court officials on Thursday informed Wang's mother, Wang Lingyun, she had one day to find him a lawyer, a signal that the dissident had been indicted and a trial was imminent.
"We've already found one," a family member said when asked if a lawyer had been hired.
The lawyer had visited the court dealing with Wang's case to begin legal formalities, but there was still no news of when the trial of the former student leader, who has been in detention since May 1995, would begin, the relative said by telephone.
"The next thing is for the lawyer to join in the law case, to understand the testimony and to understand the evidence," he said, adding it was not clear when the lawyer would be permitted to meet Wang.
Wang Lingyun said on Thursday that officials of the Beijing People's Intermediate Court had declined to say if the dissident had been indicted, but Chinese legal experts said lawyers are unnecessary in China unless a suspect has been charged.
Wang's relative said the family was concerned about the situation of the 26-year-old dissident, who has been lost in a security limbo since his detention more than 16 months ago.
"We feel pretty anxious. We are just waiting for new developments," he said.
Chinese sources have said Wang faces a sentence of up to seven years in prison if convicted of counter-revolutionary incitement, or subversion.
The outspoken activist attracted the ire of China's communist authorities in 1989 when he shot to prominence as a leader of student protests for more democracy centred on Tiananmen Square in the heart of the Chinese capital.
The demonstrations were crushed by the army on June 3-4 with heavy loss of life and Wang, a Beijing University student, served four years in jail for his role.
Wang appears likely to be the next victim of a rash of convictions and detentions of members of China's tiny and struggling pro-democracy movement.
On Tuesday, prominent dissident Liu Xiaobo was ordered to serve three years in a labour camp after he joined veteran activist Wang Xizhe in calling for the impeachment and dismissal of Communist Party chief Jiang Zemin.
Wang Xizhe's whereabouts are unknown.
Hopes that the award of the 1996 Nobel Peace Prize to jailed veteran dissident Wei Jingsheng could revitalise the faltering democracy movement were dashed on Friday when the prize went to campaigners for the former Portuguese territory of East Timor.
Beijing has long dismissed appeals from foreign countries and human rights campaigners for softer treatment of dissidents as interference in China's internal affairs.
Wang Dan had been expected to face new charges since last December, when the court that convicted Wei Jingsheng of plotting to overthrow the government also implicated Wang.
The court's verdict said Wei, who was jailed for 14 years, had links with people "convicted of counter-revolutionary crimes, including Wang Dan". It also referred to a tape-recorded conversation between Wang and Wei, but gave no details.
Wang had been active since his release from jail, defying persistent police surveillance and harassment to join in a daring appeal to Communist leaders for the release of all those still in prison for their part in the 1989 protests.
