Australia's Foreign Minister Alexander Downer announced on Friday an agreement with China to expand their security dialogue, saying recent frictions had failed to spoil growing ties between the two Pacific powers.
Disagreement over Taiwan, a coming meeting with the Dalai Lama and Chinese concerns over a Canberra-Washington security pact had not spoiled the atmosphere during meetings with his Chinese counterparts, Downer told a news conference in Beijing.
"I have been able to develop a security dialogue between Australia and China," he said. "What I would like to see happen is us holding, on an annual basis, senior officials' talks about regional security issues."
Downer said an Australian proposal for broadening existing annual bilateral disarmament talks into such a dialogue had been accepted by Chinese Foreign Minister Qian Qichen, but he gave no details of how they were likely to be organised.
"It's symbolically important because it reaffirms ... that the Australian government does not support a policy of containment of China," he said.
Downer's coming meeting with the Dalai Lama, Beijing's arch-rival for the loyalties of the Tibetan people, had not been a sticking point in talks with Premier Li Peng, he said.
Beijing regards the Dalai Lama as an anti-China "splittist", and condemns all attempts by Tibet's supreme spiritual leader to gather international support for autonomy in the restive Himalayan region.
Downer said he would meet the Dalai Lama when he arrived in Australia next month, but said the Chinese premier had made no direct mention of the visit.
A defence pact in July between Washington and Canberra that raised hackles in Beijing had not been brought up as a Chinese concern, while a proposal to supply uranium to Beijing's rival Taiwan was far from becoming a reality that could disrupt growing ties, he said.
Australian officials said Downer had fulfilled a pledge made last month in Hong Kong to raise the case of jailed Chinese-born Australian businessman James Peng during his Beijing trip.
Peng, 36, was sentenced to 18 years in a Chinese prison last September after being convicted of embezzling about A$240,000 (US$180,000) in the southern city Shenzhen. He has insisted he was framed by powerful commercial rivals.
Downer had requested that China deport Peng before the end of his scheduled term, but had been told the prisoner's sentence was a matter for the judiciary to decide, officials said.
