China's rising foreign debt should not cause anxiety because the economy is booming and foreign exchange reserves are bulging, financial analysts and economists said on Tuesday.
Beijing was being cautious about raising the level of its foreign debt despite strong demand for capital, they said.
Foreign debt rose 6.3 percent to $109.57 billion at the end of June from a year earlier, the State Administration of Exchange Control said on Thursday.
Total foreign debt was up by 2.8 percent, or $2.98 billion, compared with end-1996.
The growth in debt was lagging well behind the expansion of the economy in a sign that Beijing was retaining its tight grip on overseas borrowing, said a foreign analyst in Beijing.
"(The debt increase) is not out of line with the size of the economy... I wouldn't think it is an alarming number," he said.
The need to restrain companies hungry for capital and the traditional reluctance of China's communist leadership to be indebted to foreigners were partly responsible for Beijing's tight limits on debt, said a Hong Kong-based financial analyst.
"Basically, the growth in the debt has been very moderate over the last couple of years," he said.
Demand for foreign loans and investment has soared as China's economy has boomed and officials and businessmen have pursued ambitious infrastructure and development plans, but Beijing was reluctant to depend too much on foreign finance, the analyst said.
Healthy foreign exchange reserves that reached a record $95.0 billion by the end of September had given Beijing the ability to boost debt levels without damaging lender confidence, but also enabled it to limit borrowing by providing a separate foreign currency source, said the Beijing analyst.
"China tends to be more conservative in borrowing, that's the culture, and this is more on the conservative side," he said.
"There is capacity for them to borrow more...without worrying about the underlying fundamentals," he said.
A senior Chinese economist under the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation said the rise in total debt was a response to a slight reduction in foreign direct investment and the continuing demand for capital.
He welcomed the exchange administration's report that the proportion of debt held by foreign-funded enterprises had risen to 18.6 percent, compared with the 30.2 percent accounted for by government debt and a 39.1 percent share for financial institutions.
"It is difficult for foreign-invested companies to raise money in China, so it is normal for them to raise funds overseas," the economist said. "China is not responsible for the debts of foreign-invested companies."
State media said in June that China intended to borrow more abroad, but would also adjust the foreign currency structure of its debt to make it match exchange income and reserves.
The decision to expand the scale of the national debt had not weakened Beijing's administrative vetting of the quality of overseas loans, which remained strict, the analysts said.
