The birth in 1970 of what would become one of China's top computer firms could hardly have been less auspicious.
Communist cultural revolutionaries roamed the land, schools and universities were in ferment and the computing breakthroughs of the West were locked far away on the other side of China's ideologically-sealed borders.
But for the Nantian Electronic Information Group Corp. the accidental timing of its birth was as much an opportunity as a stumbling block, senior company officials say.
The group, then known as the Yunnan Electronic Equipment Factory, was cradled in the white heat of the late Chairman Mao Zedong's ultra-leftist 1966-1976 Cultural Revolution but found its fortune in the economic reforms that followed Mao's death.
Nantian now makes healthy profits supplying computer systems to state banks struggling to adapt to the booming market economy built by Mao's successors, said group president Zheng Zhigang.
"Nantian's development has been pretty fast," Zheng said in an interview at Nantian's head office in Kunming city, capital of southwestern China's Yunnan province.
Profits in 1995 hit 42.07 million yuan ($5.07 million) on sales that had soared to 927 million yuan from 510 million the year before and from just 100 million yuan in 1990, he said.
Nantian hoped to boost revenues to 1.2 billion yuan in 1996, he said, crediting nimble market footwork and early international cooperation for paving the group's road to national success from a remote frontier province.
"We needed something special to succeed from Kunming," he said. "In 1974 we started to make computers... Even though that was the time of the Cultural Revolution and China was fairly chaotic, we still felt (computers) were important."
Nantian began building contacts abroad in 1978, just two years after Mao's death and in the earliest days of China's opening to the outside world.
The experience helped to inform a crucial choice in the mid-1980s, when the firm decided to narrow its market focus.
"In 1985, we used our expertise to analyse the Chinese market... and we chose banks," Zheng said. "We chose an excellent market target."
Computerisation had become essential for China's staid state banks, which for decades had had little need to hustle for business and were still ill-equipped to supply the financial needs of the new market economy.
It was also a market sector in which little competition existed and where there was a strong demand for computer solutions that would match foreign technology with local knowledge, Zheng said.
Nantian had established cooperation with Italian technology group Olivetti and Unisys Corp of the United States in the 1980s, and in 1993 started working with U.S. computer firm Hewlett Packard Co, he said.
"We have a joint venture with Silicon Graphics to sell and service their graphic workstation in China," he said.
A vital ingredient in Nantian's growth recipe was the company's ability to focus tightly on its chosen market sector.
"Our main market is state banks and other national financial institutions," said Zheng.
"We develop the software with our partners. For the hardware we integrate different companies' equipment with our own for a total solution," said Special Project Manager Chen Deying.
Nantian had established a firm presence in the capital Beijing and in China's financial hotspots of Shanghai, southern Guangzhou and booming Shenzhen near the border with Hong Kong, company officials said.
Dozens of joint-venture subsidiaries in major cities gave Nantian a local presence in its key markets, but the state-owned group remained headquartered in scenic Kunming, they said.
Comprehensive support to ease the difficult transition from pen-pushing to terminal-tapping was essential in the financial world, where customers could become hugely reliant on their new technology, Zheng said.
"We established a support system for computerisation," he said. "This is very important for banks, which need good after-sales service."
Nantian was reported to be keen to issue shares on the Hong Kong stock exchange as early as 1994, but Zheng said the group still had no firm plans and said subsidiaries could float first.
"We have considered (listing) and made some preparations. We will need investment to develop," he said. "We don't have a fixed plan, we will analyse our subsidiaries and choose some of the better ones to consider listing."
No matter how the group found the funding it needed, it planned to remain firmly in the market niche carved in the nation's banking system, company officials said.
"We already have 10 years of history with the banks," said Zheng. "We feel that bank computerisation has just started."
