An estimated 50,000 to 100,000 people in China are infected with the HIV virus but many Chinese still know little about the deadly AIDS disease it can cause, health officials said on Wednesday.
China was at a critical stage in its fight against AIDS, but a campaign launched by Beijing's communist leadership to promote "spiritual civilisation" -- or puritan Marxism values -- would help cut the cases caused by unsafe sex and drug use, the Xinhua news agency said.
Officials said they also planned to strengthen publicity to promote condom use.
China's official total for the number of people infected with the Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) remained around 3,400.-- up from 3,341 at the end of 1995.
But tens of thousands of other cases went uncounted, a Ministry of Public Health official said.
Experts estimated the actual number of HIV infections at between 50,000 and 100,000 people, she told Reuters by telephone.
China was continuing to clamp down on drug abuse, strengthen controls on blood for medical transfusions and boost anti-AIDS education and was currently holding a three-day national meeting on the disease in Beijing, another ministry official said.
Officials would launch a series of activities in December to promote awareness and knowledge of AIDS (Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome), he said.
"Many people do not even know how AIDS is transmitted," he said in a telephone interview.
The HIV virus is transmitted through direct contact with the body fluids of an infected person and can be spread through sexual contact, transfusions of infected blood or the use of dirty needles by drug addicts.
AIDS would not spread rapidly in China, although infection by all these routes was already occurring, the official Xinhua news agency quoted Professor Dai Zhicheng, vice president of the National Aids Committee, as saying.
"AIDS is spreading very fast in some neighbouring countries of China, and it is being transmitted through every possible method in our country," Dai said.
"China is at a critical point in its AIDS control, but some new measures will be adopted to slow down the spread of the disease," he said.
Xinhua said the official count of people infected with HIV was expected to approach 5,000 by the end of 1996, but doctors have warned widespread misdiagnosis amd insufficient reporting mean the real total may have long since passed 100,000.
Officials planned to set up a national AIDS control centre and improve monitoring networks. Regulations or laws on blood administration would also be published, Dai said.
Beijing's campaign to promote ethical progress, regarded by analysts as a bid to bolster the authority of the ruling Communist Party and boost socialist values weakened by economic reforms, would help in China's fight against AIDS, Dai said.
Overseas experience had shown that condoms were an effective way to prevent AIDS and China had launched an experimental campaign to promote condom use in Shanghai in 1994, said the health ministry official.
"The result was not very good," he said. "Many people feel willing to use condoms if they are free... but not if they are sold."
