Chinese officials have called for a war on AIDS, warning that the nation is in danger of losing its last chance to slow the invasion and spread of the disease, state media said on Thursday.
Time was running out to strengthen safeguards against AIDS spreading rapidly through the populations of China's neighbours, minister of the State Family Planning Commission Peng Peiyun told a national meeting on AIDS in Beijing.
"From now until the end of the century is a crucial time for our nation to prevent the spread of AIDS," the official Health News quoted Peng as saying.
"If we do not pay close attention to prevention, the AIDS infection will increase geometrically," she said.
The spread of drug abuse, prostitution and illegal blood supplies could combine with a drastic increase in sexual disease to speed the AIDS epidemic in China, Health Minister Chen Minzhang told the conference, which closed on Thursday.
Many Chinese still knew little about AIDS or the HIV (Human Immunodeficiency Virus) that causes it, Chen said.
"Now is the prime time for prevention and control of HIV infection," the Xinhua news agency quoted him as saying. "It could be the last chance. We have no time to waste."
China's official total for the number of people infected with HIV had hit 4,305, up from 3,341 at the end of 1995, and 131 had developed AIDS, the People's Daily newspaper said.
Officials say tens of thousands of cases go uncounted, and quote experts as estimating the actual number of HIV infections at between 50,000 and 100,000.
China has blamed much of the rapid spread of AIDS (Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome) in recent years on infection via drug addicts in southwestern provinces close to the "Golden Triangle" opium and heroin production area that includes parts of Thailand, Laos and Burma.
"Serious HIV/AIDS epidemics in neighbouring countries may have an impact on the domestic HIV epidemic," said Health Minister Chen. "A large number of migrants provide the opportunity for the spread of HIV infection."
Chinese health departments would continue to crack down on illegal blood banks to try to ensure the safety of blood transfusions, and would join with educational organisations and the media to spread knowledge of AIDS, Xinhua said.
Law enforcement agencies would clamp down on drug abuse and prostitution to try to cut HIV transmission through contaminated needles and sexual contact, it said.
Prostitution and narcotics abuse have both boomed in recent years as nearly two decades of economic reform weaken China's once-strict social controls.
Officials expect a campaign launched by China's communist leaders to promote puritan Marxist values to help cut infection caused by unsafe sex and drug use, but a Beijing AIDS activist said it was still unclear if the effort would really help.
Authorities should put more emphasis on education and health support for high-risk groups instead of relying on official disaproval and the police to curb their activities, activist Wan Yanhui said in a telephone interview.
China had largely failed to reach out to groups such as sex workers, drug addicts and homosexuals, many of whom still considered AIDS a foreigners' affliction, he said.
"There is not much public understanding (of AIDS)...the work done on the social side has been very weak," he said. "There needs to be a change in thinking."
