China must make real changes to its economy if it wants to join the World Trade Organisation and should replace anti-U.S. rhetoric with international cooperation, a leading U.S. businessman said on Friday.
Beijing should take growing dissatisfaction among foreign investors seriously, said James McGregor, chairman of the American Chamber of Commerce in China. A recent crackdown on dissidents could only harm vital ties with Washington, he said.
"China is always telling foreign investors that we must show sincerity in our business dealings in China," McGregor told a meeting of the Beijing Foreign Correspondents Club.
"Perhaps the time has come for China to show some sincerity in getting into WTO (World Trade Organisation)," he said.
Chinese officials have blamed the United States for blocking their accession to the global trade group, but no other country wanted to ease entry requirements to a point at which they were not commercially viable, he said.
"There is room for compromise on China's WTO entry, but China should be sincerely interested in joining," he said.
The terms of Beijing's entry would affect other applicants to the WTO, McGregor said, adding that the group could not lower its standards for China.
Business investors from the United States, already upset by changes in taxes and rules, should pay note to anti-U.S. tirades in China's official press and the hostile stance of a popular book on Sino-U.S. relations called "China Can Say No", he said.
"I think that American business people in China really should pay attention to these stirrings of anti-American Chinese nationalism that we're seeing in this book and in the newspapers every day," he said.
The solid accomplishments achieved by the Beijing leadership over the past nearly two decades of economic reform could inspire positive nationalism without need to resort to anti-foreign rhetoric, he said.
While some Beijing officials appeared to want foreigners to play a minimal role, what China really needed was more opening to the outside and a bold continuation of economic reforms launched by paramount leader Deng Xiaoping, he said.
"And China should say yes to a more stable and friendlier relationship with America," he said.
Sino-U.S. ties have been rocked in recent years by disputes over Taiwan, human rights and copyright piracy, as well as annual battles over the conditions attached by the United States to China's Most Favoured Nation trade status (MFN).
While the American Chamber of Commerce had worked hard to boost relations and assure Beijing's MFN status, China's clampdown on its tiny band of pro-democracy dissidents could only harm ties, McGregor said.
"Our plan for next year is to try to get permanent MFN so we won't have this battle every year, but if China is rounding up dissidents and throwing them in jail...It's disappointing because it's not going to help U.S.-China relations," he said.
Beijing should also take account of dissatisfaction among foreign businessmen and investors and take into account their need to make profits, he said.
"China is not at the peak of its goodwill with foreign investors right now... Goodwill matters," he said.
