China on Sunday used a Long March 2D rocket to fire a scientific research satellite into orbit from a base in the remote northwestern province of Gansu, the Xinhua news agency said.
The successful launch of the remote-sensing satellite followed a string of setbacks for the Chinese space industry that have sent insurance premiums for commercial launches soaring.
"The satellite went smoothly into orbit and all instruments aboard are operating well," Xinhua said.
The launch of the satellite, which is designed to spend 15 days in orbit before returning to earth for retrieval, was the third successfully completed by the two-stage, liquid-fuelled Long March 2D rocket, the official agency said.
China's space industry, once much admired for its bargain prices and its strong track record of launch successes, has been plagued by problems in recent years.
In August, a domestic communications satellite launched aboard a Long March 3 rocket from Xichang in the southwestern province of Sichuan failed to reach its proper orbit.
In February, a Long March 3B carrying an Intelsat satellite veered wildly seconds after lift-off before exploding in mid-air near the Xichang space centre.
China said six people were killed, 57 injured and 80 homes destroyed in the incident. Video footage smuggled out of China by an Israeli scientist showed dozens of levelled buildings and suggested the casualties were higher.
Chinese officials said the loss of the rocket and its payload was caused by a failure of the "inertia platform" that operates the rocket's directional controls.
In January 1995, a Long March 2E rocket blew up, killing a family of six in a rain of debris and destroying the Hughes-built Apstar 2 satellite it was carrying.
The failures, although hardly exceptional in the high-risk satellite business, have sent insurance premiums for Chinese launches soaring, eroding China's price advantage over Western and Japanese competitors.
Several launch contracts with foreign companies were cancelled following the setbacks, partly because of concerns over delays due to China's launch backlog.
China says it still has a high success rate, with only a handful of the 43 launches carried out by its Long March rocket series going wrong, and officials said this month they had tightened safety measures to prevent further disasters.
Launch vehicles would now self-destruct in the case of failure and officials would ensure people living nearby are evacuated before each launch.
In July, China took a step towards restoration its reputation for reliability when it successfully launched the Apstar 1A satellite.
