A China-wide computer network launched by a subsidiary of the official news agency Xinhua on Monday will take Chinese businesses online and supply them with news and economic information, company officials said.
The China Wide Web (CWW) created by China Internet Corp would provide Chinese customers with online services in their own language and would give overseas subscribers a window on to the Chinese business world, company chairman Ma Yunsheng said.
"Our objective is to increase understanding of China," China Internet chief technology officer Chung-Kiu Wong told a news conference in Beijing to announce the service's inauguration.
CWW would use technology developed for the World Wide Web, part of the global Internet computer network, to supply news from international economic information providers such as Reuters Holdings Ltd and Bloomberg, Wong said.
China Internet was a Hong Kong-registered company majority-owned by China's official Xinhua news agency, Ma said. He declined to give details of the other investors in the firm.
In January, Xinhua was appointed the government regulator for foreign suppliers of economic information in China, a role that some analysts say clashes with its involvement in enterprises that supply financial and business data.
Xinhua's regulatory role and China Internet's quasi-monopoly position in the market would help boost the computer company's already bright prospects, said Harry Edelson of Edelson Technology Partners, which has a stake in China Internet.
Unlike the open-access Internet, CWW was modelled on internal company networks or "intranets", Edelson said.
"There will be a lot of real-time information available," he said. "I think there's going to be very fast growth from a zero start."
China Internet would enjoy free use of Xinhua's communications network and already had access agreements with the powerful Minstry of Posts and Telecommunications, he said.
Ma said domestic economic information would also be available through Xinhua news services and databases. He declined to say how many clients were expected to subscribe.
The Internet is viewed by some Chinese officials as a haven for pornography and political dissent but CWW would likely be a politically correct alternative.
"CWW should reflect Chinese culture," technology officer Wong said, without giving details.
CWW would build bilingual online home pages for domestic firms and foreign companies in China and would work to boost foreign understanding of the Chinese market, he said.
"If a U.S. company wants to show its wares on the Chinese Internet, we will translate it so the Chinese can understand... and vice versa," Edelson said.
