A huge ethylene venture linking a British Petroleum subsidiary and Shanghai Petrochemical Co Ltd would give BP a major presence in China's downstream petrochemicals, company officials said on Tuesday.
BP Chemicals signed a letter of intent with Shanghai Petrochemical on Thursday to set up a $2.5 billion plant in Shanghai capable of producing 650,000 tonnes of ethylene a year.
"It's a big step forward for our development in China," said Zhang Jianning, BP's Beijing manager of government affairs.
He said BP's biggest China project so far also marked a change of focus for the company, which has until recently concentrated most of its Chinese investment in upstream activities such as drilling and exploration.
Analysts have predicted huge growth in China's downstream petrochemicals industry, as booming economic growth sends demand for products such as ethylene soaring.
"At the moment I would think petrochemicals is getting quite exciting," Zhang said in a telephone interview.
Officials of Shanghai Petrochemical, which is majority-owned by China Petrochemical Corp, or Sinopec, said the huge project demonstrated the company's confidence in its own future and in China's economic development.
It was too early to say how long a feasibility study for the project would take, but for a project of such a scale preliminary research could reasonably last up to two years, said Shanghai Petrochemical deputy director Lian Xiaolu.
Completion of such projects could take up to eight years, Lian told a news briefing in Beijing, adding it was too early to decide the details of how the venture would operate or of the investment required.
BP will own a 50 percent stake in the ethylene plant with the remaining 50 percent either held by Shanghai Petrochemical or shared with its parent Sinopec, officials said.
The venture is one of six ethylene projects with annual capacity of 600,000 tonnes or more promoted by state planners, the official China Daily said.
Sinopec president Sheng Huaren said last week the state oil refiner planned to more than double ethylene production capacity to around five million tonnes a year by 2000 from the current annual 2.36 million tonnes.
Shanghai Petrochemical officials said they hoped to establish a joint venture company with BP to produce acrylonitrile, used to make synthetic fibres.
The joint venture could then be expanded if all went well with technical studies for the ethylene plant, they said.
"If the market is there we will go ahead very quickly on this one," BP's Zhang said. He declined to say when the British firm hoped to begin production.
While the letter of intent showed a major commitment to working with BP, even if the ethylene project developed it did not mean Shanghai Petrochemical would slow cooperation with other foreign firms, said board of directors secretary Cai Hongping.
"It's not like love with a marriage of one husband and one wife," he said. "I think Shanghai Petrochemical will not stop looking for other partners."
