China's economy grew by 9.6 percent in the first nine months of 1996, but many urban family incomes are lagging behind, the State Statistical Bureau said on Wednesday.
Chinese industrial output was up, farmers were on their way to a year of record grain harvests and the scourge of inflation had been tamed to a year-on-year 6.6 percent in the first three quarters, bureau spokesman Ye Zhen said.
"The development of the macro-economy overall appears good," Ye told a news conference.
Gross domestic product was 4.5675 trillion yuan ($550.3 billion) between January and September, up 9.6 percent from the same period of 1995, Ye said, but gave no details. China's GDP grew by 10.2 percent in 1995.
The average income for urban Chinese rose to 3,249 yuan ($391) between January and September, an actual year-on-year increase of 3.4 percent, he said.
But the incomes of many urban residents are lagging behind as China's economy booms, Ye said.
A survey of 35 major cities and towns had revealed that the incomes per family member of around 40 percent of households had declined, he said.
Some of the decline was the ordinary result of the birth of children or the retirement of ageing family members, he said.
"The second kind of situation is when the level of income falls or the level of income growth cannot keep up with inflation," Ye said, adding such problems were the cause of the income fall in about half the families surveyed.
"The difficulties of some low-income urban families have been aggravated," he said.
He gave no explanation of the decline in incomes suffered by some urban wage-earners, but many surplus workers in China's huge and largely stagnant state sector have been sent home on minimum salaries.
Although such workers are not considered unemployed and the state sector is highly reluctant to fire employees, China's urban unemployment rate hit 2.98 percent at the end of September, Ye said.
The number of unemployed in Chinese cities reached 5.3 million, he said, but gave no comparative figures.
China's urban jobless rate was 2.9 percent by end-June, the same as the official figure for 1995, but state newspapers have warned that unemployment, a major bugbear for Beijing's communist leadership, could shoot up to 7.4 percent by 2000.
Optimism over the economy and the success of a continuing policy of tight credit aimed at curbing inflation and reining in runaway growth has been boosted by predictions that 1996 will be a bumper year for China's hundreds of millions of farmers.
Government policies had encouraged farmers to increase the area of land under grain, and grain output this year was forecast to exceed 480 million tonnes, beating the 1995 record harvest by about 15 million tonnes, Ye said.
China had set a target of 465 million tonnes for 1996.
Other figures released by the Statistical Bureau also painted a positive picture of an economy that Beijing says is on target for a "soft landing" after years of breakneck growth.
Year-on-year retail price inflation in the first three quarters was curbed to 6.6 percent, down 10 percentage points compared to the same period of 1995, Ye said.
The Xinhua news agency on Wednesday quoted economic tsar Zhu Rongji as forecasting inflation would be below 6.5 percent in 1996 and as saying it would be possible to cut it to six percent next year.
Retail inflation hit 21.8 percent in 1994.
