China said on Thursday it could produce more than enough grain to feed its growing population despite frequent natural disasters, rapid industrialisation, long-term droughts and a chronic lack of arable land.
In a draft "white paper" released to allay foreign fears that future Chinese grain shortages could overwhelm world markets, agricultural officials said the nation could feed its people for decades to come.
"Instead of forming a threat to the world's grain supply, China will make ever greater contributions to it," it said. "The Chinese government and people have the ability to solve the problem of grain supply by relying on their own efforts."
Some Western analysts have said China's rapidly expanding economy is swelling the nation's appetite for grain for food and feedstuffs. That in turn could force Beijing to make huge purchases on an international market already stressed by rising global demand.
The draft white paper, issued by the Ministry of Agriculture, dismissed such fears as a repeat of Western scepticism towards China's agriculture that greeted the nation's victorious communist revolutionaries in 1949.
"Some Westerners predicted that the Chinese government would not be able to solve the problem of feeding the country's population," the document said.
"History has already shown the futility of such a prediction," it said in one of many proud references to China's achievements in feeding 22 percent of the world's population with only about seven percent of its cultivated land.
China could raise output by protecting existing farmland, raising efficiency, improving irrigation, changing consumption patterns and reclaiming wasteland, it said.
By 2000, the Chinese population was expected to reach 1.3 billion, pushing total demand for grain to 500 million tonnes.
By the time the population peaked at 1.6 billion people in 2030, total demand was expected to be around 640 million tonnes, but Beijing was confident output would be able to keep pace even in the face of diminishing returns from the land.
"China can achieve its desired total grain output target if the annual average increase rate of per-unit area yield is one percent from 1996 to 2010 and 0.7 percent from 2011 to 2030," the white paper said, adding much bigger increases were likely.
For the next few decades, China planned to reclaim more than 300,000 hectares (741,000 acres) of wasteland each year to make up for land lost to industrialisation.
The proportion of inland and offshore waters used for aquaculture would be increased and the area of irrigated land would be raised to 53.30 million hectares (131 million acres) by 2000 from 49.33 million hectares (122 million acres), it said.
At least 10 percent of China's grain, more than 45 million tonnes last year, was lost annually between planting and consumption. Improved storage and shipping could help make savings of 20 million tonnes a year possible, it said.
China has long been eager to dismiss foreign fears that its demand for grain will spiral out of control, but Beijing has so far failed to convince its most vocal doubters.
China did not have enough land to sustain its economic growth rate and would find it hard to boost grain output, Lester Brown of the U.S.-based Worldwatch Institute said last month.
But the white paper said Beijing would turn to the international market only to make up for local shortages or natural disasters and to adjust the types of grain available.
"If China were to import a great deal of grain from other countries, the international grain market would be under severe pressure, and poorer countries would be unable to obtain enough supplies of cheap grain from it," the document said.
