A Beijing court on Wednesday sentenced dissident and former student leader Wang Dan to 11 years in prison, the latest hammer-blow struck by China against its tiny band of pro-democracy activists.
The Beijing Number One Intermediate People's Court took less than four hours to convict Wang of plotting to subvert the government, but the young dissident's family quickly denounced the verdict and vowed to appeal.
"We are angry... He received such a heavy sentence even though he was innocent," Wang's father, Wang Xianzeng, said in a telephone interview after a brief meeting with his son at a Beijing detention centre.
"Wang Dan said he wants to appeal," he said. "Wang Dan feels everything that he has done has been above-board... it was all for China's democratisation."
Wang, 27, was sentenced to 11 years in prison and deprived of his political rights for a further two years, the Xinhua news agency said in a long report hailing the fairness of the trial.
"Sufficient evidence, which includes written materials, witness accounts, recorded tape and criminal technical appraisal, were shown at the court," the official agency quoted the trial's chief judge as saying.
"The evidence is conclusive," it quoted the verdict as saying. "(Wang) instigated people by saying that 'It is time we turn our words into actions'."
Wang, who vanished into detention in May 1995, had faced a maximum penalty of death and a minimum 10-year prison term.
One of the student leaders of the 1989 pro-democracy protests in Beijing that were crushed by the army, Wang had been one of the few members of China's dwindling band of dissidents not in exile or serving a long term in detention or prison.
A spate of arrests and detentions in recent months has left the pro-democracy movement reeling, analysts say.
Wang's conviction was a slap in the face for Western governments that have appealed to Beijing to improve its human rights record, diplomats in the Chinese capital said.
New York-based rights group Human Rights in China denounced the verdict as the result of a show trial that blatantly violated Chinese law and international standards.
Scores of police enforced tight security around the court building in western Beijing, keeping foreign journalists well away from a trial billed by officials as open to the public.
Less than 20 observers had been allowed in the court, said Wang's father, who was allowed to attend along with the dissident's older sister.
"Not one witness was summoned," he said. "The judge did not uphold the justice and dignity of the law... How can writing articles constitute a crime?"
The family would have 10 days to appeal upon receiving official notification of the verdict in about five days' time, he said, adding they were not optimistic the verdict would be overturned.
The 11-year sentence had been no surprise to the family or to Wang, who had been in good spirits during their 30-minute meeting after the trial, said his mother, a 61-year-old museum researcher who attended as one of two defence lawyers.
Wang, who once promoted free debate in the campus of the elite Beijing University, has already served four years in prison for counter-revolutionary crimes, or subversion, for his role in the 1989 Tiananmen Square demonstrations.
He returned to political activism after his parole in 1993, defying police surveillance to join a daring appeal to Beijing's communist leadership for the release of those still jailed for their part in the 1989 protests.
Wang's father said his son's health had deteriorated during more than 15 months in detention, but added the former student activist believed he had done nothing to be ashamed of.
"He has a clear conscience," he said.
