A Chinese court took less than four hours on Wednesday to convict prominent dissident and former student leader Wang Dan of plotting to overthrow the government and sentenced him to 11 years in prison.
The Beijing Number One Intermediate People's Court found Wang guilty of conspiring to subvert the Chinese government, the Xinhua news agency said. He faced a maximum penalty of death.
"Sufficient evidence, which includes written materials, witness accounts, recorded tape and criminal technical appraisal, were shown at the court," Xinhua quoted the judge as saying after the trial.
Wang, 27, was also deprived of his political rights for two years, Xinhua said, quoting the verdict.
"Wang candidly confessed his activities," Xinhua said, adding that he received funds from overseas hostile forces, gave financial aid to families of jailed dissidents and tried to set up an "opposition force" by uniting illegal organisations.
Charges against Wang were backed by testimony by another dissident, Liu Xiaobo, Xinhua said. It did not elaborate. Liu was sent this month to a labour camp for three years.
"His criminal fact is clear, and the evidence is conclusive," Xinhua said quoting the verdict against Wang. "He instigated people by saying that 'It is time we turn our words into actions'."
The verdict was issued just four hours after the trial began. Foreign reporters and legal experts were barred from attending the trial in western Beijing.
Security was tight around the court building, with dozens of police preventing the public from approaching the building.
Earlier on Wednesday, the dissident's father said the family would appeal if Wang were convicted.
"We will definitely appeal... We will not give in," Wang Xianzeng told reporters just hours before the start of the proceedings.
"He is definitely innocent," he said as he left his home with the dissident's mother, Wang Lingyun, to go to the court.
"Speech can't overthrow the government," he said.
Wang's mother, a 61-year old museum researcher who has no background in law, attended the trial as one of two defence lawyers. His father and a sister were allowed to sit in.
Wang Lingyun said on Tuesday she expected Wang to receive a harsh sentence although he would plead not guilty.
The mother had said the dissident was calm and mentally prepared for a harsh sentence, although she has said his health had deteriorated since he vanished into detention in May 1995.
Wang Dan faced a minimum 10-year sentence and a maximum penalty of death.
The New York-based Human Rights Watch said last week the chances of acquittal were slim because Wang has not had adequate time to prepare a defence.
Human Rights Watch attacked the trial on Tuesday as a sign of the Chinese leadership's increasing intolerance of dissent.
Wang has already served four years in prison for counter-revolutionary crimes, or subversion, for his role in pro-democracy demonstrations in Beijing's Tiananmen Square that were crushed by the army in June 1989 with heavy loss of life.
He was politically active again after his parole in 1993, defying police surveillance to join a daring appeal to communist leaders for the release of those still jailed for their part in the 1989 protests.
China has recently cracked down on the few remaining dissidents who have not fled into exile or been jailed.
