China said on Thursday its jailing of leading dissident Wang Dan for 11 years was not a human rights issue but an ordinary legal matter that would not hurt Beijing's sensitive relationship with the United States.
A Chinese court on Wednesday took less than four hours to condemn former student leader Wang for plotting against the government, in a verdict that prompted quick expressions of deep concern from Washington.
Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Shen Guofang said the trial would not cause further damage to cross-Pacific ties, long sorely tested by disputes over Beijing's human rights record.
"The case of Wang Dan has nothing to do with the issue of human rights," Shen told a news briefing. "I don't think the case of Wang Dan will have any effect on Sino-U.S. relations."
The Beijing Number One Intermediate People's Court sentenced Wang, 27, to 11 years in prison and stripped him of his political rights for a further two years, after a brief hearing hailed by state media as a model of fairness.
International human right activists rushed to condemn the trial as a sham and the verdict as a travesty, while Wang's family said justice had not been served and vowed to appeal.
"Wang Dan's trial was a parody of justice," rights watchdog Amnesty International said in a statement. "It is clear that the verdict and sentence against him had been decided in advance."
Foreign reporters had been barred from the trial and the speed with which the official Xinhua news agency released a lengthy interview with the chief judge afterwards showed the report had been prepared in advance, Amnesty said.
Police posted outside Wang Dan's home in western Beijing blocked reporters from meeting his family, who plan to appeal as soon as they receive official notification of the verdict.
Two policemen had visited the family on Tuesday morning and others continued to keep constant watch, said the dissident's mother Wang Lingyun, a 61-year-old museum researcher who attended his trial as one of two defence lawyers.
"Wherever I go, they go," she said by telephone.
European governments expressed dismay at the severity of the sentence imposed on a dissident renowned abroad for his role as a leader of the 1989 pro-democracy demonstrations in Beijing's Tiananmen Square that were crushed by the army.
Wang, who once promoted free debate on the campus of Beijing University, had already served four years in prison for his role in the 1989 protests. He returned to political activism after his release, before vanishing into detention in May 1995.
Washington officials greeted the verdict against Wang with expressions of concern and high praise for the young dissident, hailing him as one of China's premier voices for human rights.
"We are deeply concerned by the sentence that has been given to Wang Dan," White House spokesman Mike McCurry said.
"We urge the Chinese authorities to show clemency to this courageous man, whose championing of democratic values has gained him deserved international recognition," said U.S. State Department spokesman Nicholas Burns.
Chinese spokesman Shen said Wang's conviction was purely a domestic legal affair.
"The trial of Wang Dan is entirely a Chinese legal procedure carried out in accordance with the law," he said. "It has no connection with human rights or other issues."
Sino-U.S. ties have long been strained by disputes over human rights, trade, copyright theft in China and Taiwan, but both sides say tensions have eased in recent months after a series of high-level meetings.
