Officials of the six nations of the Mekong river region arrived in southwestern China on Tuesday for a ministerial conference intended to boost cooperation in an area long hobbled by distrust and war.
The sixth meeting of the Greater Mekong Sub-region (GMS) programme would begin in Kunming city on Wednesday, with ministers from Thailand, Laos, Cambodia, Vietnam, Burma and China scheduled to review billions of dollars worth of regional infrastructure projects, officials at the conference said.
Ministers would consider an environmental action plan to curb deforestation on the upper reaches of the Mekong which borders or flows through all six nations, said Norida Morita of the Asian Development Bank (ADB).
The meeting would push forward the GMS programme from planning projects to implementation, Morita told reporters.
"The main thrust of the Greater Mekong activities is to link the six countries with a transport network," he said.
A proposed $490 million road to connect Bangkok with Phnom Penh and Ho Chi Minh city in southern Vietnam was one project expected to gain ministerial approval, officials said.
Other joint projects being considered include a $1.8 to $2.1 billion China to Southeast Asia railway and construction of a telecommunications and power transmission network.
Plans to boost infrastructure in the underdeveloped region were only one part of a programme that had helped speed the transformation of the area from wartorn backwater to an attractive investment destination, said GMS consultant David Husband of Global Economics Ltd.
China and Vietnam border troops and naval forces clashed repeatedly in the 1980s after a bloody border conflict in 1959.
Vietnamese troops fought Khmer Rouge guerrillas in Cambodia through the late 1980s, while drug lords and soldiers sparred along the Thai-Burmese border.
"The projects are the tangible results, but sub-regional cooperation is as much as anything about trust and goodwill," Husband told Reuters.
"This very coming together is testimony to the world that something is happening here," he said. "It has helped draw attention to the fact that there is peace in the region."
GMS supporters hope that this trust forged through shared economic and environmental projects will help build stability in the Mekong region, home to almost 230 million people.
Relations between the six nations have seldom been better, despite the Cambodian government's continuing war against the Khmer Rouge and the political divide between Burma's military junta and the country's democratic activists.
A rush of new interest in investment projects in the area was making the coordination of development a key issue at the Kunming conference, ADB's Morita said.
New development initiatives from the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and other countries were welcome, but should be organised to complement the development foundation built by the GMS programme and the ADB, he said.
