The family of jailed Chinese dissident Wang Dan on Friday received official confirmation of his 11-year prison sentence, suggesting the way was now clear for the former student leader to appeal his conviction.
A Beijing court on Wednesday took less than four hours to condemn Wang for plotting against the government after a trial that sparked expressions of concern from around the world.
Wang's family received official notification of the verdict on Friday afternoon, implying the 27-year-old activist was now free to appeal within 10 days, said his mother Wang Lingyun.
"The verdict should be first given to him, with another (copy) given to the family," she said in a telephone interview.
"This is an issue for Wang Dan, he has to write an appeal document...for the higher court," she said. "After the court has received it they may inform us."
Wang, a dissident known for his role as a leader of the ill-fated 1989 pro-democracy protests in Beijing's Tiananmen Square, had pleaded not guilty to subversion charges carrying a maximum death sentence and a minimum 10 years' imprisonment.
During a brief meeting with his family after the trial he vowed to appeal, a decision widely considered to be a symbolic gesture as verdicts imposed on Chinese dissidents in past political trials have almost never been overturned.
The 11-year sentence imposed on Wang was the latest in a series of crushing blows on China's embattled band of dissidents, most of whom were already in exile or serving long terms in adminstrative detention or jail.
It drew immediate fire from international human rights activists, who condemned the trial as a parody of justice masking a pre-arranged result.
Chinese state media called the trial a model of fairness. Officials said it was an ordinary legal matter and an internal affair.
The United States and some European and Asian nations expressed their concern, while Czech President Vaclav Havel -- himself a former dissident against a communist government -- said the verdict was unacceptable and deeply disturbing.
Wang, who once promoted free debate on the campus of Beijing University, had already served four years in prison after the 1989 protests were crushed by the army with heavy loss of life.
The former history student returned to activism after his parole in 1993, defying police surveillance to join a daring appeal to Beijing's communist leadership for the release of those still jailed for their part in the 1989 demonstrations.
He was detained once more in May 1995 and disappeared into legal limbo for almost a year and a half until being formally arrested.
Wang Lingyun, a 61-year old museum researcher who attended the trial as one of Wang's two defence lawyers, said it was unclear when she would be able to meet her son again.
"If he continues to ask me to be his defence lawyer, it's possible we will be able to have a lawyer's meeting, like last time," she said. "It's his decision."
The family had had little time to discuss the details of Wang's appeal during their 30-minute meeting at a Beijing detention centre on Wednesday, she said.
"Last time we didn't speak much, because the time was so short," she said. "We hadn't seen each other for such a long time, we just talked about family things."
