Chinese state media on Friday lashed out at a U.S.-funded radio news station, accusing the United States and other Western nations of stepping up "Cold War propaganda" against Beijing.
U.S. Radio Free Asia, which broadcasts news to China in Chinese, had been launched by Washington to create chaos and sow dissent in Asian nations, the official China Youth Daily said.
"With the broadcasts of Radio 'Free Asia', the United States is further stretching its gossiping tongue into the Asian region," the newspaper said in an article published on the same day a senior U.S. official began a visit in Beijing.
U.S. Undersecretary of State Lynn Davis had arrived in China for talks on arms proliferation and to lay the groundwork for a crucial visit later this month by Secretary of State Warren Christopher, a U.S. Embassy spokesman said.
Christopher's visit is intended to be the latest in a series of moves by Washington and Beijing to mend ties long strained by disputes over human rights, trade, copyright piracy and Taiwan.
Officials on both sides say relations have warmed in recent months after a string of high-level contacts, but articles in the Chinese state press on Friday took a more hostile tone.
"Although the Cold War has been over for years, the United States and other Western nations rely on the superiority of their communication and information technology to increasingly launch Cold War propaganda," China Youth Daily said.
"The real goal of setting up Radio 'Free Asia' is to use news media to interfere in the internal affairs of China and other Asian nations, to create chaos, and to destroy the stability of these countries," the newspaper said.
Radio Free Asia would only boost people's abhorrence of U.S. power politics and hegemonism, the China Youth Daily said, calling for Asia-wide vigilance against the station.
China last month told Washington to pull the plug on Radio Free Asia, created by the U.S. congress as an Asian counterpart to the anti-communist Radio Free Europe. But U.S. officials have said the local-language news broadcasts were here to stay.
The station announced on Thursday that it planned to begin beaming uncensored news to Tibet this month and to expand Chinese broadcasts next year.
U.S. commentators have suggested the station could become a new irritant in fragile cross-Pacific ties, particularly after U.S. congressmen reversed a change of name to the less contentious Asia Pacific Network.
Another potential stumbling block for Sino-U.S. reconciliation is the case of Chinese dissident Wang Dan, who was jailed for 11 years for plotting against the government after a trial on Wednesday that lasted less than four hours.
Beijing's human rights record has long been a major focus of U.S. concerns and a perennial source of dispute.
While the China Youth Daily focused on the pro-democracy rhetoric of Radio Free Asia, a separate report in the official Legal Daily took aim at the entire U.S. political system.
In a scathing analysis of the current U.S. presidential election, the newspaper said ordinary Americans had little say in the choice of their leadership.
"U.S. democracy is essentially democracy of the capitalist classes or democracy of the rich -- it certainly is not democracy of the whole people," it said.
Most voters chose not to turn out for mud-slinging contests between presidential candidates promoted by special interest groups, it said.
While some analysts see the Chinese media's anti-U.S. rhetorical broadsides as evidence of growing nationalist sentiment, Beijing officials say they are keen to mend fences with a nation also seen as a vital economic partner.
