China has ordered two Hong Kong democracy activists to leave the country after they tried to petition Beijing officials over the political future of the colony, Hong Kong sources and Chinese media said on Friday.
Beijing police had told activists Wong Chung-ki and Chui Pak-tai to leave China, the official Xinhua news agency said.
Hong Kong sources said the two had been trying to petition officials over what they called the "undemocratic" methods being used by China to select a chief executive to run the British colony after it reverts to Beijing rule on July 1, 1997.
"The Beijing Public Security Department issued a warning to Chui and Wong, asking them to return (to) Hong Kong within a stated time," Xinhua said.
It was not clear if the two campaigners, both members of local councils in the British colony, had already left Beijing.
Officials of a Beijing hotel had filed a public disturbance complaint against the two for distributing materials to reporters in the hotel on Thursday evening, Xinhua said.
Anxiety has grown in Hong Kong in recent months over how much political freedom China will allow after it regains control of a colony run from London for more than 150 years.
The jailing of leading Chinese dissident Wang Dan for 11 years by a Beijing court on Wednesday awakened fears that those who criticised the post-handover, Beijing-backed administration could face a similar fate.
Chinese authorities, currently overseeing the selection of a group to choose Hong Kong's first post-colonial chief executive, also barred two other pro-democracy advocates from entering the country on Thursday, activists in Hong Kong said.
Officials at the Sha Tau Kok border post refused entry to Andrew To and Chan Kwok-leung of the Hong Kong Democratic Party after keeping them in a room for two hours, To told Reuters.
All four activists had planned to lobby the China-selected Preparatory Committee that will select the committee to decide the chief executive, and to appeal for a reprieve of Hong Kong's current elected legislature, which Beijing has vowed to scrap.
A copy of a statement by the activists obtained by Reuters accused China of using undemocratic methods to choose the chief executive and condemned the decision to bar their colleagues from entering the country.
Their petition urged Beijing to scrap a plan to appoint a provisional legislature in place of the elected Legislative Council, and demanded the territory's future leader be elected instead of chosen by a China-controlled selection committee.
China, which has bitterly opposed democratic reforms introduced in Hong Kong in recent years, says the official Selection Committee will be well equipped to represent the will of the colony's six million people.
The rules for choosing the chief executive would guarantee a selection that was fair, honest and without corruption, Chinese Vice Premier Qian Qichen told Preparatory Committee members in a speech on Friday.
Analysts said a list of candidates for the Selection Committee released on Friday was dominated by pro-China politicians. The Preparatory Committee was scheduled to vote on the list on Saturday.
China has agreed to retain Hong Kong's capitalist system for 50 years but officials have suggested that freedom of expression in the bustling colony would be limited after the transfer.
A survey published on Thursday said most businessmen in Hong Kong expected press freedom, the political system and human rights to deteriorate after the return to Chinese rule.
