A China-selected committee on Saturday chose 340 members of the group which will select the first chief executive to lead post-colonial Hong Kong, and said the final appointment would be made in early December.
The Hong Kong Preparatory Committee, a group hand-picked by Beijing to chart the British colony's return to Chinese rule on July 1 next year, chose 340 members of the Selection Committee from a list dominated by pro-China politicians.
The 400-member Selection Committee would make the final selection of the first post-colonial chief executive in a meeting on December 11 in Hong Kong, officials of China's Hong Kong and Macau Affairs Office said.
"The 400 members of the Selection Committee are shouldering a great historic mission, I hope they willl not let down the trust of the nation and will not let down the hopes of six million Hong Kong people," said Chinese Vice-Premier Qian Qichen.
The committee should chose a leader capable of maintaining Hong Kong's stability and prosperity, Qian said in a speech to the Preparatory Committee in Beijing's cavernous Great Hall of the People.
The Preparatory Committee meeting chose the 340 Selection Committe members from a prepared list of 409 candidates made up largely of prominent Hong Kong politicians, well-known businessmen and community leaders.
"I think this is a very broad-based representative committee," Chen Ziying of the Hong Kong and Macau Affairs Office, when asked why few democrats were in the group.
Preparatory Committee members select 340 of the 400 members. Of the remaining 60 seats, 26 automatically go to 26 delegates on China's National People's Congress, or parliament.
The other 34 members will be appointed by local deputies of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference.
The Selection Committee will also choose a provisional legislature to replace the current elected Legislative Council on July 1, 1997.
Anxiety has grown in Hong Kong in recent months over how much political freedom China will allow after it regains control of a colony run by Britain for more than 150 years.
Democratic campaigners in the colony have accused Beijing of using undemocratic methods to shape its future government and have condemned the scrapping of the existing legislature.
China this week ordered two Hong Kong democratic activists to leave the country after they tried to deliver a petition to officials that criticised the selection method and called for a reprieve of the legislature.
Businessmen Peter Woo and Tung Chee-hwa and retired judge Simon Li, who are front-runners in the contest to become Hong Kong's chief executive after the handover, are members of the Preparatory Committee.
Woo and Li voted in the Selection Committee election, while Tung -- regarded by many as China's favourite -- abstained.
Former Chief Justice Ti Liang Yang, another key candidate for the top job, is not a member of the Preparatory Committee.
