Swedish Prime Minister Goran Persson said on Monday he had expressed disapproval to his Chinese counterpart over the jailing of dissident Wang Dan.
Persson raised the case of former student leader Wang, jailed last week for 11 years, during a dinner with Chinese Premier Li Peng in Beijing on Sunday, he told a news conference.
A court in the Chinese capital last Wednesday took less than four hours to condemn Wang for plotting against the government, after a trial that sparked expressions of concern from around the world.
"During the official talks of the delegation we talked about human rights in general," Persson said.
Asked about the case of Wang Dan he said the 27-year-old dissident had not been discussed in the official talks but had been raised afterwards.
"During the dinner I had the opportunity to have a more private discussion with Premier Li Peng and raised that case you mentioned, Wang Dan," he said.
"I told him what we have said before...that we don't like the treament in this case," he said.
Persson, who has drawn political fire at home for his decision to carry out the six-day visit despite Wang's jailing, declined to give details of the talks or to describe Premier Li's reaction to the raising of Wang's case.
It was more efficient to raise such cases as Wang's in private at a dinner than during official talks because China considered such matters internal affairs, he said, adding that Sweden firmly believed in continuing dialogue on human rights.
"We...think that China treats its political dissidents and religious dissidents too hard and are also critical towards their frequent use of capital punishment," he said.
"We have signed an agreement with China where the Swedish Raoul Wallenberg Institute will arrange human rights seminars in Sweden and China...for officials from the prisons and the judicial system," he said but did not elaborate.
The jailing of Wang Dan was latest in a series of crushing blows to China's tiny and struggling pro-democracy movement. Most dissidents have already been forced into exile or are serving long sentences in prison or adminstrative detention.
Sweden and China had signed an agreement on a consulate for Hong Kong, which returns to Beijing rule on July 1, 1997, he said adding that his discussions with Chinese leaders had also touched on international politics and trade.
A delegation of Swedish businessmen was travelling with the prime minister during his visit and was expected to sign a number of deals, Persson said but gave no details.
