A senior U.S. arms control official said on Tuesday she was encouraged by Chinese efforts to control exports to unsafeguarded nuclear facilities, but Beijing said the key issue in two days of talks was Taiwan.
The United States had been lending its experience to Chinese efforts to place controls on exports, after a pledge in May by Beijing not to repeat sales of nuclear technology to Pakistan, U.S. Undersecretary of State Lynn Davis told a news conference.
"I am encouraged by the steps the Chinese are taking," Davis said on the second day of arms proliferation talks in Beijing that are intended to pave the way for a visit to China by U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher later this month.
"We have been working with the Chinese to ensure what I call very practical implementation," Davis added. "We have already had some real success in the commitments that China has made in the areas of proliferation and their nuclear assistance to unsafeguarded facilities."
Chinese Foreign Minister Qian Qichen had urged Washington to stop arms sales to Taiwan during a meeting with Davis on Tuesday, the official Xinhua news agency said.
A Foreign Ministry spokesman said U.S. weapons sales to Taiwan were the main Sino-U.S. arms proliferation issue.
"The most sensitive and important issue is that the United States has violated the August 17 communique by exporting large numbers of advanced weapons to Taiwan," spokesman Cui Tiankai told a news briefing.
Cui said Washington had broken its pledge under an August 17, 1982 communique to reduce the quality and quantity of arms sales to Taiwan, which Beijing considers a rebel province.
Xinhua quoted Qian as saying the United States should strictly abide by the August 17 communique to try to reduce and ultimately stop its arms sales to Taiwan.
In August, the U.S. Defence Department notified Congress that it would sell Stinger missiles and launchers to Taiwan, prompting angry Chinese protests.
Disagreement over arms sales and nuclear proliferation have long added to the strains on Sino-U.S. ties, already chilled by disputes over trade, copyright piracy and human rights.
After months of Sino-U.S. negotiations, China said on May 11 that it would not permit the sale of equipment to nuclear facilities not subject to international inspection.
The May exports accord averted possible U.S. sanctions over China's reported sale to Pakistan of ring magnets, which are used in gas centrifuges and can be used in the production of nuclear weapons material.
China and Pakistan have denied that the sales took place.
Washington had said it accepted assurances by Chinese leaders that they did not know about the sales.
Both Beijing and Washington have been keen to resume a "strategic dialogue" on security and arms issues as part of efforts to rebuild cross-Pacific relations.
U.S. arms officials say differences remain with China over the export of nuclear equipment to Iran, which Washington considers a rogue state, while Beijing has repeatedly condemned U.S. arms sales to Taiwan.
China does not rule out the use of force to regain control of Taiwan, Beijing's arch rival since the end of the Chinese civil war in 1949, and in March carried out intimidatory missile tests and wargames in the seas near the island.
Davis said Taiwan was discussed during her talks with Chinese officials but declined to give details.
She said U.S. weapons sales to Taipei did not contravene Washington's agreements with Beijing.
