Beijing accused the United States on Tuesday of pursuing hostile policies towards China and defended a campaign to boost patriotism as a shield against aggressive foreign forces.
"In the last few years the United States has pursued antagonistic policies toward China," said the official People's Daily, mouthpiece of China's ruling Communist Party.
"U.S. media circles have spared no effort to attack and sully China," it said as disarmament talks between Chinese and U.S. officials entered a second day in Beijing.
U.S. Undersecretary of State Lynn Davis began talks on arms proliferation in the Chinese capital on Monday, part of a visit seen as a vital step towards rebuilding ties long strained by disputes over trade, human rights, copyright piracy and Taiwan.
Both sides, however, say relations have warmed in recent months after a string of high-level meetings. But the Chinese state press has continued to issue harshly worded condemnations of U.S. policies and individuals seen as hostile to Beijing.
In an angry reaction to an article in the New York Times on October 24 by former U.S. ambassador to China James Lilley, People's Daily slammed the U.S. media for unfriendly reporting that was harming vital cross-Pacific ties.
In his signed opinion piece, Lilley wrote that the loss of communism's appeal in China had left a vacuum that was being filled by nationalist xenophobia, but warned that nationalism was a dangerous road to take.
People's Daily said no such warning was required.
"(Some Westerners) see Chinese people's patriotism as being narrow-minded nationalism that will be catastrophic for the West and must quickly be discarded," it said.
Over 100 years of abuse at the hands of imperial powers had taught Chinese how to be patriotic without straying into blind xenophobia, it said.
Washington's anti-Chinese actions did not stop at thwarting Beijing's bid to hold the 2000 Olympics or at U.S. threats over human rights, trade or nuclear proliferation, it said.
Chinese feelings had been badly hurt by outrages such as Washington's dispatch of two aircraft carriers to the seas near Taiwan in March, it added.
Washington sent the aircraft carrier battlegroups to monitor intimidatory war games and missile tests carried out by China near Taiwan in the run-up to the island's first direct presidential elections, a decision that infuriated Beijing.
"It is this kind of pressure from the United States and other Western countries that has inspired the enthusiasm of the Chinese people's patriotism," People's Daily said.
"This kind of intense spontaneous reaction to interference by foreign forces is an ordinary manifestation of the Chinese people's patriotism," it said.
"Only when the motherland is strong and prosperous can the interference and aggression of outside forces be fundamentally resisted and forestalled," it said.
Analysts say Beijing is keen to boost nationalist sentiment in China to fill an ideological vacuum caused by the rush from strict communist values to a market-style economy.
Repeated calls for more patriotism have been accompanied by repeated state media diatribes against the United States and by a mass campaign for a return to orthodox socialist values.
