China released dissident Chen Ziming on Wednesday to allow the ailing activist jailed for his role in ill-fated 1989 pro-democracy protests to seek medical treatment, a family member said.
The release of the leading dissident on medical parole came just seven days after a Beijing court jailed former student leader Wang Dan for 11 years following a brief trial that prompted expressions of concern from around the world.
Chen, 42, arrived home from the Beijing Number Two Prison at around 10.30 pm (1430 GMT), his mother Wu Yongfen said.
"His wife went to meet him... He's at his own home," Wu said in a telephone interview.
"Because he is ill, he asked to be released on bail for medical treatment," she said, adding it was unclear how long Chen would be permitted to remain at liberty.
The veteran pro-democracy activist was sentenced to 13 years in prison in 1991 for engaging in "counter-revolutionary", or subversive, activities during pro-democracy protests centred on Beijing's Tiananmen Square in 1989.
Chen had been singled out by Beijing authorities as a behind-the-scenes "black hand" organiser of the demonstrations, which were crushed by the army with heavy loss of life.
He won medical parole in 1994 in a move widely seen as part of a successful bid by Beijing to persuade Washington not to revoke China's Most Favoured Nation trade status on grounds of persistent human rights violations.
Human rights have long been a major irritant in Sino-U.S. ties already strained by disputes over trade, copyright piracy, arms proliferation and Taiwan.
U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher is scheduled to travel to Beijing this month for a visit widely seen as a vital step toward rebuilding the cross-Pacific relationship.
It was unclear whether Chen, who has been treated for cancer, hepatitis B, heart disease and other ailments, would be imprisoned again after treatment, his mother said.
"Last time, in 1994, he was also released on bail for medical treatment and later they made him go back," she said.
Chen was returned to prison on June 25, 1995, after joining calls for Beijing to release political prisoners and reverse its verdict that the Tiananmen Square protests were seditious.
"Recently he has been suffering from a lot of illnesses," said Wu, who last year joined other family members in a bold campaign to demand medical parole for her son.
Chen, who ran a social sciences institute with fellow activist Wang Juntao until the 1989 protests, had been receiving medical treatment twice a month while in prison, she said.
His release by Chinese authorities came amid condemnation from human rights groups over the jailing of Wang Dan after a hearing last Wednesday that lasted less than four hours.
The United States and other nations expressed deep concern over the verdict and sentence. Chinese state media hailed Wang's trial as a model of fairness, but rights activists called it a parody of justice held only to mask a pre-arranged result.
Wang, a dissident also known for his role as a leader of the 1989 pro-democracy protests, had pleaded not guilty to subversion charges carrying a maximum death sentence and a minimum 10 years' imprisonment.
The 11-year sentence imposed on him was the latest in a series of crushing blows to China's embattled band of dissidents, most of whom were already either in exile or serving long terms in administrative detention or prison.
