China congratulated U.S. President Bill Clinton on Wednesday for his election triumph, saying the victory presented a good opportunity to improve ties between Washington and Beijing.
Clinton's sweeping win over Republican rival Bob Dole is good news for a Beijing leadership which prefers to deal with familiar statesmen, Chinese academics and officials said.
"We wish to congratulate President Clinton on his re-election," Foreign Ministry spokesman Cui Tiankai said.
"Now, a good opportunity has presented itself for improving and expanding Sino-U.S. relations," Cui told reporters. "Some positive progress has been made in bilateral relations, with a somewhat improved atmosphere."
China was ready to work with Washington for further progress on the basis of past Sino-U.S. joint agreements, he said.
While Clinton had presided over four years of Sino-U.S. ties often strained by disputes over trade, human rights, arms proliferation and Taiwan, his re-election could help stabilise relations, Chinese academics said.
"The result should be a good thing for Sino-U.S. ties. After four years Clinton now understands China to a certain extent and there is some stability in his China policy," said one academic at a U.S.-funded election party in Beijing.
"Another four years should allow some improvement in relations," said the specialist in international strategic studies, who declined to be identified.
"Clinton is an opponent we know well," said a government official at the reception, where invited U.S. and Chinese guests watched electoral results emerge over satellite television and real time Internet links.
"It's like basketball: if the Chicago Bulls come to play the Beijing team and the two sides have never met before, it won't be a good game," said the official who declined to be named.
"Neither side knows what the other can do," he said.
Washington and Beijing both say ties have thawed since the two sides narrowly averted a trade war over copyright piracy and exchanged diplomatic fire over Taiwan earlier this year.
Cautious optimism was the tone taken by many of the Chinese specialists and officials at the reception in a Beijing hotel, where cola, hamburgers and live election coverage were served up by U.S. businesses keen to boost cross-Pacific understanding.
"The Chinese leaders... like to deal with U.S. presidents whom they know personally," said Professor Xu Cunyao of the Ministry of Culture's Institute for Administrators' Education.
"I think the Chinese leaders will be very happy with this result," he said.
Despite the diplomatic spats of recent years, Sino-U.S. economic and trade ties had grown relatively fast during Clinton's tenure, Gu Yuanyang of the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences said in a telephone interview.
"We are all satisfied with this result because it will have a certain positive effect on the recovery and development of Sino-Chinese relations," said Gu, director of the academy's Institute of World Economics and Politics.
Relations would not improve automatically, he said, adding Clinton should push for high-level contacts, ensure China's trade status, smooth Beijing's entry to the World Trade Organisation and refrain from creating difficulties on Taiwan.
