After four years of Sino-U.S. ties laced with near-miss trade wars, rhetorical broadsides and diplomatic sparring over human rights, Beijing is hoping for a new post-election approach from Washington.
Bill Clinton's electoral triumph on Tuesday may mean no change of occupant in the White House, but Beijing is hoping for a second-term transformation of the Democratic president's policy on China, diplomats and analysts said on Thursday.
"After this election (Clinton) doesn't need to worry about attracting votes," said Tong Tianqi, a international relations researcher at an institute under the State Council, or cabinet.
"We hope he will take a practical approach... it's possible he will change his approach," Tong said.
Relations between Beijing and Washington have been badly strained for years by disputes over trade, human rights, arms proliferation and Taiwan, but both sides say ties have warmed recently after a series of high-level meetings.
Beijing's hopes for change in Clinton's China policy are the flip side of the desire for stability in the fragile Sino-U.S. relationship that made Chinese academics and officials welcome his victory as the return of a devil they knew.
"The most important thing for us is stability in U.S. policy," said an official of the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation.
After four years in office Clinton was a familar face to a Beijing leadership that preferred to deal with statesmen it knew, and the U.S. president's understanding of China had also grown, the analysts said.
Chinese officials and state media have spotlighted what they call U.S. obstruction to Beijing's long-coveted accession to the World Trade Organisation (WTO) as a key area of dispute.
China blames Washington for blocking its entry to the global trade body on favourable terms as a developing country, while U.S. officials say Beijing must do more to open its markets.
Chinese hopes for change in Washington's approach could be borne out as U.S. electoral passions faded, but deep-rooted differences meant the path of Sino-U.S. ties over the next four years was unlikely to run smooth, diplomats in Beijing said.
"The Chinese will be thinking: is this the point at which the Americans might kick in with some new set of suggestions on either WTO or human rights cooperation, or both," said a Western diplomat. "I wouldn't be suprised if there were some."
Clinton's meeting with Chinese president Jiang Zemin in the Philippines later this month on the fringes of a regional economic forum would be a key opportunity to bolster ties, diplomats said.
The presidential face-to-face will be the latest in a string of high-level contacts that officials on both sides hope will set relations on a more stable footing and lead to an eventual exchange of state visits.
While there appeared to be few immediate threats to the new Sino-U.S. cordiality, issues such as copyright piracy in China -- which has twice led both sides to the brink of a trade war -- and Taiwan would continue to dog ties, the diplomats said.
China's growing U.S. trade surplus would continue to raise hackles in Washington, while Beijing's human rights record would remain a major stumbling block -- despite the release on medical parole of dissident Chen Ziming on Wednesday, they said.
Chen's release came just seven days after a Beijing court jailed former student leader Wang Dan for 11 years following a brief trial that prompted U.S. expressions of deep concern.
Wang's sentence was just the latest blow to China's tiny band of pro-democracy dissidents, most of whom were already in exile or serving long sentences in detention or jail.
Washington was tired of scuffling with Beijing over its treatment of dissidents, but China would need to make bigger concessions if it hoped to bring an end to the annual threat of U.S.-backed censure at the U.N. Human Rights Commission in Geneva, said a diplomat.
"I don't think that (Chen's release) would be effective," he said. "It's pretty small compared with what went before."
