Some of the brightest stars of Chinese pop put on a glittering show in Beijing on Friday, but officials kept politically-suspect rock heroes off the playlist, sources close to the concert said.
A capacity audience of around 18,000 flocked to the Capital Gymnasium to see a showcase event featuring dozens of performers from China's fledgling popular music industry.
State media said the event, the first leg of a double concert in the capital, was intended to celebrate the growth of the pop music industry since it was banned as capitalist poison during the chaos of the 1966-76 Cultural Revolution.
The concerts were intended to capture the flavour of the past decade of Chinese pop, but organisers had been ordered to cut some of the nation's biggest and most influential rock and roll stars from the playlist, sources close to the event said.
The Friday 'A' concert, to be followed by a 'B' performance on Saturday, was a showcase mainly for sugary pop songs largely focused on themes of love and friendship --  a staple diet for state-run music broadcasters.
Harder-edged music -- unpopular among communist authorities keen to promote safe socialist loyalties -- was conspiciously absent.
Beijing has repeatedly ordered campaigns to boost socialist morality weakened in the rush to a market economy, prompting tighter official controls on all forms of cultural activity.
Cui Jian, widely regarded as the father of Chinese rock music, was not scheduled to attend either concert, organisers said.
Sources close to the event said Cui, whose music is a blend of Western rock, Chinese instruments and politically-sensitive lyrics, had originally been intended to play a major part in the event but had been barred by China's musical mandarins.
The classically-trained performer's music is still hugely popular among listeners, but ideologically-suspect anthems such as "Nothing to My Name' that caught the mood of a generation in the late 1980s are seldom permitted on state-controlled media.
"Cui's basically been banned from performing in Beijing since 1993," said a promoter close to the event who declined to be named. "The higher-ups told the organisers...he couldn't take part."
Heavy rock group Hei Bao, or Black Panther, which has won the hearts of many younger Chinese despite official disapproval, would also be absent, said concert promoter and radio presenter Zhang Shurong.
Zhang said he had not been told of any ban against Cui or Hei Bao, who have long been forced to seek venues far from the Chinese capital.
Hei Bao had not been banned but were considered unsuitable because they could make the audience too excited, he said, adding the stars still on the playlist were attraction enough.
"They are all very important, all people who can play epoch-making roles in the circle of Chinese singers," he said.
