China on Tuesday rolled out the memory of long-dead revolutionary leader Sun Yat-sen to strengthen its drive for reunification with Taiwan and defy what it sees as foreign forces trying to split the motherland.
The 130th anniversary of Sun's birth was an occasion for remembering his work for the cause of national unity, said the official People's Daily newspaper in a front-page editorial on a national hero revered by both Beijing and arch-rival Taipei.
Sun had firmly advocated the safeguarding of both China's sovereignty and unity, President Jiang Zemin told an anniversary meeting in Beijing's cavernous Great Hall of the People.
"It was always the unremitting pursuit of Mr Sun Yat-sen to achieve the return of Taiwan at an early date and to fulfil the great cause of the unification of the motherland," said the People's Daily, the mouthpiece of China's communist leadership.
While in Sun's day it had been Japanese occupation that kept the Taiwanese apart from their mainland brethren, Sun's unitary zeal was as relevant now as then, it said in an article that also hit out at foreign forces trying to divide China.
In fullsome tributes to Sun issued by the state media, officials rushed to appeal to Taiwan leaders to work for speedy reunification while condemning all moves toward independence.
Sun, who helped lead the 1911 revolution that overthrew China's imperial Qing dynasty, also founded the Nationalist Party which later fled to Taiwan after losing a bitter civil war against the communists in 1949.
While the Communist Party says it took up his banner of revolution after his death in 1925, Taipei's Nationalist leaders see themselves as Sun's true heirs.
The farmer's son turned doctor and radical has long been seen as a potential symbol of unity for politicians on either side of the Taiwan Strait who have walked very different revolutionary roads in the seven decades since his death.
Cross-strait relations have been sorely tested in recent years by Taipei's attempts to break out of the diplomatic isolation imposed by Beijing, which considers the island a rebel province and has vowed to invade, if it ever declares independence.
Separatism was still rampant in Taiwan, while forces both there and abroad still worked to split the Chinese nation, the People's Daily said.
"The activities to split the motherland of the Taiwan authorities have not ceased and forces for 'Taiwan independence' run wild on the island," it said.
"Internationally, forces still exist that interfere in our nation's internal affairs and support 'Taiwan Independence'."
While some Taiwanese politicians have long called for independence, the ruling Nationalist Party dissmisses Beijing allegations that it harbours a hidden "Two Chinas" agenda and says it is firmly committed to reunification some day.
Growing detente between Beijing and Taipei ran aground in June 1995, when Taiwan President Lee Teng-hui made a landmark unofficial visit to the United States, enraging Beijing.
Ties cooled further in March when Chinese war games and missile tests in the seas near Taiwan overshadowed the island's first direct presidential election, prompting Washington to send two aircraft carrier battlegroups to the area.
U.S. Navy intelligence specialists have concluded that the war games were rehearsals for a possible all-out invasion of the island in the future, a study made available on Monday showed.
While Chinese state media called on the populace to emulate Sun's revolutionary spirit, local authorities celebrated the anniversary with historical soirees and exhibitions.
Gold and silver stamps bearing his portrait would be issued nationwide soon, the official Xinhua news agency said.
