Chinese leaders Wednesday denounced Beijing's exclusion from the World Trade Organisation as unjust, saying the giant Communist nation had made great strides in opening its markets to trade and investment.
Protectionism or trade sanctions should not be policy tools in a world increasingly dependent on international trade, Minister for Economic Restructuring Li Tieying said at a meeting of business executives.
"It is unjust to exclude China from the World Trade Organisation," Li told a business summit in Beijing.
"A World Trade Organisation without China is incomplete," said Li, who is also a member of the Communist Party's elite Politburo. "We hope this situation will quickly change."
Chinese officials say Beijing should be allowed to join the WTO on lenient terms as a developing country. They blame the United States for blocking their accession with tough demands for more open markets.
Disagreement over the terms of Beijing's admission to the WTO, which Washington says should take into account China's huge and fast-growing economic clout, is just one of a number of disputes that have long troubled Sino-U.S. ties.
Rows over copyright piracy, arms proliferation, human rights and Taiwan have all strained relations in recent years, with Washington's annual review of China's Most Favoured Nation trade status triggering some of the bitterest rhetoric.
China has urged Washington to make MFN status permanent, and Li warned Washington that the United States would lose if MFN was revoked.
"If the United States cancels China's Most Favoured Nation treatment, and imported the same goods from other countries, then U.S. consumers would have to spend $14 billion more every year," he quoted World Bank statistics as showing.
Beijing and Washington earlier this year went to the brink of a trade war after Washington announced punitive sanctions over widespread copyright piracy in China.
In a pointed reference to such disputes, Li said tough trade tactics should not be overused, but did not mention the United States by name.
"The new international economic order ... should not have any kind of trade protectionism or discriminatory policies and the big stick of sanctions should certainly not be wielded at every opportunity," he said.
China's growing trade surplus with the United States is also widely seen as a barrier to warmer Sino-U.S. relations.
U.S. embassy officials said Wednesday that the top U.S. textile negotiator had postponed her trip to China for talks in the face of U.S. sanctions on Chinese textiles and a threat by Beijing to retaliate.
Chinese exports to the United States in the first 10 months had increased by 5.5 percent to $21.3 billion, official Chinese newspapers said Wednesday. They gave no details for imports.
