Chinese leaders on Wednesday denounced Beijing's exclusion from the World Trade Organisation (WTO) as unjust, saying the nation had made great strides in opening its markets to trade and investment.
Protectionism or trade sanctions should not be policy tools in a world increasingly dependent on international trade, said Chinese minister for economic restructuring Li Tieying.
"It is unjust to exclude China from the World Trade Organisation," Li told a business summit in Beijing.
"A World Trade Organisation without China is incomplete," said Li, who is also a member of the Communist Party's elite Politburo. "We hope this situation will quickly change."
Chinese officials say Beijing should be allowed to join the WTO on lenient terms as a developing country and have blamed the United States for blocking their accession with tough demands for more open markets.
Chen Jinhua, chairman of the State Planning Commission, said China was committed to gradually establishing a trade system in line with international practice and had this year already slashed import tariffs to an average 23 percent from 36 percent.
Beijing would continue to open its markets to foreign trade and investment and to push for membership of the global trade club, Chen said in a speech to the business summit.
"We will continue positive negotiation with the members of the World Trade Organisation to regain membership in the organisation at the earliest possible date," he said.
Disagreement over the terms of Beijing's admission to the WTO, which Washington says should take into account China's huge and fast-growing economic clout, is just one of a number of disputes that have long troubled Sino-U.S. trade ties.
Rows over copyright piracy, arms proliferation, human rights and Taiwan have all strained relations in recent years, with Washington's annual review of China's Most Favoured Nation (MFN) trade status triggering some of the bitterest rhetoric.
China has urged Washington to make MFN status permanent, and Li warned the United States itself would lose if MFN was revoked.
"If the United States cancels China's Most Favoured Nation treatment, and imported the same goods from other countries, then U.S. consumers would have to spend $14 billion more every year," he quoted World Bank statistics as showing.
Beijing and Washington earlier this year went to the brink of a trade war after Washington announced punitive sanctions over widespread copyright piracy in China.
In a pointed reference to such disputes, Li said tough trade tactics should not be overused, but did not mention the United States by name.
"The new international economic order... should not have any kind of trade protectionism or discriminatory policies and the big stick of sanctions should certainly not be wielded at every opportunity," he said.
U.S. embassy officials said on Wednesday that the top U.S. textile negotiator had postponed her trip to China for talks in the face of U.S. sanctions on Chinese textiles and a threat by Beijing to retaliate.
China's growing trade surplus with the United States is also widely seen as a barrier to warmer Sino-U.S. relations.
Exports to the United States in the first 10 months had increased by 5.5 percent to $21.3 billion, official Chinese newspapers said on Wednesday. They gave no details for imports.
