China's power minister vowed Thursday to protect the interests of foreign investors expected to provide one-fifth of the 700 billion yuan ($84 billion) to be invested in power generation between 1996 and 2000.
Foreign investment in the electricity generation sector would be carefully channelled to boost China's domestic industry, power minister Shi Dazhen told a business conference.
"We have established a legal framework to protect foreign investors," Shi told reporters at the conference.
Beijing would perfect its laws and regulations to ensure that investor interests were guaranteed, he said.
China's electricity generating capacity would hit 290,000 megawatts by the end of 2000 from 217,000 megawatts at the end of 1995, Shi said.
China would require around 700 billion yuan ($84.4 million) investment in the power sector during Beijing's state-set ninth five-year plan, which runs from 1996-2000, he said.
Foreign investors were expected to come up with 20 percent -- around $17 billion -- while the central government provided 40 percent and local authorities and enterprises shelled out the remaining 40 percent, he said but gave no details.
The investment estimates appeared to be lower than those made by other senior power officials last month, who said China would need $20 billion from abroad.
Shi said he was unaware of the $20 billion figure.
Potential foreign investors have said an effective 15 percent limit on returns on investment from Chinese power plant projects is a major disincentive, but Shi waved aside such concerns, saying any specific limit would be impractical.
Chinese energy officials have consistently denied setting any limit on returns, although they have said the best rate from key projects is around 17 percent.
Chinese electricity prices are fixed by the state, which has kept prices low.
Shi said foreign investors remained keen to put their money behind Chinese efforts to build enough generating capacity to keep up with rocketing economic growth and to raise per capita capacity from the meagre 180 watts achieved by the end of 1995.
"Although the power industry has developed very quickly, because China has a population of 1.2 billion, the power supply is still very tight and the supply level is very low," he said.
"There is great enthusiasm among foreigners to invest in this sector," he said, adding that such investment should be carefully guided.
"The use of foreign investment must be combined with that of China's own power manufacturing industry, with foreign funds used to buy Chinese-made generating equipment," he said.
Foreign funds would be focused on high technology plants with capacity of 300 megawatts or more, he said.
Beijing says it wants to replace inefficient thermal power stations that burn dirty high-sulphur coal with larger new plants and with nuclear and hydro-electric projects.
