European record business executives on Friday sang the praises of China's crackdown on widespread copyright piracy, saying Beijing appeared sincere in its desire to build a legitimate music industry.
European companies were eager to establish cooperative ventures with local firms that would allow them to supply music to a vast listening audience currently largely supplied from illicit music production lines, the executives said.
"The Chinese market has enormous potential," EMI Europe President Rupert Perry told reporters in Beijing, adding that China was making progress in its crackdown on piracy.
Beijing vowed to clamp down on pirates and prise open its cultural markets in a June agreement with the United States that narrowly averted a multibillion dollar cross-Pacific trade war over violations of intellectual property rights.
Analysts and some industry figures have cast doubt on China's commitment to wipe out piracy, but the music executives said they had been encouraged by their talks with Chinese copyright and publishing officials.
"Our conversations with Chinese officials in the last couple of days lead us to believe that they are very cognisant of the problem and doing everything that they can to control it," said Perry.
"The laws are in place, they have an understanding of what has to happen and yes, they have had successes in closing certain factories," he said. "We believe that will continue."
The executives, who are part of a trade delegation to China led by European Commission Vice President Sir Leon Brittan, said they hoped to build an industry that would develop Chinese musical talent for a domestic and international audience.
The multimillion dollar Chinese music market had the potential to grow 10-fold over the next few years, industry officials in the delegation said.
"We... tried to explain to the Chinese what we could do together," said Polygram Far East president Norman Cheng, "They have been pretty receptive to all these ideas."
"This is our first round of meetings," said Michael Smellie, senior vice president of BMG Entertainment International Asia Pacific. "We were encouraged."
Music imports into China were still negligible, while pirate sales were estimated at $170 million a year, roughly equivalent to the value of legitimate sales, said Adrian Strain of the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry (IFPI).
European music companies were looking for Chinese partners to develop the local market, with former pirate firms among the potential wedding partners, the executives said.
While it was impossible to wipe out piracy with a single campaign, Beijing's crackdown on illicit production had worried illegal producers and had forced them to shift some production lines to Vietnam and even South America, IFPI officials said.
