The head of China's restive northwestern Xinjiang on Friday accused western nations of working with pro-independence activists to try to split the nation, saying no end was in sight in the war on separatism.
Activists in the mainly-Moslem district had fomented riots and carried out political killings, but their struggle against Beijing rule was bound to fail, chairman of the Xinjiang autonomous region, Ablait Abdureschit, told reporters here.
"Against the strategic background of some people internationally engaging in splitting and westernising China, there is a small clique who want to split Xinjiang from China and achieve independence," he said.
"To achieve their objectives they take all kinds of actions; they infiltrate, make propaganda, carry out assassinations and create riots," he said.
"The vast majority of Xinjiang people resolutely oppose such activities," he said, adding western conspiracies to divide China could never succeed.
Separatists stood against the economic progress that Beijing was bringing to a region where development had long lagged behind other areas of China, he said, accusing un-named western nations of conspiring with pro-independence activists.
"In the last few years some western countries have concentrated on engaging in activities to westernise and split China," he said. "...In Xinjiang, the separatists have cooperated with the international conspiracy to westernise and split China."
Authorities in Xinjiang this year intensified a crackdown on separatists and unauthorised religious activity after a series of violent clashes, bombings and assassinations of officials and Islamic leaders regarded as pro-Beijing.
The arid region, described by officials as a sunny "Land of Fruit and Melons", is considered by many Chinese a wild frontier province and has a long history of ethnic unrest between the native Uighur population and members of China's Han majority.
In May, Beijing ordered tighter controls along Xinjiang's long borders to block the smuggling of weapons and subversive materials from nearby central Asian states.
Ablait Abdureschit said only a few people were involved in separatist activities in the region, but acknowledged the struggle against separatism was unlikely to end soon.
"Nationalist separatist activities occurred in the past, occur now, and will occur in the future, abroad and also within the country," he said. "This struggle is long-term and complicated."
Despite the struggle against separatism, the outlook was bright for the sprawling region, which borders Afghanistan, Pakistan and three mainly-Moslem central Asian states from the former Soviet Union, Ablait Abdureschit said.
Beijing, which provided more than 40 percent of the region's government budget, was working hard to boost the economy and improve Xinjiang's links with the outside world, he said.
The resource-rich region was aiming to become one of the country's top grain producers by the end of the century and had already gathered a record cotton harvest of 1.05 million tonnes in 1996, while oil and gas resources were abundant, he said.
"The general situation in Xinjiang is good," he said.
