China's soaring demand for computer chips is expected to fuel strong growth in a domestic semiconductor industry that has long lagged behind its Asian neighbours, industry and government officials said on Monday.
Beijing hoped to boost the output of advanced integrated circuits (ICs), despite complaints that import tariffs and U.S. technology export restrictions made some vital equipment difficult to obtain, they said.
"In recent years the industry has grown fast," said Yu Zhongyu, chief engineer of the Ministry of Electronics Industry. "In the next five years it will grow even faster."
Chip production had been identified by Beijing as the first priority of the electronics industry, Yu told Reuters at an industry conference in the Chinese capital.
Demand for ICs would continue to be pushed by China's growing hunger for consumer electronics and telecommunications, with personal computers expected to become a major future source of demand, he said.
The value of China's IC output soared to $550 million in 1995 from $400 million the year before, but production was just one-fifth of demand, said industry group Semiconductor Equipment and Materials International (SEMI).
China was expected to produce 700 million chips a year by 2000, up from 330 million in 1995, SEMI officials said.
The value of equipment imports for the plants needed to make chips was expected to soar to about $700 million in 1997 from an estimated $500 million this year, they said.
China was pulling itself out of a semiconductor swamp created by its attempts during the 1980s to set up small-scale producers around the country, said an official of one U.S. company that supplies semiconductor production equipment.
Beijing was now promoting larger, more advanced fabs, or IC plants, that could match international standards, said the official, who declined to be identified.
"They have made up their mind that they are going to go for it...and believe me, the market is big," he said.
Yu said Beijing had decided to build 0.5 micron ICs at the Huahong Microelectronics Ltd in Shanghai as part of moves to develop China's ability to make sophisticated small chips.
Other sub-micron plants were being built or expanded in cooperation with foreign firms, such as Mitsubishi Stone IC Co, a joint venture between China's Stone Group and Mitsubishi Electric and Mitsui &amp; Co Ltd of Japan, he said.
The $1.6 billion Mitsubishi Stone venture was announced in March, with a $100 million 0.35 micron IC fab to be launched next year.
South Korean chipmaker Samsung Electronics Co, which opened a $100 million semiconducter plant in the eastern province of Jiangsu in July, has said it expects the Chinese market to grow an average annual 26 percent until 1999.
Difficulties in importing production equipment were a major obstacle to China's creation of a semiconductor industry that could compete with neighbouring powerhouses such as South Korea and Japan, industry analysts at the conference said.
"China's increased import tariffs and U.S. restrictions on technology exports are the biggest problems," said one analyst. "Companies say they can't bring in the equipment they need."
