China said on Tuesday a visit by U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher could help keep Sino-U.S. ties on track but warned differences remained on such sensitive issues as trade and human rights.
Christopher, the highest level U.S. official to visit Beijing for two years, was scheduled to arrive in the Chinese capital on Tuesday evening for meetings intended to give a vital boost to long-strained Sino-U.S. ties.
"We hope this visit by Christopher to China can play a certain role in helping keep Sino-U.S. relations on track for healthy and stable development," Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Cui Tiankai told a news briefing.
While holding out the hope that ties could continue to grow warmer, Cui also criticised Washington's policies on trade, Chinese human rights and U.S. arms sales to Taiwan.
China has sent Washington mixed signals in the run-up to Christopher's visit, combining conciliatory talk with tough rhetoric on a range of tricky diplomatic issues, but diplomats say both sides are keen to make the visit a success.
Sino-U.S. ties have long been rocked by disputes over trade, human rights, copyright piracy in China, arms proliferation and Taiwan, although both sides say tensions have eased recently.
Differences remained with the United States over trade issues, but these should not be solved by threats of economic force, Cui said.
"There are differences and problems in Sino-U.S. trade and sometimes conflicts; this is the result of increasing trade," he said.
"The two sides should resolve possible differences and conflicts on a basis of mutual equality and by consultation rather than with unilateral actions or the imposition (of one side's) views," he said.
U.S concerns over China's human rights record, long a major issue in ties, have been heightened by Beijing's rejection last week of former student leader and dissident Wang Dan's appeal against his 11 years sentence for subversion.
Wang's sentence was a heavy blow to China's struggling pro-democracy movement and was widely seen as a slap in the face for Washington, which has touted constructive engagement with Beijing as the best way to boost Chinese human rights.
Cases such as Wang's were not human rights issues and were judicial matters that had nothing to do with Sino-U.S. relations, Cui said.
Washington's annual review of China's Most Favoured Nation (MFN) trade status, necessary to avoid heavy tariffs on Chinese imports, was another unneccesary irritant, he said.
"The U.S. review of China's MFN status every year is inappropriate," he said. "The settling of MFN once and for all is already on the agenda."
Washington has also been critical of Chinese policies on weapons proliferation, but Cui said the United States was the main offender, with arms sales to Beijing's arch-rival Taiwan.
"Of the so-called weapons proliferation issues, the most sensitive and most important are U.S. weapon sales to Taiwan," he said.
Christopher has come under pressure from members of Congress to raise U.S. concerns over the future of human rights in Hong Kong after it returns to Beijing rule next year but Cui said such matters were not Washington's concern.
"Hong Kong issues are totally China's internal affair," he said.
