China has launched an ideological onslaught on dissent in Tibet, vowing to crack down on pro-independence monks and nuns and calling for tighter controls on religion in the restive Himalayan region.
Beijing's campaign to build "spiritual civilisation" -- communist code for a return to socialist values -- was a matter of strategic importance for the region's future, the official Tibet Daily said in an edition seen in Beijing on Wednesday.
The ideological campaign would aim to cut the role of religion in the deeply Buddhist region, as well as wipe out the influence of Tibet's exiled spiritual leader, the Dalai Lama, and curb separatism, the newspaper's November 11 edition said.
"Monks and nuns who follow the Dalai Lama clique's separatist wrecking activities will be dealt with according to the law," it quoted Tibet's communist leadership as saying.
"Those who use religion and superstition in...activities threatening the physical and mental health of the masses will be resolutely suppressed," it said in a long front-page report laced with references to Marxist ideological struggle.
China has long tried to weed out pro-independence monks and nuns, blaming them for playing a major role in an underground Tibetan campaign against Beijing rule.
The London-based watchdog group Tibet Information Network reported this week that a jailed Tibetan nun had had her sentence doubled to 18 years for defying Beijing's choice as the reincarnation of the region's second holiest monk.
The 10th Panchen Lama died in 1989, and Beijing has anointed a six-year-old boy as his reincarnation. The Dalai Lama has named another six-year-old boy as the 11th Panchen Lama.
The identification of reincarnations of living Buddhas, organisation of major religious activities and construction of religious sites all require local government approval, the Tibet Daily said, adding that management of religious festivals would be tightened.
Monks and nuns would be organised to take part in activities to benefit society and would be directed to become "patriotic religious professionals", while Communist Party members who took part in religious events would be disciplined, it said.
Work was needed to establish in Tibetan people's minds the view that their region was an inseparable part of China, it said.
Spiritual civilisation, a watchword touted by China's leadership as a way to revive socialist morality weakened by the nation's rush to a market-style economy, was also needed to combat enemy Westerners, the Tibet Daily said.
"The schemes of hostile Western forces to split and Westernise us will not change," it said, without giving details.
The newspaper reserved some of its harshest rhetoric for supporters of the Dalai Lama, who won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1989 for his non-violent campaign for autonomy for his homeland.
Beijing's main rival for Tibetan loyalties has lived in exile since a failed uprising against communist rule in 1959, but he remains revered among the region's devout Buddhists.
"The ideological infiltration of our region by the Dalai Lama clique is still very fierce," the Tibet Daily said. "The splittist forces' war to win ground, win over the masses and the the youth and win command of the monasteries is still intense."
