The goodwill generated by recent high-level visits may warm a Sino-U.S. presidential meeting this weekend, but lingering disputes mean the two leaders will still have much to talk about, diplomats and analysts said on Friday.
Chinese President Jiang Zemin's meeting with his U.S. counterpart Bill Clinton at a conference of the Asian-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum in the Philippines would be a key chance to bolster recent progress in easing ties, they said.
A visit this week by U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher had brought Beijing welcome signs of new U.S. flexibility on such thorny issues as weapons proliferation, trade and Taiwan, said a Chinese specialist on U.S. affairs.
"During Christopher's visit to China there was progress on all the issues," said Niu Jun of the North American foreign policy department of the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences.
Both sides had acknowledged a need to boost contacts and exchange state visits, while Christopher had accepted that U.S. arms sales to Beijing's island rival Taiwan were a weapons proliferation issue, Niu said in a telephone interview.
The clearest sign of Washington's desire to repair the battered cross-Pacific relationship was U.S. willingness to consider starting peaceful nuclear cooperation even before a previously signed accord on the issue was implemented, he said.
"This change (on nuclear technology transfer) symbolised the change in the U.S. attitude," he said.
"There has to be a belief in the possibility of establishing fairly good relations with China in the future (for the United States to be willing) to transfer this kind of advanced technology," he said.
China is eager to buy nuclear reactors from U.S. firms equally keen to tap into its potentially large market, but cooperation has been stunted by U.S. fears that Beijing places few controls on the proliferation of nuclear technology.
While nuclear flexibility is controversial in Washington, mutual interest made nuclear cooperation the issue one that Washington and Beijing could use to ensure a recent improvement in ties did not falter, said a Beijing-based Western diplomat.
"I think that's the big carrot the Americans are trying to hold out for more progress on non-proliferation," the diplomat said. "It's something the Americans would quite like to do anyway because there's money in it."
While Christopher's visit had helped to boost ties in general, China was still likely to hold out for unilateral concessions from Washington on the terms of its accession to the World Trade Organisation, human rights and trade, he said.
"They don't really seem to have made a lot of progress," he said. "I get the impression that there's still a lot of hard pounding to go."
A U.S. desire to see more concrete commitments from Beijing before making concessions meant that the Jiang-Clinton meeting could end up achieving little of real substance, he said.
Taiwan, which Beijing has considered a rebel province since the end of the Chinese civil war in 1949, would remain China's main policy focus at the presidential meeting, said Niu.
"For China the most important issue is Taiwan...and the reaffirmation that (the United States) will not sell weapons to Taiwan," he said.
While China's stance on most Sino-U.S. bugbear issues was clear, Beijing was unlikely to give any public signal of its intentions on newer issues such as a U.S. push for tax-free imformation technology imports or other APEC proposals, the Western diplomat said.
"I think the Chinese are keeping their powder dry on all these issues," he said.
