Motorola Inc is appealing to Chinese authorities over taxes on capital imports that would boost the cost of a $500 million semiconductor plant being built in the city of Tianjin, a company official said on Friday.
Construction of the plant in Xiqing district, a half an hour's drive from the northern port city's centre, was on schedule and production was expected to begin in the first quarter of 1998, said the official, who declined to be identified.
The U.S. high-technology giant was appealing to China's State Council, or cabinet, over taxes on imports of vital equipment for the semiconductor plant, or fab, he said.
Beijing on April 1 abolished privileges for foreign-funded ventures that had allowed them to import machinery and other capital equipment free of tax. Investors say the move has dramatically increased the cost of many projects.
"There is an appeal committee within the State Council and we are appealing for some tax exemption (for the Xiqing plant)," the Motorola official said.
He declined to say if the company was optimistic of being granted exemptions, or when a decision was expected.  
An official of the State Council's information office contacted by telephone said he was unaware of an appeal by Motorola over taxes on imports, adding that such matters were the concern of the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation.
Work on the Xiqing project had already begun, the Motorola official said.
"We have already broken ground...Now we are erecting the buildings," he said. "We are looking at 1998, first quarter (to begin production)."
Initial investment in the venture was expected to be around $500 million, but the cost of such semiconductor plants could easily rise to $1.0 billion, he said but gave no details.
Motorola has been quoted as saying the Xiqing plant will produce 180,000 eight-inch sub-micron wafers a year, making it a major addition to a Chinese semiconductor industry that has long lagged far behind its Asian neighbours.
Motorola, which has vowed to invest $1.2 billion in China, Taiwan and Hong Kong between 1988 and 2000, generated sales revenues in China and Hong Kong of $3.2 billion last year, the official said.  
The company's China plants were considered strategic investments, he said, adding that the local content rate of their products was expected to rise to around 55 percent by 2000 from around 45 percent currently.
Motorola's exports from its China operations accounted for about 30 percent of production value, less than expected because of the breakneck expansion of the domestic market, he said.
"The market here, especially the telecom market, just exploded," he said.
State media has quoted Motorola executives as saying the number of Chinese using pagers is likely to rise by around 43 percent this year to more than 40 million people, making China the biggest user of pagers in the world.
Motorola currently supplies more than 50 percent of the domestic pager market, the official said, but declined to give details.
In the competitive mobile phone market -- where Motorola is seen as enjoying less success -- the U.S. firm was hoping development of Code Division Multiple Access (CDMA) cellular technology would help boost market share, he said but gave no details.
