China issued a spirited defence of embattled U.N. Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali on Friday, accusing the United States of trying to use financial blackmail to stop him from serving a second term.
Boutros-Ghali had helped push forward world development during his five-year term as U.N. chief and his re-election should have been assured, said the People's Daily newspaper, official mouthpiece of China's communist leadership.
The United States should reconsider its lonely stance as the only nation on the U.N.'s 15-member Security Council to oppose the Egyptian's re-election, the newspaper said.
Washington on Tuesday vetoed Boutros-Ghali's candidacy, accusing him of being too slow in pushing U.N. reform and saying his candidacy would further delay U.S. payment of $1.4 billion in membership dues owed to the world body.
"Lumping together Boutros-Ghali's reappointment and the payment of membership dues can only make people feel that someone is trying to blackmail the United Nations," People's Daily said in a signed editorial.
All U.N. members, whatever their internal politics, were responsible for paying dues and U.S. opposition to Boutros-Ghali was unjustified, it said in the latest of a series of Chinese affirmations of support for the U.N. chief.
"The United States has absolutely not raised any decent grounds for opposing Boutros-Ghali's renewal, but has just criticised him for being weak on U.N. reform," it said.
"You just have to respect facts to be able to see that this kind of criticism of inadequacy is not persuasive."
Boutros-Ghali's opposition to U.S. attempts to use the United Nations as a cover for policies of hegemony and power politics was a key factor behind Washington's opposition to his re-election, said the Yangcheng Daily newspaper.
The U.S. Republican-dominated Congress is delaying payment of the $1.4 billion U.S. debt to the United Nations, a policy helping to bankrupt the cash-strapped world body.
People's Daily said Boutros-Ghali had worked to push U.N. reform, had paid great attention to the cause of world development and had made a special contribution to development in Africa during his tenure, which ends on December 31.
Diplomats say African nations are currently driving the campaign for Boutros-Ghali's re-election, aiming to keep his candidacy alive as long as possible in the hope of a compromise solution or a change in the U.S. stance.
Boutros-Ghali said on Thursday that he did not wish to see his name submitted to the Security Council for another vote but also that he was not withdrawing from the race.
Washington's reluctance to propose alternatives to Boutros-Ghali was a sign of U.S. insecurity and its knowledge that any candidate it chose would be rejected by other nations, the People's Daily said.
"If the African nations continue to support Boutros-Ghali, the United States will face a difficult decision," it said.
"Many people hope the United States that cast the opposing vote will consider its position anew and solve this problem in an appropriate way.
