Authorities in central China's Anhui province have ordered three pro-democracy activists to stand trial on charges of counter-revolutionary propaganda and incitement, a human rights group said on Monday.
The Hefei Intermediate People's Court in the Anhui capital was scheduled to try dissidents Shen Liangqing, Ma Lianggang and Huang Xiuming on Tuesday, New York-based watchdog Human Rights in China said in a statement.
A court official in Hefei contacted by telephone declined to comment on the case, saying questions related to it touched on matters that had "not been made public".
The group said the trial would be the latest step in a state crackdown on dissent that has seen many of the main figures in China's struggling pro-democracy movement disappear into prison or administrative detention.
There was little doubt about the likely result of the trial of Shen, Ma and Huang, all of whom had been detained at least once since they took part in an ill-fated campaign for more democracy in 1989, the U.S. group said.
"Although they must go for trial on (November) 26th, it has already been decided that they are guilty and must be punished," it said.
All were unemployed, though Shen had been a government official and Huang a manager at a company. Ma had been a student.
The evidence against the three stemmed from articles written and distributed in 1991, and for which all had already been detained for more than a year, the human rights group said.
"To suddenly try them again now is a typical case in the Chinese government's strict nationwide suppression of dissidents," it said.
Earlier this month, a Beijing court took just 10 minutes to reject the appeal of leading dissident Wang Dan and uphold his 11-year prison sentence for subversion.
The trial and failed appeal of the former student leader were part of a series of crushing blows delivered by authorities to China's tiny band of political dissenters.
Visiting U.S. and European officials and politicians have raised the case of jailed dissidents in talks with Chinese leaders, but have said individual human rights cases should not be allowed to disrupt overall ties.
China dismisses criticism of its human rights record as interference in its internal affairs.
Human Rights in Asia said observers were being denied access to the trial of the three Anhui dissidents, although the proceedings were officially open.
"It is believed this is another trial in which society and the free media are not permitted to understand the real situation," the group said.
The intermediate court official said he could not confirm any details of the case.
"We cannot answer over the phone, because this concerns a matter that has not been made public," the official said.
