A long-delayed Japanese mission to discuss the details of Tokyo's huge state loans to China has reached basic agreement on 22 development projects proposed by Beijing, Japanese officials said on Thursday.
Projects involving infrastructure, agriculture and environmental protection were likely to be among the recipients of favourable Japanese loans, said Shiro Sadoshima, director of the loan aid division of Japan's Foreign Ministry.
Final decisions had yet to be made on the 22 projects slated to receive the 180 billion yen ($1.6 billion) earmarked for the first year of the yen loan package, which will run from 1996 to 2000, Sadoshima told a news briefing.
Japanese sources in Beijing say discussions on the projects had been long delayed because of faltering relations and Japanese anger at China's nuclear testing that last year led to the freezing of Japanese grant-in-aid.
The 580 billion yen in Japanese soft loans due to be extended to China between 1996 to 2000 were not formally affected by the protest, but no missions to approve their details had been sent since China conducted a nuclear test in May 1995.
Asked if Chinese nuclear testing was a factor in Tokyo's delay in sending the loan mission, Sadoshima said that did not appear to be the case.
"At least, our government has never said that," he said, adding it was incorrect to say work on the loans had been "resumed" -- a word used by other Japanese officials.
"It's not a resumption... We never stopped," he said.
Relations between Beijing and Tokyo have been strained this year by a controversial visit by Japanese Prime Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto to a shrine to Japan's war dead and by a territorial dispute over an island group in the East China Sea.
While Chinese state media have been quick to condemn what they call resurgent Japanese militarism, diplomats say Beijing is keen not to allow the disputes to harm an economic relationship in which the soft yen loans are an important part.
Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Cui Tiankai earlier this week warned Japan not to use financial assistance as a form of political pressure, saying to do so could only harm ties.
The yen loans, widely seen in China as a form of reparation for the suffering inflicted by Japan during World War Two, have themselves been a source of dispute.
The rise of the value of the yen in 1994 and 1995 -- which sent the cost of the loans soaring -- prompted howls of Chinese complaints and demands to be allowed to repay in U.S. dollars.
Tokyo refused, but the yen's later decline helped blunt the issue as a potential cause of conflict and both sides have recently shown new willingness to cooperate on other issues.
Prime Minister Hashimoto has been reported as promising to consider lifting the freeze on grant-in-aid to China, but Sadoshima said that issue would not be discussed by the loan mission.
"That's not my department," Sadoshima said.
($1 = 113 yen)
