The child chosen by China to be Tibet's second holiest monk passed the first anniversary of his selection quietly in Beijing on Friday, far from the restive Himalayan region, officals in the capital said.
Officials in Tibet said they had concluded a six-month push to curb separatist sentiment in the deeply Buddhist region's monasteries, a campaign that an overseas watchdog group has reported led to the expulsion or detention of scores of monks.
Seven-year-old Gyaincain Norbu, chosen by China as the 11th incarnation of the Panchan Lama, would not attend any activities on the first anniversary of his selection, an official of the Tibet regional authority's Beijing office said.
"The child is in Beijing, so there will not be any activities in Tibet," the official said by telephone.
All planned anniversary celebrations slated for the capital had been completed, he said.
State media have said that Norbu, regarded by many Tibetans as a pretender to the 10th Panchen Lama's spiritual mantle, visited Beijing's Yonghe Lamasery last week to celebrate the anniversary of his enthronement.
Tibet's spiritual leader, the exiled Dalai Lama, has named another boy as the reincarnation of the 10th Panchen Lama, the Himalayan region's second holiest monk who died in 1989.
Chinese sources have said Beijing's choice lives in the capital under state protection against possible assassination attempts by radical Tibetans.
In Tibet, an official of the religious affairs bureau said a six-month campaign to boost patriotism and curb separatist sentiment in the region's monasteries had been concluded.
The London-based human rights watchdog Tibet Information Network (TIN) said this week that official attempts to bring restive clergy to heel had led to at least 150 monks being expelled from their monasteries and possibly 20 arrests.
TIN said many monks had been told to leave because they refused to criticise the Dalai Lama, Beijing's greatest rival for the loyalties of the remote region's people.
Some monks had been sent back to civilian life because they did not behave properly during the patriotism campaign, the religious affairs official said but gave no details.
He dismissed a report from TIN that the campaign left only 300 monks at Ganden monastery near the Tibetan capital.
"Ganden has more than 490 monks...they are all at the monastery," he said, but declined to comment on whether there was an official limit on the number of clergy allowed there.
"That is a secret, we cannot talk about it on the telephone," he said.
While Beijing says most Tibetans back Chinese rule, a constant propaganda barrage against supporters of the Dalai Lama, exiled since an abortive uprising against Beijing rule in 1959, is testament to his remaining influence.
An edition of the Tibet Daily newspaper seen in Beijing on Friday quoted senior officials as saying all public figures should clearly state their position in the war on separatism.
"Some of our comrades do not sufficiently recognise the Dalai Lama clique's ideological infiltration and do not combat it strongly enough," the newspaper said.
