The stock of VLSI Technology Inc. took a nose-dive Friday, losing over 25 percent of its value, after projecting that revenues in the 1997 first quarter would be equal to or below the fourth quarter of 1996.
VLSI stock fell $5.875 to close at $17.325 on Nasdaq Friday. More than 19 million shares changed hands, topping the Nasdaq actives list.
The San Jose, Calif.-based high technology company late Thursday reported a loss for the fourth quarter of 1996 of $63.6 million, or $1.38 a share, on revenues of $183.6 million, including a pre-announced charge for closing a factory.
After speaking with analysts, VLSI's vice president of corporate communications Allen Marcow said, "We did not see a lot of first quarter growth in revenues" compared with revenues the 1996 fourth quarter.
In the 1996 first quarter, the quarter that will be used for comparison when 1997 figures are released, VLSI earned $3.2 million, or 7 cents a share, on revenues of $167.7 million.
VLSI appears to be facing competition or other problems in three of its four business groups, said C.B. Lee, an analyst at Hancock Institutional Equity Services.
Problem areas are computing, hurt by the recent sales slowdown at a key customer Apple Computer Inc.; digital entertainment where it faces stiff competition from SGS-Thomson, and the Compass software unit.
The key exception is VLSI's wireless communications chip business, which remains strong, Lee said.
Merrill Lynch analyst Tom Kurlak said the stock decline was also a delayed reaction to the Wednesday resignation of VLSI Chief Financial Officer Gregrory Hinckley.
Hinckley left to join Mentor Graphics Corp. as finance chief and chief operating officer. He was replaced at VSLI by Bala Iyer, the company's former controller.
The San Jose, Calif.-based company is a maker of high-end Application Specific Integrated Circuits (ASICs) used in communications, digital entertainment and, to a declining extent, in personal computers.
For several years, the company has been undergoing a transition out of the computer chipset business and into more profitable areas such as communications and TV set-top boxes.
