(Corrects by deleting the fourth paragraph, so that the story will reflect that at no point did Giering blame AT&amp;T for tax issues that NCR faces as an independent company.)
NCR Corp eked out a small profit in the fourth quarter of 1996 and saw healthy gains in year-over-year profit margins but hopes of matching computer industry growth rates remain a long way off, executives said.
In a conference call with analysts and a phone interview after the call, NCR Chief Financial Officer John Giering said profits are weighed down by a whopping 75 percent tax rate.
Giering said NCR was unlikely to bring its tax levels down to resemble industry norms of 35 to 40 percent before 1999. 
He said his goal was to bring the company's U.S. operations to breakeven in 1997 in terms of profitablity. NCR is already profitable in its overseas operations, which accounted for half of its $7 billion in 1996 revenues.
Besides slashing the company's tax rate, the NCR executive said the company's primary goal was to see a 9 to 12 percent growth rate from core operations over the next several years.
Giering said he expected NCR to reach gross profit margins in the mid-30 percent range within three years.  
In 1996 results released earlier Tuesday, gross margins for the year rose to 28.1 percent from 1995's 21.8 percent.
Giering said profits remain small but tax liabilities are very large, hence the high effective rate. AT&amp;T absorbed much of the potential benefit from operating loss carry-forwards when NCR was still a subsidiary, he said.
On balance, AT&amp;T relieved NCR of more than $3 billion in net losses since 1993, leaving NCR's balance sheet remarkably clean prior to its spin-off as a separate company this month.
NCR said it ended 1996 with $1.2 billion in cash and debt of only $76 billion.  
"Right now (the tax rate) is in the 75 percent range," Giering told Reuters, "I look at this as a 1997 phenonmon."
He estimated that the tax rate would come down to roughly 50 percent in 1998 on the way to the 35 to 40 percent level expected in 1999. "Clearly we need to have more income in the U.S. to turn that number around," Giering said.
The company may be aided in its goal of balancing the contribution of its U.S. and international operations by trends in top-line revenue growth.  
Giering told analysts that the 1996 revenues for core businesses, excluding mass-market PCs and the entry level server businesses it is exiting, grew 9 percent in the Americas, but declined one percent in Europe and 3 percent in the Asia/Pacific region.
NCR does not break out its revenues in dollar terms.
The CFO said his primary goals was to ensure that "international operations are really paying their full share in terms of all the costs incurred on their on behalf."  
He said one of the anomalies NCR is working hard to reconcile is that many of its corporate functions are domiciled in the United States, which made sense as a unit of AT&amp;T but now hurts NCR as a standalone entity at tax-time.
Deep concern about NCR's financial prospects commbined with the company's insecure position in a computer industry that refuses to stand still has lead Wall Street analysts to be deeply leery of the stock since its public debut.
Of the two analysts following the stock, one of them, Smith Barney's Shao Wang maintains a neutral rating. In an an unusual move on a neutral rated stock, Wang set a target price of $28 on the stock, well below its current price of $38-3/4.
Nonetheless, on the strength of its ongoing turnaround, its limited fourth quarter profits and rising profit margins, NCR stock gained 3-1/8 on Tuesday.
-- E. Auchard, New York newsdesk, 212-859-1736
