Xerox Corp. on Thursday reported higher fourth-quarter profits from continuing operations, as a 26 percent rise in sales of digital products offset flat sales of its mainstay black and white copiers.
Xerox shares also got a boost when the nation's largest maker of document processing systems said it had agreed to sell part of its Talegen insurance holdings in a deal worth $450 million including assumption of debt.
In addition, the company also said its board had voted to raise the dividend 10 percent.
Xerox reported earnings of $426 million for the latest quarter, up 12 percent compared to earnings from continuing operations of $379 million in the 1995 quarter.
The 1995 figure excludes a $1.6 billion charge related to the planned sale of Talegen and a one-time gain on taxes related to operations in Brazil.
Sales rose to $5.08 billion from $4.76 billion.
The earnings beat forecasts by a few cents a share, according to figures from First Call, a service that tracks analysts' estimates, and Xerox stock closed up $1.375 at $59.50 on the New York Stock Exchange.
The fourth quarter report marked a significant turnaround from a stunning third quarter earnings disappointment that had sent Xerox shares tumbling as low as $46 a share in October.
"A lot to like," Smith Barney analyst Peter Enderlin said, pointing in particular to sales growth in key businesses, progress on exiting the insurance business, and the dividend increase. "It was a good solid quarter," he said.
Stamford, Conn.-based Xerox said in September that a deal to sell all of Talegen for $2.7 billion to investors led by Kohlberg Kravis Roberts &amp; Co., the New York buyout firm, had fallen apart, leaving it to sell the insurance unit piecemeal.
Xerox announced Thursday that it agreed to sell Talegen's Coregis unit, a professional liability insurer, for $375 million in cash and the assumption of $75 million in debt to General Electric Co.'s GE Capital unit.
Xerox said that its digital product revenues, which now account for a third of overall corporate revenues, rose 26 percent in the quarter, boosted by strong sales of color copiers and printers and copy publishing systems.
Black-and-white copiers, the products that remain synonymous with the company's name, accounted for 53 percent of total revenues.
Strong increases in copier equipment sales in the United States and Brazil were partly offset by a decline in Europe, due largely to sluggish national economies, the company said.
Xerox Chairman Paul Allaire said he was encouraged by the planned sale of Coregis and by the strong interest of prospective buyers in the rest of Talegen Holdings Inc.
He said he expected Xerox will have sold most of Talegen's operations by year-end and hinted the divestiture may allow it to boost its program to buy back shares of Xerox stock, a move that increases the value of remaining shares outstanding.
Industry analysts had said Coregis was the most attractive piece of Talegen, which also provides workers' compensation, industrial indemnity and other types of specialized insurance products.
Chicago-based Coregis, which has 470 employees, writes commercial property and casualty insurance for public entities and licensed and certified professionals.
Xerox said in a separate deal it agreed to sell Apprise Corp., a New Jersey-based firm that sells computing services to insurers, to Andersen Consulting. Terms were not disclosed.
Xerox also said the board voted to raise the quarterly dividend to 32 cents a share from 29 cents, an increase of 10 percent, payable April 1 to shareholders of record on March 7.
For the full year, Xerox earnings from continuing operations rose 3 percent $1.21 billion from $1.17 billion, in 1995. Including the charge for Talegen, Xerox lost $472 million in 1995.
Sales grew 5 percent to $17.38 billion from $16.59 billion.
