International Business Machines Corp., aiming to halt a slide in its stock price, Tuesday set a 2-for-1 split that helped fuel a Wall Street rally in one of the most popular stocks on Main Street.
The world's biggest computer maker said its board approved the split, which will double the number of shares traded while halving the stock's price, subject to shareholders approving a rise in the amount of authorised shares, a formality.
Industry analysts said that while the move gave the stock a cosmetic boost, the gains may be fleeting unless IBM proves it can revive the growth of its core computer business.
"The company's management must show how they can deliver sustained growth again before people will say 'IBM is healed,'" Nomura Securities analyst Daniel Ries said.
Still, analysts and traders said IBM's timing was impeccable, coming after Salomon Brothers upgraded the stock and following the past week's drop of $25.
"People were looking for an entry point -- they found it," one trader said.
The stock, which had tumbled since IBM's fourth quarter earnings report disappointed Wall Street last week, bounced back and rose $5 to $150.75 in active New York Stock Exchange trading.
The stock, widely held by individual and institutional investors worldwide, is one of 30 issues in the Dow Jones industrial average and often sets the tone for the broader market on Wall Street.
Besides the initial boost that typically accompanies stock splits, the move may provide some psychological benefits, analysts said, such as reducing the focus on the price of $175, IBM's record high set in 1987, which the stock again approached recently until last week's sell-off.
Now, IBM must provide concrete evidence of its plans for sustained earnings growth before the stock can move higher.
"The significant move upward in the second half of 1996 was based on the people becoming convinced that IBM could sustain growth of 8 to 10 percent," Nomura's Ries said.
IBM shares jumped more than $60 in the second half of 1996, reaching $170 in December.
"Not a big deal," Soundview Financial analyst Gary Helmig said of the split, noting the main effect will be to double the daily share volume of IBM, which has averaged about 5 million shares a day.
"There's no real reason for them to do this, but it does tend to make the stock go up," he said.
Analysts also said the split will make IBM more affordable to smaller investors, but was less significant for investors who manage pension funds or other large portfolios.
In its earnings report last week, IBM said profits rose 18 percent to $2 billion, or $3.93 a share, in the fourth quarter, but several analysts cut their ratings after the report, citing sluggish mainframe sales, weakness in Europe and other factors.
Salomon Brothers analyst John Jones upgraded his rating Tuesday to strong buy from buy but did not comment further.
The company said the board proposed raising the number of authorised common shares to 1.875 billion from 750 million. It said the record date for the split was May 9 and that the split shares will be distributed on May 27.
It also declared a regular quarterly dividend of 35 cents a share on the presplit shares and set its annual shareholders meeting for April 29 in Dallas.
