International Business Machines Corp gave its stock a cosmetic boost with a two-for-one split Tuesday, but the luster it gave the stock may prove fleeting unless IBM can revive core business growth.
"The company's management must show how they can deliver sustained growth again before people will say 'IBM is healed,'" Nomura Securities analyst Daniel Ries said.
Nonetheless, IBM surged to 153, up 7-5/8 points, reversing a 25-point slide the stock has endured in the past week since signs of slower growth emerged in its fourth quarter results.  
Analysts and traders said the timing of the split coincided with an analyst upgrade by Salomon Brothers and took advantage of what many investors considered the stock's oversold condition after the recent sell-off.
"IBM did the right thing: they split the stock right on top of Solly's upgrade," said one trader, referring to Salomon analyst John Jones' move to upgrade IBM stock to strong buy.
"People were looking for an entry point -- they found it," he said.  
IBM's more than seven point gain contributed over 22 points to the Dow's 84 point rise Tuesday afternoon, due to the stock's heavy weighting in calculating the 30-stock index.
While the stock split was largely seen as numerical window-dressing -- doubling the number of shares traded while halving the price into the $70s of each post-split share -- the split has subtle psychological implications for investors.
Besides the initial boost that typically accompanies share splits, the move may reduce investors' focus on the psychologically important level of 175.  
That's IBM's historic high share price, reached in 1987, and a level the computer maker's shares had flirted near, but never quite reached, prior to last week's selloff.
The higher share activity should help dramatize daily movements in the stock and lift total volumes to the lofty levels seen by Intel Corp and Microsoft Corp, which can often top 10 million shares traded.
One tangible benefit of the split may be to heighten retail investor interest in the stock.  By cutting the investment necessary to buy a "round lot" of 100 shares, the stock may appear more affordable to smaller investors.  
But securities analysts said the stock split move does nothing to stoke the main engine for further stock price gains -- core business growth.
"The significant move upward in the second half of 1996 was based on the people becoming convinced that IBM could sustain growth of eight to 10 percent," Nomura's Ries said.
IBM shares gained more than 60 points in the second half of 1996, reaching as high as 170 in December.
But disappointing growth in fourth quarter hardware sales and continued economic sluggishness in European markets led Wall Street to slash ratings.
The company had told analysts that hardware sales grew only two percent during the final quarter of 1996.
"Not a big deal," said Soundview Financial analyst Gary Helmig of the share split, noting that the principal effect should be to double the daily share volume of IBM, which previously has averaged about four five million shares a day.
"There's no real reason for them to do this, but it does tend to make the stock go up," he said.
-- Wall Street bureau, 212-859-1736
