Xylan Corp was pummelled to a new low Tuesday after its fourth quarter earnings came in a penny shy of expectations and the company warned a rebound may not come until fall, a quarter longer than previously hoped.
Renewed fears of a December sales slowdown at 3Com Corp further stoked a sell-off in network shares Tuesday.
Xylan fell 7-5/8 Tuesday morning to 20-7/8, a 27 percent drop, echoing the sharp declines seen in recent weeks in other once high-flying names in the computer network sector like Cascade Communications Corp and Shiva Corp.  
In published comments, Deutsche Morgan Grenfell analyst Noel Lindsay said he cut his fiscal 1997 year earnings estimate to $0.70 per share from $0.76 per share following a conference call with Xylan executives Monday night.
In the call, officials guided analysts to expect modest growth in 1997's first half, but for growth to accelerate again beginning in the September quarter, Lindsay said.
The selling spree extended to the industry's normally untouchable leader, Cisco Systems Inc, which tumbled 2-3/4 to 65-1/2 ahead of its fiscal second quarter report due after the close of trading Tuesday.  
3Com fell 3-3/4 to 58-1/4 Tuesday, its second consecutive sharp decline, and part of a 10-point retreat since company executives warned analysts last week that a sales slowdown had hit the company in December, despite a recovery in January.
Lindsay also cut his earnings and revenue estimates on 3Com for the fiscal third quarter ending later this month and for the 1997 fiscal year, citing the 3Com officials' remarks.
Traders said Cisco was tugged down in sympathy with 3Com. While the current consensus for Cisco is $0.50 per share, and whispered expectations hovered at $0.52, they said investors are jittery that slowing growth may be an industry-wide issue.  
Despite continued strength in its financial results, Ascend Communications Inc, another network equipment stock prized by money managers for its rocket-like growth, was dragged down by association with its sector, traders said.
Ascend shares fell 3-1/8 to 65-1/4 Tuesday and joined 3Com, Cisco and Xylan among the Nasdaq's ten most active stocks.
Lindsay said Xylan's shortfall resulted from a build-up in the company's sales force ahead of new product introductions in upcoming quarters. For the fourth quarer, Xylan reported $0.11 per share versus the consensus forecast of $0.12.
Nonetheless, the analyst said his reduced forecast for the first half of 1997 was partially offset by a "bright" second half outlook. While the stock has proved highly volatile, he said he was maintaining his accumulate buy on Xylan.
Adding force to Xylan's volatility is the growing short position in the company shares in recent months.
As of January 15, the short position represented 4.9 million shares, or 12 percent of the total shares outstanding, a 30 percent increase since December, according to a Nasdaq spokesman.
-- Wall Street bureau, 212-859-1736
