Cisco Systems Inc fell more than two points in active trading Wednesday and analysts said the decline in the stock reflected cautious comments by Cisco officials about the traditionally weak April quarter.
The share weakness came despite continued strong growth in revenues and earnings for Cisco's second quarter ended in January.  Quarterly earnings were $0.51, which was a penny above published expectations, versus the year ago's $0.32.
Analysts said Cisco management was generally upbeat on company prospects in a conference call Tuesday evening.  
In published comments, Gruntal analyst David Takata said that, "The one-to-one book-to-bill ratio going into the seasonally weak Q3 may temporarily spook some investors."
Takata was referring to Cisco's rate of bookings to orders as it began its third quarter ending in April.  Cisco's 73 percent revenue growth year-to-year was well above that of rivals but down from an historic 80 percent-growth plus rate, he noted.
Takata retained his outperform rating on the stock.  Most analysts appeared to retain their favorable recommendations on the stock and left earnings estimates more or less unchanged.  
Merrill Lynch analyst Joe Bellace reacted to Cisco's results by fine-tuning earnings estimates to the higher end of his previous range for both the 1997 and 1998 fiscal years.
In comments to his brokerage's sales force, the Merrill analyst said he expected Cisco to report earnings for fiscal 1997 in a range of $2.05 to $2.10 per share, narrowing his view from a broader $2.00 to $2.10 range.
Bellace's fiscal 1998 range closed to $2.70 to $2.80 per share from the previous range of $2.60 to $2.80, a spokesman for Merrill confirmed.  He retained his short- and long-term accumulate ratings on the stock.  
Bear Stearns analyst Eric Blachno said the quarterly report was "a very solid one" and the conference call that followed "very upbeat."
He noted a slight rise in the time it took to collect accounts receivable during the January quarter but dismissed the issue by saying he believed the problem had been resolved.
"We think the company's performance should alleviate concerns in the investment community that the networking marketplace is slowing," Blachno told Reuters.  "We actually think the marketplace is strengthening."
Consequently, Blachno reiterated Cisco's buy rating, which he described as equivalent to a "strong buy" at other firms. He maintained his earnings estimates for the 1997 fiscal year ending in July at $2.10 per share and for 1998 at $2.80.
In published remarks, the Bear Stearns analyst said Cisco appears to be gaining market share versus competitors, but  the overall market continues to grow at a healthy 30 to 50 percent clip.
Reflecting confidence in the sector's health, he reiterated his recommendations on other names in the sector, including 3Com Corp and U.S. Robotics Corp as buy and Cabletron Systems Inc as attractive.
((-- New York newsdesk, 212-859-1736))
