NCR Corp. unveiled Friday the prototype for a do-it-yourself retail checkout system designed to speed supermarket checkout times and substantially reduce the frustration of shoppers waiting in line to pay for goods.
The company said the automated check-out system will allow shoppers to scan, bag and pay for groceries in express lanes, without cashier assistance, making shopping transactions as easy as banking at an automated teller machine.
Following in-store consumer testing this year, NCR said it plans to introduce the self-checkout system in 1998.
NCR estimated there are more than 175,000 food store checkout lanes in the United States, with about 30 percent of those lanes operated as cashier-assisted express lanes.
"We are trying to serve the frequent shopper who has just a few items to buy on the way home from work," said Joanne Walter, NCR's vice president of future retailing systems.
The initial system is targeted at food store express lanes. Future versions will target consumer checkout in other retail environments.
Walter said initial versions would be aimed "express service" customers who have 15 items or less to buy.
Walter said the company's market research shows that 65 percent of all retail purchases involve 20 items or less.
She said the system is an extension of her company's expertise as a world-leader in retail automation. NCR was origanally known as National Cash Register.
The Dayton, Ohio-based company, the former computer equipment arm of AT&amp;T Corp., is now the No. 1 supplier of self-service automated teller machines used in banking and the bar-code scanners used at retail checkout counters.
"This is a product that will replace the retail checkout line. We are using all of our existing (retail automation) research and development to combine it into one product," Walter said.
The automated checkout system is known as SCOT, for Self Checkout Terminal. The name is also a playful reference to the national origin of the product prototype. The engineering team that developled the system is based in Dundee, Scotland.
Building on existing ATM banking machines, shoppers will be able to purchase groceries and even make cash withdrawals, without cashier intervention.
Shoppers using the system touch selected points on an automated teller menu. A screen leads them through the checkout process, prompting them to scan items and complete the checkout by inserting a debit or credit card, or cash.
The company said the system was designed to cut reduce labor costs and allow checkout staff to be deployed in other areas of the store.
"Shoppers are looking for ways to avoid checkout lines, and grocers are focusing on enhancing customer service while reducing front-end labor costs," Walter said.
