WavePhore Inc on Monday unveiled a service that broadcasts data to home personal computers via television signals, allowing users to bypass bottlenecks in the Internet.
The company said its WaveTop service will broadcast entertainment and information programming nationwide through TV signals, side-stepping the clogged phone lines and overstrained computer networks that slow Internet connections.
"We think we can complement the Internet beautifully," said Sandy Goldman, WavePhore's consumer unit vice president.  
Initially, the WaveTop system will carry stereo broadcasts of a music radio station, real-time news, educational programs for children, and new and updated software to home PCs -- all without interrupting ongoing activities on the computer, the Phoenix-based company said.
Once it begins U.S. operations in September, WaveTop will represent the first wireless data broadcast medium delivering audio, video, software and real-time data to home PCs, Goldman told Reuters in a recent interview.  
"This gets past the bottleneck of the phone line being busy," said Gary Arlen, a veteran online industry analyst who heads Arlen Communications in Bethesda, Md.
The system will be free to consumers who own a broadcast-ready personal computer equipped with a TV tuner, a device that several top computer makers plan to integrate into their machines this year. TV tuners now add $99 to $150 to the cost of a PC, but prices are falling.
WaveTop is to be advertiser-supported. It may also provide consumers with optional higher value, pay-per-use services.  
Arlen said the system is well suited for transmitting information that does not require instant feedback. "For a lot of Web surfing, all you need is a way of quickly accessing things that are floating through the wires anyway," he said.
WavePhore's system operates by embedding data into a portion of existing TV signals. The company has a pact with the Public Broadcasting Service's 250 local stations to broadcast via an unused portion of their signals.  
This high-speed, point-to-multi-point service will have the capacity to reach more than 99 percent of U.S. television households simultaneously and is capable of being extended to Canada over the Canadian Broadcasting Corp's TV network.
"It's a network infrastructure that's already in place," said Joel Krasner of brokerage firm Southcoast Capital, the one Wall Street analyst who formally WavePhore.
"You don't have to have people using cable modems or fiber optic cables," Krasner said. He was referring to other, more costly delivery methods capable of speeding Internet delivery using phone and cable TV technologies.  
Goldman said the WaveTop network plans to offer one radio station in 1997 and three by 1998, playing a choice of rock, classical music and jazz.
KidsTop, aimed at children, will deliver educational programming developed by the Public Broadcasting Service and others, Goldman said.
For news, the company said it plans to negotiate deals with media companies such as Dow Jones &amp; Co and Reuters Holdings Plc, offering a slimmed-down version of what it already offers on its professional investor network, he said.  
Both Dow and Reuters declined comment.
WavePhore already carries Dow and Reuters news on its professional investor network.
Goldman said WavePhore has few information content partnerships to announce at this stage but is in talks with content providers for each of the seven services WaveTop will offer.
Goldman said the company expects to sign these deals ahead of the formal launch of the service in September.
WavePhore said a recent study by the technology research firm Yankee Group estimated that by the year 2000, nearly 20 million U.S. households will have PCs capable of receiving data embedded in a TV signal.
WavePhore's strategy has been embraced by computer industry leaders Microsoft Corp, Intel Corp and Compaq Computer Corp. All three are developing enabling technology to support the integration of home computer and TV technologies.
Krasner believes WavePhore may strike a deal with Pointcast Inc, a Web-based information broadcaster. The two companies already work together to provide information to corporate subscribers, he said.
((-- New York Newsdesk, 212-859-1736))
