3Com Corp and U.S. Robotics Corp's merger promises to create a second powerhouse in the data networking industry capable of competing head-to-head in the Internet access business with Cisco Systems Inc.
The merger, valued at $6.6 billion in stock, represents the largest such deal ever in the computer network industry.
But analysts were divided on whether the merger by two of the top six network equipment suppliers will be strong enough to offer end-to-end network connections on the scale of Cisco.  
"No more Cisco and the Seven Dwarfs," Bear Stearns analyst Eric Blachno said, invoking an analogy frequently heard in the industry to describe Cisco's dominant market leadership.
"It appears the Cisco has acquired a large competitor," he said in reaction to the latest industry consolidation move.
However, veteran industry analyst Frank Dzubeck questioned the viability of combining the two companies in light of precedents set by previous mega-mergers in the industry.  
"This could be another Bay-Wellfleet-Synoptics deal," he said, referring to the 1994 merger that formed Bay Networks Inc, a union seen as running aground over conflicts in integrating product lines, company cultures and managements.
Similarly, Dzubeck, president of Communications Networks Architects Inc, an industry consulting firm, said 3Com and U.S. Robotics represented "two cultures, two different product streams, two managements."
"A lot depends on how they meet the organizational challenges," the analyst said of the complexities inherent in combining companies centered about 2,000 miles apart.  
3Com is headquartered in Santa Clara, Calif., the heart of Silicon Valley, while U.S. Robotics is located in Skokie, Ill.
3Com is known as the leading maker of network adapter cards used to connect personal computers to office networks. Roughly 40 percent of its $2.3 billion in fiscal 1996 revenues were derived from adapter card sales, analysts say.
By contrast, Robotics is the top maker of computer modems for consumers and other products providing Internet access.
The $1.9 billion company also sells switchboard-like data communications hubs, which Internet Service Providers (ISPs) use to handle scores of simultaneous incoming consumer calls.  
"The whole concept of those two companies getting together is a very strong one," said Paul Deninger, chief executive of Broadview Associates, a high-technology investment banking firm, when asked Tuesday to speculate on rumors of the merger.
"Robotics is a remote access company," Deninger said. "3Com has no remote access strategy. This provides them one."
While Deninger is an active dealmaker in the networking industry -- completing 24 smaller technology acquisition deals in the last 18 months -- the latest merger was managed by Morgan Stanley and Goldman Sachs, according to the companies.  
In a conference call, executives of the two companies said 3Com's strength as a corporate equipment supplier and U.S. Robotics' strong retail presence would allow the company to compete in both local-area and wide-area networks.
But several industry analaysts said rather than allowing 3Com to compete head-to-head in every market segment of the networking industry, the merger was best seen as allowing it to create a defensible niche in important segments.  
3Com Chairman and Chief Executive Eric Benhamou acknowledged as much in saying his company's strengths lie at what he called "the edge of the network" -- selling products to connect office workers and consumers to computer networks.
"We are much stronger at the edge of the network," Benhamou said, allowing that archrival Cisco dominates the core of office networks and long-distance "backbone" networks.
Cisco's strength in the larger network equipment used to build these portions of computer networks was bolstered by a major acquisition of its own last April, when it paid about $4 billion to acquire Stratacom Inc.  
The combination of 3Com and Robotics comes no where near Cisco in several vital respects. Their combined revenues are running at roughly $5 billion a year, officials said, compared with Cisco's current annual run rate of more than $6 billion.
But Cisco's daunting advantages become more apparent when the underlying growth rates of the companies are compared.
While the 3Com and Robotics businesses are estimated to be growing at 40 percent per year -- a healthy rate by most any industry measure -- Cisco continues to outrun all major competitors by its explosive 80 percent per year pace.
"That's an amazing growth rate," Deninger said of Cisco's market momentum. "Especially since no one else in the industry is growing faster than 40 percent," he said.
Across a variety of measures Cisco remains the dominant player in the industry, followed by a 3Com/Robotics combination, Bay Networks Inc and Cabletron Systems Inc.
((New York newsdesk, 212-859-1736))
