A group of 28 computer and communications equipment makers -- missing a major modem manufacturer -- Wednesday announced a coalition to develop a common standard for a new generation of faster modems running at speeds up to 56 kilobits per second.
Missing from the coalition was U.S. Robotics Corp., the industry's leading maker of consumer modems and the company credited with pioneering development of 56-kilobit modems, which began shipping its products earlier this week.
U.S. Robotics and 3Com Corp. later announced that 3Com would buy U.S. Robotics in a deal valued at $6.6 billion.
Faster modems will dramatically cut the time it takes to access a Web page or download software to a personal computer. The 56-kilobit-per-second speed would effectively double the speed of current 28.8-kilobit-per-second modems.
The standards group is backed by other makers of modems and related products like Rockwell International Corp., Lucent Technologies Inc. and Motorola Inc.
Backers of the industry standards effort, to be known as the Open 56 Forum, include leading data and telecommunications equipment makers, semiconductor suppliers and personal computer manufacturers.
Twenty-eight companies in all signed up initially. In a conference call, supporters of the initiative said the forum would welcome the participation of any company willing to create interoperable 56-kilobit modems, including U.S. Robotics.
"We have approached U.S. Robotics directly ... to join," said David Mays, an official at Ascend Communications Inc., a driving force behind the effort to create a common standard.
But before industry unification can be achieved, the standards-setting group may have to do a better job of encouraging key industry players to participate.
A spokeswoman for U.S. Robotics said the company was first invited to join the Open 56K Forum less than one hour before the group's announcement was released Wednesday afternoon.
Asked if U.S. Robotics would consider joining the Open 56K Forum, spokeswoman Sarah Powers responded, "Definitely. We are actively seeking interoperability" in the industry.
She said Robotics was actively considering participating in the forum's first meeting, slated to be held March 27.
While Robotics is the first to ship actual products, several vendors have said they plan to ship products in March.
For example, Motorola introduced two 56-kilobit modems Wednesday, the Modemsurfr 56K and the Voicesurfr 56K. A spokeswoman said the modems will be available by mid-March.
Until an industrywide standard is created, modems from each supplier will remain incompatible when communicating with modems offered by other suppliers.
There is wide agreement within the industry that failure to agree on a common standard will create confusion among consumers, delaying acceptance of the higher-speed technology.
