Shares of network stocks fell on Thursday amid fears that 3Com Corp's merger with U.S. Robotics Corp would heap new burdens on an industry already struggling with a raft of near-term issues.
Analysts said the $7.3 billion merger plan boosted pressure on other network players to use their discounted shares as currency to fund major acquisitions of their own.
Some said 3Com's $7.3 billion offer for U.S. Robotics stock and options put a low-ball valuation on the modem maker of 20 times 1997 earnings, versus a historic 25 times multiple.  
"If anything this deal is more of a take-under than a takeover," Salomon analyst Peter Swartz said of the 3Com deal.
"This deal says the days of the 35 to 40 percent premiums paid in previous networking acquisitions are over," Swartz said, noting many stocks were now trading at historic lows.
"Both stocks are down 50 percent from their highs," he pointed out.
By midafternoon, U.S. Robotics shares were up 1/4 at 61-1/4, well below the 68-1/4 contemplated by the terms of 3Com's merger offer. 3Com stock was off 3-1/2 points at 35-1/2.  
Donaldson Lufkin analyst Eric Buck harshly criticized the terms of the deal. "I think U.S. Robotics shareholders are being robbed," he said.
In the wake of the deal, industry leader Cisco Systems Inc was down 2-1/8 to 56, Ascend Communications Inc lost 4-3/8 points to 58 and Cascade Communications Corp was down 2-1/8 to 30-1/2.
"We believe the competitive landscape of the networking sector is undergoing a fundamental restructuring," J.P. Morgan's Bill Rabin said in published comments. "Other networking vendors will have to combine or be bought."  
Still, Rabin reiterated buy ratings on four stocks in the sector, while maintaining his market perform rating on 3Com. Swartz also kept his buy rating on 3Com shares, and recommended investors take advantage of price weakness.
The main beneficiaries of the 3Com-Robotics deal appeared to be Bay Networks Inc and Shiva Corp -- two stocks that have sat in the doghouse for some time -- based on their potential as acqusition targets, analysts said.
Shiva rose 9/16 to 15-13/16, recovering from its historic low, while Bay added 1/8 to 19-3/8.  
In comments to his sales force, Merrill analyst Joe Bellace said Shiva, among other remote access suppliers, may be a more likely acquisition target over the next two years in light of the 3Com-Robotics deal, market sources said.
"The merger forces other players in the industry to ante up to play in this bigger game," said Steve Harmon, an independent analyst who publishes the Internet Stock Report.
"It forces equipment makers to look for end-to-end solutions supplying network products to both businesses and consumers," he said of how the 3Com-Robotics merger would allow the combined company to compete in both markets.  
Strong break-up penalties the 3Com-Robotics deal would levy if either party backs out, makes it unlikely another suitor will arise with a sweeter offer, analysts said.
Earnings shortfalls, or close calls, fears of slowing industry growth, and cautionary comments from 3Com, Cascade and Shiva have excited fears about the whole sector, Rabin said.
In addition, technology changes in the industry and the growing threat of competition from outsiders such as chip makers Intel Corp and Rockwell International Corp have weighed down the prospects for the industry as a whole.
Some analysts cited fears that Intel may decide to integrate network adapter cards or modem chips directly into the computer chassis its builds, rendering stand-alone products from many network suppliers a commodity, if not obsolete.
((--E. Auchard, Wall Street Bureau, 212-859-1736))
