Computer network company 3Com Corp. will acquire modem giant U.S. Robotics in a deal valued at $6.6 billion, the companies said Wednesday, in a deal that would create a counterweight to industry powerhouse Cisco Systems Inc.
The merger -- the largest ever in the computer network industry -- will create a company with more than $5 billion in annual revenues and more than 12,000 employees in 130 countries, U.S. Robotics and 3Com said.
Under terms of the deal announced after markets closed, each share of U.S. Robotics will be swapped for 1.75 shares of 3Com. The deal is valued at $6.6 billion based on the $39.125 Tuesday closing price of 3Com stock, the companies said.
3Com closed Wednesday down 12.5 cents at $39 and U.S. Robotics was down 50 cents at $61, both on Nasdaq.
The companies said the merger would create a company that would provide end-to-end equipment for computer networks.
U.S. Robotics, based in Skokie, Ill., is the world's largest maker of consumer modems, which enable personal computer users to connect to the Internet and online services and to send and receive faxes from their PCs. Santa Clara, Calif.-based 3Com is one of the biggest computer networking companies.
Industry analysts were divided over whether the merger of two of the top six network equipment suppliers would be enough to offer one-stop shopping for network equipment on the scale of No. 1 company Cisco Systems Inc.
"No more 'Cisco and the Seven Dwarfs'," Bear, Stearns analyst Eric Blachno said, invoking a nickname frequently heard in the industry to describe Cisco's dominant position. "It appears the Cisco has acquired a large competitor."
Veteran industy analyst Frank Dzubeck, however, questioned the viability of combining the two companies in light of precedents set by previous mega-mergers in the industry.
"This could be another Bay-Wellfleet-Synoptics deal," he said, referring to the 1994 merger that formed Bay Networks Inc. That merger ran into problems over conflicts in combining product lines, company cultures and management teams, analysts have said.
The U.S. Robotics-3Com deal calls for 3Com Chairman Eric Benhamou to remain chairman and chief executive officer of the combined company. U.S. Robotics Chairman and Chief Executive Casey Cowell will join 3Com's board as vice chairman.
"The combination of 3Com and U.S. Robotics dramatically alters the networking landscape with the industry's broadest set of innovative, feature-rich network access solutions," said Benhamou. "Together, with an installed base of over 100 million network connections, we can offer network users the fastest access to their local and wide area networks.
Cowell said, "By providing faster, more intelligent, and easier-to-use products for connecting the broadest array of users to local and wide area networks, we can accelerate the deployment of networking worldwide."
Cowell founded the company in 1976 with four college friends, working day and night in a windowless workroom above a military surplus store in Chicago.
U.S. Robotics, known for its Sportster and Courier modems and for being the first to market with 56-kilobit-per-second modem technology, became the darling of Wall Street in its relatively short stint, taking advantage of the Internet craze of the 1990s.
"They've become the bride, one of the most prized catches of networking," said Amar Senan, an analyst for investment bankers Volpe, Welty &amp; Co.
"They've come from a humble analogue company to one of the most formidable networking companies," Senan said. "They started with 300 (bits per second) modems" and just this week shipped their first 56 kilobit "x2" modems.
The company's first modems were sold under the names of Apple Computer Inc. and Commodore Computers. In 1987, the company began to focus on selling its own brand of products and posted revenues of $21 million. For fiscal 1996 which ended on Sept. 30, U.S. Robotics reported revenues of $1.98 billion.
U.S. Robotics went public in October of 1991 at $13 a share. After stock splits, a $1,000 investment made in 1991 is worth about $30,000, Cowell said.
