America Online Inc. said Tuesday it planned to place advertising on company-sponsored discussion areas, or "chat groups," as part of the world's largest online service's bid to expand its revenue base beyond mainly subscriber fees.
The Dulles, Va.-based company said placing ads in the company-sponsored chat rooms would generate 360 million ad "impressions" every month, a program one analyst estimated could generate $15 million to $25 million in new revenues in 1997. Impressions, or how many times an ad is viewed, are the advertising industry's standard way of measuring the impact of individual ad promotions.
America Online stock rose $3.75 to $43.75 a share on the New York Stock Exchange in afternoon trading. That rise followed a gain of $2.50 on Monday.
"AOL has the largest online chat community in the universe," Bob Pittman, the president of America Online Networks, the company's main operating unit, said in a statement.
"Over 70 percent of our members chat and we log 1 million hours of chat every day, a figure that has more than doubled over the last six months," he said.
Lehman Brothers analyst Brian Oakes estimated "chat rooms" account for about 23 percent of online usage time among America Online subscribers.
Oakes said America Online places ads on less than 4 percent of the screens its subscribers view, marking it as a significant revenue growth opportunity for the company.
If ads ran on all interactive services on America Online, including chat, electronic mail, special interest bulletin boards and its "instant messages" subscriber messaging system, America Online could book as much as $500 million in advertising revenues, he said.
America Online's chat area, known as "People Connection," creates up to 14,000 virtual chat rooms with up to 23 people in one area.
Advertisements would rotate every 60 seconds, utilizing America Online's new software ad delivery technology, the company said.
The ads will run in company-sponsored chat rooms like Town Square (current events), Life, Romance, Special Interest, Places, Arts &amp; Entertainment, and News, Sports &amp; Finance. Advertising will not be targeted at private chat rooms created by members themselves, the company said.
As an example, Oakes said sponsored chat rooms could include a Michael Jordan chat session with his fans, sponsored by Nike, or a health care discussion, sponsored by Johnson &amp; Johnson.
Daytime TV talk show host Rosie O'Donnell's recent appearance set a record on America Online with more than 16,000 simultaneous participants signing on during the program, he said.
Adding advertising to chat rooms represents America Online's latest bid to boost revenues from sources other than subscriber fees.
Last week, America Online announced a deal with Tel-Save Holdings Inc., a long distance phone service provider, in which America Online received a $100 million payment from Tel-Save to market its long-distance services to America Online members.
The online service has said it expected an increasing portion of its revenues to come from ads instead of just subcriber fees as it grows beyond its roots as an online access company to become a diversified media company.
"This is yet another asset that we have that will allow America Online to capture an ever larger percentage of online and Internet advertising spending," Pittman said of the plan to mix advertising with online chat sessions.
America Online is the world's largest Internet online service with about 8 million members.
