Shares of 3Com Corp and U.S. Robotics Corp slid on Monday as prospects dimmed for a new suitor emerging to rescue Robotics shareholders unhappy with the proposed merger of the two firms, traders said.
The agreement binding 3Com and Robotics to the $7.3-billion merger, announced last Wednesday, requires either party to pay up to $160 million if the deal falls through, according to a Securities and Exchange Commission 8-K filing over the weekend.
3Com closed on Monday at 32-13/16, down 19/64 on the day. U.S. Robotics shares, which have traded in tandem with the ups and downs of 3Com stock, closed at 55-3/8, down 7/16.
Terms of the merger call for 3Com to exchange 1.75 shares of its stock for each Robotics share. The exchange ratio is fixed with no collar, according to officials of the two companies.
The value of the 3Com offer to Robotics shareholders -- which stood at $68 when the deal was announced -- has fallen in line with the six-point decline in 3Com shares. At Monday's close, the offer was worth $57-27/64 in Robotics shares.
Analysts said shareholder disatisfaction with the proposal extends into mid-level management at Robotics. Options given employees in recent years are worthless at current price levels.  
One investment banker not involved in the deal said he made inquiries after the announcement seeking alternative bidders. "What we found is that there was not a high level of interest among competitors to enter a rival bid to 3Com," he said.
In the near-term, 3Com's rivals appear content to let the deal stand, seeing the distraction of managing the integration of 3Com, a leading corporate network supplier, with Robotics, the top consumer modem maker, as a competitive advantage.
Competitors "preferred to see 3Com and Robotics go through this period of pain instead of doing anything to break the deal up," the banker said. "They feel this deal is going to slow 3Com in the near-term."
But analysts said the deal was vulnerable because it involved a stock swap only, leaving it open to someone willing to pay cash or a stronger stock price. A shareholder vote is not expected for several months, giving rivals time to mull options.
"It's very possible that if the 3Com price continues to fall, USRX continues to fall too," Senan said. "If I were a USRX shareholder, I would be willing to consider other bids."
A U.S. Robotics spokeswoman, asked if the company had been approached by other potential bidders, said: "As a matter of policy, we don't comment on rumors or speculation."  
One possible new suitor mentioned on Monday was network industry leader Cisco Systems Inc.
Volpe, Welty and Co analyst Amar Senan said Cisco "could certainly afford to buy U.S. Robotics with minimal dilution. It's speculation, but it is also possible. It all depends on how much of a threat Cisco sees in this merger."
Cisco fell 1-3/8 to 54-1/4 on Monday, topping the Nasdaq most active list with 12.5 million shares traded. Cisco officials were not immediately available for comment.
-- New York newsdesk, 212-859-1736
