Sony Corp. will unveil Monday an Internet-based staging area for consumers to sample, play and even purchase the entertainment giant's vast store of popular television, film, music and video games.
"The Station at Sony.com," as Sony's site is to be known, represents a major push by the consumer electronics and entertainment giant to make its presence felt on the Web.
The Station moves Sony beyond the typical company-promotion site to offer many features of a full-scale online network comparable to that of America Online Inc.
Sony officials said they believed the Station could make Sony the top entertainment brand on the Web -- "the place people turn to play," to quote a Sony official -- just as Disney has come to symbolise children's programming and ESPN means sports.
"For the first time, Sony has brought together the best of all it has to offer, " Mitchell Cannold, president of Sony Online, the U.S.-based Internet marketing unit of Sony, said of the centralized entertainment site.
"Our goal is to make The Station the primary online entertainment destination for fun and games -- a place that Web users of every age will be able to be entertained in, have fun and make their own," Cannold said.
The Sony Station harnesses the latest Web technology to allow users to sample and buy music and film clips, or communicate with other Station visitors in an array of topical discussion areas, called "chat rooms," on the site.
One feature is a special "back-stage pass" that appears on computer screens of those who sign up to join the Sony site.
Called the "StationPass," this token functions as a kind of electronic mail connection that travels with users to outside Web sites, keeping them in touch with other StationPass holders.
The StationPass uses new Java programming technology that will allow the computer user to remain in touch with other StationPass holders by pager or other digital communications device.
Sony said it has laid down strict formating guidelines for graphics, text and other content on the Station, so computer users with PCs purchased in recent years using a standard modem should suffer few delays when visiting the site.
Games and contests of all sorts are available, from Sony Wonder interactive entertainment for children, to online versions of the TV game shows Jeopardy and Wheel of Fortune, to Battleground, a new type of multiplayer game where a thousand combatants can navigate tanks through a futuristic warzone.
Station visitors can shop for Sony merchandise and collectible items, along with Columbia TriStar home videos and Sony Wonder kids products like CDs, boosk and tape packages.
Gary Arlen, president of Arlen Communications and a veteran industry analyst, predicted that popular entertainment fans will find the Sony Station engrossing.
If people go to the Web to be entertained -- to play a game like Jeopardy, to see a soap opera like "Days of Our Lives," or to sample the new single by Mariah Carey, they will go to Sony Station and they will go there regularly," he said.
Promising to provide a boost to the site is an exclusive joint marketing partnership Sony has agreed to with Visa U.S.A., the credit card consortium.
In return for making Visa the preferred method of payment for goods purchased at the site, Visa has agreed to feature the Sony brand name in a major TV and publishing campaign Visa plans to launch later this year to promote Internet commerce.
A Visa marketing executive confirmed outlines of the deal.
The agreement makes Sony the exclusive "entertainment" brand to be featured in the ads, although other brands may also appear, Sony officials said.
They said Visa's outside marketing commitment represents "many millions of dollars" in free advertising for the site.
More immediately, Sony said it planned a broad promotional campaign in publications such as Wired magazine and other advertising venues to promote the lauch of the Station.
Sony also boasts of having the largest amount of brand name advertising ever assembled for a new site, with marquis names like Sears, Roebuck and Co., General Motors Corp., American Airlines, Kellogg Co., Colgate Palmolive and Microsoft Corp.
Sony said it expected the six companies to contribute roughly $1 million for it to display ads during 1997, a figure that excludes any unpaid reciprocal promotions.
Ads targeted to fit computer users' personal interests pop-up as they click to navigate through the Web pages of the Station. The target audience is young people, the same 18-to-34-year-old demographic group that is already active on the Web.
While a complete range of Sony brand products will be available, the Station also has been opened up to allow selected corporate partners also to showcase their products. Half the products on the site are from Sony, officials said.
