New York State utility regulators are set to approve the Bell Atlantic Corp/NYNEX Corp merger, subject to several conditions, to be set forth prior to a final vote set for Thursday.
Regulators will consider demanding the combined company permanently locate its headquarters in New York, reduce rates, issue $300 million in rebates and improve customer service.
These conditions were among those considered at a hearing Wednesday of the N.Y. Public Service Commission in Albany, the state capitol, which will be taken up at tommorrow's meeting.
The merger would create the nation's largest local phone operator and still faces hurdles in Washington, as well as New York, the only state now withholding its approval.
In Washington, the combination reportedly has met with increased scrutiny in recent weeks from anti-trust officials at the Department of Justice and the Federal Trade Commission. Federal officials have issued new subpeonas requesting details on rivals' plans to offer local phone service in New York.
The deal still faces an ongoing anti-trust review by New York State Attorney General Dennis Vacco, who argues the merger strengthens NYNEX's existing monopoly and represents a bad deal for N.Y. residential and small business customers.
"We are watching closely the review being conducted by the PSC," said Joe Mahoney, a spokeman in the office of the Attorney General, the state's top anti-trust regulator.
Vacco may issue a statement on the subject if the PSC makes its decision Thursday, the spokesman said.
Regulators seek to balance the economic benefits and efficencies created by the merger with any negatives that may arise by strengthening NYNEX's grip on local service and the potential that has to slow the entry of new competitors.
A report by the staff of the N.Y. Public Service Commission discussed at Wednesday's hearing before the three-member panel argued that NYNEX and its merger partner should be required to immediately refund roughly $300 million.
The figure represents one third of the $908 million the report estimated would be the economic benefit of the deal.
The companies dispute this figure, arguing the potential benefit is likely to reach only $600 million by the third year of the deal, according to Bell Atlantic Chairman Ray Smith.
Consumer advocates, who oppose the merger, have countered that the companies should rebate $1.25 billion immediately to consumers, a figure that includes an estimated cost of the loss of competition resulting from the merger. That represents 15 percent of the gains the combined Bell Atlantic could expect to enjoy in the coming five years, they maintain.
However, two of the three commissioners called for any decision about a customer rebate be postponed until a more complete picture of the impact of the deal emerges.
Commission members asked whether the impact should be based on current estimates or whether the determination should wait to see what happens to pricing after the entry of new competitive forces and any savings achieved by the merger.
They also called for other tangible economic benefits to the state, such as strong assurances that the company's primary headquarters will be located in New York.
Commissioner Thomas Duleavy called for the New York corporate headquarters of the company "not to be one of form, but one of substance."
Commissioners also said they want to see more tangible benefits for wholesale and retail NYNEX customers.
They also may decide to increase an existing plan designed to spur NYNEX to improve its long-criticized customer support operations. One proposal would demand that NYNEX increase hiring of customer support personnel and rapidly bring service quality up to the standards of Bell Atlantic.
Also Thursday, the commission approved a two-zone pricing plan that would allow NYNEX competitors to selectively choose which services they purchase from the local phone company as they offer local phone services of their own.
A press advisory issued after Wednesday's meeting said the NYPSC had "reserved a final decision on the NYNEX - Bell Atlantic merger until a special Commission session scheduled for Thursday."
The meeting is set to for 1000 EST/1500 GMT in Albany.
Bell Atlantic closed Wednesday down 1-7/8 to 63-3/8. NYNEX fell 1-3/4 at 47-3/8. The declines reflected a broad decline among Baby Bell stocks and the stock market in general.
-- New York newsdesk, 212-859-1736
