New York state utility regulators Thursday approved the $23 billion Nynex Corp. and Bell Atlantic Corp. merger, subject to conditions the regional telephone giants must agree to by the end of March.
Consumer groups opposed to the merger that have demanded rate rebates for New York customers blasted the state Public Service Commission's decision as a sellout.
New York became the last state in Nynex's six-state service region to approve the merger, which still faces hurdles in Washington and New York.
The merger of the Baby Bells would create the nation's largest local phone company serving customers in 12 Northeastern states and Washington.
"The bedrock requirements of our approval are improved service quality and ensuring that ratepayers see tangible benefits," New York State Public Service Commission Chairman John O'Mara said.
He said in an interview that, while there would be no immediate rate reduction, "We have attached conditions that we believe will bring rate reduction."
The merger is being held up by federal regulators who are reviewing its competitive implications.
Bell Atlantic spokesman Eric Rabe said the companies now expected the deal to close after April 22, the previous target date. "Obviously, things are moving slower than we had hoped," Rabe said.
He said the Justice Department had still not indicated when it would act on the deal. He said the Federal Communications Commission said it would take 30 days after the Justice Department finishes its review before it took action.
The companies welcomed the commission's decision but said in a joint statement they were still assessing the conditions.
In addition, state Attorney General Dennis Vacco expressed concern the decision did not go far enough to protect ratepayers and said he was reviewing the deal.
After several months of hearings, the three-member panel voted for the merger and the conditions in a 15-minute meeting in Albany, the state capital.
The commission said the combined company must not move major operations that were located in New York state before the merger and that its headquarters be in New York, which New York-based Nynex and Philadelphia-based Bell Atlantic have agreed to.
The regulators focused on improving customer service in New York, where consumer groups have berated Nynex for offering what they call the worst service in the nation.
The approval calls on Nynex to accelerate spending to improve customer service, including hiring up to 1,000 new support staff by the end of 1997 in New York state.
A Nynex spokesman said the company has been hiring service personnel over the past year and would hire more in 1997. Last year, it hired 3,600 employees in service-related areas, three-fourths of them in New York state. Overall, Nynex has just over 68,000 employees.
Consumer groups were swift to criticize the commission's decision.
"We are outraged that this commission approved a merger that is completely anticompetitive," said Robert Ceisler of the New York Citizens Utility Board ratepayers' group. "The commission has sanctioned a more powerful and richer monopoly."
Consumer advocates had demanded the commission at least force Nynex to give consumers immediate rebates to compensate for the reduced competition and greater efficiencies expected from the merger.
Other conditions cited were having Bell Atlantic pledge to observe existing agreements between regulators and Nynex, that Nynex employee pension funds be protected, and that Bell Atlantic grant regulators access to its records.
Nynex stock closed down 37.5 cents at $47 while Bell Atlantic fell 75 cents to $63.625, both in consolidated trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
