America Online Inc. said on Tuesday it plans to launch a national Internet service in Japan in mid-April, and vowed to make Japan its biggest international market within a couple of years.
"Japan is a huge market opportunity for AOL, and we are pursuing it aggressively," AOL Chairman Steve Case said in a statement. "Over the next few years, we plan to make Japan our largest international market."
AOL Japan Inc. is a three-way joint venture by America Online, Mitsui &amp; Co. Ltd., a diversified Japanese trading company; and publisher Nihon Keizai Shimbun Inc., or Nikkei. America Online owns a 50 percent stake, Mitsui 40 percent and Nikkei 10 percent.
Taking aim at established rivals in Japan, officials with Dulles, Va.-based America Online, the world's No. 1 online service, said the new service would offer a range of graphically oriented, multimedia features not available on the largely text-based services of other Japanese online services.
Leading online and Internet service providers include Nifty-serve, a 2 million-member Japanese licensee of Columbus, Ohio-based CompuServe Corp. ; PCVAN, a unit of Fujitsu Ltd. and ASCIINet, a unit of ASCII Corp..
AOL Japan promised to make its service uniquely Japanese, with content, customer service, billing and management all rendered in the Japanese language.
AOL Japan will be offered at a monthly fee of 980 Japanese yen, or about $8, for three hours' use, and 480 yen, or $4, for each additional hour, about half the hourly price of Nifty-serve, Japan's dominant online service.
New AOL Japan members will get a 10-hour free trial in the first month, the company said.
AOL International President Jack Davies said the service will offer a fixed price for access to all information services, in contrast to Nifty-Serve requirements for access to some databases.
Another newcomer to Japan's market for online and Internet access is Redmond, Wash.-based Microsoft Corp.'s Microsoft Network (MSN), which is allied with national phone company Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corp..
MSN Network claims more than 200,000 members in Japan.
Industry analyst Peter Krasilovsky said AOL Japan and MSN were positioned to rapidly acquire market share from incumbent online service providers like Nifty-Serve, whose services have an antiquated look compared to AOL.
"It looks like AOL will be a major player, battling it out with the Microsoft Network," said Krasilovsky of Arlen Communications, a consulting group based in Bethesda, Md.
Japan's total online audience is estimated at around 5.7 million computer users, America Online said, citing recent statistics from market research firm International Data Corp.
AOL Japan will have access to news from Nihon Keizai Shimbun, Japan's leading financial newspaper and other well-known Japanese publications.
The service will supply sports, news and entertainment to Japanese subscribers and give them direct access to other America Online services around the world, plus member-to-member chat groups, electronic mail and Internet access.
Additional partnerships will be announced with major Japanese publishers before the service is launched April 15, America Online officials said.
Initially, about two-thirds of Japan's population will be able to dial the service via local numbers, officials said. The company plans to make more comprehensive access available shortly. Like its North American and European cousins, AOL Japan will target home computer users, not businesses.
America Online is the world's largest online service with 8 million subscribers. CompuServe is second at 5.3 million members, including the 2 million Nifty-Serve members.
America Online also said Tuesday its international subscriber count had surpassed the 600,000 mark and was on track to reach 1 million members by September.
America Online has nearly 500,000 members in Europe, and AOL Canada has more than 100,000 members, the company said.
"Our goal is to have 1 million members outside of the U.S. by September 1997. We think we are well on track to acheive that with the growth in Japan and other countries," Davies said in a phone interview.
