Shareholders of MCI Communications Corp are expected to vote overwhelmingly in favor of the proposed merger with British Telecommunications Plc at MCI's annual shareholder meeting Wednesday.
The shareholder vote is one of the first major milestones on the road to winning approval for the $23 billion cross-border merger, which will create a combined company known as Concert Plc with $40.6 billion in revenues.  
The merger awaits regulatory approvals in Washington, London and Brussels, the headquarters of the European Commission. Company officials are confident the merger -- announced in November 1996 -- is on track to close in the fall of 1997.
The annual meeting, to be held in out-of-the-way Wilkes Barre, Pa., two hours north of Philadelphia, is expected to be a quiet affair, with only three items on the agenda: the shareholder vote, and election of directors and auditors.
Wilkes Barre was chosen because it was the hometown of William McGowan, the legendary founder and former chairman of MCI, who died in June 1992.  
In his speech to shareholders Wednesday, Bert Roberts, MCI's current chairman and chief executive, is expected to focus on the projected benefits of its merger, which would create one of the world's first global communications carriers.
One industry analyst briefed by the company said he expected Roberts to reveal some of the early products and services that may result from its ties to British Telecom.
Among the possible offerings would be seamless services connecting the United States and Britain, including wireless phone transmission, faxing, electronic mail, voice mail and the Internet, the analyst said.  
Industry analysts believe the MCI official will also respond to AT&amp;T Corp's initiative to offer local phone service using a fixed wireless system attached to the side of a customer's premises as a means of bypassing local networks controlled by regional Bell companies.
Through interconnection pacts and the new wireless technology, AT&amp;T has said by 1998 it plans to offer local service to the vast majority of the U.S. population.  
MCI made an early move into local phone markets with its MCI Metro unit but has appeared less aggressive than its rivals since the passage of the U.S. Telecommunications Act of 1996 in evolving a strategy to expand its local phone presence.
A key benefit of the merger with cash-rich British Telecom is the financing muscle that MCI can tap as it seeks to slice substantial market share away from the incumbent regional Bell companies in various local service markets.  
MCI provides local service in 20 U.S. metropolitan markets through a mix of company-owned facilities and resale agreements to use other companies' networks. It has said it plans to be in 31 local service markets by the end of 1997.
By contrast, long-distance rivals AT&amp;T and Sprint Corp have each said they are gearing up to compete in the 50 top U.S. metropolitan markets by year-end.
There are three nominees, all British, to the MCI board. They include Sir Peter Bonfield, British Telecom's chief executive and a current MCI board member; Sir Colin Marshall, chairman of the Confederation of British Industry and chairman of British Airways ; and J. Keith Oates, deputy chairman of British retail group Marks and Spencer Plc.
Sources close to the company said they expected a favorable vote at the meeting, due in part to the substantial 20 percent stake that British Telecom already owns of MCI and the lack of opposition to the merger among other shareholders.
The MCI vote will be followed April 15 by an extraordinary general meeting of British Telecom shareholders to be held at Wembley Stadium in London.
