Lucent Technologies Inc expects its lagging consumer products unit -- the smallest of four product divsions -- to show substantial profit gains in 1997 and a return to revenue growth by the December quarter.
"We expect a substantial improvement in profitablity this year (for the unit) mainly through cost-cutting," Chief Financial Officer Don Peterson Peterson "and positive revenue growth" in the December quarter, due to new products.  Earlier Thursday, Lucent had said consumer product revenues fell 41 percent in the second quarter ended in March.  
Consumer products comprised a small fraction of total March quarter revenues of $5.15 billion.  It was the only Lucent unit not to see double-digit growth in the quarter.
The division's revenues fell to $174 million in the March quarter due to the impact on sales resulting from the closing in 1996 of hundreds of phone center stores, the streamlining of the product line and reduced revenue from phone rentals.
Revenues from Lucent's carrier network systems division jumped 23.3 percent to $2.93 billion, while the business communications unit rose 14.1 percent to $1.3 billion and semiconductor revenues gained 18.3 percent to $615 million.  
In addition, Peterson told Reuters the company's closely watched backlog of customer equipment orders remained "in the $4 billion range, or about the same level it was in the fiscal first quarter ended in December 1996."
"The backlog was about the same level that we talked about in the prior quarter's conference call," Peterson said.
He said the backlog was replenished by about $600 million in new wireless equipment orders in Taiwan, Brazil, Indonesia, the Philippines and Mexico balancing out the revenue recognized from prior equipment contracts during the quarter.  
The Lucent executive said he expected the company to maintain its gross profit margin as a percentage of revenues at around 42 to 43 percent for the fiscal 1997 year ending in September.
For the March quarter, Lucent reported an overall gross margin of 42.1 percent, down from the 45.9 percent reported in the seasonally strong volume December 1996 quarter but up from the 39.9 percent margin in the year-ago March quarter.
"I don't see margin expansion as a major opportunity, but I do think we can hold onto it if we run the business right," he said of plans to hold margins at 43 percent in fiscal 1997.  
Peterson said international revenues increased 26 percent over the year-ago quarter to $1.26 billion from $1.0 billion.
Because most large equipment contracts are transacted in U.S. dollars, he said the impact of currency translation on Lucent results was immaterial during the latest quarter and was expected to have minimal impact for the rest of the year.
Speaking of plans to pump up consumer product revenues, he said the company plans to introduce a slew of new products including wireless, cordless and corded phones and answering machines to replace older models.  
After a round of profit-taking in the morning that sent Lucent shares down 5/8 of a point, the stock recovered in mid-afternoon trading to 54-7/8, up 1/4 of a point on the day.
((-- New York newsdesk, 212-859-1736))
