Bell Atlantic Corp. said Thursday its earnings rose sharply in the first quarter, boosted by growth in its telephone and cellular businesses.
The Philadelphia-based telecommunications company reported first-quarter net income of $515.6 million, an increase of 11.0 percent over the $464.7 million it earned in first quarter of 1996. Earnings per share rose to $1.17 from $1.06, slightly more than the First Call consensus estimate of $1.16.
Operating revenues grew to $3.4 billion from $3.2 billion.
"This was a good solid set of numbers," J.P. Morgan analyst Simon Flannery said of the strong showing in new and second-line growth, wireless business and productivity.
"In spite of investments for new initiatives, they were still able to deliver double-digit earnings growth in the latest quarter," he said.
Bell Atlantic Chairman and Chief Executive Raymond Smith said, "Demand for our services, including data connectivity, wireless and value-added services, continues to drive excellent bottom line performance."
Anticipating a landmark year for the company, Smith said, "We are heading toward the closing of our merger with Nynex with great momentum. With solid fundamentals, we are poised for a terrific year in 1997."
The Wall Street Journal reported Thursday that Bell Atlantic and Nynex Corp. are stepping preparations for a legal counter-attack if the Justice Department blocks their proposed $23 billion merger, which was announced in April 1996.
Smith said the company has been able to absorb significant start-up costs for new ventures, such as the PrimeCo personal communications services partnership and international wireless activities.
The chief factors in the latest results were continued cost-control measures and the strong performance of Bell Atlantic's core business units, driven by revenue growth of 7.6 percent, including Bell Atlantic's proportionate share of domestic cellular revenues.
The year-ago results excluded a non-cash $142.1 million charge the comnpany took to cover a change in the method for booking revenues from its directory publishing business in 1996. After the restatement, first-quarter 1996 net income was $606.8 million, but investors focused on the company's actual operating results.
Bell Atlantic's stock gained $1 to $60.25 in late morning trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
The latest earnings report consolidates the results of the Mexican Grupo Iusacell SA de CV investment for the first time following Bell Atlantic's assumption of operational control of the business in February. Specific figures were not broken out in the company's statement.
