Lucent Technologies Inc. said Thursday it earned $66 million the first three months of 1997, reversing a big loss as it ended its first year as an independent company.
Lucent, the former high-technology manufacturing unit of AT&amp;T Corp., reported net income of $66 million, or 10 cents a share, for the three months ended March 31, reversing a loss of $103 million, or 16 cents a share, in the 1996 quarter.
The company, which designs and builds public and private communications systems and networks and telecommunications equipment, said revenues for its fiscal second quarter grew by 12.5 percent to $5.15 billion from $4.58 billion.
Lucent said it benefited from strengthened relationships with the regional Bell companies that followed its spin-off from AT&amp;T a year ago.
Previously, local phone companies had been reluctant to do business with the AT&amp;T equipment unit, seeing AT&amp;T as a potential rival in the coming era of open competition for local and long-distance services.
Of Lucent's four main businesses, only consumer products suffered a decline in revenues for the quarter, which was expected, the company said.
"We're delighted to report double-digit revenue growth and a dramatic quarter-over-quarter rise in profits as we complete our first year as a public company," Chairman Henry Schacht said in a statement.
"Our strong U.S. and international sales to network operators, businesses and microelectronics customers position us well to take maximum advantage of the exploding communications technology market."
The company, based in Murray Hill, N.J., said its gross profit margin for the quarter rose to 42.1 percent of revenues from 39.9 percent, due primarily to higher sales volume and productivity improvements.
Lucent said its revenues from systems for network operators increased 23.3 percent to $2.93 billion. Revenues for microelectronic products increased 18.3 percent to $615 million and revenues for business communications systems increased 14.1 percent to $1.308 billion.
Revenues from consumer products decreased 41 percent to $174 million as a result of continuing reengineering of the business to increase profitability, Lucent said.
The company said the decrease was expected following the closing of its phone centre stores, the streamlining of its product line and expected reductions in phone rentals.
Lucent said continuing demand for second telephone lines in businesses and residences for uses such as Internet access, data traffic and fax services contributed to solid gains in sales of wireless systems, switching systems and related software.
Chief Financial Officer Don Peterson said the company expects its lagging consumer products unit -- the smallest of four product divsions -- to show substantial profit gains in 1997 and a return to revenue growth by the December quarter.
"We expect a substantial improvement in profitablity this year (for the unit) mainly through cost-cutting, and positive revenue growth" due to new products, he said.
Lucent's stock closed at $54.125, down 50 cents a share, on the New York Stock Exchange.
