On top of its domestic troubles, AT&amp;T Corp must now contend with new threats to its international strategy after Friday's defection of Spain's Telefonica into the rival British Telecom-MCI camp.
"They certainly have a lot of balls up in the air," Bear Stearns telecommunications analyst Bill Deatherage said, referring to the multiple battles facing AT&amp;T, the largest U.S. telephone company.  
The international rebuff comes just ahead of AT&amp;T's first-quarter earnings report, slated for release Monday.
Wall Street expectations are set low after the company's warning to financial analysts in early March that heavy investments in competitive initiatives would cause earnings in 1997 to fall substantially short of profit last year.
Analysts on average expect AT&amp;T to post first-quarter earnings of $0.69 per share, down from $0.90 in the 1996 first quarter.  
Analysts agree AT&amp;T's primary focus must remain on shoring up its domestic results, most of all in its core long-distance business, which is contending with market share losses to large long-distance rivals as well as smaller niche players. At the same time, it must gear up for the emerging competition in local phone and wireless communications services, they said.
Nonetheless, global alliances are forming fast, and AT&amp;T is widely perceived to have been put on the defensive after recent moves by Concert, the British Telecommunications Plc and MCI Communications Corp alliance.  
On Friday, Telefonica de Espana SA said it struck an alliance with MCI and British Telecom, a move that is expected to open up the vast Latin American market for Concert.
Later, AT&amp;T said Telefonica's new relationship was "incompatible" with the Spanish company's membership in the Unisource telecom alliance backed by AT&amp;T.
The U.S.-based company said it expected to spend $8 billion to $9 billion this year -- mainly on new high-speed data networks and to expand wireless services -- which would dilute earnings by $0.75 to $1.00 per share.
