AT&amp;T Corp. said Monday its first-quarter profits fell 17 percent, trimmed by competition in long-distance services and investments in new businesses, and warned second quarter results might be weak as well.
Meanwhile, BellSouth Corp., a consistent top performer among regional telephone companies, said its operating earnings rose 11 percent due to a rise in the number of customer lines and strong growth in its wireless operations.
AT&amp;T said it earned $1.13 billion, or 69 cents a share, on revenues of $13.05 billion, down from net income of $1.36 billion, or 85 cents a share, on revenues of $12.85 billion in the first quarter of 1996.
AT&amp;T's earnings per share for the first quarter were in line with Wall Street's expectations based on previous guidance the company had provided financial analysts.
"Results are where we expected them to be as we implement our strategy," Chairman Robert Allen said in a statement.
In a conference call Monday, AT&amp;T also warned that its second quarter results were likely to be weaker than the first quarter but that its expectations for the full year remained on track.
Several Wall Street analysts said they planned to reduce their earnings estimates for the remainder of the year.
"There was not a great deal to cheer in the results," Goldman Sachs analyst Richard Klugman said.
AT&amp;T's first quarter revenue increase was driven by growth in local telephone service and other initiatives, business long-distance services and wireless services. That was partially offset by declines in financial services and consumer long-distance revenues, the company said.
AT&amp;T said long-distance calling volume in the most recent quarter increased by 6.7 percent over the same period of 1996, but revenue from those services rose only 0.6 percent to $11.51 billion.
Volume from consumer long-distance was flat and revenue fell 1 percent to $6.06 billion, the company said. Revenue from business long-distance rose 2.4 percent on a double-digit increase in volume.
AT&amp;T said expansion in online, local and international operations reduced its quarterly per share income by 25 cents. A year earlier, those expenses reduced earnings by 10 cents a share, AT&amp;T said.
Atlanta-based BellSouth said it earned $693 million, or 70 cents a share, on revenues of $4.8 billion in the three months ended March 31, slightly ahead of Wall Street expectations.
A year earlier the company earned $626 million, or 63 cents a share, before a one-time gain of $344 million, or 35 cents a share, on the sale of paging operations.
Revenues were $4.5 billion in the 1996 quarter.
"BellSouth's 17th consecutive quarter of improved operating results was driven by our innovative marketing," said Chief Executive Officer Duane Ackerman, adding that, "Sales increased across the board."
The company said the number of customer lines increased by 379,000 -- the biggest gain for any quarter in its history, breaking the old mark of 359,000 set in the first quarter of 1996. BellSouth now has a total of 22.5 milllion access lines.
BellSouth said the company's U.S. cellular operations ended the first quarter with 3.8 million customers, reflecting an annual growth rate of 24 percent. In international cellular markets, customers rose 76 percent since the first quarter of 1996, reaching 1.5 million.
"These are just blistering numbers," Montgomery Securities analyst Bill Vogel said of BellSouth's growth in customer access lines and the value-added services like Caller ID and Call Waiting the company offers in addition to basic access.
"They not only have the access lines growing, but the services on those lines growing sharply," he said.
Vogel, who maintains a "buy" rating on the stock, said he expected BellSouth earnings to accelerate beyond the 11 percent rise seen in the first quarter as the company benefits from rising growth in new services.
BellSouth stock was down $1.125 at $39.875 and AT&amp;T stock was off 75 cents at $32.875, both in afternoon trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
