MCI Communications Corp. Thursday reported flat quarterly earnings despite a healthy rise in revenues, and the company warned that growth might slow as it embraces higher profit margin businesses.
The telecommunications company earned $295 million, or 42 cents a share, in the first quarter, unchanged from a year ago and in line with analysts' consensus estimates. Revenues grew 8.7 percent to $4.9 billion from $4.1 billion.
"MCI continues to demonstrate strong overall revenue growth and profits," said Gerald Taylor, chief executive. "As we move towards our merger with BT, MCI is focused on implementing long term strategies that position us for growth."
In October, MCI and British Telecom announced a merger valued at $23 billion that would create the world's second-largest telecommunications group. The deal is expected to close in the fall, subject to regulatory approval.
Long-distance revenues rose 8.2 percent to $4.4 billion from $4.1 billion, twice the pace of MCI's key long distance rivals, it said. Operating income was $653 million, a rise of $39 million, or 6.4 percent from last year's first quarter.
Traffic grew 4 percent from the 1996 first quarter.
MCI said, however, that it expected revenue and traffic growth rates to slow in coming quarters as the industry's growth in home phone markets moderates and as MCI invests more money in higher profit margin businesses.
Washington-based MCI said it was shifting away from selling access to its network at wholesale prices to other telephone companies, and tightening credit collection among the companies to which it sells network access.
In an interview, Chief Financial Officer Doug Maine said MCI's strategy of replacing discount-seeking residential callers with customers willing to pay for value-added services should insulate it from the industry-wide slowdown.
MCI's strategy echoes concerns by rival AT&amp;T Corp., which described in its own first-quarter report Monday competitive pressures and a variety of costly ways to keep customers.
Until remaining barriers to entering the local services market drop, Maine said MCI will avoid chasing low-end consumers with AT&amp;T's practice of writing them checks.
Bear Stearns analyst Bette Massick said MCI appeared to be making progress in reducing the number of customers who switch to whichever provider offers the cheapest calling plan.
In both the business and mass markets, MCI said it is benefiting from efforts to offer integrated voice and data services on one bill under its networkMCI One and MCI One brands.
MCI's Business Markets posted double-digit revenue growth, led by especially strong growth in value-added services such as data, Internet, conferencing and pre-paid calling cards.
Business services account for about two-thirds of the company's overall revenues.
MCI's Information Technology revenues grew 27 percent to $433 million, with U.S. revenue doubling year-over-year. MCI said revenue from its Internet services has grown nearly 200 percent over first quarter 1996.
Local services revenue grew to $65 million or 63 percent year-over-year and jumped 33 percent from fourth quarter 1996, it said. MCI's stock fell $1.375 to $37.375 on Nasdaq.
