Nynex Corp. has until Monday to respond to charges it acted in bad faith by not signing an agreement with MCI Communications Corp. that would have allowed the nation's No. 2 long-distance carrier to enter Nynex's local market in New York state.
MCI filed a motion against Nynex on Monday asking the state Public Service Commission (PSC) to impose sanctions on Nynex for failing to sign the so-called interconnection agreement, which would enable MCI to provide local phone access in the state.
On Wednesday, state Attorney General Dennis Vacco filed papers with the commission seeking to bar Nynex from offering long-distance service because it discriminates against local-service rivals.
Vacco has been an outspoken critic of the proposed Bell Atlantic Corp. takeover of Nynex, and its New York Telephone operating unit, on anticompetitive grounds.
Nynex operates 11.1 million local service lines while competitors have less than 100,000 local service lines, according to state regulators' estimates.
Nynex spokesman Mark Marchand said the New York-based company strongly disagreed with Vacco's assessment of their draft application for long-distance service in New York.
"Fifty phone companies are licensed with the PSC to provide all forms of local phone service," Marchand said. "What they do is up to them. The market is open. There is no other state in the country which has a more competitive market."
Nynex has signed full interconnection deals with competitive access providers, including MFS Communications, a unit of WorldCom Inc.; Teleport Communications Group Inc. and WinStar Communications Inc.
The deals would allow the companies to route traffic over their own network switching equipment.
In addition, Nynex has reached resale pacts with Frontier Corp., among others, to allow companies to offer local access over Nynex's network.
Most of the new entrants into the New York local service market are focused on profitable niches in the business services market, rather than residential service.
The dispute is part of a broad change across the United States due to the 1996 Telecommunications Act, under which local and long-distance providers are seeking to meet regulatory requirements that would allow them to compete on each other's historic turf.
Washington-based MCI, which has waged an agressive campaign to enter local service markets, so far has reached five interconnection deals -- two in California, where Pacific Telesis and GTE Corp. operate, and with the respective Baby Bells in Georgia, Minnesota and Iowa.
