Seeking to show its readiness to compete in high-speed networking, Bay Networks Inc on Tuesday unveiled a set of products and strategies aimed at shoring up its reputation as a technology leader and helping it recover from the stumbles of recent years.
David House, Bay's recently hired chairman and chief executive, outlined the company's new "Adaptive Networking" strategy for making the plumbing of Internet-based networks easier to upgrade to the higher-speed networks now emerging.  
"Everybody's goal is networks that are invisible to the user," House said during a Las Vegas press conference at Networld+Interop, the semiannual trade show of the Internet equipment industry.
"We want networks that behave like electricity and water," House said, comparing computer networks to other well-developed infrastructures.
"Adaptive Networks are the products and technologies that will transition us to the Internet-optimized networks of tomorrow," he said.  
His appearance came exactly six months after House joined Bay Networks from Intel Corp, where he served as a respected senior executive for more than two decades.
Highlighting the company's new product announcements was a new single, application-specific networking chip capable of carrying up to 1.5 million packets of Internet data a second --- allowing networks to carry billions of bits of data per second.
The company said the new Route Switch Processor (RSP) integrates the manageability of routers with the speed of switches -- two traditionally separate product categories.  
House said the RSP chip, now running in Bay laboratories, would be offered in new routing switch products due out in 1998.
The RSP chip is designed to solve the growing demand for high-speed Internet transmission, while reducing technical bottlenecks that cause congestion on overloaded data networks.
House said RSP would serve as the core technology in its main product lines, including local networks used in corporate offices and in products serving telephone and Internet carriers.  
He said the chip would allow Bay to cut switch product prices tenfold over time, driving the cost of advanced switching down to $500 per connection from $5,000 currently.
Sounding like the old chip revolution evangelist he is, House described what he said were the semiconductor-driven dynamics of the networking business, which is seeing benefits from both exponential jumps in the power of computer chip technology and commodity-style price cuts.
