Caterpillar Inc., the world's largest construction and mining equipment maker, Tuesday reported record third-quarter profits of $310 million, up 45 percent from $213 million a year ago.
Sales jumped to $4.03 billion from $3.73 billion, while earnings per share rose 50 percent to $1.61 from $1.07.
The results exceeded expectations on Wall Street and Caterpillar stock jumped $2.50 to $76.625 on the New York Stock Exchange. Analysts had forecast profits of $1.34 a share, according to First Call, which tracks earnings estimates.
For the first nine months of 1997, sales were $12.06 billion, up slightly from $11.86 billion a year ago, while profit surged to $980 million from $836 million.
"There really wasn't much of a sales increase but there was a tremendous bottom-line increase," Caterpillar Chief Financial Officer Douglas Oberhelman said in a telephone interview. Most of the earnings gain was due to improved operations, though some was currency related, he said.
Profit margins rose to 25 percent in the quarter from 19 percent a year ago, primarily due to higher prices, stronger volume and the effects of a stronger U.S. dollar, Caterpillar said. Price gains were seen equally inside and outside the United States, Oberhelman said.
Continuing improvements in manufacturing and essentially flat material costs also helped boost profits but were partly offset by an unfavourable product sales mix, the heavy equipment maker said.
The sales mix in the quarter shifted more toward lower margin smaller machines, Oberhelman said, but he added that this mix shifts month-to-month and quarter-to-quarter.
"The thing that's encouraging is the gross margins remain strong," said Lisa Shalett, analyst at Sanford C. Bernstein &amp; Co., Inc. "It looks like the productivity gains they talked about in the second quarter are continuing"
Higher machine sales in the United States accounted for most of a 5 percent increase in sales volume in the quarter, Caterpillar said.
But deliveries to U.S. dealer rental fleets fell from a year ago as rental inventories remained high, the company said.
Machine sales in Europe fell due to declines in Germany and France, where the contruction sector remains weak, the company said. Sales in China, Japan, Australia and Latin America were up, while sales in Canada were unchanged and sales fell in the former Soviet Union.
The company also said it expected 1997 sales to be up slightly from an expected record in 1996, while it expects 1996 profits to exceed the $1.14 billion reported in 1995. The current record for sales is $16.07 billion, set in 1995.
"Our preliminary outlook for 1997 is to slightly surpass the record levels achieved in 1996," Chairman Donald Fites said in a statement.
"We continue to see opportunities for solid growth in the vast majority of the global markets we serve, particularly in the fast-growing developing nations where infrastructure needs are greatest," Fites said.
Higher industrial demand in developing regions, Canada and Australia are expected to offset slightly lower demand in the United States, Europe and Japan, the Peoria, Ill.-based company said.
"The outlook statement surprised me on two levels," Shalett said. "It talked about slightly higher sales but not higher profit. I thought that was deliberate."
She also said that while sales gains outside the United States, Europe and Japan are expected to offset lower demand in those areas, "it's not clear to us that it makes up for (those areas) on the profit side."
