Struggling to stay on course away from its troubled past, Trans World Airlines Inc. now must find a new chief executive to take the helm of the troubled carrier.
How quickly it can find an experienced airline executive for the job will determine whether it stays on course or runs into more financial trouble, industry analysts said.
The St. Louis-based airline said on Thursday that Chief Executive Officer Jeffrey Erickson, who has headed the company for the past two years, will leave in January.
"The last thing that the company needs now is more management turmoil," said one analyst, who declined to be identified. "It doesn't have a strong or stable enough footing to deal with this kind of stuff."
Erickson's departure comes just four months after Chief Financial Officer Robert Peiser left the company. At the time, TWA said Peiser's decision to leave was over differences in management direction.
"They're going to have to regain the confidence of Wall Street," said William Fiala, who follows the airline industry for Edward D. Jones &amp; Co., which is based in TWA's hometown. "The only way they're going to do that is by coming up with a leader that's a proven turnaround (manager), or well-respected in the industry."
Erickson, who became chief executive officer in August 1994, brought the airline through its second bankruptcy reorganization and back to where it was buying new aircraft. But the turnaround is not finished, and higher fuel costs and the July 17 crash of Paris-bound Flight 800, which hurt confidence in the carrier and therefore its sales, have stalled the company's improvement.
"Erickson was the one who really steered them through the first half of the turnaround, but they still have a way to go," Fiala said.
The company on Thursday reported a $14.3 million third-quarter loss and said its yield, a measure of fares, fell in the quarter.
"I don't know specifically the reason he chose to depart now," said Don Jacobs, chairman of the TWA Master Executive Council of the Airline Pilots Associaition. "I think it's probably an impact of the third quarter financials and Flight 800."
TWA's unions have four seats on the company's board of directors and will play a part in choosing a successor for Erickson, Jacobs said, though he could not suggest possible replacements.
"We would expect that the board would replace Jeff with a top-notch airline manager," he said. "As both employees and the stockholders in the company, we will be concerned and involved in that."
Industry experts said TWA's board of directors might have become impatient with the pace of the turnaround after seeing the third-quarter results. But they also quickly defended Erickson's record at the company.
"When you see what TWA was three years ago and what it is now, it's a world of difference," said Michael Boyd, president of Aviation Systems Research Corp., a research and consulting firm  in Golden, Colo.
Calls to Erickson at TWA's offices Friday were transferred to a public relations office, which said he was unavailable for comment. TWA Chairman Thomas Meagher did not return calls.
Analysts said TWA's board would need to move quickly and that the next chief executive would need a good degree of independence from the board.
"Whatever they do to replace Erickson, they need a hands-on manager, not a messiah," Boyd said. "In a situation like this, you have to have free reign. You can't have people behind you second-guessing every one of your moves."
Boyd said several managers at United Airlines might be interested in the job. He also suggested that former Alaska Air Group Chief Executive Raymond Vecci could be a candidate.
Earlier this year, Erickson, who was criticized by families of the Flight 800 victims for the company's response to the crash, told students at Washington University in St. Louis that the aftermath of the crash was draining, said Stuart Greenbaum, dean of the university's business school.
"I can't help believing the crash just took a lot out of Jeff," said Greenbaum, who said he is a friend of Erickson's. "That was so difficult for him, as it would be for any human being, to try to represent the company to the world" after the tragedy, in which 230 died.
