Mercantile Bancorp Inc would likely remain a potential target in the Missouri bank merger wave after its planned combination with Mark Twain Bancshares Inc.
"This certainly doesn't mean that Mercantile is no longer a buyout candidate," said Michael Ancell, analyst at Edward D. Jones &amp; Co. "It's clear that the bank merger wave has rolled into St. Louis and it's turning into a tsunami."  
As the largest bank holding company in Missouri behind Boatmen's Bancshares Inc, Mercantile is seen by analysts as attractive to banks looking to establish a presence in the lower Midwest.
In August, NationsBank Corp agreed to buy Boatmen's Bancshares Inc for $9.5 billion.
That deal valued Boatmen's at a pricey 2.7 times book value, analysts said. Mercantile's deal values Mark Twain at about 2.8 times book value, analysts said. The pooling of interests deal is worth $49.62 a share to Mark Twain shareholders, based on Friday's closing price, the banks said.  
The St. Louis-based bank holding companies would have a combined total of $21.3 billion in assets.
"It's a pretty pricey transaction," said James Schutz, banking analyst at Chicago Corp. "Mark Twain is a very profitable and a very attractive franchise."
Mark Twain reported return on average assets of 1.82 percent in the third quarter and return on average realized common equity of 18.49 percent, putting it in the upper echelon of Midwest banks, analysts said.  
"It's an in-market deal, which allows for a tremendous ammount of efficiencies, which is good for Mercantile," said Joseph Steiven, analyst at Stifel Nicolaus. "They're paying full-boat prices, but they're getting an excellent company."
But Schutz noted that Mark Twain already operates efficiently, and questioned how much more in efficiency Mercantile could wring out of Mark Twain.
"The question I would ask is how is Mercantile going to earn back this premium they're paying," Schutz said.  
That question appeared to be in the market Monday, with Mercantile shares down 2-3/8 at 49-3/4 and Mark Twain up 3-5/8 to 46.
Mark Twain chief executive John Dubinsky, who is slated to become chief executive of Mercantile's St. Louis bank when the deal is completed, indicated there were not likely to be wholesale job cuts when the two banks combine.
"Between Mercantile and Mark Twain as we sit here today, there are over 200 job openings," Dubinsky said in an interview. "There will be some duplications, there will be some consolidation of job functions."
But "quality" individuals whose jobs are eliminated because of duplication will be able to apply for other jobs, he said, noting "I would be very surprised if there was a large number of individuals that won't be needed."
Dubinsky also would not rule out the possibility of the combined Mercantile/Mark Twain being acquired.
"Banking is changing so rapidly," he said. "One couldn't make any comment with certainty about the future."
--Reuters Chicago newsdesk, 312-408-8787
