As the world's first Internet bank, Atlanta-based Security First Network Bank has had somewhat of an identity problem with potential customers.
"We get a lot of questions," Chief Executive Officer James Mahan III said. "Are you real? Are you virtual? Where are you really?"
Part consumer bank, part software testing site, Security First opened its virtual doors a year ago this month.
But now Security First plans to add actual doors, opening small offices in Atlanta, Cambridge, Mass., and Silicon Valley in California.
"I think we can more effectively market if we have a physical presence," Mahan said in an interview.
Comparing his bank to discount brokerage firm Charles Schwab &amp; Co., Mahan said having the offices may give customers a sense of security, even if they never use an office.
Security First's current location is on the Internet. The bank is one of five in the United States that operates directly on the Internet, according to the Bank Administration Institute.
Federally insured Security First can be accessed at Website (www.sfnb.com), which brings consumers to a home page that looks like a bank lobby.
Customers can reach their account anywhere they have access to the Internet, rather than being tied to a single terminal where they have finance software, like other computer banks.
"Our goal was to have a bank that was fully interactive, where an individual could see all his information," Mahan said.
Most Security First customers have a money market account and a demand deposit account. Customers can open a checking account with as little as $100, an amount most choose to start to make sure the bank works, Mahan said.
Customers can pay bills electronically, purchase certificates of deposits or acquire a Visa card. Security First is also hoping to offer brokerage products and first and second mortgage products by the end of the year. Funds can be accessed by automatic teller machine, and Security First absorbs interbank fees for using the machines.
With limited infrastructure, Security First can offer higher yields, Mahan said. The bank was offering a six-month CD with an annaul percentage yield of 5.9 percent.
Security First was spawned as an idea of Mahan, who was chief executive officer at Kentucky-based Cardinal Bancshares Inc., and his sister-in-law's husband, Michael McChesney, who was starting a security software firm.
"He educated me on the Internet for years and years and years," Mahan said. Mahan used the charter of one of Cardinal's thrifts, changed its name to Security First and used it to start the Internet bank.
McChesney's, firm, SecureWare Inc. developed software that Mahan said has military-grade security. So far, the bank has not had its security breached, Mahan said.
"That doesn't mean that there haven't been a number of sophisticated attempts," he said. "If you have enough money and enough time you can break into anything."
Outsiders agree that Security First has shown a record of being secure, avoiding viruses, data theft and other potential dangers of Internet commerce.
"They do use a level of security that the Pentagon reserves for its most secure and sensistive systems," said Paul Schmeltzer, executive vice president for network services at Southeast Switch Inc., the corporate organisation for the Honour Network, the fourth largest ATM network in the country. "Is any security design totally foolproof or totally secure? Probably not."
That software and others developed for the bank is likely to be the prime money maker for Security First. Mahan admits that Five Paces Inc., Security First's software unit, will be the prime contributor to the company's net income.
"The bank is really a test site to use as a demonstration for potential customers of the software business," said Gary Craft, an analyst who follows the bank for Alexandria, Va..-based Friedman, Billings, Ramsey &amp; Co.
Security First's stock is traded on Nasdaq.
Security First has opened about 5,600 accounts. Most of its customers are male, between the ages of 25 and 45, with average income above $63,000 a year. More than 80 percent own their own home, attractive demographics for marketing.
Security First has also attracted competition. This month, Atlanta Internet Bank opened for business.
Unlike Security First, Don Shapleigh, chief executive of Atlanta Internet, says he does not plan to open any customer offices. "I have the WorldNet. I have other ways to get out." Federally insured Atlanta Internet currently offers its services to subscribers of AT &amp; T's WorldNet Services.
Shapleigh also argues that Atlanta Internet is the first true Internet only bank, saying that Security First is really a software company.
"I'm not selling software," he said. "I'm a banker."
Atlanta Internet, which is a service provided by a unit of Carolina First Corp. can be reached on the Internet at (www.atlantabank.com).
