Caterpillar Inc. said Tuesday it is prepared to unilaterally impose employment terms, effective Oct. 1, on employees represented by the United Auto Workers after declaring an impasse in talks with the union.
The impasse revolves around the firings of some union workers before and during the 17-month strike against the Peoria, Ill.-based heavy equipment maker that ended in December without a new contract.
Caterpillar is willing to have firings after the strike sent to arbitration, but not those before and during the walkout.
The terms Caterpillar said it will impose at its eight UAW-represented plants in the United States include a pledge not to close any faciltities except the company's York, Pa., plant through September 2001, and job guarantees through that time period. Caterpillar has 31 manufacturing plants in the United States.
"We are taking this step to provide our employees with an added sense of security about their future, while giving Caterpillar the labor costs and the flexibility we need to keep jobs in the U.S. and keep our U.S.-made products competitive around the world," Caterpillar Vice President Wayne Zimmerman said in a statement.
Other terms include a 19 percent increase in Caterpillar's supplement of pensions for retirees until they become eligible for Social Security, an average increase of 7-1/2 percent in pensions and a doubling of potential incentive pay, Caterpillar said.
Caterpillar's UAW workers have been working without a contract since 1991. A 17-month strike against the equipment maker ended in December without a resolution of contract issues.
The UAW said Tuesday it does not agree that it has reached a lawful impasse with the company that makes it necessary for the terms to be put into effect.
"This tactic is yet another attempt to subvert the collective bargaining process," UAW Vice President Richard Shoemaker said in a statement.
The union said it will pursue the appropriate legal remedies if the company takes action to implement employment conditions without the existance of an impasse.
One analyst said the impasse declaration by Caterpillar appears to be genuine, not just a bargaining ploy.
"I don't think this is really a bargaining move," said Barry Bannister, analyst at S.G. Warburg. "It's just an obvious impasse."
He also said he did not expect the move to affect the stock, noting that strikers returned to Caterpillar several months ago without an effect on the company's profit margins.
