Olympic Financial Ltd said Tuesday it could reach a deal to sell the company by October.
"I would expect that the time frame hopefully would be sometime in October," said Warren Kantor, chairman of Olympic's executive committee, in an interview. He was referring to the process of its investment banker Donaldson, Lufkin and Jenrette considering strategic alternatives for the Minneapolis-based automobile finance company.  
Olympic said Monday it has received an indication of interest from a potential buyer. Kantor said others have also expressed interest in the company since Monday's announcement.
"Effectively, what I believe is happening is due to the public announcement, those people who would go through a longer time frame... want to be sure (they are) not left out," Kantor said.
He would not comment on the identity of any potential suitors, but said the first contact came from a company with investment grade credit.  
A combination with an investment grade company could allow Olympic greater access to capital to expand its business, Kantor said. Olympic's credit is not investment grade.
Olympic needs capital to expand technology as its business expands, Kantor said.
"We think that the circumstances of the company are such that it makes sense to consider offers in order to take advantage of our rapid growth and opportunities," he said, noting that access to capital could especially become an issue in the event of a recession.  
While capital may be harder to come by in a recession, demand for loans from Olympic's customers, who essentially need their cars to get to work, would not wane much, Kantor said.
Kantor would not rule out the option of remaining independent and slowing down its growth plans, but added that it was likely the company would receive an acceptable buyout offer. "While we think it is likely that we will get offers that are acceptable, we're not going to accept (just) anything," he said.
Olympic's loans serviced have jumped to $3 billion at the end of June from $1.5 billion a year ago and the company is looking to further expand into a somewhat higher risk loan category it refers to as Classic, Kantor said.
Those loans net 16-18 percent rates, while 80 percent of its portfolio is made up of loans at about a 12 percent rate, Kantor said, adding that Olympic wants Classic loans to make up 50 percent of the portfolio by the end of the year.
Kantor would not comment on analysts' estimates ranging from $25 a share to more than $30 a share as a sale price for the company. Olympic rose 2-1/2 to 26-1/2 Tuesday.
--Reuters Chicago newsdesk, 312-408-8787
