The newly appointed chief executive officer of Meredith Corp said Monday that the company was beginning to see prices for television stations peak and come down.
That could lead to Meredith making an acqusiiton sometime in 1997, said William Kerr, who is currently president and chief operating officer of the media company.
"We are hopeful that certainly in the course of the next calendar year that we would see some action," said Kerr, who will become chief executive January 1.  
In the next few years, Meredith, which owns seven television stations could acquire about five more, he said in an interview.
"I think it may be easier in calendar 1997 than in calendar 1996 to make an attractive acquisition," he said, describing attractive as a VHF network affiliate in the 10th to 40th largest U.S. markets. "We'd like a larger market, but we think it's unlikely one will become available," he said.
The Des Moines, Iowa-based company also publishes magazines including Better Homes and Gardens and Ladies' Home Journal.  
He said Meredith will not seek publishing acqusitions, he said. Instead, the company plans to launch new titles, including Family Money magazine, which is expected to be launched in the first half of 1997.
Due to consolidation in the magazine business in the 1980s and early 1990s, "we do not think there are many acquisitions" to be made on the publishing side, he said.
Kerr said he did not see another major magazine launch by the time the company's fiscal year ends next June, but said one could be launched later in the calendar year.  
He would not say what the next title would be, but said it would be compatable with the publisher's family focus.
Publishing currently makes up about 54 percent of Merideth's earnings, broadcasting about 43 percent, with the rest coming from licensing, Kerr said.
The company currently has two licensing agreements with Wal-Mart Stores Inc, and Kerr said other agreements are possible, both with Wal-Mart and other companies.
But he also said a new deal is not likely to happen for 12 to 18 months.
"I think it is unlikely that we would have a major new deal to announce in this fiscal year," Kerr said.
On Monday, Meredith said its board of directors appointed Kerr chief exectuive officer. He had been president and chief operating officer. Kerr, 55, will replace Jack Rehm January 1, though Rehm will remain chairman until December 31, 1997, when he plans to retire, Kerr said.
--Reuters Chicago newsdesk, 312-408-8787
