McDonnell Douglas Corp. stock tumbled Monday after the Defence Department eliminated the company from the race to build a new generation fighter jet that eventually could be worth $200 billion or more.
The decision was a blow to McDonnell Douglas, the nation's second-largest defence contractor and a long-time leader in fighter jets, and could force it to restructure, seek a merger or become more acquisition-minded, industry analysts said.
The Pentagon on Saturday awarded four-year contracts to Boeing Co. and Lockheed Martin Corp. to develop prototype fighter jets for the early 21st century for the Air Force, Navy, Marine Corps and the British Royal Navy.
British and U.S. forces have announced plans to buy 3,000 of the joint strike fighter jets, with initial delivery scheduled for 2008.
With potential export sales of another 2,000 jets and additional funding for development and support, the programme could be worth $200 billion to $500 billion over the coming decades, industry executives said.
McDonnell Douglas stock lost $4.25 to close at $52.50 on the New York Stock Exchange, where it was one of the biggest losers of the day. Boeing rose $1.50 to $93.25 and Lockheed Martin rose $1.875 to $95.625, also on the NYSE.
John Modzelewski, an analyst at PaineWebber, said the decision could force St. Louis-based McDonnell Douglas to seek acquisitions more aggressively to help build its business, or into a merger with another defence or aerospace company.
"Everything's back on the table," Modzelewski said.
In the past year, McDonnell Douglas has been the subject of rumoured talks with Boeing, Rockwell International Corp. and Raytheon Co..
McDonnell Douglas has declined to comment on potential mergers and acquisitions. "We have said we will look at mergers, acquisitions and partnerships that will grow our business," a company spokesman said.
"This will be something of a wakeup call," CS First Boston analyst Peter Aseritis said. "It's a fairly sharp and dramatic blow to McDonnell Douglas and I would venture to guess one they probably didn't see coming."
PaineWebber's Modzelewski said, "Without having the internal growth such as joint strike fighter would give them, they're going to have to grow through acquisition." That could include Texas Instruments Inc.'s defence electronics business, which is for sale, according to published reports.
McDonnell Douglas Chief Executive Harry Stonecipher said on Saturday the loss was a surprise to the company.
"Certainly in terms of the overall future, 10 years and beyond, it is a significant programme to us," Stonecipher said.
But in a statement to employees Monday, Stonecipher noted the company's backlog of aircraft orders to the military at home and abroad and said it was pursuing other orders. The company has a $46 billion order backlog, a spokesman said.
"This decision does not mean we are out of the military aircraft business," Stonecipher said.
McDonnell currently builds the Air Force F-15 fighter and the Navy-Marine F-18E/F as well as the C-17 military cargo plane. Both the F-15 and the F-18 are to be replaced by the joint strike fighter in the next century.
PaineWebber's Modzelewski said McDonnell Douglas was likely to participate in the new jet fighter programme as a subcontractor, as politics will force the wealth to be spread.
But despite its key role providing fighter jets for decades, the based company has failed to win a major role in any of the next generation of tactical aircraft.
Already the smallest of the three major commercial jet makers, McDonnell said last month it would not continue to compete against Boeing and Europe's Airbus Industrie in the market for the biggest commercial jetliners.
