Dayton Hudson Corp., the nation's fourth-largest retailer, Tuesday reported higher third-quarter results, giving added credence to analysts' projections of an industrywide strong holiday shopping season.
Women's retail chains Ann Taylor and The Limited also posted higher results.
General merchandise retailers should post decent gains in November and December combined, said Howard Eilenberg, an analyst at Johnson Redbook Service, a unit of Lynch, Jones &amp; Ryan Inc.
"It's going to be overall in the 5-to-5-1/2 percent increase range (over the previous year's sales). More importantly, the gross margins and the profits are going to look better," Eilenberg said.
Dayton Hudson said it had a 164 percent increase in operating earnings for its third quarter ended Nov. 2. Results were aided by a strong performance at its Target discount stores.
The Minneapolis-based retailer reported operating earnings of $116 million, or 49 cents a share, several cents above analysts' estimates. A year earlier it earned $44 million, or 18 cents a share.
"The key issue was a very strong performance from Target in all areas," said Saul Yaari, retail analyst at Piper Jaffray.
Target's operating profit in the third quarter rose 82 percent to $213 million, and total revenues increased 14 percent while same-store revenues rose 5 percent, Dayton Hudson said.
Meanwhile, Dayton Hudson's Mervyn's unit reported a 98 percent increase in operating profits to $64 million in the quarter, boosted by reductions in marketing costs, store expenses and headquarters costs. The increase came despite a 3 percent drop in revenue and a decrease in gross margins.
"Our third-quarter results reflect continued strong profit performance at Target and Mervyn's," Dayton Hudson Chairman Bob Ulrich said in a news release. "While the holiday calendar is challenging, we believe we are well positioned for a successful finish to 1996."
The 1996 holiday season includes five fewer selling days between Thanskgiving and Christmas than a year ago.
New York-based AnnTaylor Stores Corp. reported net income of $3.3 million, or 13 cents a share, after a $2 million, or 8-cent-a-share after-tax charge related to obligations under its former chairman's contract. That compared with $666,000, or 3 cents a share, a year ago.
Columbus, Ohio-based Limited Inc. reported operating earnings of $88.4 million, or 15 cents a share, before gains from initial public offerings, compared with $69.1 million, or 10 cents a share, a year ago.
"Our much improved third-quarter results reflect performance gains and continuing momentum in certain of our women's and our emerging businesses" including the Abercrombie &amp; Fitch business, Limited Chief Executive Leslie Wexner said in a statement.
"Consistent with our sales plan, we enter the holiday period well positioned, with overall inventories up 3 percent per square foot at retail," he said.
Analysts agreed The Limited was well positioned for the key holiday shopping season.
"I think they're positioned for a decent Christmas," said Elizabeth Pierce, analyst at Stephens Inc. "Inventories are conservatively managed."
Dayton Hudson stock rose $1.25 to $37.625, Limited rose 25 cents to $17.75 and AnnTaylor fell 87.5 cents to $20.50, all on the New York Stock Exchange.
