McDonnell Douglas Corp. said Monday it would consider mergers and acquisitions, but not a restructuring, after the Defence Department eliminated the company from the race to build a new generation fighter jet that eventually could be worth $200 billion or more.
"We've always been interested in mergers and acquisitions and we continue to look at them," Chief Executive Officer Harry Stonecipher said in an interview with CNBC financial television network.
The Pentagon on Saturday awarded four-year contracts to Boeing and Lockheed Martin Corp. to develop prototype fighter jets for the early 21st century for the U.S. Air Force, Navy, Marine Corps and the British Royal Navy.
The decision was a blow to St. Louis-based McDonnell Douglas, the nation's second-largest defence contractor and a long-time leader in fighter jets, and could force it to restructure, seek a merger or become more acquisition-minded, industry analysts said.
McDonnell Douglas had reportedly had preliminary merger discussions with Boeing Co. earlier this year. Stonecipher would not comment on any specific mergers or acquisitions.
"I don't think Boeing would be on our radar screen," he said regarding a possible acquisition. "We may be on theirs."
Stonecipher also said he would be interested in trading McDonnell Douglas commercial aircraft assets for Boeing's military aircraft business, but noted there have been no talks in that area. Boeing said it did not comment on rumours or speculation about mergers and acquisitions.
Already the smallest of the three major commercial jet makers, McDonnell said last month it would not continue to compete against Boeing and Europe's Airbus Industrie in the market for the biggest commercial jetliners.
British and U.S. forces have announced plans to buy 3,000 of the new generation fighter jets, with initial delivery scheduled for 2008.
With potential export sales of another 2,000 jets and additional funding for development and support, the programme could be worth $200 billion to $500 billion over the coming decades, industry executives said.
McDonnell Douglas stock lost $4.25 to $51.50 on the New York Stock Exchange, where it was one of the biggest losers of the day. Boeing rose $1.50 to $93.25 and Lockheed Martin rose $1.875 to $95.625, also on the NYSE.
John Modzelewski, an analyst at PaineWebber, said the decision could force St. Louis-based McDonnell Douglas to seek acquisitions more aggressively to help build its business, or into a merger with another defence or aerospace company.
"Everything's back on the table," Modzelewski said.
In the past year, McDonnell Douglas has been the subject of rumoured talks with Boeing, Rockwell International Corp. and Raytheon Co.
"This will be something of a wakeup call," CS First Boston analyst Peter Aseritis said. "It's a fairly sharp and dramatic blow to McDonnell Douglas and I would venture to guess one they probably didn't see coming."
PaineWebber's Modzelewski said, "Without having the internal growth such as joint strike fighter would give them, they're going to have to grow through acquisition." That could include Texas Instruments Inc.'s defence electronics business, which is for sale, according to published reports.
"Texas Instruments is a very interesting property if in fact it is for sale," Stonecipher said in repsonse to a question about the defence electronics business.
In a statement to employees Monday, Stonecipher noted the company's backlog of aircraft orders to the military at home and abroad and said it was pursuing other orders. The company has a $46 billion order backlog, a spokesman said.
"This decision does not mean we are out of the military aircraft business," Stonecipher said.
McDonnell currently builds the Air Force F-15 fighter and the Navy-Marine F-18E/F as well as the C-17 military cargo plane. Both the F-15 and the F-18 are to be replaced by the joint strike fighter in the next century.
