H&amp;R Block Inc. Thursday reported a big loss for the latest quarter, as its CompuServe online service posted a $58 million loss and became more of a headache to its parent.
H&amp;R Block had a net loss of $74.1 million, or 71 cents a share, in its second quarter ended Oct. 31, compared with a loss of $8.3 million, or 8 cents a share, in the 1995 quarter. Revenues grew to $253.4 million from $221.0 million.
Kansas City-based H&amp;R Block, the nation's largest tax preparation company, blamed the bad news mainly on losses at its CompuServe unit, the world's second-largest online service, which has failed to sign up new subscribers, especially in the United States.
H&amp;R Block still owns 80.1 percent of CompuServe, after selling the rest of the stock in April in an initial step to spin off the unit.
But plans to complete the spin-off were suspended in August after CompuServe reported poor first-quarter earnings and projected second-quarter losses.
Just nine months ago, shareholders and analysts were pushing for a spinoff, arguing that CompuServe's value was being held back by H&amp;R Block's staid tax business.
Now they want a spinoff because the online services provider is weighing on H&amp;R Block's performance.
"The business model changed for CompuServe in a fairly dramatic way and now CompuServe's valuation is clearly holding back H&amp;R Block's valuation," said Martin Romm, analyst at CS First Boston.
"How quickly things change," said Dennis Hudson, analyst at George K. Baum. "What happened was a whole lot of competition came in (to the online market.) The market became saturated before people expected."
Analysts said H&amp;R Block was waiting for CompuServe's new business strategy announced Thursday -- focusing on the corporate market rather than home users -- to push the unit toward profitability before the spinoff is completed.
H&amp;R Block also cut its quarterly dividend to 20 cents a share from 32 cents, a move that it had previously said would occur after the spinoff was completed.
"Even though the separation has not been completed, the board decided such action was prudent at this time because CompuServe is not adding to the company's profitability," said Frank Salizzoni, H&amp;R Block's president and chief executive officer and CompuServe's chairman.
"In taking this action today, the board is indicating it anticipates the separation of CompuServe."
Both Romm and Hudson said they continue to rate H&amp;R Block stock as a buy and stressed that there was nothing wrong with the company's core tax business.
The company said its Tax Services unit reported a pretax loss of $42.2 million in the second quarter, up $6.9 million a year ago.
"This year's deeper second quarter loss in these core businesses is in large part a result of the company's investments to expand its office network and roll out new products," Salizzoni said.
"They're making these investments primarily in new stores that are absorbing costs primarily without any commensurate contribution in revenue," Romm said, noting that the tax season does not begin until early next year.
H&amp;R Block stock fell 37.5 cents to $28 on the New York Stock Exchange. CompuServe lost 93.75 cents to $10.6875 on Nasdaq.
