Just nine months ago, shareholders and analysts were pushing for H&amp;R Block Inc to spin off its CompuServe unit, arguing that the unit's value was being held back by H&amp;R Block's staid tax business.
On April 19, H&amp;R Block began that process with a public offering of about 20 percent of CompuServe Corp.
Analysts are still looking for the spinoff to be completed, but now the focus is on the sagging fortunes of the online service which is weighing on H&amp;R Block's performance.  
"The business model changed for CompuServe in a fairly dramatic way and now CompuServe's valuation is clearly holding back H&amp;R Block's valuation," said Martin Romm, analyst at CS First Boston.
On Thursday, H&amp;R Block reported a net loss for the fiscal 1997 second quarter of $74.1 million or $0.71 a share, compared to a loss of $8.3 million or $0.08 a share a year ago. Kansas City-based H&amp;R Block said the larger loss was primarily due to CompuServe's $58 million second quarter loss. H&amp;R Block still owns 80.1 percent of CompuServe.  
"How quickly things change," said Dennis Hudson, analyst at George K. Baum. "What happened was a whole lot of competition came in (to the online market.) The market became saturated before people expected."
In August, H&amp;R Block suspended the rest of the spinoff, citing CompuServe's performance and market conditions, among other factors.
Analysts said H&amp;R Block is waiting for implementation of CompuServe's newly announced business strategy -- focusing on business and professional users, rather than home users -- to push the company toward profits before completing the spinoff.  
H&amp;R Block also said Thursday it was reducing its quarterly dividend to $0.20 a share from $0.32, a move that it had previously said would occur after the spinoff was completed.
"The timing of (the dividend cut) was a little bit surprising," Romm said.
Both Romm and Hudson said they continued to rate H&amp;R Block stock as a buy and stressed that there was nothing wrong with the company's core tax business.
"I believe the company will have a very good tax season this year," Romm said, noting H&amp;R Block has made investments to grow the business. The company said its Tax Services unit reported a pre-tax loss of $42.2 million in the second quarter, up $6.9 million from a year ago.
"They're making these investments primarily in new stores that are absorbing costs primarily without any commensurate contribution in revenue," Romm said, noting that the tax season does not begin for more than a month.
H&amp;R Block stock was down 1/2 at 27-7/8 Thursday, after falling as low as 26-3/8 earlier in Thursday's session.
--Reuters Chicago newsdesk, 312-408-8787
