Dutch bank ABN AMRO Holding NV said Friday it agreed to pay $1.9 billion to acquire Standard Federal Bancorp, which owns the seventh-largest savings bank in the United States and the biggest in Michigan.
ABN AMRO, which already has a U.S. banking arm, the LaSalle group, said it was offering $59 a share for Standard Federal, a bank holding company with $15.5 billion in assets based in Troy, Mich.
SFB owns Standard Federal Bank, a large home mortgage lender in Michigan that operates about 180 bank branches and 11 home lending centres. It also operates a wholesale mortgage banking business.
Despite the offer, SFB stock fell after running up sharply in recent days on takeover speculation. Some investors were disappointed the price was not higher, analysts said.
"All the people were really speculating yesterday that it was a lot higher are selling today because they're disappointed," said Tony Howard, analyst at Olde Discount Corp.
SFB stock lost $1.625 to $56.375 in active trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
Standard Federal chief lending officer Garry Carley said at a news conference that ABN AMRO had made the highest bid for the bank among several serious suitors.
"We had others who expressed strong interest in the bank," Carley told reporters.
ABN AMRO, the Netherlands' leading bank, said it would issue $750 million in preferred stock to help fund the acquisition, its biggest to date. It said it would issue the shares through a U.S. subsidiary, ABN AMRO North America Inc.
Formed in a 1990 merger, ABN AMRO already is the biggest foreign bank in the United States. Its LaSalle group has 130 branches and 7,750 staff members, mainly in the Chicago area.
The agreement marks ABN AMRO North America Inc.'s sixth acquisition in three years and is likely to be the last for a while, ABN AMRO North America Chief Executive Officer Harrison Tempest said at a news conference.
"We're out of the acquisition business for some time now," Tempest said. When asked how long before it might make another deal, he said, "probably two years."
The combined banks will also be the eighth largest mortgage originator in the United States, ABN AMRO said.
"It gets us into the league we want to be in mortgage servicing and mortgage origination," Tempest said.
SFB employs about 4,000 people and serves 1 million clients in Michigan, Ohio, Illinois and Indiana.
ABN AMRO said Standard Federal's banks will continue to operate under the Standard Federal name and there would be "significant cost savings" following the deal.
While saying no jobs would be cut initially, both companies said some job cuts were likely eventually as administrative functions and some branches were consolidated.
With Standard Federal, ABN AMRO North America will have the second largest deposit base in the Chicago market.
Analysts said recent changes in U.S. banking law that will level the playing field between thrifts and banks should help speed other acquisitions of savings and loans.
"I think you're going to see an increased level of activity, both in banks acquiring thrifts and thrifts acquiring thrifts," said Jonathon gray, analyst at Sanford Bernstein &amp; Co.
ABN AMRO said it had reached agreement with Standard Federal's board, but the deal still needed the approval of its shareholders and supervisory authorities.
The acquisition was expected to be completed by mid-1997, ABN said, adding that the deal would contribute to its earnings.
