Shoppers lined up outside stores Friday, some arriving before dawn to get an early start on the holiday shopping season.
The day after Thanksgiving is traditionally one of the busiest days of the year for retailers and the unofficial start of the holiday shopping season, the make-or-break time for many retailers.
With consumer confidence high and employment strong, analysts are generally expecting sales gains of about 5 percent over last year's weak sales growth. The crunch is especially tight this year, since there are five fewer days between Thanksgiving and Christmas.
"The money's there. The confidence is there. The jobs are there. The goods are there and the pent-up demand is there," said Allen Sinai, chief economist at Primark Decision Economics. Sinai forecast sales growth of 4.5 percent for November and December, compared with 2.9 percent gains a year ago.
Shoppers also were there, with many retailers offering early bird sales to entice them.
Roni Campos lined up outside the door of the Wal-Mart at first Colony Mall in Sugarland, Texas, a suburb of Houston, at 6:30 a.m.
"You should have seen Wal-Mart. They had a 13-inch television on sale for $99, and people were fighting for those TVs. Arms were flying, and people were just pulling those things off the shelf," she said.
Stephanie Foster, of Richmond, Texas, was shopping for baby gifts in Mervyns California, a Dayton Hudson Corp. store chain.
"They had a line outside Target of at least 200 people," said Foster, who began her shop-a-thon this year at 5 a.m., shopping list in hand. "I started out with a list of what everybody wanted and what time every store opened."
As one of the first customers through the door at Target, she was handed a bag with treats, juice, coupons and mints.
"I came here for a 64 bit Nintendo (for my granddaughters) and they had 40 in stock, but I ended up with two bags of Christmas presents," Rosalee DiGregorio said at the Menlo Park Mall in Edison, N.J.
Other items that were expected to be hot this year are those related to the movies "101 Dalmatians" and "Space Jam," said Tracy Mullin, president of the National Retail Federation. Barbie dolls from Mattel Inc. are also expected to be hot sellers, especially Holiday Barbie.
"Believe it or not, Barbie still has legs," Mullin said.
The federation is forecasting holiday sales will rise about 6 percent over last year, reaching about $460 billion.
While the the day after Thanksgiving attracts traffic and media attention, actual sales for retailers tend to come later in the holiday season.
"This whole weekend only accounts for 8 percent of purchasing," said John Konarski, vice president of research for the International Council of Shopping Centers.
Susan Eich, a spokeswoman for Dayton Hudson, said sales volume the day after Thanksgiving is typically three times the retailer's normal sales. That day and the Saturday before Christmas are typically the company's busiest days.
Filene's Basement Corp.'s flagship store in downtown Boston opened at 7 a.m. and was packed with shoppers by 7:30. Filene's Basement Chief Executive Samuel Gerson said the cold weather and a late Thanksgiving were making for a busy season.
At the Falls, a mall near Miami, a small fire on a utility pole nearby cut off power to the complex for about an hour Friday morning.
"We actually ran registers, but off power. Everyone was doing it by hand, doing it by candle light," said a spokeswoman for the Bloomingdale's store at the mall. Bloomingdale's is owned by Federated Department Stores Inc..
Norm Allen, head of customer services at the Glendale Galleria in suburban Los Angeles, said the 280-store complex opened at 8 a.m. with about 100 shoppers in line to enter.
"This is going to be a good year. Our volume sales are already up 8 to 10 percent over last year at this time," he said.
Apparel and soft goods were expected to lead sales nationwide, while analysts and retailers expect tough competition and a lack of major new items to pressure sales at elctronics stores.
"We'll provide an array of holiday sales," said John Costello senior executive vice president of marketing for Chicago-based Sears, Roebuck and Co.. "Our sales are comparable to last year."
