From free gift wrapping and valet parking to sweepstakes and private scheduled visits with Santa, retail malls are pulling out the stops to attract customers during the key holiday season.
So far their efforts, as well as a strong economy, appear to be yielding results, as mall operators said they saw double-digit sales increases on Black Friday, the name retailers have given to the day after Thanskgiving.
"I think overall, consistently across the board, we're seeing sales up anywhere from high single digits to low double digits for the day," said Robert Michaels, president of General Growth Properties Inc., which owns and operates 120 retail centers across the country.
Traffic patterns varied at different malls, with some reporting traffic up by close to 10 percent, while others saw traffic flat. But unlike last year, when there were many window shoppers, this year, people were buying.
"Everyone was browsing last year," said Sarah Liddle, associate marketing director of Newport Centre Mall, in Jersey City, N.J. "Everyone was a little skeptical about what they were going to buy. Yesterday, it was unbelievable how many (shopping) bags were going through this mall."
That appeared to be the case throughout the country, according to Billie Scott, spokeswoman for Simon DeBartolo Group Inc, which owns Newport Centre and owns or has an interest in 185 properties, most of them malls and retail centers.
"For the most part, (according to) the people I talked to, traffic was at last year's level or above, but I guess the big difference is people were buying," she said.
The publicly traded companies that own many malls -- and are known as real estate investment trusts (REIT) -- do not have as much of their revenue directly generated during the holiday shopping season as retailers. But a portion of rents are based on a percentage of sales, and the season will also help set rents in the future.
"The high sales in the fourth quarter justify the rent the rest of the year," said Lee Schalop, an analyst who follows REITs at J.P. Morgan Securities.
To attract shopppers, malls offer features ranging from free gift wrapping to giveaways including $1,000 shopping sprees.
At the Woodfield Mall in Schaumburg, Illinois, a northwest suburb of Chicago, Santa is available for five-minute prescheduled visits during the hour before the shopping center opens. Woodfield is owned by Bloomfield Hills, Michigan-based Taubman Centers Inc., which also said sales appeared strong to kick off the holiday shopping season.
"Everything we're hearing is positive," said Taubman spokeswoman Karen Mac Donald. "Everyone is saying they had a good day yesterday. They were up."
At the Paramus Park mall in Paramus, N.J., prizes are being given away each week, with a grand prize of a trip to New York and dinner with the Rockettes.
"It's an effort to distinguish ourselves," said Kathy Lickteig, spokeswoman for Columbia, Maryland-based Rouse Co., which owns Paramus Park. "At this time of the year, it is very important to have something special to attract shoppers."
But while services are a factor in attracting shoppers, mall owners said having the best stores is the key for bringing shoppers in to a mall.
"Number one, it does come down to having the right shops," said General Growth's Michaels.
Mall operators said the stronger economy and the fact that there are five fewer days between Thanksgiving and Christmas may have helped prompt more shopping Friday.
In fact, many operators said they have had promotions earlier this season because of the shorter shopping period, with some starting as early as Veteran's Day.
Heidi Holwerda, vice president of marketing for Muskegon, Michigan-based Horizon Group Inc., an outlet mall operator with 36 centers, said her company began coordinated sales Nov. 10.
"As a result, we've seen some pretty significant increases in November in regard to traffic," she said, noting that traffic was up 10 percent in centers that the company has owned for at least a year.
