A brisk start to holiday shopping should help retailers post solid sales gains for November and make this season merrier than last year for the nation's store chains.
But quirks in the calendar, with a later Thanksgiving this year, and some retailers tallying sales differently than others, could obscure overall results for November.
Industry analysts said they expect sales at stores open at least a year to rise 2.5 percent to 4.0 percent overall in November, with clothing continuing to be a strong contributor, as it was in October.
Most retailers report November sales on Thursday.
"We think the majority of companies are going to be on or above plan for the month of November, with good inventory levels," said Harry Ikenson, retail analyst at Rodman &amp; Renshaw Inc. "We think the promotional level for Thanksgiving was high, but probably no higher than last year."
With discounts and markdowns no higher and in some cases lower than last year, and inventories being managed tightly, profit margins should improve, helping to lift fourth quarter earnings, analysts said.
"On balance, good business now is going to translate into decent earnings," said Dean Ramos at Dain Bosworth Inc. Ramos said his index of sales could be one to two points higher than the 3.1 percent rise reported last year and that the trend should continue through December.
"Absent some sort of event that shakes the consumer you should see good retail sales" in December, he said.
Holiday sales are crucial to retailers who typically earn a quarter or more of the year's profits during the season, analysts said. Steady economic growth and low unemployment have helped boost sales so far, and store chains should also benefit from easy comparisons with weak results a year ago.
Consumers got off to a fast start on their holiday shopping after Thanksgiving, analysts said.
Retail consumer spending in the post-Thanksgiving weekend rose 4.3 percent from a year ago, according to TeleCheck Services, which tracks check-writing volume. Overall, same-store sales rose 2.1 percent, TeleCheck said.
Several department store operators were expcted to be among the winners when sales are reported on Thursday.
Rodman &amp; Renshaw's Ikenson said he expected J.C. Penney Co. Inc. and May Department Stores Co. to be above expectations, with Penney's same-store sales up 7.5 percent to 8 percent and May's up 6 percent to 7 percent. Federated Department Stores Inc. should be up 7 percent to 9 percent, with gains in all its segments, he said.
He also sees speciality retailer Paul Harris Stores Inc. up 15 percent to 17 percent, but Charming Shoppes Inc. slightly below expectations with a gain of 5 percent.
Dean Witter analyst Patrick McCormack said in a research report he expected sames store sales to be up 3 percent in the month for the firm's index of 44 companies.
He also saw JC Penney, May, and Federated above expectations, as well as Sears, Roebuck and Co.
Sears was forecast by analysts to post a smaller-than-expected decline of 1 percent to 2 percent, which is due to a quirk in the company's sales reporting calendar that should help boost results in December.
Sears Senior Executive Vice President John Costello said on Sunday that post-Thanskgiving sales appeared to be up across the board, from men's and children's clothing to Craftsman tools to fine jewelry.
"Optimism is up and it looks like consumers are responding to the short season by getting an earlier start," he said.
Most analyts expect big-ticket consumer electronics to continue to be weak, though one saw some signs of a pickup in sales at the end of the month.
"Sears and Wal-Mart over the last week talked about a pickup in the computer area," said Michael Niemira, analyst at Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi. He forecast sales overall up 2.5 percent for November at a comparable number of stores.
