First Chicago NBD Corp chief executive Verne Istock expects to see more job cuts at the corporate banking unit as the bank tries to turn around a business that has far underperformed the rest of the company.
"I suspect as part of our restructuring of the corporate bank there'll probably be reduced head count in the corporate bank, and there will be reduced capital allocated to the corporate bank," Istock said in an interview.
He would not say how many jobs would be cut.  
The corporate banking unit posted a dismal return on equity of eight percent in the first nine months of the year, compared with nine percent a year ago, with results this year weighed down by a $12 million trading loss. Overall, the bank reported return on equity of 16.9 percent in the first nine months of 1996.
Now the corporate and institutional banking unit is being reshaped, paring back business lines to focus on those central to customer relationships.  
"I firmly believe that something that's chugging along at eight or nine percent can in fact be improved and we fully expect to get it up to that 15 percent or better return" on equity, Istock said.
Stockholders and analysts appear to accept Istock's argument that the corporate bank's results can only go up.
"You can criticize them, but frankly, it can only improve," said Joseph Duwan, analyst at Keefe Bruette &amp; Woods. "I think they're taking a hard look at the businesses they're in in corproate banking."  
Istock stressed that increased revenue will come from the corporate bank by focusing on areas that will grow and cutting unprofitable areas.
Already this year, the bank has said it will exit the institutional custody and master trust businesses, two paperwork-intensive lines that would have required major investment to gain significant market share.
Istock also said the bank was trimming its trading operations, again focusing on instruments customers need.  
"I don't think we will have to have the entire (trading) product line or be on the edge of the envelope," Istock said. But he added that the types of trading vehicles customers need change.
Istock said he was aware of the corporate bank's troubled performance before First Chicago Corp and NBD Bancorp merged a year ago, forming what is now the ninth largest bank holding company in the United States with assets of $106.7 billion.
Meanwhile, First Chicago's stock hit a post merger high last week, before sliding in a sell off of most bank stocks this week. An aggressive 40 million share stock repurchase plan announced in October has helped boost the stock.
But another area of concern to analysts is credit card chargeoffs, which jumped earlier this year.
Istock said while chargeoffs will likely rise more as the economy slows, the business will continue to be a strong earner for First Chicago.
"It's a business we know, we understand and we plan to stay in," Istock said. He added that the bank is beginning to use its 13-million-customer credit card database to sell other products to credit card holders.
First Chicago shares were up 1/8 at 55 Friday.
((--Chicago newsdesk 312 408 8787))
