First Chicago NBD Corp, while still open to acquisitions to expand its banking network, expects more retail branches to be cut over time as customers bank electronically or at supermarkets.
"As customers use more and more of those (channels), we've got to take away more of the brick and mortar" branches, Verne Istock, chief executive, said in an interview Thursday.
But don't expect First Chicago to make drastic cuts like the nearly 280 branches that Ohio-based KeyCorp said last month it would close or sell.  
"I don't think that's the approach we want," Istock said. "I think that's pretty dramatic. I think you're better off to do it on an orderly basis from a customer satisfaction standpoint as well as an employee basis."
First Chicago has closed about 25 branches since the merger with Detroit-based NBD Bancorp a year ago that created what is now the ninth largest bank holding company in the United States, with $106.7 billion in assets.
But at the same time, First Chicago could be looking to expand its retail customer base through acquisitions of other banks in the greater Midwest.  
"I have publicly said on more occasions than once that this organization does have an interest in expanding through acquisitions where it makes sense for shareholders," Istock said.
This means any acquisition First Chicago does could only dilute earnings for a short time, if at all, he added.
But Istock also said First Chicago has not had talks with Milwaukee based Firstar Corp, which has been mentioned as a possible First Chicago target for at least a year.
"We've had no discussions," he said of Firstar. He would not comment on other possible acquisition targets.  
Istock also reiterated that an acquisition could be made outside of traditional banking as regulatory lines between banking other financial businesses are erased.
Insurance, investment banking and securities banking are all areas that could be targets of traditional banks, he said.
"We're willing to consider any alternative that we think makes sense for our shareholders first of all and also for enhancing our customer relationships," Istock said.
Analysts see First Chicago as having excess capital on its books, which weighs on a bank's performance. EVEREN Securities analyst Thomas Maier said the bank could have more than $2 billion in excess capital, while others estimate a lower amount.
An aggressive 40-million-share stock repurchase plan has helped allay analysts' and investors' concerns about the excess capital. But making a purchase could also put capital to work.
"It's a way of in fact buying your stock back without having to go out in the market to do it," Maier said.
First Chicago shares were up 5/8 at 55-1/2 Friday.
((--Chicago newsdesk 312 408 8787))
