Firstar Corp's announcement on Thursday that it expected to fall short of analysts' fourth-quarter earnings estimates for what it believes are temporary factors includes one element -- a continued modest decline in commercial loans outstanding -- that could be a more lasting concern, analysts said.
The Milwaukee-based bank holding company, which has $19.9 billion in assets, said it expects fourth quarter earnings of about $0.95 a share excluding any one-time gains, $0.08 short of the consensus and unchanged from a year ago.  
Firstar is in the midst of a program to trim costs and enhance revenues and said factors including the implementation of that program and assimilation of recent acquisitions would hurt earnings. But the bank also said continued declines in its commercial loans outstanding would also hinder earnings, and was a temporary factor.
"I think while that sounds plausible, it also remains to be proven," said Ben Crabtree, banking analyst at Dain Bosworth. Crabtree had forecast earnings of $1.08 a share for the quarter.  
While expenses from the restructuring and acquisitions should eventually be eliminated, analysts were not as sure that the loss of loans would be reversed.
"The question going forward, and that's an unanswerable question, is the long-term impact on the revenue side," said Thomas Maier, banking analyst at EVEREN Securities.
Firstar investor relations spokesman Joe Messinger said the decline in loans outstanding is due mostly to the focus on the restructuring during the first two quarters of the year.  
Firstar also said credit card charge-offs will remain higher than the company's historic levels in the quarter, though they will be in line with the industry overall.
"It's something they've indicated in the past," Maier said, adding that higher charge-offs were already built into his previous $1.05 a share estimate on fourth quarter earnings and outperform rating on the stock.
In the 10-Q filing with the SEC for the third quarter, Firstar said it expected credit card charge-offs to rise to 4.5-5.0 percent in the fourth and first quarters, before declining to 4-4.5 percent. Charge-offs were 4.06 percent in the third quarter.
If Firstar meets its $0.95 a share estimate for the quarter, 1996 earnings would be $3.34 a share, compared to $3.00 a share a year ago.
Firstar shares fell one to 51 Thursday amid a downturn in banking stocks.
((--Chicago newsdesk 312 408 8787))
