Mercantile Bancorp Inc's planned $1.07 billion purchase price for Roosevelt Financial Group Inc and an expected merger-related charge of $25-$30 million after tax both appear reasonable for an in-market deal, analysts said Monday.
The St. Louis-based bank holding company said it expects to take the charge in the quarter the deal closes.
"For a deal this size, I think, it's probably relatively modest," analyst Steve Schroll at Piper Jaffray said.  
Roosevelt, a $9 billion thrift holding company also located in St. Louis, has 83 branches, 73 of which overlap with Mercantile, Schroll said.
The banks told analysts they expect to eliminate 50 of the overlapping branches by the middle of 1998, he said, adding that Mercantile also expects to cut 37 percent of Roosevelt's pre-tax cost base by 1999.
In a news conference, Mercantile would not specifically say how many branches would be shut.  
The cost reductions help justify the $1.07 billion price tag, which is about 11 times 1997 earnings estimates for Roosevelt, Schroll said.
"It's reasonable," Schroll said. "For an in-market deal, because of the opportunities to save costs, it's reasonable."
With its recently announced plan to acquire Mark Twain Bancshares Inc for $855 million, Mercantile will be the largest financial institution in Missouri, with $30 billion in assets once both deals close.
That could make Mercantile, often mentioned as a takeover candidate, even more attractive.  
"I'd say Merc was already attractive anyway," said Joseph Stieven, a banking analyst at Stifel Nicolaus, which advised Roosevelt on the deal. "This makes them no less attractive."
Joseph Roberto, a banking analyst at Keefe Bruyette &amp; Woods, said, "I think it makes Mercantile more attractive. It gives them the number one market share across the state."
But the process of closing the two deals, expected in the second quarter, and absorbing the acquisitions could take Mercantile out of play as an acquisition target in the short term, analysts said.
"I would think in the short term, an acquisition of this size, when combined with the acquisition of Mark Twain, probably delays the likelihood of somebody from outside coming in to buy Mercantile," Schroll said.
Meanwhile, St. Louis-based Magna Group Inc and Kansas City, Missouri-based Commerce Bancshares Inc could become more attractive for suitors looking to buy in the Missouri market, analysts said.
((--Chicago newsdesk 312 408 8787)).
