Mercantile Bancorp Inc. said Monday it agreed to acquire Roosevelt Financial Group Inc. for about $1 billion in cash and stock, a move that would create the largest bank in Missouri.
The companies said the acquisition will create the largest locally managed and independently owned financial services organisation based in the southern Midwest. It will make Mercantile the largest banking company in Missouri, with more than 23 percent of the state's deposits, Mercantile said.
Mercantile will become the largest bank in St. Louis, where it is headquartered, and in Springfield, Mo., and will strengthen its presence in other major Missouri markets such as Kansas City.
Roosevelt, a savings and loan with $9 billion in assets that is also based in St. Louis, has 81 offices and branches in Missouri, Kansas and Illinois.
The acquisition follows Mercantile's agreement to buy Mark Twain Bancshares Inc., another St. Louis-based bank, for $855 million in stock. That deal was announced on Oct. 28.
"Our combination with Roosevelt will materially enhance our mix of strong retail, middle market lending and other speciality businesses," Mercantile Chairman Thomas Jacobsen said in a statement.
Mercantile plans to take a pretax charge of $25 million to $30 million for merger-related costs when the deal closes next year but also expects it to add to earnings in 1997 and 1998, officials said.
The deal would save about $20 million a year in branch costs annually, Jacobsen said but would not elaborate on how many branches would be closed.
"There will be some certainly, but probably fewer than you might think," Jacobsen said at a news conference.
Analysts said they were told separately that about 50 overlapping branches were expected to be closed by 1998.
Due to attrition and since the two companies will not be completely merged, layoffs were expected to be minimal, officials said.
"We're not aware of anyone at this time that won't be able to find a role with the ongoing company," said Stanley Bradshaw, chief executive at Roosevelt.
Mercantile, which said both the Roosevelt and Mark Twain acquisitions were expected to close in the second quarter of 1997, would not rule out future acquisitions.
"We have continuing interest in Illinois, Iowa and Arkansas," said John Beirise, group vice president for emerging markets at Mercantile. "Oklahoma has interest to us and would also be a logical extension."
The Mercantile that emerges after the pending takeovers are completed will have $30 billion in assets and could itself become an attractive takeover target, analysts said.
Mercantile, which will have a stock market worth of more than $4 billion, could be even more attractive once the acquisitions have been assimilated.
"I'd say Merc was already attractive anyway," said Joseph Stieven, a banking analyst at Stifel Nicolaus, which advised Roosevelt on the deal. "This makes them no less atttractive."
Said Joseph Roberto, banking analyst at Keefe Bruyette &amp; Woods, "I think it makes Mercantile more attractive. It gives them the No. 1 market share across the state."
Mercantile said it will exchange up to 13 million shares of its stock at a ratio of 0.4211 Mercantile share for each Roosevelt share, and pay $22 cash for each remaining share.
Based on the $50.75 closing price Friday of Mercantile's shares on the New York Stock Exchange, the exchange ratio would value Roosevelt shares at about $21.37 each. Roosevelt's stock closed Friday at $18.125 on Nasdaq.
Roosevelt shares added $2.375 to $20.50 on Nasdaq while Mercantile stock fell $1 to $49.75 on the New York Stock Exchange.
Mercantile also said it planned to repurchase up to 7 million of its own shares in connection with the acquisition.
