'Twas the day before Christmas and all through the malls, retailers were looking for a last minute push for a merry holiday sales season.
Industry analysts said sales were hovering near or a shade below expectations for the holiday shopping season so far.
After a strong start, sales came in below retailers' own expectations last week, according to a weekly survey of chain store sales by BTM/Schroders, a venture of two investment houses.
Analyst Michael Niemira at Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi, which compiles the index with Schroder/Wertheim, said he expected December sales to rise 4 percent to 4.5 percent, compared with earlier expectations for a 4.5 percent to 5.0 percent rise.
But activity picked up Monday and Tuesday as shoppers, pinched by five fewer shopping days between Christmas and Thanksgiving this year or just old-fashioned procrastination, rushed to find gifts at the last minute, retailers said.
"It definitely feels active," said Karen Farnham, assistant manager at an Abercrombie &amp; Fitch Co. in Manhattan. "Yesterday (Monday, I'd say, was probably the busiest," she said, noting that Abercrombie customers spend hundreds of dollars apiece, on average.
At the Limited Inc., last-minute shopping has been hectic, store manager Christina Vigo said in Manhattan.
"It's out of control. Yesterday was the busiest day all season. We started sales extremely early to draw business, but everyone's shopping last minute," she said, noting the average sale has been about $50.
In New York, lone men, coursing through stores with a clear purpose, accounted for a good portion of store traffic on Christmas Eve. "I'm just not finished yet. I get lazy, I guess," said Eric Gotthard.
Tom Kurpiewski said he, too, fell behind in his holiday shopping, adding that he's spending about the same as he did in 1995.
Saul Yaari, senior retailing analyst at Piper Jaffray Inc., said sales should be about 5 percent above last year's results, measuring on a store-for-store basis.
Yaari said sales at department stores have slowed in the last week after a strong holiday start while discounters have done well.
But people were still spending freely last weekend, reflecting a trend toward later shopping during the season, Yaari said.
Clothing, shoes, jewelry and certain toys, such as Nintendo's new video game system and Tyco Toys Inc.'s Tickle Me Elmo, sold very well, Yaari said.
"Consumer electronics was a very poor category," he added, noting retailers were offering free computer accessories and generous financing terms to stir up interest.
Analysts said the holiday shopping season and fourth quarter as a whole should be strong for retailers, boosted by tighter inventories and fewer unplanned promotions, as well as comparisons with a dismal season last year.
Clothing continues to lead the stronger sales.
"My read so far is I don't think it was as promotional as last year in apparel," said Harry Ikenson, retailing analyst at Rodman &amp; Renshaw Inc.. He added that electronics sales appeared to be under much more pressure than apparel.
Peter Schaeffer at Dillon Read &amp; Co. Inc., said he expected sales to rise 4 percent to 5 percent overall but only 2 percent to 3 percent at comparable stores open at least a year.
Discounters and off-price retailers such as TJX Cos. Inc. and Ross Stores Inc., as well as some of the big chains, notably J.C. Penney Co. Inc. and Sears, Roebuck and Co., should do better than average, he said.
