Retailers looking for a post-Christmas rush to boost lukewarm holiday sales may be disappointed as snow in some areas and holiday exhaustion kept many shoppers from bargain-hunting Thursday.
"I think people did their shopping" before Christmas, said John Konarski, vice president at the International Council of Shopping Centers, a group of retail mall operators that surveys 85 large regional malls across the country.
"You're going to have some people out today (but) you're not going to see the massive crowds some people expected."
Konarski said he expected that holiday season sales would be up 4 percent to 6 percent from a year ago, which is about what he expected before the season began.
But after strong activity in the weekend following Thanksgiving, retailers' hopes for even better sales ended up being dashed by a slowdown in the week before Christmas.
"I think generally, the overall picture appears to be we had a good, solid holiday sales period, but not a spectacular one," said Tracy Mullin, president of the National Retail Federation, which represents major store chains.
She said she expects holiday sales rose about 5 percent from last year, when gains were a weak 2.5 percent to 3 percent.
Store officials and analysts said that while sales were coming in at or just below retailers' expectations, that still beats the dismal results last year.
"They slowed up very moderately, actually, from the input we're getting," said Jay Meltzer, managing director of LJR Redbook Research. "You know, we didn't go over a cliff and a year ago we did go over a cliff."
In Chicago, snow and cold weather appeared to be keeping crowds down in the Michigan Avenue shopping district the day after Christmas.
"Sales today are relatively slow compared to before Christmas," said Julie Towson, manager of the Knot Crazy tie store in Water Tower Place. "I think a lot of people spent all of their money before the holiday. Also, who wants to come out in this kind of weather?"
In central New York State, where it was also snowing, Konarski said there were lines at malls before stores opened at 7 a.m. EST (1200 GMT), but most shoppers were looking for markdowns on holiday accessories and to return merchandise.
In Cleveland, many workers were on vacation and some offices were closed, and shopper traffic at the Tower City Center mall complex was moderate.
"We've had a good, strong season," said the manager of a women's clothing store who has worked in retailing 11 years. "Business today is pretty good. Volume is moderate."
At Tower City's AnnTaylor store, sales associate Mary Rogonjich said Thursday morning traffic was slow but she expected things to pick up during lunch hour.
"Things have been steady this morning, and we have not had that many returns," she said. "We've had a very good season -- above plan." The store was offering up to 50 percent off on silk blouses, pants, jackets, shoes and other items on Thursday.
In Miami, some shops were seeing more traffic.
"The store is very busy. Really everything is marked down," said a spokeswoman at Federated Department Stores Inc.'s Macy's store in Miami's Falls mall.
But analysts said that while promotions picked up before Christmas and would accelerate this week, special discounts were fewer and less steep than last year, which should help retailer profits.
"Some retailers did get promotional in the last few days," Mullin said. "I think you'll see it really starting today."
Wal-Mart Stores Inc., the nation's largest retailer, said in a telephone message for investors on Monday that discount and warehouse sales were at the low end of plan for the holidays in the third week of December.
The company is in line for sales increases of 4 percent to 5 percent for November and December, the company said.
Dayton Hudson Corp. said on Tuesday sales were meeting expectations and that the company had planned its inventories well.
Sears, Roebuck and Co. said overall sales and sales at stores open at least a year were showing upper-single digit increases.
"Overall sales were strong the last three days before Christmas," Vice President of Marketing John Costello said, noting that clothing, tools, jewelry, multimedia computers and tires sold well.
