Magna Group Inc. has a definitive agreement to acquire Homeland Bankshares Corp., the second-largest banking company in Iowa, for about $216 million, the companies said Tuesday.
St. Louis-based Magna will issue 5 million shares of its common stock and pay $92 million in cash in exchange for all theoutstanding Homeland common shares. Homeland shareholders may choose to exchange each of their shares for either about 1.55 Magna shares, a comparable amount in cash or a combination.
Magna said it will repurchase about 600,000 shares of the stock, under its current repurchase plan.
"We certainly will consider buy back programmes beyond that, but nothing has been approved beyond that," G. Thomas Andes, Magna chairman, said in a news conference.
Waterloo, Iowa-based Homeland, with assets of $1.2 billion as of June 30, owns and operates four commercial banks and one savings bank and provides financial services through a network of 33 locations in Iowa.
Magna, with $5.35 billion in assets, is the third-largest banking institution in the St. Louis metropolitan area and the nation's 95th largest banking company. It has 106 banking locations throughout Illinois and Missouri and a trust and brokerage company.
After the acquisition, Magna would have about 55 percent of its assets in Illinois, 25 percent in Missouri and 20 percent in Iowa, Andes said.
The deal is subject to approval by Homeland shareholders and regulators.
Magna said it expected the acquisition to boost earnings within 12 months, and save about $8 million through centralization of systems and procedures.
Some of the cost savings will come from job cuts, though those cuts could come from attrition, Andes said.
Homeland Chief Executive Erl Schmiesing said during the news conference that cuts were underway at Homeland in any case as it consolidated.
Magna will continue to consider other acqusitions, possibly in Iowa, Andes said.
"We certainly like the state of Iowa," he said. "We would certainly welcome the opportunity to expand in the state of Iowa, as well as Illinois and Missouri."
Magna is also among several Missouri-based banks considered by analysts to be likely acquisition targets, a perception that did not change with the Homeland acquisition announcment.
"It certainly doesn't make them any less attractive or likely as a takeover candidate," said Steven Schroll, a banking industry analyst at Piper Jaffray.
Homeland's stock rose $1.75 to $35.75, while Magna edged down 6.25 cents to $24.81 Tuesday on Nasdaq.
