Rawlings Sporting Goods Inc chief financial officer Paul Martin said on Friday the company is not for sale, although it recognizes its responsibility to shareholders.
"The company is not for sale and the company doesn't comment on takeover rumors," Martin said in a telephone interview. "Obviously, we recognize our fiduciary responsibilities." Stock of the St. Louis-based sporting goods company has jumped more than 50 percent since early December, with market sources pointing to takeover rumors.  
"We keep hearing takeover, takeover," said one analyst, who does not follow the stock directly.
Another analyst said he was skeptical there were any takeover talks currently underway.
"I think it's just pure speculation right now, I don't think there's anything happening," said Timothy Conder, analyst at A.G. Edwards. He added that, based on fundamentals, the stock, which closed up 1-1/8 at 12-5/8 Friday, has a fair price of 9-1/2.  
In a research report on Thursday, Conder reiterated a maintain/aggressive rating on the stock, saying in the long term, Rawlings brand name makes it an attractive takeover candidate.
One potential acquirer for Rawlings that is repeatedly mentioned is Beaverton, Oregon-based Nike Inc. A Nike spokesperson could not be reached for comment Friday.
Conder said Friday the case for Nike is that it would round out the company's on-field baseball presence. But the case against Nike is that Rawlings is too small and does not have margins that match Nike's.  
Martin said Rawlings is scheduled to report fiscal 1997 first quarter financial results Tuesday, but added the company in November said it expected to report a modest loss for the quarter.
Rawlings said it expected revenues to decline in the quarter because of lower sales in baseballs and baseball gloves. The company reported net income of $890,000, or $0.12 a share a year ago.
Conder pointed out in his research note that the recent settlement of the Major League Baseball labor situation removes a large risk factor.
Major League Baseball is also considering using commemorative Jackie Robinson and Joe DiMaggio baseballs during the 1997 baseball season, which could boost Rawlings business in 1997, he said.
((--Chicago newsdesk 312 408 8787))
