Aiming to fill Americans' seemingly insatiable desire for sport utility vehicles, Chrysler Corp.  and Ford Motor Co.  both introduced new models of the go-anywhere vehicles Tuesday at the North American International Auto Show.
The plush Lincoln Navigator and the brawny Dodge Durango were introduced a day after General Motors Corp.'s unit unveiled an upscale version of its popular Yukon sport/utility vehicle and Subaru of America Inc., a unit of Fuji Heavy Industries Ltd  7270T, debuted a new sport/utility based on a passenger car chassis.
Sport/utility vehicles sales climbed to just over two million in the United States in 1996 and are the fastest-growing automotive segment.
The vehicles are so popular that even sportscar maker Porsche AG said Tuesday it also plans to enter the market by the turn of the century.
Although more and more companies are adding more and more models, the market is yet to be saturated, as more drivers foresake cars for the larger vehicles.
"They really are considered substitutes," said Diane Swonk, deputy chief economist at First Chicago NBD Corp. "These are replacing old station wagons. They're also eating very heavily into the luxury car markets."
Luxury is a key feature of the new Ford and GM models.
Ford's Lincoln Navigator, which is expected to be available in July, includes leather seating surfaces, walnut wood accents and second row bucket seats.
It is expected to be priced in the mid-$40,000 range and will compete at the premium end of the market with vehicles by Lexus and Land Rover. It is aimed at affluent empty nesters or high-profile active families. The target age for Navigator owners is 45-55, said Jim O'Connor, general manager of Ford's Lincoln Mercury division.
The vehicle, which O'Connor expects will sell 20,000 annually, was driven through a mock rock wall and waterfall to make its debut.
The vehicle seats eight, has a 5.4-litre V8 engine with 8,000 pound towing capacity and 116.4 cubic feet of cargo space.
GMC's Yukon Denali, which is scheduled to be in production in  the 1998 calendar year, features four heated seats and a premium sound system, among other accessories.
"We're certainly going upscale," Roy Roberts, general manager of GM's Pontiac-GMC division, said when asked about pricing. He declined to comment further.
Chrysler made its typical auto show splash with the introduction of the Dodge Durango, which broke through the floor of a mock-up of the automaker's new headquarters building.
Touting it as a breakthrough vehicle that offers "more of everything," Chrysler said sales could eventually reach 200,000 units. The automaker invested $910 million to bring the vehicle to market.
The Durango, which goes on sale in December, uses the same chassis and beefy front end as the Dodge Dakota pickup truck. It is aimed at a more downscale audience than Chrysler's tony Jeep Grand Cherokee. One unique feature is a rear cargo well sized to fit a hunting rifle.
The vehicle is bigger than Ford's popular Explorer, but smaller than the Yukon, Navigator and Ford Expedition.
Durango features an optional third bench seat, boosting its seating capacity up to eight people.
Despite growing criticism about sport/utilities' poor fuel economy, the Durango offers the biggest engines in its class, including 5.2-litre and 5.9-litre V8s.
Pricing was not announced, but Chrysler Vice Chairman Robert Lutz said the Durango could be made with a four-cylinder engine, if necessary.
With so many new sport/utility vehicles entering the market, it is becoming more competitive, which will eventually lead to pressure on margins.
"We'll get saturation if people can't afford to buy these things, relative to the cars they drive," said Joseph Phillippi, analyst at Lehman Brothers.
Demand for more affordable sport/utilities will push manufacturers to build them on car platforms, as Subaru, Toyota and Honda are doing, Phillippi said, adding that few drivers travel far off road and don't need the ruggedness and high ground clearance of a truck-based sport/utility.
Executives at the Big Three automakers stress that their new sport/utility vehicles will not compete with existing lines.
"We don't think this will be a major drag at all on Expedition," O'Connor said of Ford's current top-of-the-line sport utility vehicle. Instead, he said the Navigator should attract new customers to Lincoln-Mercury.
"I think it will bring a whole new customer to Lincoln," he said.
But the automakers also know that if they don't offer sport/utility vehicles in a variety of niches, others will.
"I'd rather have the alternative be in my dealer" showroom, said Chrysler's Lutz.
As for Porsche, Chairman Wendelin Wiedeking would not go into specifics on the German automaker's plans in the sector, other than to say it was in discussions with a third party.
