The U.S. economy should provide a repeat in 1997 of the steady growth seen in 1996, which should also lead to car and truck sales near 1996 levels, according to economists who work for the Big Three automakers.
Economists for Ford Motor Co and General Motors Corp both forecast vehicle sales between 15 million and 15.5 million in 1997, while Chrysler Corp's economist predicted sales of 15.2 million. Sales were about 15.4 million in 1996. The forecasts were made in a presentation to the Society of Automotive Analysts.  
"We are likely to see more of the same," Chrysler's W. Van Bussmann said, echoing the view of the other two analysts.
"We see no significant changes in either direction on fiscal or monetary policy," said G. Mustafa Mohatarem of General Motors.
Ford's Martin Zimmerman was even more optimistic. "I frankly don't see why this growth can't continue into 1998," he said.  
But that does not mean the auto industry has no concerns. The one short-term worry all three economists voiced was the weakening of the yen, which fell to about 117 to the dollar Monday from about 106 a year ago. A weaker yen makes Japanese imports, including automobiles, less expensive in the United States.
That, in turn, makes Japanese cars more competitive in the U.S. market, giving Japanese automakers more flexibility in pricing, analysts said.  
But the analysts all expected political or market pressures to cause the yen to stabilize and then strengthen somewhat against the dollar this year.
"We should see the yen start to strengthen," Zimmerman said.
Bussmann forecast the yen at 106 to the dollar by the end of 1997.
In western Europe, analysts see continued economic pressure associated with the move to European union in 1999 continuing to weigh on the economy there and keep vehicle sales about flat.  
But Mohatarem argued that there is a possibility for a positive surprise in central Europe, saying Russia could achieve three percent economic growth by 1998.
Mexico was also seen as an area for growth, with that economy recoverying quicker than expected from the recent peso crisis, analysts said.
Meanwhile, Bussmann argued that capacity usage for truck production will remain at about 80 percent through the year 2000 and that truck demand as a percentage of total vehicle market share will continue to rise.
"We see the light truck demand reaching 50 percent (of total vehicle demand) by just past the turn of the century," he said.
But other analysts were not as optimistic about demand for light trucks, which generally have higher profit margins than cars.
"I don't think it will reach 50 percent of demand," said Thomas Webb, chief economist with the National Automobile Dealers Association.
During his presentation, Webb also said his forecast for 1997 auto sales was on the low end of a range he defined between 14.7 million and 15.1 million autos.
	 ((Chicago newsdesk 312 408-8787))
