Chrysler Corp. Wednesday introduced all-new versions of its Chrysler Concorde and Dodge Intrepid family sedans, part of a $2.1 billion revamp of the car line that helped rescue the automaker five years ago.
Detroit's third-largest automaker said the cars, which will reach showrooms in the fall, will stay in the same price range as the cars they replace -- about $20,000-$26,000.
The strategy contrasts with that of Ford Motor Co., which in 1995 introduced a redesigned Taurus sedan with more upscale features that resulted in higher prices. Ford later brought out a lower-priced Taurus when sales failed to meet expectations.
"Our concept is to keep them as affordable as possible and keep them in the same price range of today's" models, Chrysler Vice Chairman Robert Lutz told reporters following the introduction of the new model at the North American International Auto Show here.
Chrysler introduced the original "LH" car line in 1992 at a time when the automaker was emerging from its second brush with bankruptcy in a decade. Dubbed by some analysts as the company's "Last Hope," the cars' acceptance by consumers brought badly needed cash and confidence to the company.
Chrysler did not introduce other LH variants, which include replacements for the Chrysler LHS luxury car and the Eagle Vision.
Improved production processes will help keep prices down, though the cars' features include all new engine technology, Lutz said.
The cars, as well as two other models to be introduced in the fall, were the result of a 31-month development programme that cost Chrysler about $2.1 billion, including two new overhead-cam V-6 engines, Chrysler said.
The automaker expects to sell 250,000 to 260,000 of the cars annually, with the Intrepid accounting for about 50 percent of the sales and the other three models making up the rest.
To follow up on its launch Tuesday of the new Durango sport/utility vehicle, which broke through the floor of a mock-up of Chrysler's new corporate headquarters, Chrysler unveiled the new sedans in a fake thunderstorm, complete with water falling on the Cobo Hall stage. The theme of the presentation was "Lightning Strikes Twice."
The programme marks the launch of a new family of V-6 engines for Chrysler, part of a significant revamping of the company's engine line.
The base models of both cars will be powered by an all- aluminum, 2.7-litre 24-valve V-6 engine rated at 200 horsepower. The Concorde LXi and Intrepid ES will have 3.2-litre, 24-valve V-6 engines rated at 220 horsepower.
Chrysler said it engineered the cars to offer a quieter ride and better handling than current models.
The cars also include larger headlights and larger brakes, increased usable cargo room, platinum tipped spark plugs and a "coil-on-plug" ignition system to eliminate tuneups before 100,000 miles, Chrysler said.
Chrysler stressed that the two sedans are designed to appeal to different consumers, with Intrepid geared toward slightly younger, less affluent buyers.
The cars will be assembled at Chrysler's Bramalea, Ontario plant.
Lutz admitted that Chrysler was introducing the cars into a declining market for sedans, with typical sedan buyers now opting for other choices, including sport/utility vehicles.
But he said the decline was cyclical and could change with the next generation of car buyers.
"We know each generation rejects what its parents had," said Lutz.
