First Chicago NBD Corp said Wednesday rising bankruptcy filings contributed to a rise in credit card charge offs in the fourth quarter.
Charge offs rose to 6.7 percent of managed receivables in the quarter, compared to 5.9 percent a year ago.
"The fourth quarter increase is due to a combination of factors, including a resurgence of bankruptcy filings after a third quarter lull, an increase in contractual charge offs, and average loan volume that was basically flat in the third quarter," chief financial officer Robert Rosholt said.  
But in a telephone message to investors, Rosholt also noted that credit card fee revenue rose 28 percent from a year ago to $259 million, adjusting for securitization.
"Clearly this demonstrates bank card's ability to counter some of the effects of deteriorating credit quality," he said.
While the credit card business continues to be profitable for the $104.6 billion asset bank holding company, some analysts noted the charge-off rate was high.
"I think that's very clear that that's not as profitable an operation as it is at other places," said James Schutz, analyst at Chicago Corp.  
But other analysts said the bank has tightened credit standards in the past year and were less concerned about the charge-off rate.
"That thing has bounced around all over this year (1996) and it's still a very profitable line of business this year," said Robert Ollech, analyst at Principal Financial Securities.
Rosholt also said the bank plans to improve its trading operations to restore results in market-driven revenues.  
Market-driven revenues were $83 million in the fourth quarter, up from $40 million in the previous quarter but down from the bank's average of $100 million a quarter, Rosholt said.
Trading profits were $12 million in the quarter, compared to a $12 million loss in the third quarter.
"We plan to get back to our $100 million per quarter average as we improve our execution of trading activities this year," Rosholt said.
Return on common equity was 17.5 percent in the quarter, up from 15.4 percent a year ago, while return on assets was 1.46 percent, up from 1.02 percent a year ago.
Earlier Wednesday, the bank reported operating income of $377 million or $1.14 a share in the fourth quarter, compared to $318 million or $0.96 a year ago.
Earnings were $0.01 a share below estimates, according to First Call. First Chicago shares were up 1/8 at 54-3/8.
((--Chicago newsdesk 312 408 8787))
