Equity Residential Properties Trust, a real estate investment trust led by Chicago real estate investor Sam Zell, agreed Friday to buy Wellsford Residential Property Trust( in a deal valuing Wellsford at $1 billion.
The deal would make Equity Residential, which is already the largest publicly traded apartment building owner in the country, the second largest real estate investment trust in any category, the company said.
"Consolidation of this industry is critical for its evolution," Zell, who is chairman of Equity Residential, said in a statement. "The size and liquidity of the combined entity reinforces EQR's status as the No. 1 multifamily (real estate investment trust)."
The deal values New York-based Wellsford at about $1 billion, or $29.61 a share, an 18.7 percent premium over its recent stock price, the companies said.
Equity Residential said it expected to trim about $3.1 million in annual general and administrative expenses and $800,000 in property management expenses after the closing of the deal, which is expected to occur by May.
Equity Residential expects the merger to add 10 cents to 13 cents a share in annualized funds from operation -- the measure commonly used to measure real estate investment fund performance.
When the deal closes, Equity Residential will own and operate 317 properties with 90,873 units. It also adds properties in areas like the Pacific Northwest and West Coast, where strong demand allows for higher rents.
"Those markets have higher rental growth than the national average from other markets," said Jeff Langbaum, associate analyst at investment firm Alex. Brown &amp; Sons. Equity Residential estimated rent growth in those areas at 5 percent to 6 percent annualy, while Langbaum estimated the national average at about 4 percent.
Each Wellsford share will be exchanged for 0.625 share of Equity Residential, or about $27.11, plus one share of Wellsford Properties Inc., a newly formed company that will continue Wellsford's development activities, the companies said in a joint statement.
The exchange ratio is subject to upward revision if Equity Residential shares fall below $40. If they drop below $37, the parties have the right to terminate the merger agreement.
Equity Residential also will exchange about $158 million in preferred shares. In addition, Equity Residential will assume about $330 million in Wellsford's debt.
The deal continues the consolidation of real estate investment trusts (REIT).
"It's pretty apparent that that's the way the REIT world, especially apartments right now, is heading," Langbaum said.
In December, Houston-based Cambden Property Trust said it would acquire Dallas-based Paragon Group Inc., to create an apartment real estate trust with 36,199 units.
Unlike the hostile takeover Zell's Manufactured Home Communites Inc. launched against Chateau Properties Inc., which was rebuffed by the manufactured housing community operator last year, the Equity Residential deal was unanimously approved by both companies' boards of trustees, the companies said.
Wellsford shares were up $1.875 at $27.625, while Equity Residential was down $1.125 at $42.25 on the New York Stock Exchange in late trading.
