A conservative forecast for 1997, calling for profits near 1996 levels, helped push Caterpillar Inc stock lower despite record earnings reported for 1996 Tuesday.
But the outlook was also causing some analysts to question the conservatism of the Peoria-based heavy equipment maker.
"Caterpillar always looks at the glass being half empty," said Thomas Burns Jr., an analyst at NatWest Securities Corp. "We think it's half full."  
"We expect a better U.S. economy," Burns said. "We don't expect housing starts to be off." He noted that Federal Reserve Board Chairman Alan Greenspan made positive comments about the economy Tuesday.
But Caterpillar said in its earnings statement that it expects U.S. gross domestic product growth of about two percent in 1997, slower than in 1996.
Burns is also more optimistic about European growth than Caterpillar.
"Clearly, as far as we're concerned, there's a turn up on the way in Europe," he said.  
But in Caterpillar's view, bullish factors will be offset by delays of infrastructure products as countries impose fiscal restraint to meet the entry criteria for the European Monetary Union.
Caterpillar reported earnings of $381 million, or $1.99 a share for the fourth quarter of 1996, above the $1.53 a share reported in 1995 and the consensus estimate of $1.88 a share reported by First Call Corp.  
But the stock was down 1-1/8 at 77-3/8 Tuesday, mostly because of the outlook.
"It's basically '97," Lisa Shalett, an analyst at Sanford C. Bernstein, said of the stock's downturn. But she noted that one-time currency factors helped boost the earnings above estimates.
"It comes across as a surprise, but it's not necessarily a surprise from operations," Shalett said.
Still, despite Caterpillar's guidance on profits in 1997, Burns and other analysts are sticking by estimates showing earnings per share climbing from the $7.07 reported in 1996.
Burns estimates earnings of $7.70 a share for 1997.
Blair Brumley, an analyst at Dain Bosworth Inc, is even more bullish, forecasting earnings of $8.00 a share.
"It doesn't look like there's anything in the outlook statement that would cause us to be concerned with this year," Brumley said, noting that share repurchases, gains in the engine business from a recent acquisition and price gains from new products should boost earnings.
"Even assuming flat unit sales, you're not going to see a flat bottom line," he said.
((Chicago newsdesk 312 408 8787))
