Wallace Computer Services Inc. said Thursday its directors will unanimously recommend that shareholders reject a bid by Wyser-Pratte &amp; Co. Inc. to gain control of the computer services company's board.
Wyser-Pratte, which holds 2.3 percent of Wallace's outstanding shares, has proposed three candidates as directors for the Lisle, Ill.-based company, as well as a special committee to explore ways to maximize shareholder value.
It seeks to remove Wallace's poison pill takeover defence, which requires an 80 percent vote to approve certain mergers.
Wyser-Pratte filed the proposals with the Securities and Exchange Commission after Moore Corp. Ltd., a huge Canadian business forms manufacturer, abandoned a 13-month campaign to acquire Wallace in a $1.3 billion deal in early August.
Wallace's board said in a letter to Wyser-Pratte that it will recommend that its shareholders vote against the proposals at their annual meeting on Nov. 6, as they are not in the best interests of them or the company.
Wallace said it was aware that Wyser-Pratte tried to contact the three Wallace directors who were nominated by former suitor Moore at last year's annual meeting.
"You should be under no illusion that you or your purported director nominees have three allies on the Wallace board. We want to emphasise that we are unanimous in opposing your actions," the letter said.
Guy Wyser-Pratte, president of Wyser-Pratte, responded that he would continue to push his proposals.
He said although Wallace had increased its dividend substantially and reported higher-than-expected earnings Wednesday, the stock was only up slightly. Wallace rose 12.5 cents to close at $27.375 on the New York Stock Exchange.
"They're not delivering value to shareholders," he said.
Wallace said its profits jumped to $19.2 million, or 42 cents a share, in the fourth quarter ended July 31, from $15.8 million, or 35 cents a share, in the year-ago period. Sales rose 8.2 percent to $214.5 million from $198.2 million.
Factoring in the company's stock split, the stock is trading at just over $54, compared with Moore's offer last year of $60, Wyser-Pratte said.
"It's been a year and nothing has happened with the stock," he said.
However, analysts said that strong business fundamentals and a presumed change in Wallace's shareholder profile should protect it from Wyser-Pratte's proposals.
Many arbitrageurs likely sold their Wallace stock after Moore abandoned its 13-month takeover campaign, resulting in more shareholders interested in long-term gains, analysts said.
