Mercury Finance Co. said Wednesday it found problems in its bookkeeping that caused it to overstate earnings by $90 million over four years and that its chief accountant had apparently disappeared.
The Northbrook, Ill.-based finance company said the irregularities appear to have come from unauthorised entries in financial records by its chief accounting officer.
The company said a special committee of the board has been formed to investigate with legal and accounting experts.
The accountant, James Doyle, was last seen at the company on Jan. 23, the day it reported fourth quarter results, Mercury Finance spokesman Joseph Kopec said.
"He called Friday and said he would not be in for personal reasons," Kopec said. "They haven't seen him since."
Doyle's whereabouts were unknown.
The problems may jeopardise Mercury's planned acquisition of Fidelity Acceptance Corp., a consumer finance company, from BankBoston Corp. in a $393 million deal announced on Jan. 10.
Wednesday's announcement caught the financial community by surprise, with analysts unwilling to comment after Mercury's statement, saying they were still trying to gather information.
As a result of the adjustments, shareholders' equity as of Dec. 31, 1996, would be reduced from $353 million to $263 million, the company said.
As a result of the overstatement of earnings, Mercury said it is in violation of some of its debt agreements and was negotiating with lenders.
It said its financial condition remained strong and would support continuing operations and its expansion plans.
BankBoston said it would await the results of the accounting investigation before proceeding with the sale of Fidelity Acceptance. Mercury said it was optimistic about completing the deal.
Mercury said 1996 net income would be restated to $56.7 million from $120.7 million, 1995 profits would be cut to $76.9 million from $98.9 million and 1994 earnings would be $83 million instead of the $86.5 million originally reported.
In addition, 1993 profits would be trimmed to $64.2 million from $64.9 million.
Mercury stock was halted all day on the New York Stock Exchange. It closed Tuesday at $14.875.
Moody's Investors Service cut its rating on Mercury's short-term borrowings and Standard &amp; Poor's said it may lower its rating.
Mercury Finance suffered another blow last year, when Daniel Terra, chairman of the company since it went public in 1989, died in June.
