Mercury Finance Co. got hit by a lawsuit charging it violated securities laws after the auto-loan company said phony bookkeeping entries had inflated its earnings and that it fired its chief accountant.
The stock, which remained halted on the New York Stock Exchange, has not traded since it closed at $14.875 on Tuesday.
The exchange would not indicate where the stock might open but traders said it was changing hands at $4.25 overseas, which would mean a loss of more than $1.8 billion in market worth for the company, based in suburban Lake Forest, Ill.
One of the officers named in the lawsuit was James Doyle, the former controller who Mercury said has not been seen since last Thursday. In its statement on Wednesday, Mercury said it fired Doyle.
Filed in federal court in Chicago on Wednesday, the lawsuit alleges the company and some senior officers misrepresented or omitted crucial information about Mercury's earnings for the last three years, lawyers who filed the suit said in a statement.
The lawsuit also said Doyle had sold tens of thousands and Chairman John Brincat hundreds of thousands of shares of Mercury stock at inflated prices, netting millions of dollars in illegal profits.
Brincat was not available for comment. A company spokesman declined to comment. Attempts to locate Doyle were not successful.
The finance company said on Wednesday its 1996 earnings would be restated to $56.7 million from $120.7 million and that earnings for the three prior years would also adjusted downward, though not as sharply.
The problems appeared to stem from unauthorised entries in financial records by its chief accounting officer, Doyle, the company said.
It also said it was in violation of certain provisions if its loan agreements and that a special committee of directors has been formed to investigate the problems.
Analysts were hesitant to talk about Mercury, saying they did not have much information.
But they did say the company's planned acquisition of Fidelity Acceptance from BankBoston Corp. was unlikely to be completed. The deal, announced on Jan. 10, called for Mercury to issue about $458 million in stock to BankBoston. BankBoston said on Wednesday it was awaiting an audit of Mercury.
"I think the odds are very high that the deal will not go through," one analyst said, who asked not to be identified.
Analysts also said Mercury has not been as forthcoming as other consumer finance companies when providing detailed financial information.
Mercury helped pioneer the business of lending to consumers whose credit was less than perfect. It started making loans to people in the military and has grown into one of the country's largest lenders in the used-car market.
"They haven't been quite as open as any others in the industry have been," one analyst said.
Two brokerage firms cut ratings on Mercury Thursday.
Gruntal &amp; Co. said it suspended its rating, adding, "We recommend that holders exit positions as soon as possible."
Piper Jaffray cut its rating to market performer from buy and in a research report said, "Our guess is most of the over recognised income came from (Mercury's) insurance subsidiary."
