Hong Kong's 250,000-strong Catholic community looks ahead with confidence to Chinese rule but is treading cautiously in its relations with Beijing, church sources said on Tuesday.
The sources said a statement from Pope John Paul on Monday that the Vatican would closely watch how Catholics fare in Hong Kong after the British colony's handover to China in mid-1997 was a necessary expression of concern.
They believed the church would remain free after 1997.
But one said: "Probably our future is like a lame duck -- still alive but unable to do very much. We will have to obey and stay within our political border -- Hong Kong."
Some Catholic agencies are quitting Hong Kong in order not to endanger the community after the Chinese red flag is raised.
Hong Kong's Roman Catholics, most of them ethnic Chinese. amount to four percent of the capitalist territory's 6.3 million population.
Speaking in his annual "state of the world" address, the Pope said: "By reason of the size and vitality of the Catholic community in the territory, the Holy See will follow with particular interest this new state."
"The Pope's concern is necessary because this is the biggest Chinese diocese in the world," Anthony Lam, executive director of the Holy Spirit Study Centre, told Reuters.
"The relationship between the Hong Kong government and the diocese is harmonious," he said. The community and China must work to maintain that harmony after 1997."
Hong Kong has been a base of missionary activity aimed at China's teeming millions since its inception as a British colony in the gunboat diplomacy of the mid-19th century.
This fact has made Beijing's Communist rulers view Hong Kong with suspicion since they took control of the mainland in 1949.
Many local Catholics have risen to senior official rank or political prominence. These include a vocal critic of the Beijing government, Democratic Party leader Martin Lee, as well as Financial Secretary Donald Tsang and anti-corruption chief Michael Leung.
Other prominent Catholics in Hong Kong include the British governor Chris Patten and Leo Goodstadt, who is an adviser to both Patten and Catholic Cardinal John Wu.
Highlighting the very different position of the church in Hong Kong from the church in China, Wu presided over a colourful annual pageant of judges in the Catholic Cathedral on Monday.
On the mainland, churches are tightly restricted through "patriotic associations", the Vatican is banned from appointing bishops, and China often jails dissident priests for organising religious activity outside state control.
However, church sources in Hong Kong said they believe the territory will not suffer the same fate because China pledges to allow religious freedom in the territory under its Basic Law.
"The church will stay in Hong Kong and will take a positive view towards the political transition," Lam said.
But one church source said: "We've seen China reinterpret the Basic Law to suit itself. This does not bode well for freedom. They've said we can speak only about Catholics in Hong Kong, not those in China, who we care about," he said.
Mary Seung, director of the Catholic Social Communications Office, which acts as a spokesman for the diocese, sounded a more upbeat note, saying:
"We've had contacts with the Chinese authorities and they've guaranteed that the Catholic community can continue its work in social services and the schools."
Hong Kong has over 300 Catholic schools at various levels.
The 1997 handover has forced churches in Hong Kong to search their political souls over the past year, with the religious community split over how much to cooperate with China.
Eight Catholics sit on the Selection Committee, a China- appointed body crafting new Hong Kong power structures.
But the church allowed them to participate only in their personal capacity, not as its official representatives.
