The red Communist flag of China is already flying in Hong Kong.
Not just one flag. Thousands of them. Like a red forest, as if the territory's handover to Beijing had already taken place.
Beijing recovers sovereignty over the colony that Britain prised from it a century and a half ago at midnight on June 30, 1997.
More than five months before the historic handover, red Chinese flags with their five golden stars are fluttering over the villages of Kam Tin district in the rural New Territories.
Dozens of red flags with Hong Kong's future floral emblem the purple bauhinia, or tree orchid, have also been raised.
"Hong Kong is departing from British rule after 150 years, so we've hung these flags to celebrate," Tang Wing-yuen, the organiser of the tribute to the coming handover, told Reuters.
Kam Tin's main street is a riot of colour. Long strings of bunting with thousands of small Chinese flags attached are slung between lamp posts parallel with the lines of washing on apartment balconies.
The flags fly from almost every building -- offices, homes, village stores and supermarkets, and the Kam Tin rural council building looks like a Communist Party headquarters in a mainland village.
A huge red banner is also strung across the building with gold Chinese lettering carrying the words "Kam Tin community warmly welcomes Hong Kong's 1997 reversion to China".
Most buildings in Hong Kong are still flying Britain's Union Jack, although the bauhinia flag has also begun sprouting in various places.
KAM TIN - A BASTION OF RESISTANCE TO BRITISH RULE
The Kam Tin area is the home of the powerful Tang clan and has been a bastion of nationalist sentiment and resistance to colonial rule ever since the British marched in brandishing a 99-year New Territories lease extracted from imperial China.
That lease expires this year, and at midnight on June 30 Britain hands back to China not only the New Territories but the entire colony of Hong Kong, with its 6.3 million people.
"We in the New Territories, which has been under the rule of foreigners, are now free. Hong Kong and the New Territories are part of China so we support China," said Tang, the son of clan leader Tang Che-leung, the head of Kam Tin's Rural Council.
"It is a humiliation for Hong Kong to have been ruled by foreigners. Now, with its return to China, it should be celebrated by Chinese all over the world. We of course welcome our sovereign. We don't care about anything else."
The Kam Tin community decided to raise the flags from New Year's Day onwards as a mark of patriotism.
"WE SHOULD PAINT THIS CITY RED WITH CHINESE FLAGS...",
"This is what the whole of Hong Kong should look like on July 1. We should paint this city red with Chinese flags," said Jimmy Tang, a youth chatting to friends outside Kam Tin's famed walled village.
The walled village, a traditional structure in the New Territories and across the border in south China's Guangdong Province, is also decked with flags.
The village, whose outer walls and battlements are surrounded by a moat, rises fortress-like from the Kam Tin plain, surrounded by productive farmland that has now given way to modern-day automobile scrapyards and freight container dumps.
Timothy Wong, an academic at the Chinese University of Hong Kong, said the show of Chinese red flags was also a sign of disillusionment towards the government of the Chinese Nationalist Party on Taiwan.
Taiwan previously had a big following in many Hong Kong villages, which flew its flags.
But the tide has been turning as Beijing's takeover has neared.
"They are more or less disenchanted by Taiwan's actions, but their nationalism is still there. With this sudden change, they are filling the nationalist gap by shifting their identification from Taiwan to the People's Republic of China," Wong said.
He said the flags were also a way of protecting local rights and privileges unique to the rural area. Beijing has promised to preserve the traditions of the area's rural dwellers.
KAM TIN'S PATRIOTISM HAS FAIRY TALE ROOTS
The village is proud of its historical patriotism.
In the 12th century, when Mongol armies captured the Chinese emperor Gao Zong and his family, his 10-year-old daughter managed to escape.
The ladies of the court fled with the girl to the south and took refuge in Kam Tin where the Tang clan militia protected the little princess.
She later fell in love with her rescuer's son and married him. When she died, she was buried on Hong Kong's Lion Hill.
In 1898, when British troops marched in, Kam Tin raised armed militias to resist but was eventually suppressed with heavy casualties in the Battle of Tai Po.
"We villagers opposed the British, but we couldn't fight them off and some of our people were killed," said Tang.
"The British occupied our place in the New Territories and robbed us of our metal gates and took them back to Britain," Tang said. The gates were later found in Ireland and returned.
The walled village is a tourist attraction nowadays. The elder women of the village dress in the costume of Chinese peasants who speak the Hakka dialect, characterised by ring-shaped straw hats with a deep, black cloth fringe.
Some sit in the fortress doorway playing the Chinese gambling game of mahjong to while away the hours, while others run souvenir stalls in the narrow alleyways.
"Where you from?" asked one wrinkled woman as she demanded the ritual one dollar entrance fee to a visitor who crossed the threshold. "You from England? A-ha, your time finished now."
