Hong Kong's chief judge came under intense pressure to quit the judiciary on Wednesday after stoking the political fire with a bid to become the territory's leader after Britain hands the colony back to China in 1997.
Politicians and legal experts said Tuesday's declaration by 67-year-old Chief Justice Sir Ti Liang Yang that he would be a candidate created a conflict of interest and raised a question mark over his role in the British-style judiciary.
"It is important to give people the confidence that Hong Kong's judiciary is independent," said lawyer Martin Lee, leader of the colony' biggest political party, the Democratic Party.
Yang dodged suggestions he should quit and told a Hong Kong television station he wanted to tap public opinion first.
"Whether I should resign is not a question for me, but rather for the executive, for society and the government, for the Chinese side, and for the public, what are their views on this?" he said.
But the resignation calls came even from some members of the pro-Beijing camp.
Pro-China politician Tsang Yok-sing said Yang should resign as top judge but welcomed his bid, saying it was good to have more candidates, and especially one "politically neutral and without any business connections".
"He should consider stepping down from his position as Chief Justice. That should happen as early as possible," Tsang said, speaking to Hong Kong radio from Beijing.
"It will be seen by the public, by people in the legal profession, that there may be a conflict of interests."
Nihal Jayawickrama, a law professor at Hong Kong University, said China-born, British-trained Yang had a right to bid for the leadership, but having entered politics he should now resign.
"It's not possible for him to hold the office of Chief Justice any longer. It's quite incompatible," Jayawickrama said.
There are just 300 days before this bustling capitalist territory of 6.2 million people reverts to communist-ruled China, ending a century and a half of British rule.
Now that Yang's hat is in the ring, with pro-Beijing publisher Xu Simin pledging to nominate him, the leadership stakes have been injected with a new element of competition.
Other names touted as possible candidates include Patten's Chief Secretary Anson Chan, shipping tycoon Tung Chee-hwa and a former Hong Kong cabinet member, lawyer T.S. Lo.
Chan is widely believed to be unacceptable to China, Tung has not made clear his intentions, and Lo has no proposer yet.
A 400-member Selection Committee which will pick the leader and the new legislature is gradually taking shape.
Yang, widely seen as a neutral, independent figure because of his judicial career and as a possible compromise candidate, has said he will resign as chief justice if formally nominated.
But the earliest Xu can formally propose Yang's nomination is when the Selection Committee is constituted in November. Critics say he cannot be chief judge and a politician at the same time and should step down ahead of any formal nomination.
The latest twist comes amid signals from Beijing that China is setting aside its bitter quarrels with Britain and possibly with Hong Kong's democrats for the sake of a smooth handover.
China's Hong Kong policy boss Lu Ping said in Beijing on Tuesday he accepted that Britain and China might not settle all disagreements by the time of the midnight June 30 handover.
"We shall try our best to resolve minor differences before July 1, 1997. If we fail, we can put them aside," Lu said.
He added that he was willing to shake hands on that day with his arch-rival, Hong Kong's colonial governor Chris Patten.
The handover negotiations have been a thorny process. Patten and pro-democracy groups have been quick to dub most of China's moves as anti-democratic in recent years, especially its plan to scrap the elected legislature for an appointed provisional body.
