Beijing is moving rapidly to roll back Hong Kong's democratic and human rights safeguards, sending a chill through the territory five months before it returns to Chinese rule.
On Sunday, China dealt a blow to the democratic changes of recent years that included Western-style human rights guarantees and moves to expand direct elections in the British colony.
The China-controlled Preparatory Committee, meeting in Beijing, listed 25 laws including the Bill of Rights and key electoral statutes that will either be axed or diluted when sovereignty over Hong Kong reverts to China at midnight on June 30.
"These proposals are a great blow to freedom after 1997. It is a black day for human rights in Hong Kong," said James To, legal affairs spokesman of the Democratic Party.
The party, Hong Kong's largest, won the lion's share of votes in 1995 legislative elections, making it the greatest beneficiary of colonial Governor Chris Patten's reforms while pro-China parties were the biggest losers at the ballot box.
China's Xinhua news agency said the laws were "formulated by the British Hong Kong authorities in an attempt to apply its constitutional bill in violation of the Sino-British Joint Declaration on Hong Kong", the 1984 treaty on the handover.
It said Britain had introduced "principles which contravene the Basic Law and agreements reached by the two governments". The Basic Law is Hong Kong's post-handover constitution.
China's move was the latest in a string of setbacks for democracy. Last month China appointed a provisional legislature to replace the elected Legislative Council.
The new body is full of pro-China politicians, many of whom lost to democrats at the ballot box in 1995. It will handle law-making in Hong Kong from July 1 onwards.
Top Chinese officials have also said the media will not be free to air "anti-constitutional" ideas after the handover, and have said they will not allow Chinese dissidents or foreign powers to use Hong Kong as a base for "subverting" China.
In another sign of conservative times ahead, pro-China politicians said on Monday the new legislature's first session this Saturday will not be open to the general public, as previously promised, blaming the change on a shortage of space.
The assault on Hong Kong's laws has dismayed the democratic camp.
"These recommendations are thoroughly bad. They will do grave damage to the already fragile public confidence in the handover," said Democratic Party leader Martin Lee.
Lee, heading for Europe next weekend to woo support for basic freedoms in Hong Kong, said the changes would "do away with most of the existing legal protections for human rights and civil liberties in Hong Kong".
He urged post-colonial leader Tung Chee-hwa and the Chinese government to repudiate proposals "which can only further erode confidence in Hong Kong's future under Chinese rule".
"These recommendations will be a body blow to human rights protection in Hong Kong," a government spokesman said, and they would "send a most worrying signal to the people of Hong Kong and the international community."
"I believe this totally violated the judicial spirit of Hong Kong and our concept of respect for human rights and freedom," said legislator Emily Lau.
Nihal Jayawickrama, a law professor at Hong Kong University, said Beijing's decision would sow confusion and chaos.
"The Bill of Rights created a right to assemble peacefully and a right to associate with others for legislative purposes. A right is inconsistent with now having to go to the police and ask for permission to hold a demonstration, permission to set up associations," he said. "I think it's a very retrograde step."
The Bill of Rights, based on international standards, says any other laws inconsistent with it should be repealed. Beijing says this is unacceptable because the bill places itself above all other laws, including the Basic Law.
Two other laws facing drastic change are the Societies Ordinance, which allows free establishment of political parties, and the Public Order, law which allows demonstrations.
