China plans to abolish a raft of Hong Kong laws that allowed for democratic elections and shielded human rights in the British colony, which is set to revert to communist-ruled Beijing's control on July 1.
A legal panel of the China-controlled Preparatory Committee, meeting in Beijing, on Sunday decided to repeal or amend 25 laws and articles, some the product of recent reforms and others the outdated trappings of the colonial era.
Listing the planned changes, China's official Xinhua news agency said recent reforms in Hong Kong had been an attempt to apply British constitutional principles in violation of the 1984 Sino-British treaty and the 1990 Basic Law governing the territory's handover.
Pro-democracy groups and the colonial government described the Preparatory Committee's move as a blow to democracy and human rights that would dent international confidence in post-1997 Hong Kong.
"These recommendations are sadly predictable and a retrograde step which will deal a body blow to human rights protection in Hong Kong," a government spokesman said.
The territory, under the British flag for more than 150 years, is being handed back to China at midnight on June 30.
The handover treaty promises the territory of 6.3 million people a high degree of autonomy and allows it to retain its freewheeling capitalist system.
But China has long indicated it will dismantle the reforms of British Governor Chris Patten, who expanded democracy in Hong Kong against China's wishes after he took office in 1992.
Beijing has already appointed a provisional legislature to supplant the elected Legislative Council on July 1.
It is that new lawmaking body, which holds its first formal session this Saturday in the Chinese city of Shenzhen just over the border from Hong Kong, that will repeal the laws and introduce new ones.
Many in Hong Kong fear the new laws will be draconian and repressive. China says the changes are necessary because Britain has introduced laws in Hong Kong that clash with the territory's post-1997 mini-constitution, the Basic Law.
Among the laws to be scrapped or amended are Hong Kong's Bill of Rights, the 1992 election law and the Societies Ordinance under which political parties are allowed and the 1995 Public Order Ordinance which allows peaceful demonstrations.
Also to be rolled back are some colonial-era laws such as those regulating the British military, immigration, nationality status, extradition and colonial armorial bearings.
The changes largely echo proposals made two years ago by one of the early China-controlled panels that deliberated on the future political set-up, the Preparatory Working Committee.
The 150-member Preparatory Committee assembles mainland officials and pro-Beijing politicians from Hong Kong and reports to the Chinese central government.
The body, chaired by Chinese Foreign Minister Qian Qichen, has mapped out the contours of the post-1997 Hong Kong regime.
It elected a Selection Commitee that last month appointed shipping tycoon Tung Chee-hwa as the territory's post-colonial leader and the 60 members of the new legislature.
