A dispute over the future of civil liberties in Hong Kong has prompted Britain and the United States to issue stern warnings to China to respect a treaty pledge to preserve basic freedoms.
The quarrel flared after a Beijing-controlled panel last Sunday proposed scrapping Hong Kong laws on civil liberties and elections, including part of its Bill of Rights, when China takes over Britain's last important colony on July 1.
As London and Washington aired their warnings, China said it was an internal affair and Hong Kong's future leader tried to dampen this latest controversy over Chinese post-handover plans.
China is moving to replace the elected Legislative Council with a provisional legislature and to block a lenient British law that would exclude China-style crackdowns on dissent.
China's opponents say these steps fly in the face of vows that allow Hong Kong to keep its freedoms after it becomes a Special Administrative Region (SAR) of China.
The United States said it was deeply concerned about attempts to water down civil liberties in Hong Kong, and called for reconsideration.
"We are deeply concerned over any attempt to weaken civil liberties and basic freedoms in Hong Kong," State Department spokesman Nicholas Burns said.
Hong Kong's post-colonial leader, Tung Chee-hwa, who takes over from Governor Chris Patten on July 1, called for calm.
"I think we are being too dramatic," Tung told Hong Kong radio. "It is a very complex issue," he said, adding that he would make a fuller statement on the affair on Thursday.
Patten, however, continued the war of words. He said the "ill-considered recommendations" would be "deleterious for our economic success and social stability".
"For those two qualities are intimately related to our civil liberties, each nourishing the other," he told a gathering of ethnic minorities.
Britain's minister for Hong Kong, Jeremy Hanley, summoned the Chinese ambassador in London to protest. A Foreign Office spokesman said the proposals were without justification.
He said the Bill of Rights was consistent with both the 1984 Sino-British Joint Declaration, which is the treaty governing Hong Kong's handover, and with the Basic Law, the post-handover constitution promulgated by China.
The issue was being hotly debated in Hong Kong, with some analysts predicting a backlash should China roll back basic freedoms in the capitalist territory of 6.3 million people.
"The Preparatory Committee's decision, if carried through, will certainly add to the number of political trials that greet the birth of the SAR," said political analyst C.K. Lau.
"Should the outcome of those trials be politically unpopular, more and not fewer demonstrations and rallies are likely. This will be bad for Hong Kong's international image at a critical time."
A leading law expert, Nihal Jayawickrama of Hong Kong University, said the proposals would restore old laws, which had once been applied by colonial authorities against China's supporters, to crack down on China's opponents.
"I think the intention is to use this against elements that have emerged in Hong Kong in the recent past...It will be used to control public expression," Jayawickrama told Reuters.
He said that by restoring the old Societies Ordinance and the Public Order Ordinance that imposed restrictions on the freedom of association, China would be turning back the clock in Hong Kong by two or three decades.
