Hong Kong's democracy movement on Friday likened Beijing's plans to curb civil liberties in the territory to the brutal purges of China's radical 1966-76 Cultural Revolution.
The pro-democracy camp staged a small but noisy protest on Friday morning at the office of post-colonial leader Tung Chee-hwa, who will succeed British Governor Chris Patten after the handover at midnight on June 30.
"Protect freedom of assembly. Protect freedom of association," they shouted. "Human rights cannot be infringed upon."
A handful wore tall hats and hung labels around their necks, harking back to the Cultural Revolution when those who were politically persecuted were forced to wear dunce caps and hang boards around their necks with their names crossed out. They were paraded through the streets and beaten. Many died.
Pro-democracy activists are campaigning against plans to scrap or amend 25 Hong Kong laws, some of them crucial to civil liberties, on July 1.
Laws facing the axe include parts of the Bill of Rights and laws allowing freedom of assembly and association.
The Hong Kong group called for an all-night sit-down protest outside China's de facto embassy, the Xinhua News Agency branch office, opposite the Happy Valley race course. Other protests were planned for Sunday.
"I don't think we can be masters of our own house," Yeung Sum, deputy leader of the Democratic Party, told reporters when asked what the latest developments boded for the autonomy that China has promised Hong Kong after the handover.
"The Chinese Communist Party is master of the house, and Mr Tung is the servant of the Chinese Communist party," he said.
Democratic Party leader Martin Lee called a news conference for later in the day and was due to set off on an eight-nation tour of Europe on Sunday to lobby for support for human rights, freedom and democracy in post-handover Hong Kong.
The reduction of civil liberties was proposed by a China-controlled committee last Sunday and would be implemented by a provisional legislature that China is installing in July to replace the elected Legislative Council.
The provisional body was to convene for its first sitting across the border in the Chinese city of Shenzhen on Saturday, when it is to elect its president and set rules of procedure.
Britain is handing Hong Kong back to China, after more than 150 years of colonial rule, under a 1984 treaty in which China promised to preserve the territory's capitalist system and freewheeling way of life for a further half century.
Hong Kong's leading English-language newspaper, the South China Morning Post, voiced concern that the changes would scrap a habeas corpus law that curbs police rights to detain people.
"It prevents people from being arbitrarily arrested and held without trial, or detained without good reason," the newspaper said. "Habeas corpus is one of the greatest safeguards to individual liberty in the canon of law."
Tung and Patten duelled verbally on Thursday. Tung defended the changes, saying they were necessary to strike "the right balance between individual rights and social order".
Tung said other states required permits for demonstrations and set limits on the overseas links of political groups, two of the changes that are worrying the pro-democracy camp.
Patten heaped scorn on the proposals, which have drawn Britain and the United States into a new diplomatic quarrel with Beijing. China has rejected their protests as "unwise".
