In the smoke-filled rooms of Macau, Edmund Ho, banker, community leader, philanthropist and the man tipped to lead the gambling mecca after China takes over, is playing his cards close to his chest.
"I am not the sort of person to spend time thinking about what greatness I might achieve in the future," said Ho modestly, stubbing a deluxe cigarette into a solid silver ashtray.
"I am afraid that by thinking about something like that I would turn myself into a different person than what I am," Ho said in an interview with Reuters at the Tai Fung Bank, Macau's second-largest bank, where he is executive director.
A copy of James Clavell's novel "Noble House", an epic tale of intrigue that shows how the great trading houses created what is now Hong Kong, sits on the shelf behind Ho's conference table in an office decorated with silverware and Chinese art.
This is the headquarters of a 42-year-old tycoon who is tipped widely by the politically informed in Macau to become the territory's chief executive when Portugal hands it back to China in 1999, ending a four-and-half century presence.
The job would be similar to that which China recently gave Hong Kong shipping billionaire Tung Chee-hwa, who succeeds Britain's colonial governor there on July 1.
"He is the best known local public figure in Macau. He's long been regarded as the candidate even though he denies it," said a well-placed source. "He has good relations with everybody. He is a true community leader."
HO SEES MACAU FUTURE AS SERVICE CENTRE
Macau is a sliver of territory with just 450,000 people, economically dwarfed by nearby Hong Kong. It claims a per capita gross domestic product (GDP) of US$17,000, although economists say this figure is severely distorted by high casino earnings. The average wage is about 5,000 patacas (US$625) a month.
But it occupies a strategic trading-post location on the western lip of the Pearl River delta, a region that is rocketing ahead on the back of China's staggering economic development.
Ho has no illusions that Macau can ever rival British-ruled Hong Kong, which has 6.3 million people, a per capita GDP of more than US$25,000 and is the eighth largest trading economy in the world.
"I don't see Macau as a poor man's version of Hong Kong, although I agree Macau will never be Hong Kong. Macau will learn from Hong Kong but Macau will always be different. At the same time Macau can always benefit from Hong Kong, for example from Hong Kong being an international financial centre," Ho said.
Hong Kong for a while became a thriving light industrial centre, but Macau, which counts on tourism, casino revenue and a small volume of textiles for its income, is unlikely to take that route now that China has become an alternative centre of cheap factory labour.
"Macau will have to remain a service centre with a strong tourism presence. We'll have some industries, but Macau will have no conditions to develop a full industrial base," Ho said.
Macau's sluggish economy has been slowed in the past few years by a collapse in the property market. But Ho sees new spinoffs from China's development, such as the emergence of merchant banking business in Macau for China's neighbouring Zhuhai city, and eventually the public flotation of Macau companies.
RANGE OF BUSINESS, POLITICAL INTERESTS
Ho occupies a string of business directorships, heads a clutch of local charities and sporting associations, and is a dominant figure on Macau's banking scene, as chairman of the local banking association.
His business interests span banking and financial services, family businesses including transport, restaurants, cinemas and real estate, and personal investments in property and mainland China enterprises, he says.
He is a rarity among Macau community tycoon-cum-politicians by not being involved in the casino tourism industry, which employs half the workforce. He is often confused by outsiders with Macau casino king Stanley Ho but is no relation.
Ho is a legislator and vice-president of Macau's Legisative Assembly, head of a Macau land commission set up by China, and a member of the Standing Committee of China's parliament, the National People's Congress.
He has played a leading role in drafting Macau's Basic Law, the mini-constitution by which the territory will be governed as a capitalist Special Administrative Region of China from December 20, 1999, under a "one country two systems" policy.
Ho acknowledged differences in the transitions of Hong Kong and Macau to Chinese rule. Sino-British quarrels over democracy and human rights in Hong Kong have run rampant.
"There are many reasons. The history of Macau itself, the perception of the Portguese government on the Macau question and the philosophy of the solution of ther Macau question are rather different from what the British did in Hong Kong," he said.
"Even being not so much an international city as Hong Kong has also been a part of the reason (for Macau to do better)."
Portugal has pointedly avoided laying down demands or upsetting China as it tries to work out a deal with China that will leave Lisbon's last Asian outpost as a model of amity.
FORESEES TOUGH TIME DEALING WITH TRIADS
Educated in business in Canada, Ho displays a westernised exterior and a North American wit, and switches easily between English, Cantonese and Mandarin, but, like most of Macau's predominantly ethnic Chinese community, speaks no Portuguese.
He leaves the impression of a presidential man but one who is accessible, who shows the common touch, involved in hospital charities and local sports clubs.
Whoever governs Macau, Ho admits, will have a tough time sprucing up its image as a "Chicago of the East" gangster city.
Macau has been plagued by Chinese "triad" crime gangs, mostly linked to casino protection rackets and loansharking. Bombings and shootings are commonplace, and recently there have been signs of links with crime gangs on the mainland.
"In the old days members of triad societies were ashamed to disclose they were members, but now it's like holding an OBE, it's something to be proud of. In that atmosphere what can you do?" Ho asked.
He said the image was exaggerated because Macau was so small, but that organised crime in fact was no worse in Macau on a per capita basis than it is in other places, not least the notorious Mong Kok district of Hong Kong.
"In Macau if some groups are fighting with knives it gets on the front pages, but in Mong Kok it happens several times a night."
