Western countries are geared up to quietly grant asylum in the coming months to around 40 Chinese dissidents and their families who are living in exile in Hong Kong, human rights sources said on Tuesday.
The plan has been worked out by a number of countries which fear the dissidents may face persecution by Beijing's Communist rulers after China takes Hong Kong back from Britain on July 1, the sources said.
The fears of the exiles have grown over the past year as China unveiled plans to roll back democracy and human rights legislation introduced in Hong Kong under British rule and vowed not to allow "anti-constitutional" activities there.
Anxiety has been further stoked by China's renewed crackdown on dissenters, many of whom have been jailed over the past year.
"There is a general feeling of relief because they are going to be resettled. But they won't feel safe until they are on the plane," the source, a well-informed veteran human rights campaigner, told Reuters on condition of anonymity.
Hundreds of Chinese dissidents and pro-democracy activists fled after army tanks thundered into Beijing's Tiananmen Square in June 1989, crushing a student-led democracy movement.
Scores of the fugitives -- the exact number has not been officially made public -- found sanctuary in Hong Kong. A source from a dissident support group said there were between 100 and 200.
A source from a dissident support group, the Hong Kong Alliance in Support of Patriotic Democratic Movements in China, said word was circulating among activists that London had secretly promised dissidents they could settle in Britain if no other western country gave them sanctuary before the handover.
He said some dissident families had already been discreetly resettled in Western countries last year.
The territory has been a refuge since the late 19th century for Chinese dissenters and revolutionaries, who often exploited the shield provided by British colonial rule. These included the revolutionaries led by Sun Yat-sen, the founder of China's first republic, who plotted against China's last imperial dynasty, the Qing, and toppled it in 1911.
Many of the present dissidents-in-exile fled to Hong Kong along an elaborately organised secret escape route nicknamed "Operation Yellow Bird", with the help of Hong Kong activists and companies. To Beijing they are "wanted criminals".
Some were were whisked out in speed boats and others were smuggled into Hong Kong in ships or trucks, activists say.
The Hong Kong government has always declined to comment on asylum seekers out of fear of jeopardising their safety by drawing Beijing's attention to their whereabouts or of stirring up a quarrel, Western diplomats said.
The human rights source declined to name the countries involved in the 1997 rescue plan or when the dissident families would be leaving. "We don't know when they will leave. We don't know where they will be going," he said.
Western countries, wary about upsetting Beijing, have remained tightlipped in reaction to Hong Kong newspaper reports about a mass resettlement plan for the dissidents.
A well-known Chinese dissident in Hong Kong, labour activist and Tiananmen veteran Han Dongfang, told Reuters that Hong Kong would be unsafe for many dissidents after the handover.
"I cannot say 100 percent China is going to arrest them. But it is a concern," Han said. But he planned to stay regardless.
"I have to stay here to see what is going to happen," he said. "I may leave if things go wrong."
