Tsang Yok-Sing, the leader of Hong Kong's biggest pro-China party, had his baptism of fire in the violent riots that shook the territory during China's Cultural Revolution of the 1960s.
Tsang was out on the streets during Hong Kong's 1967 riots, waving Chairman Mao Zedong's "Little Red Book", distributing leaflets and marching in the frontline of anti-British demonstrations.
Tsang, a bright light in the new political regime that will replace British colonial rule in Hong Kong on July 1, was shaped by the indignity he felt about the Chinese not being masters of their own home in the territory for more than 150 years.
The 49-year-old school headmaster makes no bones about the real quarrel between Britain and China over Hong Kong's return to Beijing's control. It's not the widely publicised polemics or legal wrangles about human rights and democracy, he says.
For Tsang, it's "the end of British rule -- the end of the institutions elected under the British constitution".
CULTURE CLASH
It's a culture clash, the clashing of national prides.
The Chinese are fired by the desire to shake off the last vestiges of an imperialist, colonial yoke, while the British rue their loss of an empire on which, once, the sun never set.
"The Chinese government has never really believed the British were happy to return Hong Kong to China," Tsang told Reuters in an interview.
"Most people in Hong Kong believe Hong Kong is part of China, that the territory should return to China, that British colonial rule should come to an end."
And end it will, at midnight June 30, when the Union Jack is furled and China's red flag is raised over a capitalist Special Administrative Region (SAR), to which China has promised a high degree of autonomy under a "one country two systems" principle.
Tsang Yok-sing is a man of humble working-class origins and a solid leftwing family. His parents moved to Hong Kong in 1949 as the Communists swept to power in a civil war in China. His brother, Tsang Tak-Sing, is the editor of China's propaganda mouthpiece in Hong Kong, the daily Ta Kung Pao newspaper.
Tsang is the principal of the Pui Kiu leftwing junior school in Hong Kong's North Point, once a bastion of leftwing ferment.
He is chairman of the Democratic Alliance for the Betterment of Hong Kong (DAB), which lost heavily to the immensely popular pro-democracy Democratic Party in legislative elections in 1995.
The DAB holds six seats in the elected 60-member Legislature but has scored nine seats in a provisional legislature which China plans to install on July 1 in place of the current chamber. The new body is packed with pro-China party members.
BROTHER, SISTER JAILED DURING RIOTS
Tsang recently wrote a graphic account of his early life including his involvement in the political mayhem that rocked Hong Kong during China's Cultural Revolution.
"When the 1967 riots broke out I was already a committed Marxist and I was in total sympathy with the workers who were only protecting themselves against the oppressive colonial government of the time," Tsang wrote.
"I was deeply affected by the dramatic events of '67. My brother, aged 18, was arrested during the riot and locked up in Stanley Prison for two years, and my sister was imprisoned for a month, aged only 15. Don't talk to me about human rights."
"My experiences drove me more to the other side. I worshipped Mao Zedong and he became my idol."
Tsang made secret visits to China via Macau during those years and developed contacts on the mainland. He then abandoned a plan to study in the United States and went to work instead in the leftwing school where he is now principal.
MAO'S DEATH DIMS YOUTHFUL REVOLUTIONARY SPARK
But the spark of revolutionary youth dimmed when Mao died and his associates were arrested in 1976.
"I and my colleagues at the school felt very cheated after the fall of the Gang of Four...The Mao craze died down."
But patriotic leftwing feeling was rekindled as China opened up in recent years, and as interest grew in the approaching return of Hong Kong to the motherland.
The 1989 Tiananmen square pro-democracy protests in China drew one million sympathisers on to the streets in Hong Kong.
Tsang joined in the protests against the Chinese government, "but I still believed we could maintain a dialogue with the Chinese authorities."
TIANANMEN TURNING POINT
It was in the wake of Tiananmen that Tsang and colleagues decided to form his political party, one which would help promote "one country two systems", without hostility to China.
He has shoved his Marxist-Leninism onto the backburner and argues China's ongoing remaking of itself and its transformation into a market economy bode well for Hong Kong.
"I cannot see any reason to be pessimistic about Hong Kong's future. We can't convert the pessimists, but we can let history prove itself."
