Anti-Japanese sentiment is surfacing in Hong Kong, fuelled by a row over a group of South China Sea islands and a wave of nationalist feeling in China.
Activists and World War Two survivors with bitter memories of atrocities committed by Japan have staged a spate of anti-Japanese protests over the past month in the British colony, set to revert to Chinese sovereignty next July 1.
The latest protest on Friday highlighted how anger against Japan is uniting Chinese in Hong Kong, China and Taiwan -- pulling together even groups whose political differences usually keep them at loggerheads with each other.
For the first time, China's mission in Hong Kong opened its doors to its arch-foes the Democratic Party, who handed over a petition calling for Beijing to take action against Japan. The democrats arrived at the door soon after a pro-Beijing group.
Anti-Japanese editorials appeared in nearly all Hong Kong newspapers on Friday attacking Japan's claim to the Diaoyu Islands, which are also claimed by Beijing and Taipei.
Anti-Japanese demonstrations have become practically a daily occurrence, and local activists are trying to organise a ship to take them to the islands next month to demolish a lighthouse and war memorial erected by Japanese rightists.
The English-language Hong Kong Standard lauded the activists' "courage, determination and optimism."
"Their cause is a just one. These islands have been Chinese territory since 1534," it said.
On Thursday, demonstrators handed over a protest note at the Japanese consulate, but Consul-General Hideaki Ueda said they were making a mountain out of a molehill.
"I sincerely hope that the concerned people do not make this issue an artificially big issue," Ueda said.
He said Japan's navy would take the "necessary measures" to halt anybody trying to land on the islands, which Japan calls the Senkakus.
The Chinese-language Ming Pao, recalling Japan's past imperialism, said China's history was a stark reminder that tolerating invasion only encouraged worse aggression.
"If Japan did not change its attitude on the islands, it would become the biggest threat to the security of Asia in the 21st Century," the paper said.
A Taiwan group said on Thursday that they would sail a private fishing boat to the islands, while 31 Chinese journalists in Beijing demanded Tokyo tear down the lighthouse.
But the Hong Kong Economic Journal, published in Chinese, said Hong Kong people showed more patriotic fervour on the issue than the communist government in Beijing, which it said offered only rhetorical condemnation.
"It is clear China has no intention of taking any action against Japan to reassert its sovereignty over the islands, as this might jeopardise vital Japanese investment," it said.
Other newspapers recently published exhortations to China to send in its navy to assert sovereignty over the islands.
Over the past few months, several articles also appeared in Hong Kong media recalling Japan's World War Two occupation of Hong Kong and war atrocities committed by Japanese imperial forces against the Chinese population on the mainland.
The prospect of British-ruled Hong Kong returning to China next year and Portuguese-run Macau two years later is a point of patriotic pride on the mainland. Hong Kong people talk of this with pride, too, despite some anxiety about becoming subjects of communist Beijing.
