Political controversy struck Hong Kong on Thursday when future leader Tung Chee-hwa lashed out at critics who tarnished Hong Kong's image, and Britain attacked China's plans to roll back democracy and human rights.
"Recently, some well-known people, including the Democratic Party, have blackened the reputation of Hong Kong overseas... giving the impression that Hong Kong is collapsing," Tung said.
"Is there the need to go abroad to blacken the name of Hong Kong? Is there the need for foreigners to come to Hong Kong and tell us, the Hong Kong people, what to do in the future?" Tung told reporters as he opened offices that will be his base until Britain hands the colony back to China at midnight on June 30.
The former shipping magnate's attack on those who "talk down" Hong Kong and frighten investors was directed primarily against Martin Lee, leader of the popular Democratic Party, which is campaigning against a new legislature appointed by China.
Lee, rounding off a 10-city tour of Europe, told Hong Kong radio after hearing Tung's remarks that Tung must do more to defend the territory of 6.3 million people against Beijing's Communist rulers.
"We want Mr Tung to change the unhappy fate that awaits Hong Kong...talk to the Chinese leaders, get them to wind up that appointed illegal legislature.
"Then our worries will be over and overseas investors will be very happy to come to Hong Kong and invest more," Lee said.
Tung said there were different views about the "need for balance between individual rights and order in society".
"But in future, I hope our friends will sit down here in Hong Kong and talk things through," said the post-colonial "Chief Executive", who was appointed by a China-controlled committee.
British Foreign Secretary Malcolm Rifkind, who is in Singapore for talks with Chinese Foreign Minister Qian Qichen and will visit Hong Kong this weekend, again condemned Beijing's plan to install a "provisional legislature" in place of Hong Kong's elected Legislative Council on July 1.
He said it clashed with a 1984 handover treaty and with the constitution covering Hong Kong's handover.
"We believe the establishment of the provisional legislature certainly goes against the spirit and indeed may be a severe breach of the Joint Declaration and the Basic Law."
The European Union's envoy in Hong Kong said negative press coverage of Hong Kong had created a misconceived "doom and gloom" scenario.
"This is a public relations disaster," envoy Etienne Reuter told reporters. "They believe that after July 1 there will be no freedoms and human rights in Hong Kong."
The president of the shadow legislature, Rita Fan, sought to reassure Hong Kong people this week they had nothing to fear when the territory becomes a "Special Administrative Region" of China. Under the handover treaty, China has promised wide-ranging autonomy and 50 more years of freewheeling capitalism.
"To be fair to ourselves we should give ourselves a chance and stay put and see what happens," Fan told Reuters.
"I personally am very confident and convinced that we will have our lifestyle and our freedom as we have enjoyed all these years," she said.
Tung said that in the next few days he would announce his team of top officials to head various policy branches, the equivalent of ministers in the government of a country.
Speculation is intense on who will be kept from the present government. Tung has already said he will retain the head of the administration, Chief Secretary Anson Chan, a fellow-Shanghainese, who has agreed to stay on.
But even after he has cobbled together a government-in-waiting, he faces enormous political challenges.
His advisory cabinet, the Executive Council, which will meet in the offices he opened on Thursday, has been attacked by democrats as too pro-Beijing, and he is constantly assailed for unswervingly echoing China's autocratic, anti-democratic views.
But on a more positive note, a Sino-British negotiating team hammering out details of the sovereignty transfer, announced on Thursday they were zeroing in on an accord on a 1997/98 budget for Hong Kong that would straddle the handover.
