Tung Chee-hwa, Hong Kong's chief executive-designate, is a Confucian who loves to preach on the need for harmony and order as he shepherds this bustling capitalist territory from British to Chinese rule.
On Thursday he showed off his new offices, which boast a soothing view over a waterfall tumbling from the lush green tropical slopes of Hong Kong Park.
The seventh floor suite will be his base at least until the Union Jack is furled and China's red flag hoisted at midnight on June 30, marking the end of more than 150 years of colonial rule.
He won't be able to practise his Chinese "tai chi" exercises on the rooftop as he once did at his offices at the Orient Overseas shipping company, where he quit as chairman last year in order to become Hong Kong's future leader.
But the view should help when he meditates on the growing political rifts and the anxiety about lost freedoms that are prefacing the transfer of sovereignty.
As he looks out of the window he will be facing east and conveniently turning his back on Government House, seat of the departing British Governor Chris Patten.
Mobbed by journalists as he put his offices on display, Tung lambasted critics, particularly the popular Democratic Party, who have been lobbying the West against China's plans to roll back Hong Kong's democracy and human rights.
"There are people from Hong Kong including the Democratic Party who are overseas talking down Hong Kong as though the world will come to an end here," Tung said, referring to a current European tour by Democrat leader Martin Lee.
The quarrel underlined the political tension that Tung has to contend with in his new office in the coming months as Hong Kong prepares to become a Special Administrative Region of China.
The skyscraper rises in a prime commercial district in one of the world's most expensive cities, and his neighbours in the building include Hong Kong's Futures Exchange and a clutch of big name international brokerage houses.
Staff from some of these companies told reporters on Thursday they did not welcome the likely disturbance whenever Hong Kong's news hounds pour into Tung's 11th floor press centre. "That's not what we expect to put up with when we pay these high rents," one executive said.
Tung, 59, has already signalled he does not intend to move into Government House, a luxurious mansion with a rich history, citing bad "fung shui", Chinese parlance for an inauspicious relationship with nature but a remark interpreted by many in Hong Kong as an oblique attack on British rule.
Visitors to Tung's office will find a bright welcome in a reception area with "People's Republic of China SAR Chief Executive's Office" in gold lettering on the wall, topped in red with Hong Kong's new emblem, the tropical bauhinia flower.
His advisory cabinet, the Executive Council, which he has filled with politicians and businessmen approved by Beijing, will meet in an adjacent conference room around a long oval table, resembling the board room of a blue chip company.
