British Foreign Secretary Malcolm Rifkind flies into a political quarrel this weekend over the future of Hong Kong's democratic elections and human rights laws, which China plans to roll back after taking over in July.
Tempers flared this week as Tung Chee-hwa, Hong Kong's future leader appointed by China, attacked the territory's Democratic Party, which he said had blackened Hong Kong's name by spreading doomsday forecasts.
Rifkind is due to arrive on Saturday night for what may be his last visit before Britain hands the territory back to China. He will meet Tung and lawmakers during his three days in the colony, placing himself in the crossfire but possibly taking sides versus Tung.
Public opinion has been turning against Tung due to his increasingly authoritarian policy statements.
Though highly popular immediately after his December appointment, a poll last week showed his approval rating had shrunk to 58.5 percent from 64.6 percent a month earlier, falling behind colonial Governor Chris Patten, who scored 59.1 percent.
"There has been a palpable shift in the public mood," the Far Eastern Economic Review noted in an editorial.
"Not only is there public disquiet and growing unease about him in the public service, but doubts are now simmering among foreign businessmen based in Hong Kong about the way the place is to be run from July," said the Economist magazine.
"This is just the beginning. The way things are going, Tung Chee-hwa and his government-in-waiting will be running out of popularity long before July 1," pro-democracy lawmaker Margaret Ng wrote in a newspaper column on Friday.
"Mr Tung's ship of state is charting a decidedly retrogressive course," she wrote. "Confidence may yet be restored provided this paranoia about democracy is put aside."
Tung's recent endorsement of a Beijing-backed move to dilute civil rights freedoms in Hong Kong was likely to incite protests, said political analyst Andy Ho. "Some back-peddling on the part of Mr Tung...may well be the best dose of medicine to defuse current political tension."
In Singapore on Thursday, Rifkind lashed out at China's plans to install an appointed legislature in place of the elected Legco, and the steps to whittle down civil liberties.
"People have enjoyed a wide range of basic political rights. Any diminution of these rights will...have significant consequences for the confidence in the territory and for its economic success," Rifkind said.
Last year British officials, praising Tung's integrity, viewed him as a benign choice to lead the bustling capitalist territory of 6.3 million people and hoped he would form a "dream team" with popular incumbent civil service chief Anson Chan.
"But now, with all his support for authoritarian changes, they must be wondering, almost aloud, if Mr Tung isn't going to be a nightmare," a political analyst said.
Tung's attacks on Democratic Party leader Martin Lee provoked critical editorials in Hong Kong daily newspapers.
The independent Ming Pao said Lee, on a tour of Europe to lobby for support against China's planned rollback of Hong Kong freedoms, had been forced to go to the West for support.
It said Tung had ostracised Lee's party -- Hong Kong's most popular -- and that if he didn't want Democrats to voice their views abroad, he should include them in more of the decision-making on the territory's future.
The popular Apple Daily said Tung was trying to mimic authoritarian Singapore Senior Minister Lee Kuan Yew and it asked why Tung was so afraid of criticism.
But the daily Wen Wei Po, a local mouthpiece for Beijing's Communist Party, applauded Tung and said freedom of speech should not extend to opinions that harm Hong Kong's interests.
