Its tough line unshaken by the death of leader Deng Xiaoping, China pressed ahead on Monday with a controversial plan to roll back political freedoms in Hong Kong, drawing a rebuke from colonial Governor Chris Patten.
Deng, who died last week, was the architect of the "one country two systems" formula for the conversion of Hong Kong into a special, autonomous capitalist zone of China when British rule ends at midnight on June 30.
Despite widespread misgivings about China in this bustling territory of 6.4 million people, thousands of residents paid their respects to Deng for the fourth day on Monday in a mourning ceremony at a shrine inside China's official mission.
On Sunday night, China's parliament approved a plan to throw out or amend a clutch of Hong Kong laws, including those that provide for democratic elections and protect civil liberties.
The plan trims back the bill of rights, the law on forming political parties and another on free association which takes a liberal approach to public protests and demonstrations.
The laws were part of London's effort to sow the seeds of democracy in the twilight of more than 150 years of British rule. China has accused Britain of violating the 1984 Sino-British handover treaty.
Patten accused China's National People's Congress of turning a deaf ear to the wishes of most Hong Kong people.
"(Sunday's decision) casts doubt on the freedoms and autonomy which have been promised to Hong Kong and the rule of law on which they are based... It will cause legal confusion and invite legal challenge," Patten said.
"It is already crystal clear that what the community wants to see is the preservation of Hong Kong's current civil liberties..."
Sunday's decision was also attacked by Hong Kong's Democratic Party, the largest in the territory's legislature.
"China's latest move means the die is now very much cast," a spokesman for the party told Reuters.
"China has shown it is not going to respect the will of Hong Kong people. The NPC is a political body making a decision that will remake Hong Kong in blatant breach of handover agreements which say Hong Kong's laws shall remain unchanged."
He said the move violated the internationally registered 1984 Sino-British handover treaty, called the Joint Declaration, and Hong Kong's future constitution, the Basic Law.
Beijing's move to crimp basic freedoms flies in the face of official protests by Britain.
London has challenged China to go to the World Court to seek a ruling on the legality of China's plan to replace Hong Kong's elected Legco with an appointed provisional legislature.
In a related development, a leading Hong Kong member of the Preparatory Committee on the handover said Hong Kong would not be allowed to amend new election rules that his panel was preparing for the territory.
Neither Hong Kong's leader-in-waiting, Tung Chee-hwa, the provisional legislature, nor the post-colonial government, could change the rules, Lau Siu-kai said.
Slightly over half of Preparatory Committee members are from Hong Kong and the rest are from the mainland. Its decisions generally echo policy statements by senior Beijing officials.
The rules would govern the first election of a long-term legislature some time in 1998 to replace a provisional body that China has appointed to make laws from July 1.
