China is pressing ahead with a controversial plan to roll back civil rights and democracy in Hong Kong, with its tough line on the territory unshaken by the death of leader Deng Xiaoping.
Deng, who died last week, was the architect of the "one country two systems" formula for the conversion of Hong Kong into a special, autonomous capitalist zone of China when British rule ends at midnight on June 30.
Despite widespread misgivings about China in this bustling territory of 6.4 million people, thousands of residents paid respects to Deng for the fourth day on Monday in a mourning ceremony at China's official mission.
On Sunday night, China's parliament approved a plan to throw out or amend a clutch of Hong Kong laws, including those that provide for democratic elections and protect civil liberties.
The plan trims back a bill of rights, a law on forming political parties and another on free association which takes a liberal approach to public protests and demonstrations.
The laws were part of London's effort to create a democratic framework in Hong Kong in the twilight of more than 150 years of British rule.
Beijing has justified its onslaught against Hong Kong's fledgling democracy by accusing Britain of treaty violations with Hong Kong's recent democratic reforms.
"China's latest move means the die is now very much cast," a spokesman for the Hong Kong Democratic Party told Reuters in reference to the National People's Congress's (NPC) Sunday decision.
"China has shown it is not going to respect the will of Hong Kong people. The NPC is a political body making a decision that will remake Hong Kong in blatant breach of handover agreements which say Hong Kong's laws shall remain unchanged."
He said the move violated both the internationally registered 1984 Sino-British handover treaty, known as the Joint Declaration, as well as Hong Kong's future constitution, the Basic Law.
Beijing's move to crimp basic freedoms flies in the face of official protests by Britain.
London has challenged China to go to the World Court to seek a ruling on the legality of Beijing's plan to replace Hong Kong's elected Legislative Council with an appointed provisional legislature.
In a related development, a leading Hong Kong member of the Preparatory Committee on the handover told reporters Hong Kong would not be allowed to amend new election rules that the panel was preparing for the territory.
Neither Hong Kong's leader-in-waiting, Tung Chee-hwa, the provisional legislature, nor the post-colonial government, could change the rules, Lau Siu-kai said.
Slightly over half of Preparatory Committee members are from Hong Kong and the rest are from the mainland. Its decisions generally echo policy statements by senior Beijing officials.
The rules would govern the first election of a long-term legislature some time in 1998 to replace a provisional body that China has appointed to make laws from July 1.
It had not been clear how much say Hong Kong people would have in setting the rules.
A Hong Kong business leader and pro-China politician set to join Tung's Executive Council said the cabinet would play a much greater role in policy making than it had done under outgoing colonial Governor Chris Patten.
But the businessman, Henry Tang, head of the Federation of Hong Kong Industries, also said he expected no big policy changes under Tung, a Shanghai-born shipping billionaire.
