The death of Chinese leader Deng Xiaoping has had an impact in Hong Kong unseen since the 1976 passing of Mao Zedong, founder of communist China.
But it pales in comparison to the outpouring of grief that followed Mao's death, long-term residents say.
An estimated 50,000 people have visited China's official mission in Hong Kong, the Xinhua news agency building, to pay their respects at a Deng shrine in the five days since the Chinese patriarch's death last Wednesday.
Some segments of the British-ruled community of 6.4 million people also saluted Deng with gestures of mourning at the moment of his official Beijing funeral on Tuesday.
Ships blasted their horns, buses trailed black ribbons, train stations broadcast dirges, flags flew at half mast, and schoolchildren stood at attention in respectful silence.
Deng, purged by Mao before becoming China's unquestioned leader in 1978, orchestrated China's opening to the West and its economic reforms, as well as Beijing's blueprint for taking back Hong Kong from Britain on July 1.
Mao died in 1976 after a rule marked by numerous purges of the communist leadership and revolutionary upheavals climaxing in his disastrous 1966-76 Cultural Revolution.
Still, hundreds of thousands in Hong Kong mourned his passing, long-term residents said.
"With Mao, huge numbers of people poured into a hall crying. It was very mournful," said Hong Kong politician Elsie Tu.
"It brought tears to our eyes as we felt the end of an era," said the 83-year-old Tu, a former missionary in China.
Long-term resident and former China-watcher John Dolfin said the turnout for Mao was massive and the salutes ear-splitting.
"The lines curled three abreast around the Bank of China building, and all through the park. There must have been thousands in the line at any given time. It took an hour and a half to get in," said Dolfin.
"The line was much smaller for Deng. It was very quick. And there wasn't much emotion," Dolfin said.
"For Mao every boat in the harbour stopped and blew their whistles. It was deafening. But today the harbour was virtually empty when the whistles were blown.
"Chairman Mao very much still held authority when he died, unlike Deng, who frankly was not really the 'paramount leader' for a number of years and held no official positions of power when he died," Dolfin said.
Szeto Wah, a pro-democracy politician and critic of Beijing, recalled Mao's mammoth personality cult.
"The reaction for Mao was much stronger than for Deng because he was like a god. It was like the death of a god. All of China felt helpless," said Szeto.
"People went to mourn Mao at the Bank of China building. The atmosphere was very grievous but also very nervous because the Cultural Revolution had not yet finished," he said. "An important difference was that there had not been any news about Mao's condition, whereas Deng's condition has been frequently reported before he died."
Arthur Hacker, a long-term Hong Kong resident and former government information officer, recalled 1976.
"They dismantled the enormous sign on the top of the Bank of China building which said 'Chairman Mao Lives Forever'," he said.
"Everybody went to the Bank of China, opposite the old cricket club. Xinhua was very invisible in those days," Hacker said. "There were wreaths all over the bank's wall, and queues of people. There were red flags all over the place."
