China's People's Liberation Army (PLA) plans to use its presence in Hong Kong after Britain pulls out as a showcase to shed the bad image it acquired in the 1989 anti-democracy crackdown in Beijing's Tiananmen Square.
The future Hong Kong garrison commander Major-General Liu Zhenwu revealed the plan in a recent conversation with British commander Major-General Bryan Dutton, who will hand the defence of Hong Kong to the PLA at midnight on June 30, British armed forces spokesman Roger Goodwin told Reuters on Wednesday.
Liu and Dutton have been in contact over the handover of defence responsibilities linked to the sovereignty change, which will end more than 150 years of British colonial rule.
"What he said to Bryan Dutton was, 'Have you heard of Tiananmen Square?' Bryan Dutton admitted, yes, he had. And General Liu went on to say, 'Well, that this is the image that the world has of us, it is not a correct image of the PLA today'," Goodwin said.
Hong Kong is reverting to China under a "one country, two systems" formula designed by Chinese paramount leader Deng Xiaoping, who died a week ago.
The arrangement, chipped into a 1984 treaty with Britain, allows Hong Kong to keep its free-wheeling capitalist system for the next 50 years.
Goodwin said General Liu went on to tell Dutton, "We wish to change the image, and we see Hong Kong as the opportunity to do so because Hong Kong is a window on the world".
"This is positive stuff," Goodwin said of the discussions.
But Goodwin, speaking ahead of a visit to Hong Kong by British Defence Secretary Michael Portillo, cautioned it would be stretching things to interpret Liu's remarks as an admission that the PLA did wrong in causing the large number of deaths in and around Tiananmen Square in June 1989.
"There was no suggestion of that at all," Goodwin said.
It is unclear how many PLA troops Beijing will station in Hong Kong, although China has signalled it may deploy as many as the British garrison had at peak strength in the 1980s -- about 10,000 personnel from all branches of the armed services.
There have been jittery reactions to the imminent presence of the PLA among Hong Kong's 6.4 million people, whose impressions of the Chinese army are indelibly marked with the images of the bloodshed in Tiananmen eight years ago.
At that time, one million Hong Kong people poured onto the streets to protest against the crackdown and support the student-led democracy movement in China.
Many in Hong Kong, citing the PLA's involvement in business on the mainland and abroad, have also voiced concerns that the PLA would get involved in corrupt activities in Hong Kong and that its troops will be above the law.
China, however, has been at pains over the past year to portray the future garrison as a model of high morality, including inviting journalists to tour the unit's training base across the border in Shenzhen.
Dutton had revealed the content of his conversation with General Liu to a group of visiting British reporters to show that the PLA had good intentions in Hong Kong, Goodwin said.
"The reason Bryan Dutton talks about that particular exchange is to demonstrate that the PLA generally do want to make it work in Hong Kong," he said. "They have created a corps d'elite. They are specially selecting people for the garrison."
