Moslem unrest in its far-west region does not augur an ethnic breakup of China similar to that which befell the Soviet Union or Yugoslavia, but more violence is possible and Beijing will respond in kind, China experts say.
Urumqi, capital of China's Xinjiang province, was hit on Tuesday by three bus bombs that killed at least four people and were believed to have been carried out by Moslem separatists.
Xinjiang is populated by Moslem minority groups such as the Uighurs.
The bloodshed came on the same day China held the funeral of its leader Deng Xiaoping and just two weeks after at least 10 people were killed and hundreds of Moslems arrested in bloody riots in the Xinjiang border town of Yining.
On Thursday, China's communist government responded to the bombings by ordering controls on explosives. China had tightened curbs in the region last year after a spate of assassinations.
"There's not much you can do about it... Even with a very heightened police protection, as seen, for example, from Israel, if someone wants to smuggle a bomb onto a bus, they are going to be able to do it," American academic Barry Sautman told Reuters.
Sautman, an expert on Chinese politics and ethnic relations at the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, said: "I think there will continue to be very heavy use of armed force against people who engage in pro-independence activity. They'll go to prison or they'll be killed. The Chinese army is a very large one, so it can bring a great deal of force to bear."
But most experts believe Moslem separatism in Xinjiang does not pose a serious threat to China's territorial integrity.
"Whether it can lead to a fragmentation of the state and a breakdown like the Soviet Union is still not clear," said Don McMillen, an expert on Chinese politics and ethnic problems from Australia's South Queensland University.
"I doubt the groups that would be interested in creating independent states are coordinated enough. They tend to have differing opinions, factional differences, that have prevented them cooperating with each other," McMillen told Reuters.
He said neighbouring Moslem states in central Asia were also not prone to back the Xinjiang separatists.
"The governments of the Central Asian states are officially unwilling to provide support for such activity, although there is a fair bit of sentiment in these states' leaderships for letting these people do their thing," McMillen said.
Sautman said travelers returning from Xinjiang spoke of great unease among ethnic Chinese there.
But he said a breakup was unlikely because many Moslems backed China's ethnic policies, the Chinese army was ready to crush rebellions, local leaderships were loyal to Beijing, and most countries would not sympathise with the separatists.
"I don't think there's an increased threat of the breakup of China along ethnic lines, despite the fact that there is a (leadership) transition going on," Sautman said.
"They've carried out...preferential policies. They carry out positive discrimination to attract the best and brightest among minorities to work for the government or improve their economic opportunities. This has actually had some effect," he said.
"Plus, the government is very well prepared in terms of repressive force against anyone who would try to split off parts of China, such as Xinjiang or Tibet.
"There are certainly tens of thousands of soldiers of the People's Liberation Army in these border areas," Sautman said.
"That's quite a different situation than has existed in some other parts of the world where countries have splintered along ethnic lines," he said.
Leaders in the Soviet republics had big differences with Moscow before the breakup, experts also noted. "That is not the case in China. So I think it is very much less likely that China will disintegrate along ethnic lines," one expert said.
He said the separatists were a small minority of Xinjiang's Moslem population. "The bulk of the Moslems of China consider themselves to be Chinese."
