A Hong Kong legislator will present the government on Wednesday with a demand to press China to clarify the role of the Communist Party in Hong Kong after this year's handover.
The question of Communist Party activity, a taboo subject for decades, would be raised at a session on Wednesday of the Legislative Council by independent democrat Christine Loh.
Loh's question, published in advance by the council, will ask the government to press Beijing and Hong Kong's leader-to-be Tung Chee-hwa on how the party will be represented, what its role will be, what channels of communication it will have with the Tung government, and the limits on this liaison.
Loh wrote in an article supporting her latest move that she hoped to break down the "wall of silence" about the party.
"Past efforts to broach the subject publicly have been greeted not only with stony official silence from the Hong Kong government, but with dismay and anger in other quarters that sometimes verged on the hysterical," she said.
"How can we possibly still pretend that the Chinese Communist Party doesn't matter in Hong Kong? The most dire speculation is that it will operate in Hong Kong after 1997 much as it does in China," she said. "Such political arrangements would be disastrous."
The territory is set to revert to China on July 1 after a century and a half as a British colony. When the flag changes, it is to become a highly autonomous Special Administrative Region (SAR) of China, with its own distinct capitalist system.
But Beijing's plans to slash civil liberties and democracy, and the constant involvement of Chinese government officials in crafting the incoming government, have cast doubts on this autonomy and left many in Hong Kong fearing communist-style controls.
The British, Chinese and Hong Kong governments have largely avoided discussing the presence in Hong Kong of the ruling Chinese Communist Party, which took power in China in 1949.
It is an open secret that party authority is represented by the de facto Chinese embassy, the Xinhua News Agency branch, headed by senior Communist official, Zhou Nan, effectively the party's "First Secretary" in the territory.
The party's operation working out of the Xinhua office is known as the Hong Kong and Macau Work Committee.
But the party has operated in an underground way for decades. Its cells have been linked to anti-British riots in the 1960s during China's radical Cultural Revolution.
Tung said last year he would legalise the Communist Party after he becomes the territory's chief executive on July 1, if asked to do so, equating it with any other political party.
The remark raised eyebrows among Hong Kong's 6.4 million people because the party in China wields absolute power and permeates every layer of civil and military organisation.
So far, China has indicated Beijing's most senior officials in Hong Kong will be a top diplomat, expected to be China's current ambassador in London, Jiang Enzhu, and the garrison commander, General Liu Zhenwu.
