Britain and China moved ahead on Wednesday to resolve outstanding details of Beijing's recovery of sovereignty over Hong Kong this year.
Just a day after they had agreed on a budget to straddle the handover, the two sides announced a breakthrough allowing Hong Kong a free hand to organise media coverage of the historic event on June 30 without China's interference.
And Britain's chief diplomatic negotiator said he thought there would soon be an agreement on one of the last burning issues -- the right of abode in the territory.
The latest progress comes just four months before Britain ends a century and a half of colonial rule and hands the territory of 6.4 million people back to communist-ruled China.
But a possible political bombshell lurked in the background as a prominent pro-democracy legislator prepared to ask the government to press China on the role of the Chinese Communist Party in Hong Kong after the change of flag.
On the media accord in the Sino-British Joint Liaison Group (JLG), Britain's negotiator Hugh Davies said: "We very much look forward to as many as possible of the international press, the local press being interested in participating and recording and reporting on the handover ceremony."
Human rights and democracy activists had voiced fears that China would not consent to a media invasion without the right to vet which journalists come to the event.
"The two sides have agreed to entrust the Hong Kong government to receive and process applications from journalists, as well as handle and arrange other matters relating to media coverage of the handover ceremony," the two sides said.
"There will be no criteria applied...provided you don't turn out to be a terrorist," Davies told reporters.
It was the second positive turn in the JLG talks in as many days. On Tuesday Britain and China struck a deal on Hong Kong's 1997/98 fiscal year, starting April 1 and covering the handover year. Finance Secretary Donald Tsang will read the budget to the legislature on March 12.
"We are convinced it will be welcomed by society," said Chinese representative Chen Zuo'er, adding that the budget would stick to Hong Kong's "prudent and moderate" tradition.
Davies said after that deal that he was hopeful a deal could soon be done on right of abode, covering who would have residence rights in Hong Kong and on what terms.
"I hope major progress can be made on those matters which are not yet resolved," his Chinese counterpart Zhao Juhua said. The two sides also still have to work out an agreement on details of the People's Liberation Army garrison that China plans to install in Hong Kong, as well as a guest list for the handover ceremony, and a string of air services agreements.
Meanwhile, Hong Kong's post-colonial leader-to-be Tung Chee-hwa saw his fortunes climb in the opinion polls as the latest survey showed more than three quarters of people felt confident he would do a good job as Hong Kong's Chief Executive.
But Tung remained under pressure from Hong Kong critics and foreign governments concerned about his support for Beijing's plan to roll back democratic freedoms in the territory.
The United States, European parliament members, as well as newsaper editorial writer, have urged Tung and China this week to realise that political and economic freedoms go hand in hand, and that a cut in basic rights could hurt the economy.
A group called the United Front Against the Provisional Legislature, on Wednesday condemned the opening of a liaison office for the shadow legislature that China plans to install on July 1, dissolving the present elected Legislative Council. It urged the Hong Kong government to seek a court injunction against the move.
