Pro-Beijing politicians have defeated two motions in Hong Kong's legislature that threatened to exert new pressure on China over human rights and the future role of the Communist Party after Britain quits the territory.
The China camp defeated Wednesday night's motion brought by pro-democracy legislator Christine Loh, who urged the Hong Kong government to press China on the role of the Communist Party after Beijing takes back the territory from Britain on July 1.
Legislative Council (Legco) Chairman Andrew Wong, who recently defected to the China camp departing from a tradition of house speaker neutrality, broke a 25-25 tie by casting a decisive vote in favour of the status quo.
Loh had sought clarification on how the Chinese party would be represented, what its role would be, what channels of communication it would have with post-colonial leader Tung Chee-hwa and the limits on this liaison.
"The official silence that envelops the Chinese Communist Party in Hong Kong is a colonial relic," she said.
"But as the colonial era ends, and we prepare to reintegrate this society into China, how can we possibly still pretend the Communist Party does not exist and does not matter in Hong Kong?" Loh told Legco.
"The greater the transparency of the activities of the party, the better," argued Anthony Cheung of the Democratic Party, supporting the motion.
"The Communist Party has no special status in Hong Kong. It's not necessary to seek clarification," countered Ip Kwok-him of a pro-China alliance.
It is an open secret that party authority is represented by the de facto Chinese embassy, the Xinhua News Agency branch, headed by the hawkish senior Communist official Zhou Nan, who is effectively the party's "First Secretary" in the territory.
Xinhua's deputy director Zheng Guoxiong told reporters on Wednesday Xinhua would still exist after the handover, with "adjustments to some functions". He gave no further details.
A separate Legco motion brought by the Democratic Party's John Tse, urging China to sign on to two key international human rights pacts, was also defeated on Wednesday night by 26 votes to 24.
Tse had argued that Beijing should guarantee people in Hong Kong and China the rights covered by the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.
"The people of Hong Kong's hearts will be at ease over their human rights protection if China enters into these international treaties," Tse said.
But opponents said the chamber had no right to meddle in China's affairs. China has said it is considering signing the covenants, which would allow international monitoring.
Over the past year many independents in Legco have fallen in behind the pro-Beijing camp, making it harder for the pro-democracy lobby to launch anti-Beijing initiatives.
The China camp hold dual membership in a shadow legislature that China has appointed to replace the elected Legco on July 1.
China and Britain progressed this week on remaining details of the flag change by announcing a deal that Hong Kong could freely organise media coverage of the event, ending fears that China would restrict media access, and a deal on the budget.
But China and Tung remain under pressure from local critics and foreign governments concerned about Beijing's plan to roll back the democratic freedoms of Hong Kong's 6.4 million people.
