World bankers and economic chiefs held Hong Kong up as a financial showcase with a rosy future on Friday but a clash of views between Britain and China over democracy augured a politically bumpy ride.
Finance ministers and central bankers gathered in the glitzy Grand Hyatt Hotel beside Hong Kong's famed "Fragrant Harbour", boosting the morale of the financial sector less than four months before China takes over the British-ruled territory.
At the same time, tearful colonial expatriates were about to set sail or were already on their way home on two of the world's greatest cruise liners, the QE2 and the Oriana, a dramatic reminder that an era is ending and that Hong Kong itself will soon be sailing in uncharted waters.
China is taking back the territory of 6.4 million people, which has prospered under the British flag for more than 150 years, at midnight on June 30.
China, in the 1984 Sino-British Joint Declaration, promised the outpost great autonomy and a free rein to capitalism -- hailed by the financial community as a harbinger of stability and further prosperity.
But much of that stability depends in large measure on the outcome of clashing views over how much democracy there should be. China plans to scrap -- at least temporarily -- Hong Kong's elected legislature and roll back civil liberties.
The titans of the financial world were treated to a taste of the future on Friday, as democracy activists protested outside the nearby police headquarters to demand prosecution of a pro-China politician for setting up an "illegal" office.
And in Beijing, China's foreign minister issued a snub to Britain, dismissing London's opposition to a plan to disband Hong Kong's legislature, saying this would not affect the smooth transfer of power.
International Monetary Fund (IMF) chief Michel Camdessus voiced confidence that Hong Kong, one of the world's richest cities, would keep its financial autonomy under Chinese rule.
Camdessus held up Hong Kong as a shining example of fiscal success thanks to prudent monetary and exchange rate policy.
He told the IMF-Hong Kong Monetary Authority conference China had a stake in preserving that success.
"History, geographic location, openness in trade and importance as a financial centre all point to its critical interest in continued global integration, an interest that is shared in China, in the region and in the rest of the world," he said.
But colonial Governor Chris Patten warned that the Hong Kong miracle was due to increasingly democratic government, and that freedom should not be tampered with.
"Democracy, as promised and pledged in the Joint Declaration and in the Basic Law (mini constitution), has taken root and started to flourish here. This has strongly underpinned Hong Kong's economic prosperity and Hong Kong's social stability," Patten said.
China's central bank governor Dai Xianglong took a different view. Hong Kong's prosperity depended on China.
"As China moves ahead in its modernisation drive, the prosperity of Hong Kong will be even more secure," he said.
Pledging that London would keep a close eye on basic freedoms in Hong Kong after the handover, Britain's Chancellor of the Exchequer Kenneth Clarke said Hong Kong's prosperity hinged on the survival of its British-based rule of law, wise economic policies and transparent government.
"As a signatory of the Joint Declaration, we will continue to take a close interest in ensuring that Hong Kong's economic achievements, and the rights and freedoms which underpin them are fully preserved," he said.
Qian signalled China would not budge from its plan to install a legislature in place of the elected Legco and said foreign countries should not meddle in post-colonial Hong Kong.
"If they (British authorities) continue to voice their opposition to the operation of the provisional Legislative Council I don't think it will have any impact on the smooth transition of Hong Kong," he said.
"No foreign country has the right to interfere in the affairs of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region."
Most Hong Kong expatriates leaving on the cruise liners, cutting careers short due to "localisation" of top government jobs, said they did not expect to be coming back.
"There will be tears at leaving my second home," said senior law draftsman Royston Griffey, who helped draft Patten's democratic reforms. "But I will probably wave a fist at the government for treating an overseas officer so disgracefully."
"It's like leaving an old friend when you are not sure when you are going to see them again," said former welfare director Ian Strachan.
"Hong Kong has been such an important part of my life."
