A low-profile shipping tycoon, tipped as Beijing's favourite to govern Hong Kong after it returns to China in 1997, took an apparent step on Tuesday to smooth the way for his widely expected leadership bid.
Magnate Tung Chee-hwa's Orient Overseas (International) Ltd posted a detailed legal notice in Hong Kong papers announcing it was seeking shareholder approval for deals linked to companies controlled by Tung's brother-in-law.
Hong Kong's business press pounced on the announcement, declaring it a clearing of the decks before Tung can publicly step into the leadership contest.
The disclosures were "probably Tung's final preparation for his candidature for the post of Chief Executive," the Hong Kong Economic Journal said.
Analysts writing for the journal and the Hong Kong Economic Times said the notice was unusually detailed.
"Today's notice has the aim of justifying some business circumstances that could lead to a challenge or a reproach, and to remove any future political pressure or doubts about his integrity," wrote the Hong Kong Economic Times' political editor, Yau Shing-mo (corrects name of newspaper from Journal).
Tung is Orient's chairman, and his firm's purchase of shipping containers from brother-in-law John Peng's companies could have become a target for a media smear, they said.
Tung was not available to comment on the notice but political analysts said it could help ward off any speculation that might be used against the 59-year-old billionaire.
"There are segments of the Hong Kong media with a hunger for dirt on the leadership candidates, and this may turn out to be a smart move ahead of his bid," one analyst said.
The press has probed for compromising weaknesses in the three other unofficial candidates for the leadership -- Chief Secretary Anson Chan, former Hong Kong cabinet member Lo Tak-shing and Chief Justice Sir Ti Liang Yang.
Tung is a frontrunner because he is not only known to be admired by the departing colonial sovereign, Britain, but is also believed to be highly regarded by China.
Many in Hong Kong believe Beijing signalled it favoured Tung in January when President Jiang Zemin singled him out from a group of Hong Kong advisers and pointedly shook his hand.
The magnate has raised expectations he will soon announce his readiness to be a candidate by meeting pro-democracy and pro-China politicians to tap their views on grassroots issues.
No candidates are official yet. They can be named formally once a China-controlled Selection Committee is formed in November. Nominations for committee seats close on September 15.
Tung resigned from Governor Chris Patten's inner cabinet three months ago to avoid a clash of loyalties.
The magnate is also vice-chairman of a China-controlled panel crafting the post-handover administration.
He differs starkly from the other three favourites in that he avoids publicity or high-profile activities, and has not gone public with his views on any policy issues. His low-key approach has kept him out of sniping range of possible enemies.
One of Tung's likely proposers, tycoon Li Ka-shing, head of the Hutchison and Cheung Kong group of companies, also signalled on Tuesday that a formal Tung leadership bid was imminent.
Brushing aside public criticism that it would be improper to have a businessman as leader, Li told reporters:
"Having a businessman as the Chief Executive has its benefits, because he or she understands the economy. Prosperity and stability can't be separated from the economy."
But one Hong Kong newspaper, citing internal Chinese documents, said on Tuesday that China had not yet made up its mind who it would like to see in the saddle in Hong Kong.
