China and Hong Kong headed for a showdown on Tuesday as the leader of Hong Kong's democrats said he would fight in court Beijing's plan to ram through laws against civil rights before this year's sovereignty change.
A new row was also brewing between London and Beijing after Chinese Foreign Minister Qian Qichen called for a rewrite of textbooks in Hong Kong schools to conform with China's principles and history.
Hong Kong was prised from China by Britain in the 19th century opium wars and reverts to Beijing on July 1.
Pro-China politician Chung Sze-yuen, mentor and adviser to Hong Kong's future leader, Tung Chee-hwa, told reporters late on Monday the China-appointed shadow legislature could pass laws before midnight on June 30.
The legislature will replace Hong Kong's elected chamber after the handover.
Other pro-China politicians promptly contradicted earlier remarks and said the legislature should adopt "vital laws" before the sovereignty transfer, including the budget law and those reducing civil liberties.
Martin Lee, chairman of Hong Kong's Democratic Party said on Tuesday his party would immediately take the handover legislature to court if it went ahead and made laws.
"We will act according to the provisional legislature's decision," Lee told reporters.
"One way is for somebody to go to the court as soon as they have begun to purport to legislate," Lee said.
Britain, the pro-democracy camp and major law organisations oppose the provisional body as an institution designed to snuff out democracy. They say Hong Kong's constitution allows only one legislature, the current Legislative Council, to operate.
Lee and fellow lawyers argue it would be illegal if the provisional body passes laws, holds meetings or opens offices in Hong Kong before July 1. So far, it has only met in China.
An influential independent Hong Kong business newspaper also warned the provisional legislature was about to set a dangerous example.
The Economic Journal said on Tuesday the body was about to "set the precedent of making law without upholding to the law, with a great effect on the future reputation of Hong Kong".
It said minister Qian had broken a promise he made last April that the body would pass no laws before the handover.
The leader of Hong Kong's biggest pro-China party, Tsang Yok-sing, said China's parliament had now given the green light for the shadow legislature to pass laws before handover, but he said it should use this power sparingly.
"The provisional legislature must be able to do so but it will only use the power when it is absolutely necessary. It will pass bills before July 1 if it is necessary," Tsang said.
Colonial governor Chris Patten lashed out on Monday at China after Qian said in Beijing that schoolbooks should be revised.
Patten said the proposal was out of line with the treaty on Hong Kong's handover and its post-colonial constitution, the Sino-British Declaration and the Basic law.
"The Joint Declaration and the Basic Law guarantee Hong Kong's autonomy in educational matters after 1997," he said.
"They are clear that educational policies are to be set by the (Hong Kong government), and not to be vetted for political correctness by Chinese officials," Patten said.
Qian had said Hong Kong schoolbooks did not conform with the "one country two systems" policy for reunifying China.
"The contents of some textbooks currently used in Hong Kong do not accord with history or reality, are not suited to the changes after 1997...and must be revised," Qian said.
Patten countered: "Naturally, schoolchildren need to be taught after 1997 about their new sovereign power... This has already begun... But if Mr Qian is suggesting more than this, his statement raises some disturbing questions."
