Hong Kong's Finance Secretary Donald Tsang, set to unveil the annual budget under China's watchful eye, is a man of conservative pedigree when it comes to economics but an outspoken liberal in the political arena.
Tsang, who appears in hallmark striped business shirts and colourful bow-ties, broke a 153-year colonial mould by becoming Hong Kong's first non-British financial secretary in 1995, crowning a 30-year career in the civil service.
So far, he has made no stunning changes to the cautious budget policies that have made Hong Kong rich, a posture that should endear him to Hong Kong's soon-to-be sovereign power, China.
The 52-year-old staunch Roman Catholic minces no words when he advertises his cautious, conservative economic approach.
"My policy is not to create excitement in the management of our public finances, nor do I have any appetite for thrills and spills," Tsang said when he took on the job.
Last week Tsang dismissed accusations that the government was acting like a miser sitting on a cash mountain while holding back welfare spending.
But he was also quick to dismiss accusations that China, due to take back the territory from Britain on July 1, had put the brakes on social spending.
"In formulating our expenditure programme we had not been overly influenced, we have not been affected, by whatever they call political pressure," he told a meeting of central bankers.
The budget to be unveiled on Wednesday has for the first time been worked out in hand with Chinese experts. It was part of the Sino-British negotiations on details of the sovereignty change, and came against the political backdrop of sour relations between London and Beijing.
Since he delivered his maiden budget a year ago, Tsang has landed himself in political controversy.
He has spoken out against China's plans to roll back key clauses in some of Hong Kong's civil liberties laws -- putting himself at odds with Hong Kong's future leader.
"If you can't convince the people of Hong Kong, people may take to the streets, some may keep their frustration in their hearts, some in the civil service may quit. Some may emigrate.
"Investors are similar. They talk about substance (of the laws). If they are happy with it, they will invest more. If they aren't, they will leave," Tsang said in a newspaper interview.
A recent newspaper report said leader-to-be Tung Chee-hwa, who has retained Tsang for the post-colonial government, now plans to sack him because he had upset China.
Tsang has declined to comment on the report.
In the 1997/98 budget, Tsang has made one departure from past practice by announcing some of the key data in advance.
But he has not commented on experts' predictions of a fiscal surplus of as much as HK$25 billion, far higher than the government's previous forecast of HK$1.6 billion.
Hong Kong-born Tsang sits atop one of the world's richest low-tax economies. In gross domestic product terms, it is equal to one-fifth of China's economy, though Hong Kong has only 6.4 million people to China's 1.2 billion.
At US$66 billion, Hong Kong has the second highest foreign exchange reserves per head on the planet, and it is the globe's eighth-largest trading economy.
