Hong Kong's finance chief Donald Tsang on Wednesday hammered home a message of fiscal independence when he presented the last budget under British rule, even though he had China breathing down his neck.
The Financial Secretary hailed cooperation with Beijing, which helped draft the budget that will straddle Britain's handover of Hong Kong to China on July 1.
But he peppered his speech with reminders -- to listeners in the territory's Legislative Council that China plans to dissolve this year -- that Hong Kong will remain financially independent of Beijing.
Tsang stressed that China had chiselled this autonomy in stone in the Basic Law, which will be Hong Kong's constitution after the sovereignty change.
Many in Hong Kong have worried that China will try to milk Hong Kong of its wealth, but Beijing has said it will not remove a cent in taxes from the territory.
"It's so obvious that Hong Kong will be worth more to China as a going concern than for a one-off raid on the pot of gold," said an analyst with a major securities house.
The Basic Law says the territory will maintain independent finances, manage its own economic policy and keep free trade.
"These articles have a clear message. The resources of Hong Kong are to be managed separately and independently -- they are to be used exclusively for the benefit of Hong Kong people," Tsang said in his speech.
"Financial and monetary affairs shall be determined exclusively by Hong Kong law...trade and investment shall continue to enjoy freedom of movement and freedom of markets."
Because the budget for the year starting April 1 straddles the handover at midnight on June 30, it was crafted jointly with Beijing through the Sino-British Joint Liaison Group responsible for settling handover details.
But there will be no repeat. Beijing had stated that from July 1, preparation of Hong Kong budgets would be Hong Kong's business alone, Tsang emphasised.
"He seemed very keen to remind China of all those things, and I think he is very right to do so," said pro-democracy legislator Emily Lau, a strong critic of China's communist leadership.
During budget negotiations a Chinese negotiator, Chen Zuo'er, complained that Hong Kong's spending was speeding out of control, like a racing car.
Lau told Reuters: "I'm quite sure everybody knows there has been a lot of pressure on him (Tsang) and on the government with all these public scoldings by Chinese officials about the racing car running out of control and killing everybody."
The budget that was agreed was moderate on the expenditure side and China appeared pleased with it.
But some analysts said Tsang's speech highlighted concerns that China might meddle in Hong Kong's economy.
"He tries to assure Hong Kong the autonomy of the government has not been affected, but the reality is that the budgetary autonomy of the Hong Kong government has been affected in the negotiations," said political analyst Sunny Loh.
Another analyst at a fund management house said there were doubts about how long China would allow Tsang to stay in his job after a recent speech in which he warned that China's plans to slash civil liberties could scare away investors.
