A leader of the crushed 1989 democracy movement in Beijing's Tiananmen Square predicted on Thursday there would be no similar crackdowns in China or Hong Kong under Chinese rule, but there would be pressure to conform.
Han Dongfang, a former railwayman who formed a free trade union in the 1989 student-led democracy movement, said China's leaders had learned lessons from "this historical misunderstanding" and would not use the army this way again.
In June eight years ago China's communist rulers sent the People's Liberation Army into Beijing and ruthlessly put down the movement with heavy loss of life.
In Tiananmen Square, the hub of the protests, it was as though hungry children were tempted by a green unripe apple of democracy, the 34-year-old dissident, now living in exile in British-ruled Hong Kong, said in an interview.
"They reached up and ate it, and suddenly they realised it tasted very bad," Han said.
"You cannot blame those hungry children, and you cannot blame the apple for being so green. So June 4, 1989, was a big historical misunderstanding," he said.
"I don't think anybody can use tanks and machineguns again to crack down on a social movement."
China's next social upheaval, if it happened, was likely to involve workers and farmers complaining they had no food or money.
"Do you think machineguns and tanks can crack down on such hungry, angry people if they are going to die of hunger anyway?"
Many of Hong Kong's 6.4 million people have been worried that China will break its hands-off promise and introduce repressive rule in the territory.
Beijing has already unveiled plans to repeal some Hong Kong legislation protecting civil rights when Britain hands the colony back on July 1 -- ordinances it has said violated the territory's future China-designed constitution.
China also plans to dissolve the elected legislature, saying the council was elected under reforms enacted over its objections.
Han said that after the death of paramount leader Deng Xiaoping last month, President Jiang Zemin's ruling group was too busy with internal problems to crack down on Hong Kong.
"They face very, very big problems in the villages, unemployment in big state enterprises, which are to be reformed, and in the ethnic minority areas," Han said.
Han said Hong Kong was a goldmine for China.
"Chinese leaders will only break the golden egg if Hong Kong becomes a very big danger to their power. I don't think that will happen," Han said, speaking a day after Hong Kong announced record fiscal reserves of HK$330 billion (US$42.3 billion).
Beijing has promised the territory will retain a high degree of autonomy and its capitalist system for 50 years.
Han spent two years in jail for "counter-revolutionary acts" after Tiananmen, and was then released and allowed to go to the United States for medical treatment.
When he tried to return to China in 1993, his passport was cancelled, forcing him into exile in Hong Kong.
Asked if he thought China would crush the Hong Kong democracy movement after the sovereignty change, Han said Beijing would be more subtle than in 1989.
He said China would try to influence Hong Kong through prods and whispers to its new legislators and leaders -- all of whom have been screened by Beijing before the handover -- and that the business community would support curbs on democracy.
"The Chinese leaders have gained a lot of experience since 1989 inside China. They welcome businessmen and tell them they will have better conditions for their business than before, in a society with no social movements, no trouble for business."
Han said he trusted Hong Kong's future leader, Tung Chee-hwa, who was selected by a Beijing-backed committee.
"He is not a bad person. I don't think he'll send protesters to jail. He's not going to wear the same trousers as the Chinese government."
(US$1=HK$7.8)
