Hong Kong's Democratic Party leaders, often seen as the arch-foes of Beijing, launched a marathon mission to North America and Europe on Wednesday to brief the West on the territory's plight as China takes over.
Britain hands the colony for over 150 years back to Beijing at midnight on June 30, and the Democratic Party has been in the forefront of political clashes with China over Chinese plans to curb democracy and civil rights laws in Hong Kong.
Party leader Martin Lee and his deputy Szeto Wah, a leading anti-communist activist, would lead the mission to the United States, Canada and the United Nations offices in Switzerland. Fellow legislator Andrew Cheng would also be going.
The three will speak to audiences in Seattle, Vancouver, Calgary, Los Angeles, Sacramento, San Francisco, Boston, Chicago, Toronto, Washington, New York, Ottawa and Geneva.
The tour is the biggest ever undertaken by the Hong Kong democratic movement's beacon organisation to convince Western opinion of the need to help safeguard the territory's basic freedoms after communist-ruled China takes over.
Lee is sharply at odds both with China and with its pick for Hong Kong's future leader, Tung Chee-hwa. Tung has accused Lee of being "anti-China" and of "badmouthing Hong Kong" by spreading doom scenarios about the territory's furture.
"Our goal is to emphasise the vital importance of Hong Kong as the economic and trade centre of the Pacific Rim," Lee said as he left Hong Kong for Seattle late on Tuesday.
"We will detail latest developments in Hong Kong and their implications for the future. I intend to give a clear, realistic picture of the situation here and encourage the American and Canadian people to take a close interest now and in the future."
In a move certain to anger China, Lee will testify to the United Nations Human Rights Commission in Geneva on April 7, where he said he plans to discuss "the threats to freedom, civil rights and the rule of law in Hong Kong".
China plans to roll back liberal laws on the freedom of association, which includes rules on forming political parties, and on freedom of assembly, which covers rules on political demonstrations, as well as Hong Kong's Bill of Rights.
Beijing says the moves are needed because the liberalisation of the political scene in recent years breaches understandings reached with Britain and formal agreements on the handover.
Lee said he would also raise China's plan to dissolve Hong Kong's elected Legislative Council upon the handover and replace it with an appointed body composed of pro-China politicians.
He would argue that Hong Kong's continued economic success and freedoms were inseparable from its political freedoms.
With 19 seats, Lee's is the largest party in the 60-member legislature. It was in the vanguard of a victory for democratic groups who took 70 percent of the vote in free democratic polls in 1995. Pro-China parties were rejected at the polls.
Lee said he would also lobby Washington to renew China's most favoured nation trading status when it comes up for review this year. Hong Kong benefits substantially from China's trading privileges because the bulk of the trade goes via Hong Kong.
In Washington on April 1-2, Lee will address the Senate Foreign Relations Committee and governmental and congressional leaders and he would lobby for visa-free access to the United States by Hong Kong people after the Chinese takeover. The mission was also intended to raise funds for the Hong Kong Democratic Party -- in what may be the last year when this is legally possible if China goes ahead as it intends and bans links between Hong Kong parties and overseas organisations.
The party would address overseas Chinese communities, think tanks, business leaders and legal and human rights groups.
After visiting Geneva Lee will return in Washington on April 9 to receive one of the country's most prestigious political awards, the National Endowment for Democracy's 1997 Democracy Award.
Previous recipients include Czechoslovak dissident-turned- President Vaclav Havel and rights campaigner Yelena Bonner, the wife of late Soviet dissident Andrei Sakharov.
