When Britain hands its Asian pearl Hong Kong back to China in less than 100 days, it will end a century and a half of colonial rule and a century and a half of Chinese national shame.
It will also spark the party of the century, a two-day holiday binge marked by fireworks and gun salutes, popping champagne corks and clinking glasses.
At midnight on June 30 in Hong Kong -- afternoon teatime half a world away in London where Big Ben will be striking five -- the sun will set on Britain's once-global empire.
Hong Kong's 6.4 million people will cheer, weep or sigh as the Union Jack comes down and Communist China's red flag goes up.
Prince Charles and Chinese President Jiang Zemin will be in Hong Kong. So, too, will be former British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, who negotiated the handover, and Lee Kuan Yew, who steered Singapore to prosperity after the city state's independence from Britain three decades ago.
Britain and China are still arguing about the guest list.
But the man who set the stage, who opened up the world's most populous nation and began to reshape it in the image of Hong Kong's freewheeling, money-spinning economy, will be absent. China's paramount leader Deng Xiaoping died last month.
HANDOVER PARTYGOERS WILL HAVE STUNNING HARBOUR VIEW
Builders are hurrying to finish the venue where the joint handover ceremony, centrepiece of the party, will unfold.
At China's insistence it will be indoors in a huge HK$4.8 billion (US$615 million) extension of Hong Kong's Convention Centre. Would-be protesters will be unable to disrupt it.
The steel and glass building rises from a man-made island off the Wanchai waterfront with stunning views of Victoria Harbour, Hong Kong Island, and the New Territories mountains.
The 4,000 guests at the ceremony will be seated in the column-free Grand Hall attached to the foyer with a view of the necklace of glittering skyscrapers that frame the harbour.
"It's fantastic for us that our opening is going to be a historic event," said Niels Kransoe, chief executive of the construction project. "I am thrilled to bits."
PRINCE CHARLES TO GIVE HONG KONG AWAY
There will be three phases -- eve-of-handover pageantry staged by the departing British, a joint handover ceremony, and post-handover revelry organised by the post-colonial regime.
Hong Kong's Chief Executive-designate Tung Chee-hwa, appointed by China, led 20,000 people this month on a charity walk to raise HK$17 million for the post-handover parties.
Prince Charles will represent Queen Elizabeth, along with Britain's Foreign Secretary. "The Queen never gives territories away," a colonial official commented.
Just before six in the evening, Governor Chris Patten will bid farewell to Government House, on Hong Kong Island's Upper Albert Road, the seat of colonial power.
Around 6 p.m., Patten and Charles will inspect the troops and preside over a farewell to the British administration at military headquarters on the Hong Kong waterfront. At midnight China's People's Liberation Army troops assume military duties.
The Queen's royal yacht Britannia will be moored in Victoria Harbour as the backdrop for the sunset parade. The frigate Chatham will also be on the water nearby, part of a Royal Navy task force cruising Asian waters this year to wave the flag.
4,000 VIP GUESTS AT BANQUET FIT FOR A KING
At 9 p.m. 4,000 VIPs from Britain, China, Hong Kong and much of the rest of the world, armed with cutlery or chopsticks, will tuck into the biggest banquet in the history of Hong Kong.
Up to 600 waiters will ferry 20,000 to 40,000 pieces of chinaware and glassware around, caterers say.
The midnight handover ceremony in the Grand Foyer hall will be a spectacle of flag changing, national anthems and speeches.
"Maybe some politicians in Britain hope the handover ceremony can symbolise the glorious or honorable withdrawl of Britain from Hong Kong. We have no objection to that because that means we can take over in a dignified and honorable manner," Chinese Premier Li Peng said of the handover fiesta.
Jiang is expected to receive Hong Kong back into the Chinese fold as the midnight ceremony is beamed on to a giant screen at the military parade ground and to homes across the world after a variety show and a ballet about China's last emperor.
BRITISH LEADERS WILL SAIL INTO THE SUNSET
Prince Charles and Patten will sail from Hong Kong on what is likely to be Britannia's final cruise before decommissioning. Their first port of call is likely to be the Philippines, one day's sail away, or the former British colony of Singapore.
Hong Kong taxpayers will foot the HK$233 million bill for the extravaganza. The grand banquet and reception will cost a tidy $HK6.5 million, Hong Kong's most expensive dinner party.
Another HK$85 million is being spent on building a huge press and broadcasting centre for 6,000 journalists.
"It is Hong Kong's responsibility to pay... because it is our historic moment and we should show the world that we will have a bright future," said Home Affairs Secretary Michael Suen.
"We estimate the event will bring in four hundred to eight hundred million dollars (US$102.5-205 million) to Hong Kong's economy," said Suen.
(US$1 = HK$7.8)
