An overture by China to bring its critics into the team picking Hong Kong's future leadership shows openness but might split the democratic camp in the British colony, analysts said on Tuesday.
Foreign Minister Qian Qichen said this month the 400-member body that will choose the chief executive and legislators who will run the territory after its July 1, 1997, transfer to China could include people with divergent views on democracy.
His remark at a Beijing meeting was taken in the colony as an olive branch towards Hong Kong's popular Democratic Party, which so far has been excluded from transition arrangements.
Although pegged to the acceptance of China's plan for an appointed "provisional legislature" to replace the current fully elected council, the remark was in stark contrast to China's harsh invective against the party over the past year.
The gesture is also fuelling heated discussion in local political circles and newspaper columns about China's motives.
"It might be an attempt to split the democrats, but more probably Beijing has realised that they've failed to split them so far and it's time to get them on board," Hong Kong University political analyst Nihal Jayawickrama told Reuters.
"I'm sure there are elements in the Democratic Party who will feel the urge to respond positively," he said.
But Democratic Party leader Martin Lee last weekend rejected the idea of joining the Selection Committee, saying that would amount to recognition of an illegitimate body.
The party argues that China's plan to scrap the present legislature and appoint a new "provisional" one has no basis in law or in the handover treaties with London.
"So long as China insists that any participant must assist in both selection processes -- Hong Kong's future chief executive and the provisional legislature -- I can't see how they can get the democrats on board," Jayawickrama said.
But he said it was likely the temptation would prove strong for some of Lee's associates and that they would quit the party.
China is very eager to give the Selection Committee a greater air of legitimacy by including some democrats, some China analysts in Hong Kong believe.
"At the end of the day, it's a question of who gets into the committee. And I don't think people like Lee or (deputy party leader) Szeto Wah would get in even if they are nominated," political commentator Andy Ho told Reuters.
The leaders of the party, the biggest in this territory of 6.2 million people, have drawn Beijing's wrath since 1989 when they sided with the student-led, pro-democracy movement that Chinese army tanks crushed in Tiananmen Square.
"We shouldn't jump to the conclusion that China has changed its position towards the Democratic Party," Ho said. "It just wants to create an impression of openness."
Some of China's Hong Kong advisers differ in their view of Qian's remarks. Tsang Yok-Sing, a pro-Beijing politician, has said he did not see them as an invitation to the democrats.
Emily Lau, an outspoken independent democrat who has often riled China's communist rulers, interpreted Qian's comment as a brazen effort to drive a wedge into the democratic movement.
Qian had divided the pro-democracy camp into "people who are prepared to compromise their principles and those who will stand firm", Lau wrote in a column in the South China Morning Post.
"With the scramble for seats on the Selection Committee having begun in earnest, it will rapidly become clear that some members of the pro-democracy camp are eager for a place... These people have long been itching to open dialogue with Beijing and are now only too eager to be given recognition," Lau wrote.
