Chinese officials sent out positive signals about Beijing's future handling of Hong Kong on Friday, and diplomats indicated China and Britain had agreed on a VIP guestlist for a grand handover party.
Hong Kong reverts to communist-ruled China at midnight on June 30 after a century and a half as a British colony, and is to retain its separate capitalist system for 50 years.
Chinese officials attending a seminar on the transition sought to assure Hong Kong there will be no influx of mainland Chinese and that the future garrison will not misbehave.
They also tried to ease fears that the economy in the capitalist enclave of 6.4 million people will suffer and stressed the need to allow Hong Kong businessmen to travel.
Wang Fengchao, deputy head of Beijing's Hong Kong and Macau Affairs Office, dismissed fears that China would open the flood gates to migrants cashing in on Hong Kong's economic miracle.
He said there were strict rules on entry into Hong Kong, and children of illegal immigrants would not be allowed in. "These provisions...will have a deterrent effect," he said.
The general who guards the political purity of China's future Hong Kong garrison said the People's Liberation Army (PLA) would not meddle in local government or business affairs.
"The Hong Kong garrison and government will be independent military and administrative systems with no affiliate relationship and will not interfere with each other," said the garrison's political commissar, Major-General Xiong Zi Ren.
"I can categorically tell you that we resolutely will abide by all regulations set out in the law," Xiong said.
"We have already set a rule that bans involvement in production business," he said.
Tackling another issue worrying Hong Kong emigrants around the world, Wang announced a grace period for them to return to the territory if they want to keep permanent residency rights.
An estimated 750,000 of Hong Kong's 6.4 million people have foreign citizenship. The bulk have made Canada, Australia, Britain or the United States their adopted homes.
If they are abroad for long after July 1 they might lose their Hong Kong permanent residency.
Wang said China was prepared to allow them a grace period, but the length of time would be set by the post-handover Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (SAR).
"As to the length of time they are allowed to stay outside Hong Kong, this is for the SAR to decide," he said.
Tam Yiu-chung, a member of the future cabinet of Hong Kong Chief Executive-designate Tung Chee-hwa, said he believed the period would be up to three years.
Britain, meanwhile, signaled it had agreed with China on the broad outlines of a guest list for the joint celebration of the handover to China three months from now.
A British official told Reuters the two sides would invite a total of about 3,200 guests to the event.
About 400 "international guests" would be included. Some would be government ministers and the heads of international organisations, said the official, who asked not to be named.
But China and Britain did not expect heads of government or heads of state. One diplomat said this was a sign China had won in its efforts not to give Britain too glorious a send-off.
Hong Kong's colonial Chief Secretary Anson Chan, who is keeping her job under Tung, said in Canada on Thursday China was fully committed to granting Hong Kong a high degree of autonomy.
"It is clear the Chinese leaders are fully committed to the faithful implementation of the late Deng Xiaoping's visionary concept of 'one country, two systems' and Hong Kong people ruling Hong Kong," Chan said.
"There is a clear appreciation that only in this way can Hong Kong best serve the interests of China," she said.
However, the United States said on the same day that China had sent mixed and sometimes disturbing signals on the future of Hong Kong's legislature, human rights and press freedom after Beijing takes control on July 1.
"Over the past year, developments in Hong Kong have sent mixed signals about some aspects of the change in sovereignty," the State Department said in a report to Congress.
"There have been significant positive developments since March 1996," it said. But "China's actions regarding the future of the legislature and the laws governing human rights and civil liberties in Hong Kong have been disturbing and have caused concern in both Hong Kong and the international community."
China has set in motion plans to replace Hong Kong's elected legislature with an appointed body and to water down liberal laws protecting civil liberties and democracy.
