The United States signed an important air services agreement with Hong Kong on Monday, guaranteeing its future aviation links after the British-ruled territory's return to China later this year.
But Washington voiced concern about a big rise in landing fees which has dismayed airlines planning to use Hong Kong's new airport at Chek Lap Kok, due to open a year from now.
The territory's airport authority chief said the door was still open for discussions with the airline industry.
Signing Hong Kong's 19th air accord with foreign countries, U.S. Consul-General Richard Boucher said Washington was concerned levies for landing and parking at Chek Lap Kok would be too high, and he called for competitive rates.
"This is something that our firms are primarily concerned about, that they raised with us, and yet it is something that we in the government are concerned about, and we want to talk to the relevant authorities on the Hong Kong side," Boucher said.
"We have (talked) in the past and we will continue to talk to them, as our companies have, to try to work out this problem, so that Hong Kong has efficient, competitive and commercially reasonable rates and a setup here that works both in a commercial sense and in terms of a competitive sense as well."
Airlines have said recently landing costs could be three to four times higher than at the present Kai Tak airport, and even the airport authority has said overall fees may nearly double.
Industry Analysts and some airlines, such as Taiwan's China Airlines, have said the rises could hurt their profit margins, push up ticket prices, or force traffic to other airports at nearby Macau or China's Zhuhai and Shenzhen.
Hong Kong Secretary for Economic Services Stephen Ip said airport officials were still consulting the airlines.
"The Airport Authority will certainly listen to the viewpoints expressed by the airlines, and I don't think a final decision has been taken. And that's the whole purpose of having consultations with the airlines," Ip told reporters.
Monday's agreement opened the way for new routings and services, giving the United States the right to select carriers to provide non-stop services from three additional gateways.
So far, Chicago and Detroit have been picked in addition to existing gateways of New York, Los Angeles, Seattle and San Francisco.
The agreement provided for the preservation of open competitive entry and unrestricted service offerings from all U.S. points, and preservation of the U.S. "round the world service" run by United Airlines.
It provided "fifth freedom rights" between Hong Kong and points in the Philippines, South Korea and Thailand. The United States has chosen flights between Hong Kong and Subic Bay and between Hong Kong and Manila under this provision.
Under the accord, Hong Kong received new gateways in the United States for passenger and all-cargo services, choosing New York and Chicago for this provision. New fifth-freedom rights were also awarded to Hong Kong, but have not yet been taken up.
Nine U.S. airlines operate about 84 passenger and cargo services per week to Hong Kong. In 1996, they carried 920,000 passengers and 147,000 tonnes of cargo on direct services between Hong Kong and the United States.
Cathay Pacific Airways Ltd and Air Hong Kong operate about 21 services per week between Hong Kong and the United States. In 1996, they carried 315,000 passengers and about 42,000 tonnes of air cargo.
