A Hong Kong human rights group reacted with scepticism on Tuesday to China's declaration that it would subscribe to a United Nations' human rights convention.
China, embroiled in controversy over its human rights record, said on Monday it will sign the U.N. International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights before the end of 1997.
Paul Harris, who heads the Hong Kong Human Rights Monitor and closely watches rights developments related to Hong Kong, said the move seemed to be a bid to dodge international censure in a debate at the U.N. Human Rights Commission in Geneva this week.
"I'm unimpressed," Harris told Reuters.
"The timing is obviously designed to reduce the risk of China being condemned in the debate at the United Nations.
"I'm very sceptical whether it will be carried out," Harris said of Beijing's avowed intention to sign the convention.
He said Monday's pledge by President Jiang Zemin to visiting French Defence Minister Charles Millon did not make clear if Beijing would go all the way and ratify the covenant in full.
Once the Geneva debate had blown over, China would probably just "forget about it", Harris said.
He questioned why China, in its latest move, had referred only to the so-called "ECOSOC" human rights covenant, and not to the other more important U.N. convention, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR).
China has in the past resisted making any commitment to observe international human rights standards and rarely submits reports on the human rights situation on its own turf, where hundreds of dissidents languish in jail.
China also resists the notion of submitting human rights reports on Hong Kong, a British colony that reverts to Beijing's control on July 1, under an international treaty that requires ICCPR human rights standards to be applied in the territory.
Both U.N. covenants would require China to submit regular reports on compliance with standards laid down in the documents, but membership could also give China a voice on the international committee monitoring the accords.
Harris said there had been no signs of any liberalisation in China's attitude toward dissent in recent months.
