Planned curbs on Hong Kong civil liberties, justified by the future government on grounds of national security, would cut chances of the territory being used to subvert communist China, analysts said on Thursday.
But the proposals, launched on Wednesday and offered to the public for three weeks of feedback, drew a torrent of criticism for being retrograde and open to abuse.
Citing the risk to "national security" posed by foreign forces, the future leader Tung Chee-hwa proposed to tighten the screws through two key laws -- the Public Order Ordinance and the Societies Ordinance -- after China takes over the British colony on July 1.
The changes would bar overseas funding of local political groups and grant police sweeping powers to ban demonstrations.
Currently, people "notify" police about planned protests. In future they would need permission, and police could refuse it.
Sunny Loh, a political analyst at Hong Kong University, told Reuters the biggest impact would be the ban on foreign funding for Hong Kong political organisations, many of which, such as the popular Democratic Party, raise money abroad.
"It's a retrograde step... Local groups will have to deal with their relations with foreign countries very carefully," he said. "There will be more sensitivity to demonstrations, protests and petitions because they will be seen to affect national security."
This would cut the risk of foreign groups using Hong Kong as a base to subvert China, Loh said. Behind China's concern is a long history of groups doing just that.
Law professor Nihal Jayawickrama said China wanted to keep a close eye on pro-democracy parties in Hong Kong, and the changes would lead to inspections of their accounts for foreign links.
"How do you make sure they are not being influenced in their thinking by foreign forces? ...They'll have to scrutinise the parties' accounts for foreign funding," he said.
In the late 19th century Hong Kong became a base of the nationalist revolutionaries who plotted and overthrew the last imperial dynasty in 1911, creating China's first republic.
Even the Communists, before they came to power in 1949, sometimes used Hong Kong as an offshore venue for meetings beyond the reach of Chiang Kai-shek's Nationalist regime on the mainland.
China also has vivid memories of the 1989 democracy movement which its tanks bloodily crushed in Beijing's Tiananmen Square.
The movement received material support from Hong Kong political and business groups, as well as information support through a "fax war" from groups based abroad. Some of the activists who fled that crackdown live in exile in Hong Kong.
China also fears that Taiwan, its arch-foe and the base of the remnant Nationalist regime which fled the mainland in 1949, will finance and organise anti-Beijing movements in Hong Kong.
After the three week pulse-taking on the plans, a China-backed interim legislature, which will replace the elected Legislative Council, will draft the relevant legislation.
The changes will take effect on July 1 when China resumes sovereignty after 156 years of colonial rule and makes Hong Kong into a quasi autonomous "Special Administrative Region".
Tung's plans were lashed by the democracy movement, pressure groups, departing colonial Governor Chris Patten, and a raft of editorials in the Hong Kong press.
"It is not as if we are on the verge of civil chaos -- in theory, at least, trouble could be made more likely by restrictive measures," said the South China Morning Post.
"The net has been spread so wide that human rights groups, unions, and environment protection groups may also be suppressed if they have political views," said legislator Albert Ho.
Analysts said the plan raised queries as to whether foreign groups such as Amnesty International, which has its main Asian office in Hong Kong, could continue operating there.
Trade unions and church groups, which receive foreign financial support, could also easily be viewed as political.
"How are we supposed to survive if we are banned from taking subsidies from international labour groups?" said Leung Yiu-chung, who runs a neighbourhood labour group.
