China's People's Liberation Army (PLA), poorly regarded by many in Hong Kong, will send an advance party into the territory next Monday, more than two months before Beijing formally resumes sovereignty.
Hong Kong unexpectedly announced an accord on the troop movement on Tuesday, ending months of deadlock over the size and role of a PLA advance guard, and whether they would bear arms.
"The two sides of the Sino-British Joint Liaison Group have reached agreement on the arrival of 40 advance personnel of the future Garrison in Hong Kong from April 21," said a Hong Kong government spokesman.
"They will not be armed and will not enjoy any special legal status or...privileges and immunities," the spokesman said.
"This agreement provides a firm basis for the smooth transfer of defence responsibilities."
But the PLA advance guard will have no defence or security role and their work will not affect the British troops who will garrison Hong Kong up to the handover at midnight on June 30.
It was the first positive news after weeks of wrangling between Britain and China over a controversial shadow legislature, Beijing's plans to curb civil liberties, and China's move to set its own rules on Hong Kong residency rights.
The PLA advance guard will prepare the facilities for the PLA garrison due to take over defence duties from the British army's "Black Watch" regiment on July 1. The PLA garrison might eventually be up to 10,000-strong, military sources say.
"The duties of advance personnel are to make practical preparations for the PLA to take over the responsibility for the defence of Hong Kong, including familiarisation with military sites, liaison with British forces and the Hong Kong government, and coordination of communications support," the spokesman said.
The group will be led by a deputy commander of the future Garrison, an officer of the rank of Major General.
A 28-member liaison group led by the deputy commander will be located with British forces at the Prince of Wales Barracks in Central Hong Kong. The other 12 will be billeted with the British garrison on Stonecutters Island in Hong Kong harbour.
The PLA troops would wear uniforms within the barracks but civilian clothing outside military sites.
"They have to strictly abide by all Hong Kong laws," the spokesman said in an effort to allay fears among Hong Kong's 6.4 million population that the PLA would put itself above the law.
The PLA has a bad name in Hong Kong, where many people vividly remember how the Chinese army sent tanks into Beijing's Tiananmen Square and bloodily crushed a student-led democracy movement with a heavy loss of life.
China has reinforced those fears and memories with a series of moves designed to trim democracy and civil liberties in Hong Kong after the sovereignty change this year.
It has overridden British objections and appointed a new interim legislature to replace the elected Legislative Council on July 1, when 156 years of British rule come to an end and Hong Kong becomes a semi-autonomous capitalist region of China.
It has also launched moves to roll back laws on the freedom to demonstrate and form political parties, as well as democratic elections introduced by London in recent years.
The latest breakthrough came just as the mood was growing bleak in Sino-British handover negotiations.
A move by Beijing on Monday to set the rules on who is entitled to permanent residency in Hong Kong after it reverts to China had stirred up a bitter quarrel.
"It's our domestic affair. We don't need the British to tell us who is a Chinese national," China's Hong Kong policy boss Lu Ping said. Britain promptly accused China of going it alone on an issue that should have been settled diplomatically.
