Hong Kong's ride to Chinese rule hit a new bump on Wednesday when future leader Tung Chee-hwa put on hold a trip to the United States during which he had planned to calm fears over the British colony's handover.
Tung's move came as the man who will effectively face him as opposition leader, Martin Lee, became the focus of media attention in the United States on a tour in which he has issued gloomy warnings of a Chinese crackdown in Hong Kong.
Tung, who will be Hong Kong's chief executive, said he was too busy at home, where there are 76 days left before Britain leaves and China's red flag is hoisted at midnight on June 30.
"The chief executive believes his focus must be in Hong Kong," Tung said in a statement.
Selected by a China-controlled committee in December to run Hong Kong after Beijing resumes sovereignty, Tung had planned a pre-handover visit to the United States to soothe anxiety there about planned curbs on Hong Kong's political liberties.
The cancellation comes despite calls by U.S. executives in the territory, worried that excessive gloom about Hong Kong could harm business ties, for Tung to go to Washington.
A spokesman for his office said Tung set great store on Hong Kong's ties with Washington and would try to make the visit by the end of this year.
He denied the postponement was linked to the visit by Lee, leader of the popular Hong Kong Democratic Party, who is meeting President Bill Clinton at the end of the week.
"He's just too busy," the spokesman said.
Lee has dominated headlines about Hong Kong lately as he toured Europe and North America, warning of China's plans to curb protests and foreign funding of political groups, and to replace the elected legislature with a handpicked body.
In New York, Lee said at the United Nations that the West was morally obliged to make sure China keeps its 1984 treaty promises that Hong Kong will remain a free capitalist society.
"It becomes the moral obligation of every government that supported the (treaty) at least to ensure that China will adhere to her promises made in 1984 and keep Hong Kong free," he said.
Secretary of State Madeleine Albright said after meeting Lee that she plans to attend the Hong Kong handover ceremony this year, and warned that Washington was watching.
"I will emphasise America's continued involvement in protecting our interests and supporting Hong Kong's people as they enter the Chinese nation," she said.
Meanwhile, the pace of politics in Hong Kong was quickening.
On Tuesday, the two countries clinched an agreement to let China's People's Liberation Army send 40 troops into Hong Kong next Monday to start getting facilities ready for the future Chinese garrison.
On Wednesday, the two sides agreed to sell 98 hectares of government land to boost the supply of development land, which should help to ease a chronically tight housing supply.
Police forces in Hong Kong and China also agreed to step up joint efforts to combat a tidal wave of illegal immigration into the territory involving mainly children and pregnant women.
But on Monday, China angered Britain by unilaterally setting rules on who will have permanent residency rights in Hong Kong after July 1. Britain said the "right of abode" decision should have been taken jointly through diplomatic negotiations.
Beijing wanted to force Britain to recognise a China-appointed legislature by agreeing to let the body process the new residency law, senior officials told Reuters.
