Hong Kong's popular Democratic Party on Thursday welcomed a pledge from the territory's future leader, Tung Chee-hwa, that people would keep their basic freedoms after China takes over on July 1.
But some activists staged a noisy protest disrupting a meeting staged by Tung's aides to tap the public's views on his controversial plan to whittle down civil liberties.
A new opinion poll, meanwhile, indicated nine in 10 of Hong Kong students do not believe China will really allow the territory its promised autonomy after Britain hands it back.
Fears have been rising in Hong Kong, a British colony for more than 150 years and now with 6.4 million people, that the territory will suffer a loss of freedom after the handover.
Tung, set to become Hong Kong's first post-colonial leader, on Wednesday vigorously defended proposed curbs on the right to demonstrate and on foreign funding of political groups, saying laws in the United States were much tougher.
"The majority of cities in North America, including New York, Washington and San Francisco, all require police permission before demonstrations can be held," he said.
"Let me assure you the (future) government has the strongest determination to preserve the freedoms that the people of Hong Kong currently enjoy," Tung said in a dinner speech.
"Peaceful and lawful demonstrations can and must be allowed to continue. I see public demonstration as a way for people to express their views, and public demonstrations are now a part of Hong Kong culture," he said.
Anthony Cheung, vice president of the Democratic Party, which believes China would like to snuff out democracy in Hong Kong, cautiously welcomed Tung's assurances, the first public comment Tung has made on the proposals launched last week.
"We welcome this pledge that the right to protest, the right to demonstrate, the freedom of assembly and association, all of these are people's rights and should be part of Hong Kong's political culture," Cheung told Hong Kong radio.
"But we question a lot of the substance of Mr Tung's proposals on how to amend the Societies Ordinance and the Public Order Ordinance," he said.
"Some of these proposals have in fact infringed the rights that Mr Tung was talking about."
About 16 pro-democracy councillors waved banners and shouted slogans, disrupting a public consultation on the plan at Hong Kong's Space Museum on Thursday. They then walked out of the meeting, attended by 50 members of local councils.
"We believe this is a fake consultation," said councillor Ng Wing-fai. "The members of the future government already have a basic line and the basic principles will not be changed."
Colonial Governor Chris Patten made clear on Wednesday that Britain would not back down on an issue at the heart of handover quarrels with China -- a shadow legislature that China has appointed to replace the current, elected Legislative Council.
Patten opposed calls to allow the China-appointed body to pass a law on residency rights before the hand-back to China.
"That is our position, our position is not going to change."
His comment followed a row this week after China announced rules on who would qualify for "right of abode" -- permanent residency -- in Hong Kong after the handover.
Beijing plans to submit the bill before June 30 to its Hong Kong provisional legislature.
The government said if the bill were to be handled before July 1 by the interim body it would be legally challenged.
