A page of history is set to turn when Chinese troops enter Hong Kong on Monday to prepare for the arrival of the People's Liberation Army (PLA) after Britain marches out of the territory in July.
The 40-strong advance party led by Major-General Zhou Borong will arrive in the colony on British Queen Elizabeth's birthday. They will drive into Hong Kong from China's Shenzhen region in full uniform but unarmed.
The PLA advance guard will be the first Chinese troops ever to be stationed on Hong Kong island.
Eight PLA staff cars and trucks will enter at the Lok Ma Chau land crossing at around lunchtime (0500 GMT).
They will drive the 30 km (19 miles) to the Prince of Wales Barracks in downtown Hong Kong, arriving soon after British troops fire a 21-gun salute marking the Queen's birthday.
The advance party will be the first of up to 10,000 PLA troops who will form the Hong Kong garrison after Britain returns its last Asian colony -- a bustling capitalist outpost of 6.4 million people -- to Communist-ruled China at midnight on June 30.
Up to 200 advance troops are expected to arrive before the handover. By that day, Britain will have phased out its garrison forces, which were once 10,000-strong in the territory.
The last of the famed "Black Watch" highlanders regiment will depart just after the midnight flag change.
"This is an historic event," Edward Ho, a legislator of the relatively pro-China Liberal Party, told reporters.
But the anti-Communist Democratic Party, which received the largest number of votes in the 1995 elections, disagreed.
"This entry has little significance or excitement. The soldiers will keep a very low profile," said the party's security spokesman James To.
It will be the first quasi-sovereign presence China has been allowed in the transition towards handover.
Beijing is currently represented in Hong Kong by its Xinhua News Agency, by a diplomatic establishment known as the Joint Liaison Group, and by a large array of mainland companies.
British authorities said the PLA group will get no special treatment at the frontier. They will go through normal customs and immigration controls and then find their own way from the border to the Prince of Wales Barracks, where 28 of them will be billeted. Twelve will stay on nearby Stonecutters Island, where Britain recently closed its Tamar Naval base.
"The soldiers will be unarmed and are here to carry out practical preparations for the PLA to take over responsibility for the defence of Hong Kong on July 1," British armed forces spokesman Roger Goodwin told Reuters.
General Zhou will be greeted at the barracks by British garrison commander, Major-General Bryan Dutton.
"They will be greeted with normal courtesies, handshakes and salutes," Goodwin said.
"It is in the best long-term interests of the people of Hong Kong that there should be a smooth transfer of defence responsibilities to the PLA," he said.
"The British garrison looks forward to working with the advance party to help ensure a successful transfer. The future PLA garrison inherits a proud tradition from the British Hong Kong garrison, a success story which we will do everything to help them continue."
Many of Hong Kong's people are disturbed by the imminent arrival of an army whose tanks crushed the student-led democracy movement in Beijing's Tiananmen Square in 1989.
China has gone to pains in recent months to soothe those anxieties with a PLA campaign at their interim base over the border in Shenzhen, parading elite troops and stressing their qualities of virtue, discipline and high education.
