An American businessman is plotting a marketing revolution in the hospitality sector and aims to house U.S. pioneers in the China market.
Corporate housing specialist Howard Ruby says he aims to turn the business of letting serviced apartments into a full-fledged industry that will provide everything from Internet terminals in the home to child care and jobs for expatriate spouses.
FROM POOR COUSIN OF HOTELS TO A GLOBAL SERVICE
Until recently the sector providing ready-to-live-in, service-provided, short-term apartments was a poor cousin of hotels, and in many cities of the world it still is.
"This whole industry has been below the radar screen over the last twenty years, being done by a mama and papa, or a small operator that operates one building at a time," said Ruby.
"And now we're seeing an industry evolve because of the needs of corporate clients as business globalises around the world," the head of Los Angeles-based Oakwood International said in an interview at a recent hotel industry conference.
EYES ON ASIA AND CHINA MARKETS
Ruby's group recently launched a joint venture with a subsidiary of Australia-listed Lend Lease in Singapore with plans to provide 10,000 serviced apartments in Asia, and intends to take aim at London during the next year.
Ruby foresees large-scale expansion in the sector in the Far East, especially in China, with much of American industry abuzz with plans to move people into the region.
Chinese cities such as Beijing, Shanghai and Guangzhou have large expatriate populations as well as large numbers of home-grown professionals moving around the country on assignment who need temporary serviced housing.
"I just finished a tour of major client companies in the United States. Every single one is planning an expansion into the Far East, with most of them talking about China.
"Telecommunications, software companies, all the way through to clothing and furniture manufacturers. They're all talking China right now. Whereas a company might have sent 10 people last year, they're expecting to send over 20 people this coming year," he said.
The serviced apartment industry is starting to break away from the niche market identity and family-style business of old into a multifaceted service industry, Ruby believes.
CORPORATE RELOCATIONS PROVIDE HUGE MARKET POTENTIAL
Oakwood is the largest national provider of serviced apartments in the United States, with offices in 60 cities, more than 17,000 apartments and 25,000 clients including 400 of the Fortune 500 companies and 75 of the world's top multinationals.
The potential of the business is highlighted by one client that carries out 50,000 relocations of staff a year, with an average three months stay in temporary housing, Ruby said.
A company like General Motors, for example, might need help with relocation or temporary housing for staff moved around on training, special projects like setting up new production lines and might put out 25,000 apartment requirements a year.
Ruby started out catering to the niche market of new college graduates three decades ago -- apartments for baby boomers.
He moved on to corporate housing when companies asked for more services, such as maid service and taking care of bills.
SERVICED APARTMENTS TO BECOME MULTIFACETED SERVICE
He sees the business progressing to include video conferencing, Internet hookups, sports and recreation facilities, orientation tours, child care and job search agencies for spouses.
"This way a serviced apartment offers a branded service dedicated to the needs of the corporate customer. They are not just a physical facility, but a service provider," he said.
"Companies do not want staff transfers to end in failure because of a dissatisfied spouse. So we want to provide a service that makes a transfer a success."
With an increasingly cluttered market, customers looked now to a reputable brand as their one point of contact, Ruby said.
DEALS IN THE PIPELINE IN ASIA
In the Far East, Oakwood and partners are working on deals in Hong Kong, Shanghai, Manila and Bangkok.
The first Asian project to go onstream will be Oakwood Premier, a serviced apartment scheme in Shanghai's historic Xuhui district, where the French concession was located in pre-revolutionary times. The property, owned by a Hong Kong family, will open later this year.
"As the industry matures in Asia, dedicated service companies will be the providers of choice for the corporations leasing the majority of serviced apartments," Ruby said.
