Britain's minister handling Hong Kong's 1997 transfer to China will confer with London's colonial governor and other officials this weekend after opening the way to a breakthrough in handover arrangements with Beijing.
Jeremy Hanley, Minister of State at the Foreign and Commonwealth Office, arrives in Hong Kong on Friday night to discuss the state of play in negotiations following his recent visit to Beijing, which was marked by a warming of relations.
Hanley, wrapping up a tour of Asia, will meet Governor Chris Patten and the territory's quasi cabinet, the Executive Council, to brief them on his recent talks with China's Hong Kong policy supremo Lu Ping.
They would also discuss how Foreign Secretary Malcolm Rifkind would handle his next meeting with China's Foreign Minister Qian Qichen, likely to take place at the United Nations General Assembly session in New York later this month.
A well-placed western diplomatic source said Hanley's talks in China had produced progress on the long-stalled and thorny issue of a joint handover ceremony when a century and a half of British rule ends, at midnight next June 30.
"The main thing was that he made good progress on the handover ceremony, and an announcement on this could come quite soon," the diplomatic source said.
A deal on the ceremony in 291 days' time to mark this closing chapter of Britain's empire was now very close, the source said. He added that there was some hope that Britain's Prince Charles might attend.
A government spokesman said Hanley's visit to Hong Kong was a "pulse-feeling mission" and that Patten was keen to hear first hand about the latest contacts with Lu Ping.
Hanley arrives in Hong Kong on the eve of the departure of Britain's diplomatic negotiating team to Beijing for a session of the Joint Liaison Group forum haggling over the handover.
This year had seen a significant shift to cordial relations between Britain and China, the diplomatic source said.
Progress was made on "substantive economic issues", although on the political front less had been achieved, he said.
London and Beijing have long bickered over the transition, with discord over the handover ceremony once so entrenched that prospects of a joint ceremony seemed in doubt. China, infuriated by Patten's expansion of democracy in the colony, was once said to have insisted that he should not attend.
But Lu told Hanley in Beijing he would seal the handover next year in a ceremonial handshake with Patten.
Another obstacle has been China's plan to dissolve Hong Kong's elected Legislative council and supplant it with an appointed "provisional legislature", which Britain opposes.
"China has managed to change the tone of its approach to Hong Kong without shifting its stance on the provisional legislature," the diplomatic source said.
Recently political analysts have noted softer Chinese policy utterances on Hong Kong, including offers of dialogue with the Democratic Party, long a fierce critic of Beijing, and an attempt to inject more candidates into the contest for the territory's first post-colonial leader, or Chief Executive.
An unprecedented exchange of letters between the Democrats and China this month came after the British side encouraged the party to open a dialogue with the Chinese and China to be more receptive to the group, a Hong Kong official said on Friday.
China has promised Hong Kong a high degree of autonomy under the handover treaty with Britain, and no change to the colony's freewheeling capitalist system for 50 years under a "one country two systems" policy aimed at reunifying Chinese territories.
