Hong Kong's future government has hit a new snag, with a shortage of trained staff forcing it to cancel a sitting of a controversial legislature preparing new laws ahead of the territory's handover to China.
It is the latest in a series of difficulties facing Tung Chee-hwa, the China-backed shipping magnate who will rule Hong Kong after the British pull out at midnight on June 30.
Tung's office said on Wednesday that this Saturday's session of the provisional legislature, which had been scheduled to deal with a draft law on new flags, had been dropped from the diary. Just a briefing would take place.
"The draft bills aren't ready because there aren't enough people," Bob Howlett, a spokesman for Tung's office, told Reuters. He said Tung's coordinator, Michael Suen, concluded the office did not have enough draftsmen to prepare planned laws.
"He doesn't want to see a rushed job done on anything," Howlett said.
But Tung's office issued a statement saying the bills would be passed in good time before the July 1 handover.
"We are doing the best we can with our limited resources. We are firmly committed to completing the drafting of all essential bills in good time for their passage by the Provisional Legislature Council before July 1."
British Governor Chris Patten has refused to second more staff to the Tung office from the Hong Kong civil service to help the future government ready itself for the handover.
The office has only two law drafters on its staff.
Communist-ruled China resumes sovereignty over Hong Kong, a British colony for the last 156 years, under a 1984 treaty that allows the territory virtual autonomy for another 50 years.
China, angered by democratic reforms introduced by Patten in the twilight years of British rule, set up the provisional legislature in December to replace the democratically elected Legislative Council (Legco).
Many of China's critics consider the interim body unconstitutional.
"I think it's a good thing there's now no legislation going forward this week, and it would be even better if no legislation goes forward at any time, because anything they do handle between now and June 30 is vulnerable to legal challenge after the first of July," said Patten's spokesman, Kerry McGlynn.
"That can't be in anybody's interests. We've always made it perfectly plain, and will continue to do so up to June 30, that we'll do nothing to undermine the credibility and legitimacy of the current Legco by providing any kind of assistance to the provisional legislature," McGlynn told Reuters.
A spokesman for the provisional legislature said the body would now organise a briefing on Saturday on the planned civil rights curbs, instead of a full-fledged legislative session, at its base in the Chinese border town of Shenzhen.
Tung's run-up to his new job as Hong Kong chief executive has been a bumpy one.
Sino-British disputes were stoked this month after Tung launched a plan to curb political liberties such as the right to protest and the right of political groups to receive foreign funds. He provoked a domestic and international outcry.
Last week he admitted to the media that he had donated 50,000 stg ($81,500) to the ruling British Conservative Party in 1992, sparking cries of hypocrisy.
