Rights groups and academics warned of threats to freedom in Hong Kong on Tuesday, while a pro-China politician denied that proposed curbs to civil liberties would strangle the territory after Beijing takes over.
Hong Kong's 156 years under the British flag come to an end when the territory reverts to Chinese rule at midnight on June 30 and, with 63 days to go, the pace of political debate is quickening.
Human Rights Watch/Asia said changes to China's criminal code had made it easier for Beijing to stifle dissent, and Hong Kong people might even be put on trial in China.
A public consultation on the future of political freedom in the colony ends on Wednesday, and the bustling capitalist outpost's 6.4 million people are sharply divided.
The pulse-taking, launched by Hong Kong's future leader Tung Chee-hwa, asks members of the public and organisations to submit views on his plan to ban foreign funding of political groups and curb the right to protest in the interests of "national security".
Hong Kong academics waded into the fray on Tuesday by saying the proposed rules on political groups posed a threat to freedom of association, the interpretation of foreign meddling was flawed and too much interpretation was left to authorities.
"This is tantamount to opening the door to abuse in the future," the statement, signed by 150 scholars, said.
Pro-democracy parties, the legal profession, human rights groups, Western-style trade unions and churches have objected to Tung's plan in written submissions, and there has been loud criticism from London and Washington.
But organisations representing industry, commerce, pro-China political parties and pro-Beijing trade unions support the plan, which was forced on Tung by a Chinese parliamentary resolution.
Pro-China politician Maria Tam told a business audience on Tuesday that Tung's proposal to curb civil and political liberties was not an attack on human rights.
"Tung Chee-hwa is not trying to strangle human rights here," Tam told the Hong Kong General Chamber of Commerce in a speech.
Tam, a leading member of China's Preparatory Committee, which is charged with setting up the post-handover political system, said similar restrictions existed in the United States, Canada, Australia and other Western states.
In the latest twist, a powerful pro-Beijing labour group, the Federation of Trade Unions, called for a widening of definitions of political groups covered by the curbs.
But in an unusual move, the federation also called for a ban on funding from China's ruling Communist Party to local political groups to be added to the restrictions. The move would "avoid disputes and criticisms", union boss Cheng Yiu-tong said.
Pro-democracy trade union federation leader Lee Cheuk-yan attacked the bid to widen the net.
"(It) is a step backward, because they want to have more organisations defined as political groups," Lee told Reuters. "They want to pressure these organisations to depoliticise."
Human Rights Watch/Asia said in a report on Tuesday that China's striking of the term "counterrevolution" -- the communist code for subversion -- from the law books in March did not mean easing political controls. Quite the opposite.
"China has merely replaced the term 'counterrevolution' with the equally elastic notion of 'endangering state security' and has, in the process, actually broadened the capacity of the state to suppress dissent," the report said.
Hong Kong people, who China has vowed can keep their legal system and way of life for 50 years, could suffer, it said.
"Despite Hong Kong's separate legal system, Beijing may have the power to bring Hong Kong people to face trial in mainland courts," it said.
