Human rights and political liberty took centre stage in Hong Kong on Tuesday as human rights watchdogs said China was making it easier to crush dissent, boding ill for the territory after Beijing takes over.
After 156 years under the British flag, Hong Kong reverts to Chinese rule at midnight on June 30 -- 63 days away -- and the pace of politics is quickening.
The watchdog Human Rights Watch/Asia said changes to China's criminal code had made it easier for Beijing to stifle dissent, and Hong Kong people might even be put on trial in China.
In Washington, Secretary of State Madeleine Albright and Chinese Foreign Minister Qian Qichen held talks on contentious issues but there was no shift in views on human rights or the future of Hong Kong, a Chinese spokesman said.
A major "public consultation" on the future of political freedom in the colony ends on Wednesday, and the bustling capitalist outpost's 6.4 million people are sharply divided.
The pulse-taking launched by future leader Tung Chee-hwa asks members of the public and organisations to submit views on his plan to ban foreign funding of political groups and curb the right to protest in the interests of "national security".
Pro-democracy parties, the legal profession, human rights groups, Western-style trade unions and churches have all vigorously objected to the plan in written submissions, and there has been loud criticism from London and Washington.
But organisations representing industry, commerce, pro-China political parties and pro-Beijing trade unions support Tung's plan, which was forced on him in March by a Chinese parliamentary resolution.
In the latest twist, a powerful pro-Beijing labour group, the Federation of Trade Unions, urged a widening of definitions of political groups covered by the curbs.
But in an unusual move, the federation also called for a ban on funding from China's ruling Communist Party to local political groups to be added to the restrictions.
"This will avoid disputes and criticisms. Hong Kong's political groups should stand on their own feet to fight for their beliefs," said the union's boss, Cheng Yiu-tong.
Cheng's rival, pro-democracy trade union federation leader Lee Cheuk-yan, attacked Cheng's bid to widen the net.
"(It) is a step backward, because they want to have more organisations defined as political groups," Lee told Reuters. "They want to pressure these organisations to depoliticise."
Tung's future Justice Secretary, Elsie Leung, said she was willing to consider calls for a ban on mainland funding.
Such funding had not originally been mentioned because it was considered that the national security interests of Hong Kong and mainland organisations converged.
"But we will consider this proposal as so many people have raised it," she said at a function on Monday.
Human Rights Watch/Asia said in a major report on Tuesday that China's striking of the term "counterrevolution", the communist code for subversion, from the law books in March did not mean easing political controls. Quite the opposite.
"China has merely replaced the term 'counterrevolution' with the equally elastic notion of 'endangering state security' and has, in the process, actually broadened the capacity of the state to suppress dissent," the report said.
Hong Kong people, who China has vowed can keep their legal system and way of life for 50 years, could suffer, it said.
"The new security provisions will facilitate the labelling of all domestic critics as tools of 'hostile foreign forces'," it said. "Despite Hong Kong's separate legal system, Beijing may have the power to bring Hong Kong people to face trial in mainland courts."
