A vow by future leader Tung Chee-hwa that there will be no "Tiananmen" crackdowns in Hong Kong after China takes over drew a muted welcome on Wednesday from the territory's leading democracy advocate.
But Martin Lee, leader of Hong Kong's Democratic Party, urged Tung to match words with deeds.
Tung vowed on the U.S. ABC News "Nightline" television programme on Tuesday to protect the right to protest and said no such repression as occurred in Beijing's Tiananmen Square in 1989 would happen in Hong Kong under his leadership.
The British colony reverts to China at midnight on June 30, and the memory of the Tiananmen massacre, when Chinese tanks crushed a student-led democracy movement in 1989, remains vivid for Hong Kong's 6.4 million people.
Tung's remark came on the last day of a pulse-taking exercise in which the public has been consulted on his plan to curb freedoms, such as the right to protest.
Asked if the Tiananmen Square crackdown could be repeated in Hong Kong, Tung said: "No, it can't happen here. It will not happen here. I will not allow it to happen here."
"Demonstration is part of our culture, demonstration is part of life...they will be free to demonstrate as they please, but I would hope they would abide by the laws of Hong Kong if they wish to do so," Tung said.
Lee welcomed the pledge but said words were not enough.
"My Democratic Party colleagues and I await Mr Tung's matching words with action and leaving Hong Kong's laws on assembly and other freedoms intact," Lee told Reuters.
Lee said Tung's comment contradicted the essence of Tung's plans to curb civil rights after China takes over.
"This is an encouraging statement from our Chief Executive-designate Mr Tung Chee-hwa which recognises the reality that Hong Kong is a free society where people regularly exercise their right to demonstrate peacefully within the law," Lee said.
"But there is a significant discrepancy between what Mr Tung is saying...and what he has proposed doing."
China's parliament has declared null and void Hong Kong's existing laws on public order and lawful assembly, once the flag is changed at midnight on June 30.
Tung's civil liberties plan includes slapping a ban on foreign funding of political groups and making it obligatory to obtain police permission to stage protests.
Pro-democracy parties, lawyers, human rights groups, unions and churches have vigorously objected to Tung's plan in written submissions. Washington and London have also criticised it.
But groups representing industry, commerce, pro-China parties and pro-Beijing trade unions support the plan.
In a separate development, China's Foreign Minister Qian Qichen issued assurances on Tuesday that Hong Kong would retain great autonomy "unmatched in the world".
"The Hong Kong Special Administrative Region will enjoy a high degree of autonomy, including the executive power, legislative power and independent judicial power and the power of final trial," Qian said during a visit to Washington.
The Hong Kong government applauded Qian's remark. "The government welcomes this reassurance," a spokeswoman said.
An official of China's Hong Kong And China Macau Affairs Office in Beijing declined to comment on Tung's pledge to protect civil rights in the territory after the handover, saying such matters were none of Beijing's business.
"Beijing is responsible for the defence and foreign affairs of Hong Kong after it returns to Chinese rule," he said.
"Everything else is the responsibility of the government of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region."
