It may be only the second qualifier on the long road leading to the 1998 World Cup but the Czech Republic and Spain are approaching Wednesday night's European group six match as though it were a battle for the final.
For the Czechs it will be the first big test since they reached the Euro 96 final, while Spain are expected to give Real Madrid's teenage striker Raul Gonzalez his first cap in the hope that he will give them badly-needed scoring power.
Both sides opened their campaigns last month with high-scoring victories over the two weakest teams in the group, Spain winning 6-2 in the Faroe Islands and the Czechs thrashing Malta 6-0.
But Yugoslavia have already collected three wins and Slovakia two against the same two hapless victims and neither the Czechs nor Spain can afford to give ground in Prague.
"(The Spanish) are explosive and technically very sound. This game's made all the more important because a loss will make it a difficult trip for either side," Czech midfielder Karel Poborsky of English premier league Manchester United said.
Victory alone will satisfy Spain's veteran goalkeeper Andoni Zubizarreta. "I would not be happy with a draw, we want three points," he said.
Czech coach Dusan Uhrin has named 16 of the 19-strong squad which caused a surprise by reaching the final of June's European championship in which they lost to Germany.
They include in-form midfielder Patrik Berger, who scored six goals in 10 days for English premier league Liverpool last month.
"Spain is obviously a strong team but we showed in London that we can play anybody," Berger said.
While the Czechs are looking to build on recent success, Spain are rebuilding and plugging holes where necessary.
Raul, 19, who scored twice against the Czechs in the quarter-finals of last season's European under-21 competition, is Real Madrid's top scorer even after being moved into a supporting role by new coach Fabio Capello.
"There are some players absent...It's the right moment to pick Raul," Spain manager Javier Clemente said.
Clemente had been strongly criticised for sticking by veteran forward Julio Salinas instead of choosing Raul.
Neither Salinas nor injured striker Kiko Narvaez are on the trip but Kiko's Atletico Madrid team mate Jose Luis Caminero is fit and is expected to be given the role of playmaker in the starting line-up.
With Spain likely to face problems in the air, tall defender Roberto Rios and striker Ismael Urzaiz have been called into the squad for the first time.
Of the seven players chosen from the multi-billion peseta Barcelona line-up, midfielder Guillermo Amor, defender Abelardo Fernandez and striker Juan Pizzi have not played regularly this season under new coach Bobby Robson, a former England manager.
By contrast utility man Luis Enrique Martinez has blossomed since moving to Barcelona from Real Madrid.  
Teams (from):
Czech Republic - Petr Kouba, Pavel Srnicek; Miroslav Kadlec, Lubos Kubik, Tomas Repka, Michal Hornak, Jan Suchoparek; Radoslav Latal, Jiri Nemec, Karel Poborsky, Pavel Nedved, Patrik Berger, Radek Bejbl, Pavel Novotny, Martin Frydek, Richard Dostalek; Pavel Kuka, Vladimir Smicer, Radovan Hromadko.
Spain - Andoni Zubizarreta, Santiago Canizares; Roberto Rios, Alberto Belsue, Rafael Alkorta, Fernando Hierro, Miguel Angel Nadal, Agustin Aranzabal, Sergi Barjuan, Abelardo Fernandez; Guillermo Amor, Josep Guardiola, Luis Enrique Martinez, Julen Guerrero, Jose Luis Caminero, Juan Pizzi, Raul Gonzalez, Alfonso Perez, Ismael Urzaiz.
