The Czech Republic and Spain played out a scoreless draw in their World Cup group six qualifier on Wednesday, in a match that never lived up to expectations.
The Czechs were facing their first big test since they reached the Euro 96 final, while Real Madrid's teenage striker Raul was looking to spark a depleted Spanish attack in his first full international.
Both sides opened their World Cup campaigns last month with high-scoring victories over the two weakest teams in the group, Spain winning 6-2 in the Faroe Islands and the Czechs thrashing Malta 6-0.
But Yugoslavia have already collected three wins and Slovakia two against the same two hapless victims and neither team could afford to give ground in Prague.
Like two heavyweights feeling each other out in the early rounds, both teams started tentatively, waiting to pounce on the other's mistakes.
The Spaniard's were the first to flinch when Kaiserslautern striker Pavel Kuka's cross found an unmarked Karel Poborsky just outside the crease. But the Manchester United midfielder failed to control the ball, wasting what would turn out be one of the game's few good scoring chances.
Next it was the Czechs turn to falter. Newcastle United goalkeeper Pavel Srnicek, winning his first cap in over a year, tried to clear the ball, but hit attacker Alfonso Perez and watched helplessly as it rolled just wide of the net.
The Czechs picked up their play in the second half, putting Spain on their heels for the rest of the game.
"I don't think we lost points tonight because they are such an excellent team. They played strongly in the defence and its too bad we missed out on the two great chances we had," said Czech striker Patrik Berger.
Teams:
Czech Republic: 1-Pavel Srnicek, 2-Radoslav Latal, 3-Jan Suchoparek, 4-Pavel Nedved (15-Martin Frydek, 86th), 5-Miroslav Kadlec, 6-Michal Hornak, 7-Jiri Nemec, 8-Karel Poborsky (17-Vladimir Smicer, 58th), 9-Pavel Kuka, 10-Patrik Berger, 11-Radek Bejbl
Spain: 1-Andoni Zubizarreta, 2-Abelardo Fernandez, 3-Sergi Barjuan, 4-Rafael Alkorta, 5-Miguel Angel Nadal, 6-Fernando Hierro, 7-Raul Gonzalez, 8-Luis Enrique Martinez, 9-Guillermo Amor (18-Ismael Urzaiz, 76th), 10-Julen Guerrero (14-Josep Guardiola, 52nd), 11-Alfonso Perez (15-Roberto Rios, 73rd)
