Third seed Boris Becker on Thursday withdrew from the $475,000 Czech Indoor Open due to a recurring injury to his right wrist.
Becker, who tore a ligament in the wrist during a third round match at this year's Wimbledon, trained on Thursday morning, but afterward complained of pain in his wrist.
He later told ATP officials that he would not play his second round match against Czech Martin Damm later on Thursday.
"Boris said his wrist was too sore and that he would not be able to play this evening," ATP Tour Supervisor Gayle Bradshaw told Reuters. He did not elaborate.
On Wednesday evening, Becker cruised to an easy 6-3 6-4 victory over Denmark's Frederik Fetterlein.
During the match he held his wrist several times, and appeared to be favouring it again at practice on Thursday morning. Becker immediately left the training court for his hotel. He was not available for comment
"I have good days and bad days with my hand...it was sore in the match but I managed to fight through it and hopefully it will be alright tomorrow," Becker said after the match on Wednesday.
The world number six tried to return to the circuit last month, but recurring problems with the wrist forced him to retire from the first round in Bucharest, lose in the second round in Basle and withdraw from Lyon two weeks ago.
Becker's withdrawal puts a serious dent in the 28 year old's plans to qualify for a record 12th appearance at the ATP Tour Championships at the end of the year. He currently trails South African Wayne Ferreira, seeded second in Ostrava, by only 46 points for the eighth and final spot in Hannover.
It also comes as a blow to tournament organisers. Though he was only ranked third in the tournament behind top seed Goran Ivanisevic and Ferreira, it was clear most of the tickets sold were by fans hoping to catch a glimpse of the German.
Barely 1,000 fans came out to watch Ivanisevic's first round match against world number 42 Adrian Voinea. In contrast, a tournament record crowd of some 10,000 watched Becker defeat the Fetterlien, ranked 156 in the world.
