Britain's Tim Henman emerged on Friday as the only seed in the $475,000 Czech Indoor Open semifinals.
Seventh-ranked Henman overcame second seed Wayne Ferreira 6-4 6-3.
But fifth seed Todd Martin was edged out by Germany's David Prinosil 7-6 7-6 and sixth seed Michael Stich lost to Czech Martin Damm 5-7 6-4 6-4.
Czech Petr Korda completed the final four with his 6-1 6-0 demolition of Davis Cup team mate Jiri Novak and now faces another Davis Cup player in Damm. Henman plays Prinosil in Saturday's other semifinal.
Reigning Ostrava champion Ferreira, ranked seventh in the world, never looked comfortable against Henman, the more aggressive of the two for most of the match.
He failed to gain a single break point all match while the Briton broke serve late in both sets.
Henman's win avenged his loss to the South African in Toronto earlier this year, and he said he had taken notes from that match on to court on Friday.
"In Toronto, Ferreira was dictating the points -- serving very well and hitting forehands very well -- so today I tried to be very aggressive and, when I had an opportunity, move forward," said Henman, ranked 26 in the world.
Local favourite Damm, a finalist at the Beijing Open last week, spoiled Stich's 28th birthday. After losing the first set the Czech scored crucial breaks in the ninth game of the final two sets.
For Martin, defeat was especially painful as he could have gained valuable ground on Ferreira in the race for the final spot at the ATP Tour championship in Hanover at the end of the season.
The American currently sits 199 points behind the South African. A semifinal berth would have eaten 37 points out of that lead while a place in the finals would have almost halved Ferreira's advantage.
Prinosil, ranked 58th in the world, profited from a Martin double fault at 5-5 in the first set tiebreak and took a 4-0 lead in the second set tiebreak on the way to sealing victory.
Martin said: "I realise I didn't help my cause at all but we've got two of the biggest tournaments coming up and I think whoever does really well in those events should probably play themselves into a position at Hanover."
Martin, Stich and Ferreira both appear next week in Stuttgart, where the winner gains 370 Tour points, 200 more than the winner here.
The German tournament's organisers said on Friday they expect Boris Becker will be fit to play, despite a wrist injury which forced him to retire here.
In a move to accommodate Becker, his first round match has been put back to Wednesday.
