Second seed Wayne Ferreira and fifth seed Todd Martin both went down to straight set defeats in the $475,000 Czech Indoor Open quarterfinals on Friday.
In the day's opening match, Ferreira lost 6-4 6-3 to Britain's Tim Henman, seeded seventh in the tournament, while Martin was edged out by Germany's David Prinosil 7-6 7-6.
Ferreira, ranked seventh in the world, never looked comfortable against Henman, who was the aggressor for most of the match.
The 22 year-old Brit avenged his loss to Ferreira in the round of 16 in Toronto earlier this year, and said he took notes from that match onto the court on Friday.
Henman managed to break Ferreira late in both sets, while the South African failed to gain a single break point in the macth.
"In Toronto Ferreira was dictating the points, serving very well and hitting forehands very well so today I tried to be very aggressive and when I had an opportunity, move forward," said Henman, ranked 26th in the world.
For Martin, the loss was especially painful since he could have gained valuable ground on Ferreira in the race for the final spot at the ATP Tour Championships in Hannover at the end of the season.
The American currently sits 199 points behind the South African, and a semifinal berth would have eaten 37 points out of the lead, while a place in the finals would have cut Ferreira's advantage by almost half.
Prinosil, ranked 58th in the world, took advantage of a Martin double fault at 5-5 in the first set tiebreak, and then jumped out to a 4-0 lead in the second set tiebreak, a hole the American could not pull himself out of.
"I realise I didn't help my cause by at all, but we've got two of the biggest tournaments coming up and I think whoever does really well in those events should probably play themselves into a position at Hannover," Martin said.
Martin was helped this week by Boris Becker's recurring wrist injury which forced him out of the Ostrava tournament after the first round.
All three players will compete next week at Stutgart, where the winner will receive 370 tour points, more than double the 170 points to be awarded to the winner at Ostrava.
