Britain's Tim Henman emerged on Friday as the only seed to advance to the semifinals of the $475,000 Czech Indoor Open.
In the day's opening match, seventh seeded Henman downed second seed Wayne Ferreira 6-4 6-3, while fifth seed Todd Martin was edged out by Germany's David Prinosil 7-6 7-6 and sixth seed Michael Stich lost to Czech Martin Damm 5-7 6-4 6-4.
Czech Petr Korda rounded out the final four with his win over Davis Cup team mate Jiri Novak 6-1 6-0. Korda now faces another Davis Cupper in Damm. Henman will square off against Prinosil in the other semifinal on Saturday.
Reigning Ostrava champion Ferreira, ranked seventh in the world, never looked comfortable against Henman, the more aggressive of the two for most of the match.
He failed to gain a single break point all match while the 22-year-old Briton broke serve late in both sets.
Henman's win avenged his loss to the South African in Toronto earlier this year, and he said he had taken notes from that match on to court on Friday.
"In Toronto, Ferreira was dictating the points -- serving very well and hitting forehands very well -- so today I tried to be very aggressive and, when I had an opportunity, move forward," said Henman, ranked 26th in the world.
Local favourite Damm, a finalist at the Beijing Open last week showed little signs of jet lag in spoiling Stich's 28th birthday. After losing the first set, Damm scored crucial breaks in the ninth game of the final two sets to take the match.
For Martin, defeat was especially painful as he could have gained valuable ground on Ferreira in the race for the final spot at the ATP Tour championship in Hanover at the end of the season.
The American currently sits 199 points behind the South African. A semifinal berth would have eaten 37 points out of that lead while a place in the finals would have almost halved Ferreira's advantage.
Prinosil, ranked 58th in the world, profited from a Martin double fault at 5-5 in the first set tiebreak and took a 4-0 lead in the second set tiebreak on the way to sealing victory.
Martin said: "I realise I didn't help my cause at all but we've got two of the biggest tournaments coming up and I think whoever does really well in those events should probably play themselves into a position at Hanover.
Martin, Stich and Ferreira both play next week in Stuttgart, where the winner gains 370 tour points, 200 more than the winner here.
The tournament's organisers said on Friday that they expect Becker will also be fit to play. In a move to accomodate the Australian Open champion, his first round match has been put back until Wednesday.
