Germany's David Prinosil ended rising British star Tim Henman's bid for his first ATP Tour victory on Saturday, while Czech Petr Korda halted compatriot Martin Damm's quest for his second final appearance in two weeks.
Prinosil beat Henman 6-4 6-3 in the semifinals of the $475,000 Czech Indoor Open and Korda followed with a hard-fought 4-6 6-3 7-5 victory against his Davis Cup team mate.
Seventh seed Henman, who had not lost a set all week, looked shaky on his groundstrokes early, but stayed in contention with his strong serve, firing seven of his 11 aces in the first set.
But in the 10th game of the match, Henman's serve failed him, his double fault giving the German triple break point.
Henman, who has now reached seven semifinals but never gone further, fought back with a service winner and then an ace, but as he has done all week, Prinosil blasted a brilliant return to take the point and set.
The British number one recovered to gain two break points of his own in the third game, but failed to come up big when he needed to.
Prinosil, who was born near here in Olomouc before emigrating to Germany, then took control.
Henman said: "I didn't serve well at the right times. I felt confident coming into the match, (but) I just didn't really make anything happen today. It was just a case of not really having a good day at the office.
"I'm disappointed to have lost because I thought it was a good opportunity to make my first final. Bar this match, I've played very well this week and am confident going into Stuttgart and Paris."
Prinosil said: "I served very strongly today and just tried to play within myself, not get too excited and lose my concentration. No matter what happens tomorrow, this tournament has been a great success for me."
Damm also looked on the bright side, viewing his appearance in the final last Sunday in the Beijing Open and this week's march to the semifinals as two of the best weeks of tennis he has ever played.
Victimns on the way have included world number three Michael Chang and ex-Wimbledon champion Michael Stich.
For Korda the win came as a relief following claims in the local media that he could no longer hold his nerve in big matches.
The former world number five has suffered several injuries in the past two years, dropping to 49th in the rankings.
"I felt a lot of pressure at the beginning of the match and I've never seen Martin play that well, but I think I also showed that I am still capable of playing tennis at the highest level," said Korda, who won his first tournament in two seasons at the Qatar Open earlier this year.
