The Czech September trade deficit should hold steady at around 14 billion crowns after a 14.7 billion crown monthly deficit in August, a Reuters poll of Czech economists showed on Wednesday.
Czech trade figures for the first nine months are scheduled to be released by the Czech Statistical Bureau (CSU) at 0900 local time (0700 GMT) on Thursday.
Most economists surveyed said they expect steady growth in the deficit and few surprises.
"It's still too early to talk about a period of stabilisation in the deficit, I think that will come in 1997 when imports level off and exports strengthen," Boris Gomez, an analyst at ING Barings told Reuters.
Whatever the deficit in September, the nine-month trade gap is sure to be a record, after the January-August figure reached 100.9 billion crowns, more than all of the 1995's total shortfall of 95.7 billion crowns.
The January-September 1995 trade deficit was 62.3 billion crowns.
Most analysts agreed a 13-15 September gap would be in-line with prevailing trends, and on target for the estimated deficit of 150-160 billion crowns.
The foreign exchange and money markets are expected to show little reaction over the figures, as long as they do not vary greatly from the estimates.
Analysts say the trade balance has been hurt by a downturn in the economies of western Europe earlier in the year, and a the effects of a recovery of demand in western Europe have yet to make an impact.
CSU figures show import growth was exceeding export growth by about 15 percent versus just over two percent over the last three months.
The government and central bank, however, has repeatedly ruled out a devaluation of the crown to boost exports.
Analysts point to mid-1997 as a crucial time in which the import wave -- which is aimed at modernising industries -- must show results in productivity growth and competitiveness.
Economists said the deficit could be financed this year, but might pose problems in the second half of 1997.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
