The Czech monthly trade deficit eased in September to 10.5 billion crowns from 14.5 billion in August, buoying market sentiment which had not expected the lowest single month total since January.
The Czech Statistical Bureau (CSU) on Thursday said the January-September trade shortfall hit an all-time high of 110.7 billion crowns, far surpassing 1995's full year deficit of 95.7 billion crowns.
Despite the fact that the overall deficit continues to break records, analysts said they were surprised by September's development. A Reuters survey of local analysts conducted on Wednesday had forecast a 13-15 billion crown monthly trade gap.
"I'm happily surprised. I think it's a relatively optimistic figure though it is not so good to make us revise our full year forecast," said Martin Kupka, an economist at Patria Finance, which has forecast a 150-160 billion crown deficit at year-end.
The CSU in a statement said that imports rose by 15.2 percent year-on-year, the same as in the previous month, while exports rose by 5.9 percent, after a 6.4 percent increase in August.
It added that strong growth in machinery and transport equipment imports continued, accounting for 38.3 percent of total imports.
Analysts said they were encouraged by the rise in this sector, saying that imports of this nature are needed to restructure industry, allowing it to produce more competitive goods for exporting.
The crown also reacted positively, dipping slightly following the release of the figures, before quickly regaining its losses as the market digested the statistics.
The crown was trading at 26.939 to the dollar at 1040 local time (0840 GMT) after opening at 26.945.
The rate implies a deviation from the midpoint of the currency basket of +2.87 percent, after the central bank's fixing on Wednesday at +2.80 percent.
"The market is pleased with the figures for sure, they seem to bear out estimates that slowly, the structure and size of the deficit is getting better," said one local forex dealer.
But, he added: "I don't think the crown itself will benefit too much from the numbers, but it certainly should not weaken."
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
