The Prague Stock Exchange suffered one of its biggest one-day falls ever on Friday, as waning foreign interest due to a lack of market transparency continues to run roughshod over the beleaguered bourse.
Four of the PSE's five largest issues fell sharply in active trading, pulling the Reuters RPIX index down nearly three percent to 1,052.
Long-criticised for its lack of transparency and regulation, analysts say Friday's loss was yet another sign that investors, especially foreigners, are pulling out of the market having grown tired of failed promises of reform.
"There's just a total lack of interest in this market," said Jan Sykora of Wood and Company.
"Fundamentally, companies look pretty cheap, but the lack of foreign interest and Czechs fearing the possibility of a devaluation and looking abroad (mean) you don't have tha much buying interest."
Under the Czech Republic's Securities Act, which was devised to handle the logistics of the government's massive voucher privatisation scheme, the Securities Registry (SCP) is bound by law to provide services such as moving securities to and from client accounts.
Since the SCP does not reveal any details of transactions, including prices and volumes, brokers have taken to the SCP because of its privacy and faster settlement process.
The problems have restrained the PSE which sees on average $4-$6 million of stock changing hands each day, compared with $15 million turnover in Warsaw, where the market has a capitalisation of just $3 billion.
"Unambiguously, a notable portion of foreign investors are not satisified with the current state of the Czech capital market," said Miroslav Nosal of Patria Finance.
In April, parliament approved a series of market reforms to compel companies and fund managers to be more open and accountable. A key element tackles the chronic problem of slow and irregular reporting of company earnings and actions.
The PSE has taken several steps to brings more transparency to the market, but some analysts say that the process is taking too long.
In mid-September, the Prague Stock Exchange pledged to improve the state of the market, stressing in particular the need for the early creation of an independent watchdog.
But many analysts were disappointed by the lack of strong enforcement requirements, as market supervision is still kept in the hands of a small, under-resourced Finance Ministry department.
And some question whether there is even the political will here to change the market, or if a few regulations will be enough to change the attitude of many market participants.
"The problem isn't only with market regulations. I don't feel the political will which can bring change and prevent frauds.," Markus Winkler, manager of the Discover Europe Investment Fund was quoted in the dsaily Mlada Fronta Dnes as saying on Friday.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
