A Czech central bank scheme to buy doubtful debts of smaller banks and restore stability to the banking sector has attracted interest from about 10 banks, the Czech news agency reported on Wednesday.
CTK, quoting central bank spokesman Martin Svehla, said that of the 13 banks allowed to participate in the plan, the number that had expressed an interest in joining "is nearing 10".
Central bank officials were not immediately available for comment.
The Czech National Bank (CNB) outlined the programme in mid-October followed the failure of Kreditni Banka in August -- the 11th bank in which the CNB had intervened -- and the politicisation of the case which had undermined confidence especially in small banks.
Under the plan, participating banks must follow strict conditions and allow the central bank to make management changes where needed. CNB officials said the programme was not aimed at resolving a problem at any one bank.
The plan will be open to all small private banks with total paid-in capital of 12.5 billion crowns ($458.5 million) and total assets of not more than 30 billion crowns.
The state-run Konsolidacni Banka would buy the banks' doubtful assets at face value.
The banks will be required to buy back the assets after around five to seven years, again priced at their nominal value, minus credits recovered by Konsolidacni from the debtors in the meantime.
Banks seeking to participate will be held to strict requirements which include sticking to a three-year stabilisation plan and an agreement to attain an eight percent capital adequacy ratio.
Banks also must maintain cost controls, profitability and liquidity as well as agreeing to frequent reviews by the central bank.
The maximum purchase of debt by Konsolidacni can total up to 110 percent of a single bank's paid-in capital, meaning a maximum exposure for the state of 13.7 billion crowns in total if all eligible banks participated.
The programme is voluntary based on a contract with the CNB, and the central bank said it would not reveal which banks elected to participate.
Banks eligible include Ekoagrobanka, Union Banka, Evrobanka, Prvni Mestska Banka, COOP Banka, Pragobanka, Plzenska Banka, Foresbank, Bankovni Dum Skala, Moravia Banka, Universal Banka, Zemska Banka, and Banka Hana.
Money for the scheme is to come primarily from state- controlled Konsolidacni Banka and if necessary from the CNB itself. A newly created unit of Konsolidacni, Ceska Financni s.r.o., will administer the programme.
Any losses from the programme are to be covered by the National Property Fund (NPF), the state privatisation agency.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
