Investors, fed up with a lack of transparency and the poor performance of the Czech equity market, are turning to the country's less opaque debt market, buoyed by favourable interest rates and economic data.
The Prague bourse has been caught in a downward spiral -- the official PX50 index has lost almost 18 percent in the past two months -- that analysts say won't end before the New Year.
But while bears maul the equities market, they say bulls are quietly finding greener pastures in Czech debt.
"The bond market is pretty bullish and the outlook is good. Rates have been tending down and people are positive especially in the longer maturities which are looking more attractive," said Michael Gartner, a debt analyst at ING Capital Markets.
Estimated daily bond turnover has grown to 900 million to one billion crowns, equal to turnover on the Prague stock exchange, from 500 million a year ago.
"The bond market is becoming even more important for foreign investors because they can get reasonable prices," said Alojz Lacko, a bond trader at Patria Finance.
Reasonable prices are something investors, foreign and domestic, have long complained they cannot find on the equities market where insufficient legislation has pushed an estimated 70 percent of trading into murky off-market dealing, and trampled minority shareholder rights.
Many strategic and speculative investors have taken advantage of the opaque system to buy up large stakes in firms without prices or counter-parties being made public until long after the deal has been made.
Bourse and Finance Ministry officials have stepped up their campaign in recent months to assure investors tighter, more stringent rules for trading will be introduced. But analysts say the moves appear to be too little, too late for investors who are turning away from Czech equities.
"Investors are really put off by the (trading) practices here and frankly, it will be hard to lure some back. But we don't have these problems in the debt market, and a lot are turning their attentions there," said one local trader.
ING's Gartner said investor motivation for entering the debt market is in many ways different from equity investments. Investor fears of having the carpet pulled out from under them by an off-market takeover deal are non-existent.
"The bond market is completely transparent because prices are transparent. It's a good market: it works, it's liquid, foreign investors, domestic investors, pension funds, investment funds all participate on an even field," he said.
A recent spate of positive economic indicators has further buoyed the market.
Inflation, one of the lowest in the region, eased further in October with the year-on-year rate standing at 8.7 percent.
The central bank's war on a burgeoning money supply has also borne fruit recently, with the expansion of the key M2 year-on-year rate falling to 13.2 percent at the end of August, just below its 14-17 percent target.
Although investor sentiment has traditionally been bearish on East European bonds because of currency risks, high taxation and political and economic instability, analysts say these factors are less significant in the Czech Republic.
While rates may be higher in neghbouring Poland and Hungary, the markets are very illiquid, especially in local currency corporate issues.
But with the strength and stability of the crown the Czech market is attractive because an investor can add a play on the local currency, and have little fear of currency risk since it is tied closely to the mark.
Traders say the government has also helped by easing currency exchange laws to help foreign investors repatriate their holdings. Foreigners may repatriate interest income on bonds as well as income from selling or redeeming them.
-- Prague newsroom (42 2) 24 23 0003
