Czechs cold-shouldered their newly-created Senate on Saturday, turning out in record low numbers for elections which were supposed to be a key test for the minority government of Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus.
The apathy suggested that the real winners might not be Klaus's Civic Democratic Party (ODS) or the opposition Social Democrats, but the far-right Republicans who boycotted the Senate elections and told fellow Czechs to follow suit.
Unofficial figures from the two-day first round, which ended on Saturday, indicated that turnout would be well under 40 percent, by far the lowest in the four parliamentary elections held since the 1989 fall of communism.
Opposition Social Democrat leader Milos Zeman bewailed Czechs' apathy towards the upper house, but predicted that turnout would improve in the second round on November 22-23.
"I think that no party can be happy with the low election turnout, because people that don't turn out for the Senate elections are giving up their civic rights, the right to vote, the right to decide," Zeman told reporters.
No national figures were available immediately after the polls closed at 2.00 p.m. (1300 GMT).
But preliminary, unofficial data from some of the 81 constituencies showed Klaus's centre-right ODS doing well against a bleak background on turnout.
In the Western city of Plzen, turnout was just 36 percent with the ODS candidate expected to face a Social Democrat in the second round, the Czech news agency CTK reported.
If no candidate wins more than half the vote in the first round, the top two candidates go through to the runoff.
In the northern mining town of Most, turnout was 26 percent with the ODS candidate leading trade union leader Richard Falbr, who is running for the Social Democrats.
Pundits have billed the Senate elections as an indicator of whether the Czech Republic can break out of a political impasse following inconclusive lower house polls which stripped Klaus's conservative coalition of its majority last June.
But the apparent low turnout, which compares with 76.4 percent in June, seems a vindication of the Republicans and their leader Miroslav Sladek.
Sladek regards the Senate as a waste of time and money. "They had nowhere to dump the political zombies so they established the Senate," he told a recent anti-election rally, adding that it "would be lazy, useless and expensive".
Conventional wisdom has been that if ODS did well in the Senate Klaus might provoke early lower house polls to regain the coalition's majority. If ODS lost to the Social Democrats, however, he could be forced to resign after seven years leading economic reform as finance minister and since 1992 as premier.
