Czechs cold-shouldered their newly-created Senate on Saturday, turning out in record low numbers for elections which were supposed to be a key test for the minority government of Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus.
Early results showed candidates of Klaus's Civic Democratic Party (ODS) ahead in the few constituencies declared so far but without the majority of the vote needed to win outright, meaning they will face the runner-up in a second round.
Foreign Minister Josef Zieleniec, an ODS vice chairman, welcomed the results but warned supporters against overconfidence. "I'm very happy that several of our candidates have moved into the next round," he told reporters.
But he added: "I warn you, add up all the votes for all of the candidates and think how they will go in the second round. The situation is not as rosy as it may appear from the numbers of ODS candidates that are moving into the next round."
With three of the 81 constitunecies officially declared, the striking statistic was the turnout figure which ranged from 26.36 percent in the northern mining town of Most to 29.78 in one constituency in the industrial city of Ostrava.
One official of the Central Electoral Commission, Ales Kaspar, forecast that turnout nationwide would be by far the lowest in the four parliamentary elections held since the 1989 fall of communism. "According to optimistic expectations, the turnout could be between 30 and 40 percent," he told Reuters.
This suggested the real winners might not be ODS or the opposition Social Democrats, but the far-right Republicans who boycotted the Senate polls and told Czechs to follow suit.
Opposition Social Democrat leader Milos Zeman bewailed Czechs' apathy towards the upper house, but predicted turnout would improve in the second round on November 22-23.
"I would like to remind all voters who criticise our country that by not voting they do not have the right to criticise the government. They have only the right to criticise themselves," said Zeman, who is speaker of the lower house.
But he added: "I firmly believe that in the second round, participation will be markedly higher because then it is a choice between the two strongest candidates," he said.
Share dealers welcomed signs that ODS, which has led free-market reform in recent years, would do well.
"The early results appear pleasantly good for ODS. To me, if these continue, it could be a good result for the market," said Jan Sykora of Prgaue brokerage Wood and Co.
Pundits have billed the Senate elections as an indicator of whether the Czech Republic can break out of a political impasse following inconclusive lower house polls which stripped Klaus's conservative coalition of its majority last June.
But the apparent low turnout, which compares with 76.4 percent in June, seems a vindication of the Republicans and their leader Miroslav Sladek.
Sladek regards the Senate as a waste of time and money. "They had nowhere to dump the political zombies so they established the Senate," he told a recent anti-election rally, adding that it "would be lazy, useless and expensive".
One complaint among voters was that many of the Senate candidates were unknown as government and opposition leaders all sit in the lower Chamber of Deputies. Few Czechs have much idea of what the Senate will do.
Conventional wisdom has been that if ODS did well in the Senate Klaus might provoke early lower house polls to regain the coalition's majority. If ODS lost to the Social Democrats, however, he could be forced to resign after seven years leading economic reform as finance minister and since 1992 as premier.
But Jiri Pehe, research director at the Open Media Research Institute (OMRI), said these theories may not be valid.
ODS is better at mobilising its supporters than the Social Democrats when interest is low. A big ODS win on a low turnout might therefore not be representative for lower house polls.
"If there is a low turnout, even if Klaus wins, I think that it would be very difficult for the ODS to know the real mood of the country," he said.
-- Prague newsroom (42 2) 24 23 0003
