Czech equity and forex markets pushed higher on Monday, buoyed by a strong showing by Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus's rightwing Civic Democratic Party (ODS) in the first round of Senate elections at the weekend.
But analysts warned profit taking and uncertainty leading up to a second round of voting this weekend will temper gains.
The Prague Stock Exchange, mired in a two-month long slump that has felled the bourse by some 16 percent, jumped 10.1 points, or 2.08 percent, at its daily price fixing to 496.8.
Brokers expressed muted optimism at the prospect that the rise was long-term, saying that domestic investors looking for a quick rise to profit from, and not key foreign investors were at the heart of the gain.
"There is very little foreign institutional buying as a result of the elections. It's mainly domestic buying. This was just the first round and the (vote) isn't won yet," said Jan Sykora of the brokerage Wood and Co.
Lubomir Vystavel of ING Barings added: "We had expected some speculation on the outcome of the elections.
Vystavel said the upsurge could continue into next week and beyond if ODS sustains its strong position in the second and final round next weekend, adding that the results may give cause for the long awaited rebound in Czech equities. "It is quite likely that this is the start of a trend," he said.
The crown also strengthened on the back of the election result, gaining around 0.3 percentage points to three percent above its dollar/mark basket in early trading, before settling at around +2.9 percent.
"Some of those who pushed the crown up in early dealing took profits, so its dropped slightly on the index," said Petr Korous, a trader at Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka.
"There will be some bias toward a stronger crown in the coming days but I don't think there will be any major move -- the majority of the move was seen already today," he added.
The central bank fixed the crown at 2.96 percent above the basket midpoint on Monday, after fixing it at +2.45 percent on Friday.
In what was billed as a key test of the minority coalition government, Klaus's ODS party took a commanding 36.47 percent of the first round vote, with the opposition Social Democrats (CSSD) trailing on 20.27 percent.
The result was a major improvement for the ODS, which won only 29.6 percent in elections to the lower house in June when a strong Social Democrat performance of 26.4 percent stripped Klaus's three-party coalition of its majority.
The rest of the vote was thinly split among coalition parties and the Communists.
The strong ODS showing was tempered though by poor turnout as only 35 percent of the electorate voted.
Of the 81 Senate seats, Civic Democrats won three outright in the first round and 76 of their candidates go into next weekend's runoff.
The CSSD meanwhile, will send only 48 candidates into the second round of voting slated for Friday afternoon and Saturday morning.
