Senate runoff elections on Friday and Saturday should have little impact on Czech capital markets, as investors focus on macroeconomic fundamentals, not political influences.
Analysts said last weekend's first round of voting gave a mild boost to the Czech crown and the Prague Stock Exchange, and unless results from the second round of voting on Friday and Saturday vary greatly, little further boost should be seen.
"Provided that nothing drastic happens, it's pretty much a non-starter from a foreign investor point of view. I think that for the markets, it will be pretty much a non-event," Jay King, of Wood and Company, told Reuters.
In the first round of voting last weekend, Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus's right-wing Civic Democratic Party (ODS) posted a strong result, capturing over 36.5 percent of the national vote, an increase of some six percent from June lower house elections where his coalition lost its majority.
The opposition Social Democrats were second with 20.3 percent. The rest of the vote was thinly split among coalition parties and the Communists but only 35 percent of the electorate voted.
Of the 81 Senate seats, the ODS won three outright in the first round and 76 of their candidates go into the runoff, compared with 48 for the CSSD. In 47 constituencies, the runoff is a straight fight between the two main parties.
Analysts said that with the two main parties assured of dominating the Senate, a body which will have limited powers anyway, little change appears imminent for the country's economic, or political course.
"Our expectation is ODS gaining somewhere around half of the total, and including the rest of the coalition it might be well over 50 seats. I don't think there should be any surprises," said Radek Maly, an economist at Citibank Prague.
Following last weekend's vote, the PSE, mired in a two month long slump began to edge higher, gaining some four percent over the week.
But dealers said the gains were based more on weak local buying than a change in sentiment from key foreign investors.
The crown too, ratcheted up slightly after the first round of voting, but has since steadied at 2.9 percent stronger than its dollar/mark basket midpoint.
Some analysts said foreign investors might be tempted, as they were the previous week, to play on a strong Klaus victory early on Monday, but any gain based on the political situation would be short lived.
"There may be some bias toward a stronger Czech crown," said Petr Korous, a dealer at Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka. "There's no other factor, more or less the basic impulse for that (a stronger crown) was really because of the elections, and then the subsequent recovery of the capital markets."
Citibank's Maly added: "I wouldn't foresee any major changes in the fixed income market. The fixed income market is rather less sensitive to these political events than is the FX (foreign exchange) market."
-- Prague newsroom (42 2) 24 23 0003
