Sweden beat the Czech Republic 3-0 in a World Cup ice hockey game on Thursday, setting up a showdown for European group supremacy against Finland and leaving the reigning world champions searching for answers.
The fast-skating Swedes seized control of the game from the opening faceoff, forcing the Czechs to take several early penalties and keeping its vaunted offense in check.
Toronto Maple Leaf winger Mats Sundin opened the scoring midway through the first period when he sped around the Czech defense and pulled Dallas Stars' goalie Roman Turek across the crease before sliding the puck between the netminder's legs.
The Swedish National Hockey League (NHL) connection struck again early in the second frame when Washington Capital defenseman Calle Johansson blasted a slapshot from the blue line past a screened Turek with only 57 seconds gone.
Turek, voted best goalie at the world championships for the past two years, was once again screened when a weak shot from Jonas Bergqvist found the bottom corner of the net to close out the scoring for the undefeated Swedes.
The Czechs came into the tournament riding high after capturing the world title in Vienna in May, but have lost the first two games of the tournament and are in danger of crashing out despite having their version of the "Dream Team".
With the addition of Pittsburgh Penguins duo Jaromir Jagr and Petr Nedved, Montreal Canadiens sharpshooter Martin Rucinsky and the core of the world championship team in tact, the Czechs were looking to prove they belonged at the pinnacle of the hockey world.
The match at Prague's Sports Hall was to be a homecoming of sorts for the Czechs, their first home game since beating Canada 3-2 in a thrilling world championship final on a last minute goal.
But after a demoralising loss to Finland in its tournament opener on Tuesday, and another listless effort on Thursday, Czech fans had had enough, pelting the Czech bench with beer cans near the end of the game.
Even Czech coach Ludek Bukac, a veteran coach with almost 30 years behind the bench, was left searching for an answer to his sputtering offense and the team's lack of dynamism.
"The Swedes played well, you've got to hand it to them. But the fact that we didn't score at home is not a very good showing," he said.
Added Jagr: "We aren't that bad, but our performance is not showing it."
Bukac, who has often expressed his disdain for bringing in players who have talent but not team spirit refused to comment on whether he would invite the same team back if he could do it all again.
But with nine players on the roster with seven or less of national team games under their belts, the Czech players know they must come together quickly, or face the embarassment of failing to win in what is touted as the true battle for hockey supremacy.
"We've got to concentrate on winning against Germany and moving on to the next round, nothing else," added Robert Reichel, who recently re-signed with the Calgary Flames after playing one year in Germany.
The win allows Sweden to keep pace with group leaders Finland, who have also won both their games so far but have a better goal difference.
The two teams meet on Sunday in Stockholm while the Czechs must regroup and beat winless Germany in Garmisch-Partenkirchen on Saturday to move into the quarterfinals next week in North America.
