The three-party coalition of right-wing Czech Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus won a majority of seats on Saturday in run-off elections to parliament's new upper house, the Senate.
But the premier's own party won fewer seats than expected after dominating the first round last week and voter turnout was dismal despite an appeal for Czechs to cast their ballots from President Vaclav Havel.
With all 81 constituencies declared, the coalition parties secured 52 seats in the Senate, the very existence of which many Czechs have questioned.
The result marked a turnaround for the coalition, central Europe's last centre-right government, which lost its majority in the more powerful lower house, the Chamber of Deputies, six months ago.
Klaus's own Civic Democratic Party (ODS) won 32 seats ahead of the strongest opposition party, the Social Democrats, with 25.
The Christian Democrats, a junior coalition partner, took take 13 seats while the third party in the government, the Civic Democratic Alliance, won seven.
The little-reformed Communists clinched two seats and two went to independents.
"I welcome the fact that the governing coalition took two-thirds of the senatorial seats, and that's a huge victory over the opposition," said Klaus, who sits in the lower house along with all other government ministers.
"The result in the second round isn't any surprising victory, but on the other hand the real fact that ODS has about 40 percent of the senators I would have to mark as successful."
The Central Election Commission reported that second round turnout was around 30 percent, lower even than the 35 percent registered in the first round held on November 15-16.
The centre-left Social Democrats, whose strong gains in June lower house elections stripped the coalition's majority, were saved the embarassment of a Senate dominated solely by their arch-rivals from Klaus's party.
"I am pleased that Senate will be a place of democratic discussion, and never the place of arrogant domination of one or another political party," Milos Zeman, the chairman of the Social Democrats and the lower house, told reporters.
Zeman's party has been beset by internal bickering since June, but the results of the run-offs -- between the top two first-round candidates in constituencies where nobody won more than half the vote -- could have been worse for the opposition.
"Most importantly the Senate won't be one-coloured or two-coloured as was expected, but multi-coloured," said analyst Jiri Pehe of Prague's Open Media Research Institute.
Before the second round, Havel appealed to Czechs to turn out in far greater numbers for the sake of the credibility of the new upper house but opinion surveys showed many had no interest.
The Senate elections had been billed as key to the future of Klaus's coalition. But analysts say that with turnout so low, the Senate results have little significance.
Klaus, an architect of economic reform, repeatedly accused the Social Democrats of conspiring with the Communists to turn back the clock on reform, and his supporters were galvanised by the coalition's June setback.
