The party of right-wing Czech Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus took a solid lead in Senate election run-offs on Saturday, but turnout was dismal despite an appeal to vote from President Vaclav Havel.
With almost half the 81 constituencies declared, Klaus's Civic Democratic Party (ODS) had won 19 seats in the new upper house, ahead of the opposition Social Democrats with eight.
The Christian Democrats, a junior partner in Klaus's centre-right coalition, put in a strong perfomance to take seven while the third party in the government, the Civic Democratic Alliance (ODA) won two.
Turnout was just 30.5 percent, lower even than the 35 percent recorded in the first round of the Senate polls on November 15 and 16, the Central Election Commission said.
Before the second round, Havel appealed to Czechs to turn out in far greater numbers for the sake of the credibility of the new upper house.
The Senate elections had been billed as key to the future of Klaus's coalition, which lost its lower house majority in elections six months ago. But analysts say that with turnout so low, the Senate results have little significance.
Finance Minister Ivan Kocarnik, an ODS member, forecast that the government parties would take control of the Senate.
"It is clear that the coalition is leading at the moment and I think they still will be after the final results are out," Kocarnik told reporters, predicting that the ODS would win between 33 and 40 seats.
Analysts had forecast that voter apathy would benefit the ODS which is well-organised and well-funded by big business.
Its supporters, largely more affluent Czechs who have benefited from Klaus's free market reforms since the 1989 fall of communism, have been galvanised by the coalition's loss of its majority in the lower Chamber of Deputies in June.
Klaus, an architect of economic reform, repeatedly accused the Social Democrats of conspiring with the little-reformed communists to turn back the clock on reform.
Scepticism is widespread among Czechs and Klaus himself has questioned the need for the Senate, which was written into the Czech Republic's new constitution when Czechoslovakia split at the end of 1992, but is only now being elected.
The Social Democrats have said they would scrap the Senate if they ever achieved the three-fifths majority in the lower Chamber of Deputies needed to change the constitution.
Klaus toned down his scepticism as voting neared but only Havel has appeared enthusiastic about the idea.
Before the run-offs -- for the top two first round candidates in constituencies where no one won more than half the vote -- Havel appealed to citizens to turn out in much greater numbers for the sake of the Senate's legitimacy.
-- Prague newsroom (42 2) 24 23 0003
