A strong showing in runoff Senate elections at the weekend may breathe new life into the Czech governing coalition, but it will do little to resuscitate the country's dormant capital market, analysts said on Sunday.
The minority coalition of Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus took 52 of 81 seats in the newly-created upper house of parliament, following the second round of voting, well ahead of the centre-left opposition Social Democrats which took 25 seats.
The Senate is a mostly advisory body with limited legislative powers, but the election was the first test at the polls for Klaus since his coalition lost its lower house majority in general elections in June.
But analysts said that while the news could have been worse for investors, the strong centre-right showing does nothing to solve the maladies which continue to plague the market.
"I think the market's reaction will be fairly positive, but in a few weeks time it will probably have settled down into acknowledging that this has not changed the situation of the past four or five months at all," Charles Robinson of the research house HILFE told Reuters.
"It has just not made it worse," he added.
The coalition's strong showing in the first round of voting last week helped spur domestic investor interest, pushing the market up in its wake.
Analysts said, however, that with this fillip already built into prices, stocks will probably not rise too much further in the near future.
The Czech crown also gained some ground against its dollar/mark basket on the back of the first round results, but it too should not rise significantly on the final outcome of the vote, they added.
"It seems that the final results of the elections reflect the current structure of the political situation here so I don't expect any significant changes or amy development as a result of it," said Miroslav Nosal of Patria Finance.
Analysts said that until legislation is tightened to bring about more market transparency and stronger minority shareholder protection, key foreign investor interest will remain low.
"I think there has been a result built into the market from the good Senate results last week, and everyone expected that the coalition would win this second round," said one analyst.
"There are still other difficulties that will keep the market relatively depressed such as a lack of regulation that will keep foreign investors away. This is a more important issue over the medium-term than the Senate elections."
