The Prague Stock Exchange hit a new year-high on Thursday as major banking issues broke out of a recent slump to spur the bourse higher.
Komercni Banka and Ceska Sporitelna, the country's two largest banks both posted strong gains to help push the PX50 index up 3.3 points, or 0.58 percent, to a 1996 high of 574.9.
Overall, advancing issues narrowly outpaced decliners by 320 to 298, with 192 holding steady. Total volume remained steady at 916,194 shares on turnover of 648.3 million crowns.
Komercni, a likely recipient of attention from investors looking to enter the Czech market after an announcement of its inclusion into the Morgan Stanley index, jumped 99 crowns to close at 2,439.
Meanwhile, savings bank Ceska Sporitelna also posted a strong gain of 16 crowns to 351.
"The inclusion of the Czech Republic in the Morgan Stanley index should help boost issues like Komercni," said Jan Sykora of the brokerage Wood and Company.
Earlier in the day, Sporitelna CEO Jaroslav Klapal announced the bank expects 1996 net profit to total 2.1 billion crowns, while gross profit will hit at least 6.1 billion.
Klapal added that he expected the bank would pay a higher dividend in 1996 than its five crown per share dividend for last year.
"Gross profit, before the creation of reserves and payment of taxes could be slightly above 6.1 billion crowns," Klapal said. "We are counting on dividends for this year will be higher than that of last year."
Sporitelna's 1995 after-tax profit, calculated according to Czech accounting standards, plummetted to 263 million crowns from a previous 980 million crowns after the bank provisioned heavily for risky loans.
The bank's 1995 gross profit was 9.17 billion crowns but the bank assigned almost an identical sum, 9.13 billion, to its reserves covering "classified" loans -- those whose likelihood of recovery ranges from doubtful to hopeless.
Klapal did not say whether his forecasts were calculated according to Czech or international accounting standards, which vary mainly in terms of allowable write-offs and depreciation costs.
Even though analysts agreed that the financial situation of the bank was markedly better this year than it was last year, they said shares of the bank were overvalued.
Analysts say they are closely watching what appears to be a strong acquisition of shares in Sporitelna by the usually secretive Czech investment group Motoinvest and the rival bank Investicni a Postovni Banka a.s.
"The attractiveness of (Sporitelna) could greatly drop if Motoinvest took a more significant share in management," said Richard Podpiera analyst at the investment house Atlantk FT.
