Czech share prices rallied following the coalition government's win in weekend Senate elections, but analysts said the rise is due more to a technical correction than a change in investor sentiment.
The Prague Stock Exchange's PX50 index rose 0.86 percent at the bourse's daily price fixing, spurred by gains to seven of the eight most-capitalised shares.
Brokers, however, were muted in their optimism that the rally would last more than a few days, saying the centre-right government's strong showing was expected and already built into the market last week.
"Basically, this is a technically-led rally, I don't think it has a basis to do with Senate elections," said Jay King of the brokerage Wood and Company.
Added another local trader: "You're not seeing real volumes here you're just seeing prices being pushed up in anticipation of year-end, and without a doubt it is domestically driven. Foreigner investors are still on the sidelines."
The minority coalition of Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus took 52 of 81 seats in the newly-created upper house of parliament, following the second round of voting, well ahead of the centre-left opposition Social Democrats which took 25 seats.
The Senate is a mostly advisory body with limited legislative powers, but the election was the first test at the polls for Klaus since his coalition lost its lower house majority in general elections in June.
But a thin turnout -- just over 30 percent of the electorate cast their ballots -- made it hard for the three-party coalition government, which lost its lower house majority in June, to claim it had recaptured voters' hearts.
The Prague bourse has been hard hit in recent months -- falling some 17 percent since September -- with most investors shying away from the a market characterised as opaque at best, and little regard for minority shareholder rights.
And analysts said that the election would probably not bring about a new push for changes to securities laws within the coalition, a condition that is necessary to lure back participants.
"I'm a little sceptical about the possibility that the Senate will help bring in changes," said Pavel Sobisek of Zivnostenska Banka.
"I think there will be a lot of pressure from market participants on the government to do something...but I have not seen any signs of a change in attitude of the coalition with respect to this topic."
Analysts said that the market should take some heart however, in statements made by Klaus following the vote when he said he saw no reason to call early elections for the lower house, which should keep the market stable in the near future.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
