The Czech trade deficit jumped sharply in October, rising nearly 16 billion crowns ($600 million), but analysts were not alarmed by the rise, which was in line with their full year forecasts.
The Czech Statistical Bureau (CSU) said on Tuesday the trade gap for the first 10 months of the year hit a record 125.5 billion crowns, up from a revised 109.6 billion crown shortfall for January-September.
The CSU, the Ministry of Industry and Trade and some analysts have predicted the deficit -- inflated by economic slowdown with the country's main trading partner, Germany -- will finish the year at a record 150-160 billion crowns.
"The figures are developing according to forecasts. It's clear that the year-end deficit will be 150-160 billion crowns," said Kamil Janacek, chief economist at Komercni Banka.
"I'm not surprised by the jump since the economic revival of Germany will only show up in export growth in the first half of next year, not in one or two months," he added.
The CSU said in a statement that imports in the first ten months of the year rose by 14.4 percent year-on-year, down from 15.2 percent in the first nine months, while exports rose by 5.2 percent after a 5.9 percent increase in January-September.
It added that strong growth in machinery and transport equipment imports continued, growing by 19.1 percent year- on-year and accounting for 38.3 percent of total imports.
Analysts said they were encouraged by the rise in this sector because the imports were needed to restructure industry, allowing it to produce more competitive goods for exporting.
"The trend seems unchanged. The financing of future economic growth is being done with imports, especially in the heavy machinery sector," Boris Gomez, an analyst at ING Barings said.
Martin Kupka of Patria Finance added -- "The country is still clamouring for machinery and raw materials which are necessary for industrial restructuring."
Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus, a monetarist-economist, has said the record trade deficit is "not tragic", adding it has come partly from a temporary foreign investment wave.
The Czech crown reacted indifferently to the trade figures on Tuesday, hovering around three percent above its dollar/mark basket parity, where it was for most of Monday.
The crown was trading at 26.919 to the dollar at 1230 local time (1130 GMT).
The rate implies a deviation from the midpoint of the currency basket of +3.09 percent, after the central bank's fixing earlier on Tuesday at +3.00 percent.
"The market is neither alarmed nor pleased with the figure. If the deficit hits the forecast level, I doubt we will see any significant change in the currency's value," said one local forex dealer.
-- Prague newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003 ($1=26.78 Czech Crown)
