Chinese dissident Liu Xiaobo has filed a lawsuit against Beijing authorities for sending him to a labour camp without trial, his wife said on Tuesday.
Liu urged Beijing's Xuanwu District Court to overturn a decision by the Beijing Re-education through Labour Committee to send him to a labour camp for three years.
"I refuse to accept the decision," Liu said in his suit, a copy of which was made available to Reuters.
"I am appealing...not out of fear of losing freedom...but to defend my right to freedom of speech as a law-abiding citizen," the 41-year-old dissident said.
Police detained Liu, a renowned literary critic and prominent dissident, in September and sent him to a camp in the northeastern city of Dalian to serve three years of re-education through labour.
Re-education through labour is a form of administrative punishment that can be imposed by authorities while avoiding the court system.
Western human rights activists say re-education through labour is increasingly favoured as a way of removing dissidents from circulation without the complications or publicity of a trial.
The dissident's wife, Liu Xia, told Reuters that the court had agreed to hear the suit though no date had been set.
Court officials declined to comment.
Authorities at the labour camp had rejected requests by Liu's family to visit him, his wife said.
"They (authorities) told his father that his performance was not good," Liu's wife said in an interview.
She said she held little hope of winning the suit.
The Re-education through Labour Committee accused Liu Xiaobo of "concocting stories, distorting facts, libelling and sullying the government, stirring up trouble and disturbing social order".
It said the alleged offences were committed in a petition to the government and a newspaper article written by Liu for a Taiwan newspaper.
In the government petition made last year, Liu and dozens of other intellectuals urged the government to reassess the June 1989 military crackdown on student-led demonstrations for democracy.
"Liu...was warned several times but was unrepentant and continued to engage in lawbreaking and criminal activities," said a document issued by the committee.
In the months before his incarceration, Liu orchestrated several daring, open letters to the government.
On September 30, Liu and another dissident, Wang Xizhe, issued a statement calling for the indictment and impeachment of Communist Party boss Jiang Zemin.
The pair demanded Jiang's resignation for violating the constitution for saying the People's Liberation Army was under the "absolute leadership" of the party instead of the state.
Wang fled to the United States in October.
Last week, Beijing's Chaoyang District Court rejected the lawsuit of another dissident, Liu Nianchun, against a similar labour camp term.
China dismisses international criticism of its human rights record as interference in its internal affairs.
Chinese authorities have dealt crushing blows to the tiny democracy movement in recent months. Most dissidents have already been forced into exile or are in prison or labour camp.
