China's propaganda machine on Thursday hailed the selection of Hong Kong's first post-colonial chief executive as the beginning of "true democracy" in the territory.
"This is a day to be remembered in Hong Kong's democratic development," the China Daily said of the choice of shipping tycoon Tung Chee-hwa as chief executive-designate of post-colonial Hong Kong.
"It is...the beginning of Hong Kong's true democracy," the official newspaper said in a commentary.
Tung was elected on Wednesday by a 400-member Selection Committee -- its members hand-picked by Beijing -- making him the territory's leader-in-waiting.
He will formally take up the job when Hong Kong reverts to Chinese rule at midnight on June 30, 1997, ending more than 150 years of British rule.
Major Chinese newspapers splashed across their front page news of Tung's election and a picture of the bespectacled tycoon smiling and waving with his wife by his side.
The newspapers carried a commentary by the official Xinhua news agency, which trumpeted Hong Kong-style democracy as "totally new, that is different from the mainland as well as different from the West".
"We can see that Hong Kong is establishing a democratic way that is based on law, open, fair, civilised and proceeding in an orderly way and step by step," Xinhua said.
China, angered at Western-style democratic reforms introduced by Hong Kong's outgoing Governor Chris Patten, has vowed to dismantle the territory's elected Legislative Council after the handover and install an appointed legislature.
Xinhua took a swipe at Britain, saying: "In the past 100 years, there has been no democracy in Hong Kong's political life under Britain's rule."
"All powers, including executive, legislative, judicial and military rights, were granted to the Hong Kong governors, who were appointed by Britain without consulting the local people," Xinhua said.
"It is China's resumption of the exercise of sovereignty over Hong Kong...that offers Hong Kong the unprecedented opportunity for its democratic development," it said.
Xinhua urged China's rival, Taiwan, to return to the fold.
"Resuming sovereignty over Hong Kong...is the first step of the Chinese nation's great undertaking to realise reunification of the motherland under the leadership of the Communist Party," Xinhua said.
It said Wednesday's elections were vital to reunification with Taiwan under the "one country, two systems" formula, in which the island, like Hong Kong, would enjoy a great degree of autonomy and be allowed to maintain its capitalist system.
Beijing and Taipei have been political rivals since the end of the Chinese civil war in 1949. Taiwan's Nationalist rulers say they are committed to reunification, but only under Western-style democracy.
The political waters ahead could be choppy for the shipping tycoon.
"People will be watching what happens to Anson Chan," a Western diplomat in Beijing said.
Tung has said he would like to keep Chan as chief secretary, but her past defence of Patten's democratic reforms could make things awkward if she decides to stay on.
"She'll have to preside over many policies that she has opposed," the diplomat said. "People want to see how she manages this."
