China's Communist Party boss Jiang Zemin, in a renewed overture to rival Taiwan, urged the island not to set up new obstacles to ties, major Chinese newspapers said on Friday.
"The Taiwan authorities...must not artificially set up new obstacles," Jiang was quoted as saying on Thursday, one day after the election of the first post-colonial chief executive of Hong Kong. He did not elaborate.
Hong Kong is due to revert to China at midnight on June 30, 1997 after 150 years of British rule.
Jiang took the occasion of the naming of Hong Kong's future chief executive to urge Taiwan to return to the fold.
"Completing reunification of the motherland is the will of the people and an historical inevitability," Jiang said.
Major newspapers carried the full text of Jiang's speech.
Beijing and Taipei have been rivals since Chiang Kai-shek's Nationalist troops lost the Chinese civil war to the communists and fled into exile on the island in 1949.
The end of the Chiang dynasty in 1988 and the rise of Taiwan's first native-born president, Lee Teng-hui, has brought Western-style democracy -- anathema to Beijing's communists -- to Taiwan.
Beijing suspects Lee is trying to push Taiwan towards independence. Taiwan denies any independence ambitions and says it is still committed to reunification, albeit under democracy and a free market economy.
Jiang renewed a call for "political talks" to iron out differences and pave the way for reunification.
He said forces clamouring for Taiwan's independence threatened peaceful reunification.
"The Communist Party of China... will not allow any person, any force to split Taiwan from the motherland," Jiang said.
China has threatened to invade if Taiwan declared independence. It held war games and missile tests near the island in March in the run-up to its first direct presidential elections, which Lee won by a landslide.
"Our determination is unwavering," Jiang said in a speech to mark the 60th anniversary of the kidnapping of Chiang Kai-shek in the ancient capital of Xian.
Chang Hsueh-liang, dubbed the "young marshal," abducted Chiang Kai-shek 60 years ago to force him to fight invading Japanese troops instead of focusing on his rivalry with the communists.
Beijing regards Taiwan as a rebel province and has sought to push the island into diplomatic isolation, but Taipei has continued to flirt with Beijing's allies.
Fiji President Kamisese Mara arrived in Taiwan on Thursday for a six-day official visit.
Beijing scored a big victory in its quest to isolate Taiwan when South Africa said in November it would switch recognition to Beijing from Taipei by the end of 1997.
Qiao Shi, chairman of China's National People's Congress, or parliament, called for the early normalisation of relations between China and South Africa during a meeting with a visiting delegation of the African National Congress on Thursday, the Xinhua news agency said.
