China said on Sunday it will tighten inspections of imported animals and plants next year for possible diseases after Chinese quarantine officials banned poultry imports from several U.S. states and a part of Britain.
"The country's animal and quarantine authorities will carry out stricter inspection on a wide range of goods," the China Daily Business Weekly newspaper said.
Inspections would cover imports and exports of plants, animals, fruit and agricultural goods, as well as containers, packages and other materials used to transport them, according to new regulations approved this month by the State Council, or cabinet.
Quarantine and customs officials would inspect both hand-carried items as well as goods imported or exported by traders, the newspaper said.
Pets and plants of diplomats who have diplomatic immunity would also have to be inspected, it said.
The authorities could slap fines of up to 50,000 yuan ($6,000) on violators, the newspaper said.
Agricultural officials would be on the lookout for animal and plant diseases at home and abroad, it said.
Last week, China announced a ban on poultry imports from Missouri and Oklahoma, alleging that five cases of Newcastle disease were discovered in the two U.S. states between July and September.
The United States denied the accusation and said it sought talks with China to lift the ban.
A spokeswoman for the U.S. Embassy in Beijing said the disease broke out in pet birds only, and that all the pet birds infected with the disease were destroyed.
The spokeswoman said she had no information on which U.S. states found pet birds with Newcastle disease or when the problems were discovered.
The newspaper said China banned in July poultry imports from an unidentified area of Britain it believed was affected by Newcastle disease.
In October, China announced a ban on imports of poultry from 10 U.S. states because of fears it carried a virus called highly pathogenic avian influenza. But the ban did not go into effect after China and the United States held talks on the issue.
China is the second-biggest market in the world, after Russia, for U.S. poultry products.
Some 330,000 tonnes of U.S. poultry products -- worth $445 million -- were exported to China through Hong Kong last year, according to the U.S. Poultry and Egg Export Council.
Every day, 700 tonnes of U.S. chicken feet are transported across the border from Hong Kong into China, the council said.
Beijing and Washington are also at odds over textile imports, and that dispute has threatened to spill over into the farm sector.
China had threatened to ban some U.S. farm goods -- as well as textiles and alcoholic drinks -- in retaliation for U.S. penalties on textiles purchased from China.
Beijing said it was delaying by one month the implementation of those curbs, which had been scheduled to take effect December 10, because the two sides were planning to hold further talks on the issue.
