China said Sunday its soaring stock markets were overheating on widespread speculation and warned of a crash similar to the great Wall Street collapse of 1929.
"Currently, China's stock markets are overheated, making us associate it with the U.S. stock disaster in 1929," the official People's Daily newspaper said in a commentary, issued in advance of its Monday edition by the Xinhua news agency.
China's foreign currency B share market in Shanghai soared by about 80 percent between Nov. 11 and Dec. 10, while the bourse in the southern boomtown of Shenzhen rose by about 100 percent before sharp falls in the final days of last week.
The Shanghai B-share market plunged 12.26 percent on Friday while its Shenzhen counterpart dived 14.75 percent. The Shanghai A-share index lost 5.51 percent and Shenzhen 4.84 percent.
"The stock markets have entered a very abnormal situation fraught with increasing market risk," the commentary said.
Anticipating sharp falls in the Shanghai and Shenzhen markets in response to the article in the People's Daily, which is the mouthpiece of the ruling Communist Party, the commentary said: "The government ... will never step in to help the markets when they slump."
The commentary described speculation that the government would support the market against falls because of political considerations before the handover of Hong Kong to Beijing in mid-1997 and the Communist Party congress late next year as "very muddled."
Bank savings were "the safest and most reliable method of investment," it said in an apparent bid to talk down trading.
Last Friday, the Shanghai and Shenzhen stock exchanges announced that they were imposing a limit of 10 percent on daily movements for stocks with effect from Monday to stop extraordinary price movements.
That move was clearly intended to forestall a possible crash on Monday following the People's Daily policy announcement.
"Recent skyrocketing has been very abnormal and irrational," the commentary said. "We must further check excessive speculation. We must strengthen supervision and regulation."
The commentary announced a list of measures to try to rein in the bull run, saying that bank loans, for example, must not be used to speculate in stocks.
The government would increase share issues by listing more profitable medium and large state enterprises, it said.
One factor in the bull run over the past month has been a lack of shares, resulting in a large number of buyers chasing a limited supply of shares.
In addition, market irregularities have been rising this year, the commentary said.
It cited manipulation by big players, bank loans entering the market illegally, overdrafts by brokerages and misleading media reports as among reasons for the skyrocketing of the stock markets in recent weeks.
Last week securities authorities suspended the rights of two key unidentified newspapers to release official information about listed companies because of "mistakes in reporting."
The Securities Commission Sunday announced a quota of 10 billion yuan ($1.2 billion) worth of share issues for 1996. The amount was 200 percent larger than the 1995 quota, Xinhua said.
The quota, if unused by the end of 1996, could be carried over into next year. Xinhua did not specify whether the quota included foreign currency B shares and domestic A shares.
