China has pledged to edge open its insurance, stock, retail, wholesale and banking sectors to foreign investment as part of a drive for long-delayed entry to the World Trade Organisation (WTO).
"From 1997-2000, China is expected to open its insurance and stock market wider to foreign investment," the China Daily said on Sunday, quoting Ma Jixian, an official of the State Economic and Trade Commission under the cabinet.
The pledge was contained in a unilateral action plan submitted by China to the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) summit in the Philippines last month, the newspaper said.
Before the end of the decade, foreign insurers would have access to markets outside Beijing, Shanghai and Guangzhou, Ma said without elaborating.
China's insurance market was once virtually monopolised by the state-owned People's Insurance Group but the sector has gradually opened up to domestic as well as foreign competition.
Only three foreign insurers are able to write insurance policies in China, including American International Assurance Co Ltd, a part of the American International Group Inc.
The others are Japan's Tokio Marine and Fire Insurance Co Ltd and which has a life insurance joint venture with a domestic insurer.
Ma, one of China's representatives at the APEC summit, said foreign stock companies would be allowed to handle A shares, whose availability is still confined to native Chinese. He gave no further details.
Currently, foreign investors are restricted to buying B shares, while Chinese nationals can only buy A shares.
In its action plan, China also pledged to cut its average import tariffs to about 15 percent from the current 23 percent.
The tariffs would be reduced futher in subsequent years, Ma said without going into details.
"A majority of non-tariff measures will have been abolished by 2010 and all those incompatible with World Trade Organisation rules will have been erased by 2020," Ma said.
China has pushed to gain entry to the WTO on the favourable terms of a developing nation, but Western countries, particularly the United States, have insisted its economy is too big for such preferential treatment.
According to the action plan, China would allow foreign banks to open more operational outfits in 24 Chinese cities and launch pilot bases where foreign banks can conduct yuan business, the newspaper said.
In the first decade of the next century, foreign banks would be allowed to expand their presence beyond the current 24 pilot cities and more pilot bases would be available for them to conduct yuan business, it said.
China would let overseas retailers establish more joint venture or cooperative retailing chains in areas beyond the 11 pilot cities currently allowed, the newspaper said.
The liberalisation would cover all provincial capitals and major economic cities by the year 2010, the newspaper said, adding that foreign retailers would be free to open outlets in China by 2020.
Foreign investors would be allowed larger stakes in China's power sector and have greater access to China's river, marine and road transportation if Beijing becomes a member of the WTO, it said.
China would further open its tourism sector, allowing joint venture travel agencies in five cities on an experimental basis over the next three years, the newspaper said.
