Chinese police have detained veteran dissident Wang Donghai amid accusations by Amnesty International that those who dare to speak up face torture, imprisonment and even death at the hands of the government.
Police in Hangzhou, capital of the eastern province of Zhejiang, told Wang's family that Wang would be sent to a "study class", a euphemism for coercive ideological reform, his sister, Wang Yisu, told Reuters on Saturday.
Two public security officers took Wang away on Friday but would not say why Wang was being sent to a study class -- a holdover from the chaotic 1966-76 Cultural Revolution -- or say when he would be released, the sister said.
Police would not let Wang's family meet him or say where he was being held, the sister said.
The sister said she suspected police detained her brother because he was trying to help fellow dissident Chen Longde, who jumped from a third-floor window on August 17 because he could no longer stand being beaten by a prison official.
Chen suffered serious injuries and was taken to hospital after the fall.
"I think it (Wang's detention) had to do with Chen Longde ... My brother was angry, shocked and surprised when he heard about what happened to Chen Longde," the sister said in a telephone interview.
"My brother and Chen Longde were very close," she said.
Hangzhou police could not be reached for immediate comment.
Wang, 45, and Chen, 39, were ordered last month to serve one year and three years of "re-education through labour", respectively, but Wang was released because of poor health.
Re-education through labour is an administrative punishment with a maximum of three years that can be imposed by police without recourse to prosecutors or the courts.
Wang, a veteran of the 1979 Democracy Wall movement, was jailed for two years for organising street protests after armed forces crushed pro-democracy demonstrations by students at Beijing's Tiananmen Square on June 4, 1989, with heavy loss of life.
Western diplomats say Chinese authorities appear to be using administrative punishment more frequently to take dissidents out of circulation without having to go through a more complicated judicial process to impose criminal sentences.
London-based human rights group Amnesty International criticised China's human rights record. "The Chinese authorities do not tolerate any form of dissent," Amnesty said.
"They allow torture to continue, use the death penalty to try to cure social problems, brutally crack down on ethnic groups calling peacefully for more independence and detain hundreds of thousands of people every year without charging them with any crime," it added.
"When China's rulers refuse to respect fundamental human rights, they set a precedent for repressive governments worldwide. When they argue that local conditions and economic necessity mean human rights must take second place, their words are echoed by governments through the Asia-Pacific region."
A commentary by the official Xinhua news agency earlier this year said that a plot by the West to force its human rights standards and values on other countries was doomed to failure.
In April, China quashed a resolution drafted by the United States and the European Union to avert censure at the United Nations Human Rights Commission for the sixth year in a row.
