China has jailed dozens of dissidents this year amid Beijing's obsession with stability coupled with easing foreign pressure on its human rights record, human rights groups and diplomats said on Wednesday.
Authorities have jailed 12 better-known dissidents or sent them to labour camps in the past year, the Hong Kong-based Information Centre of Human Rights and Democratic Movement in China said.
At least 10 lesser-known political activists have been incarcerated in the northern region of Inner Mongolia, Liu Qing, chairman of the New York-based Human Rights in China, said in a telephone interview.
In the southwestern city of Guiyang, another seven to eight dissidents have been jailed, Liu said. He declined to elaborate on the cases pending verification of details.
"A lot more dissidents were jailed this year than in previous years," Liu said. "There are not many prominent dissidents left."
Liu, who served 10 years in prison for his role in the 1979 Democracy Wall movement and left for the United States in 1992, attributed the tougher policy on dissent to an easing of foreign pressure on China.
"International pressure on China's human rights is easing and disappearing," he said.
"This undoubtedly is tantamount to telling the Chinese Communists that the Chinese government can go all out and persecute dissidents," Liu said.
The United States delinked human rights from its annual review of renewing Most Favoured Nation trading status for China in 1994. Many business-minded Western governments have been accused of turning a blind eye to human rights abuses in China.
Of the 12 better-known dissidents to be locked up this year, former student leader Wang Dan received the harshest sentence -- 11 years -- for conspiring to subvert the government.
A Beijing court took just 10 minutes last month to reject an appeal by Wang, a leader of student-led demonstrations for democracy that were crushed by the army in June 1989 with heavy loss of life.
Another nine dissidents, including Liu Qing's younger brother Liu Nianchun, were ordered to serve up to three years of re-education through labour.
Labour re-education is an administrative punishment that can be imposed by authorities without recourse to the judiciary.
Western human rights activists say re-education through labour is increasingly favoured as a way of removing dissidents from circulation without the complications or publicity of a trial.
Another dissident serving time at a labour camp, Chen Longde, jumped from a third-floor window in a suicide attempt in August because he could not tolerate alleged beating by prison guards, family members said. Prison officials deny the charge.
Two dissidents fled to the United States this year -- former student leader Liu Gang and veteran dissident Wang Xizhe.
Obsession with stability was another factor in China intensifying its crackdown on dissent, diplomats said.
"The government is obsessed with matters of stability at the moment and all the more so because the 15th party congress is around the corner," a Western diplomat said, referring to the crucial five-yearly meeting due late next year.
"In the eyes of the leadership, dissidents represent a potential threat to stability and social order," he said. "The leadership fears that treating them leniently would only encourage others to challenge the authority of the party."
China dismisses international criticism of its human rights record as interference in its internal affairs.
