A Chinese court on Thursday rejected a plea of insanity by a bank robber and sentenced him to death, along with two accomplices, for a string of heists that shocked Beijing.
In a rare move, officials allowed foreign reporters to watch the court proceedings against Guo Song and seven accessories, apparently to trumpet the success of a crackdown on crime launched this year.
The stocky Guo appeared unrepentant, his face set and defiant, as he was led from the courtroom by two policemen after the Beijing Number One Intermediate People's Court convicted him of robbing three bank cash delivery vans this year.
"The court does not believe or accept defendant Guo Song's plea of insanity," the presiding judge said in his verdict.
"After psychiatric tests, Guo Song was found to have total control over his mental faculties and was responsible for his actions during the crime," said the judge, whose name was not available.
The 32-year-old defendant, dressed in a beige jacket and dark blue trousers, did not speak during the 20-minute hearing. He has two weeks in which to file an appeal to the Higher People's Court.
The presiding judge stood to read the verdict against the eight defendants lined up in front of him and each flanked by two police officers who held their arms at their sides.
Guo, who had previously served a four-year term for rape, was found guilty of three bank robberies in Beijing in February, June and August this year, and of shooting dead four bank guards.
The robberies shocked the Chinese capital, where bank heists had been unheard of since the 1949 communist takeover.
The court sentenced two co-defendants to death for selling firearms to Guo.
A fourth defendant was given a death sentence suspended for two years and a fifth was sentenced to life imprisonment for selling firearms.
Three others, including Zhang Ying, 25, were sentenced to prison terms of up to seven years for harbouring a criminal. Zhang was the lone woman among the defendants.
Police tracked down Guo last September after police detained an accomplice of Guo's in the robberies, Lu Xianzhou, while he was driving a stolen car, state media reported.
Lu confessed to robbing the cash delivery vans and customers of banks and led police to Guo. It was not known if Lu has been sentenced.
Police had recovered six guns, 350 rounds of ammunition and part of the stolen cash -- 170,000 yuan ($20,000), 610,000 Japanese yen ($5,000) and $18,000.
Hundreds of thousands of people have been arrested and several thousand executed since China launched its Strike Hard crackdown against crime last April.
Crime, virtually eliminated after the communists swept to power in 1949, has staged a comeback in the past two decades, springing up along with economic reforms that have loosened central controls while opening up opportunities for abuse of power.
Illegal possession of firearms and gunrunning are widespread in China. The crime rate has soared, and 395 policemen were killed in the line of duty in 1995.
