A top Beijing official said on Monday the city's former Communist Party boss Chen Xitong could be punished for dereliction of duty in a further disgrace for an official who was once among China's most influential men.
However, more than a year of investigation into the man who presided over China's capital for most of the 1980s had uncovered no evidence of more serious wrongdoing, Beijing Vice-Mayor Zhang Baifa told reporters at a reception.
"He (Chen) is living very comfortably," the vice-mayor said.
Chen was being held outside Beijing, pending completion of an investigation, Zhang said, but declined to give details. Hong Kong newspapers have reported that Chen was under house arrest in Inner Mongolia.
Chen has not been seen in public since he stepped down as Beijing's Communist Party secretary in April 1995 after his protege, Vice-Mayor Wang Baosen, committed suicide after coming under investigation for corruption.
"Viewing the situation from the case of Wang Baosen, he (Chen) can't escape dereliction of duty," Zhang said, referring to what is usually an administrative punishment in China.
Zhang said the former municipal party chief, who served as mayor of Beijing during the 1980s, had accepted many expensive gifts but there was no evidence of wrongdoing in exchange.
Chen was sacked from the party's powerful Politburo in September 1995, becoming the most senior official to be ensnared in a corruption scandal since the puritan communists swept to power in 1949.
Zhang dismissed as "baseless" a Hong Kong newspaper report that Chen would be sentenced to between five and seven years in prison.
However, he signalled that the party, not prosecutors, would finally decide whether Chen would be indicted.
"It is up to the party central committee whether he is to be charged," Zhang said.
The woman who was Chen's mistress for about six years remained on the run, Zhang said. It was not known if the woman, identified as He Ping, had fled abroad, he said.
One of Chen's sons, Chen Xiaotong, former general manager of a Sino-Japanese joint venture hotel in Beijing, had been detained, Zhang said.
The case of the father was not related to that of the son, who was under investigation for corruption and accepting bribes, the vice-mayor said.
The case of Chen Xiaotong was also not related to that of another princeling, Zhou Beifang, who has received a suspended death sentence for corruption. Princelings are the sons and daughters of China's powerful ruling elite.
Chen Xitong's wife was free and not under house arrest, Zhang said.
Zhang said he and former Beijing Mayor Li Qiyan had been cleared of any wrongdoing because they had reported Chen's irregularities to the party leadership before the scandal surfaced.
Li stepped down as Beijing mayor in October and has been appointed as a vice minister of labour.
