China's paramount leader Deng Xiaoping is in good health, but may not be able to visit Hong Kong when the British colony reverts to Chinese rule in mid-1997, Beijing Vice-Mayor Zhang Baifa said on Monday.
"To my knowledge, (his health) is very good," Zhang told reporters when asked about Deng's health at a reception for diplomats and foreign journalists in Beijing.
Zhang, who is believed to be close to the Deng family, said he had not recently visited the 92-year-old architect of China's sweeping economic reforms, but said Deng was in Beijing.
Asked if Deng would visit Hong Kong for the ceremony when Beijing resumes sovereignty over the British colony at midnight on June 30, 1997, Zhang said: "He said it himself -- he will go to Hong Kong even it means in a wheelchair."
But Zhang added: "It would be difficult for him to go now. It would be disastrous for an old man in his 90s to catch cold. Catching cold would be a serious illness."
Deng oversaw the negotiations that successfully concluded in an agreement for Britain to hand back the territory it has held for 150 years. He has said repeatedly he hoped to be able to witness the historic transfer of power.
Chinese officials have said privately that Deng would not attend the handover ceremony, where his anointed successor President Jiang Zemin is expected to hold the limelight, but they hoped he would be able to visit Hong Kong afterwards.
The man who launched China's sweeping market-oriented economic reforms in 1978 and guided the nation's policies during the 1980s and into the early 1990s no longer holds public office but remains highly influential.
He has not been seen in public since early 1994 when he toured Shanghai during Chinese Lunar New Year festivities and appeared frail and halting in his movements and had difficulty speaking.
Deng's health is a matter of intense speculation in China and in neighbouring countries because his death is expected to trigger a scramble for power among those eager to succeed him as the de facto emperor of the world's most populous nation.
But analysts say that his death has largely been discounted and rumours of his ill-health that just 18 months ago sent Asian markets into a tailspin now generate little more than a murmur.
Deng is said to be suffering from Parkinson's disease. It is believed that he rarely leaves his closely-guarded home in a courtyard in central Beijing just behind the Forbidden City where China's emperors had ruled for centuries. Beijing has clamped an effective blackout on news about the health of the man who guided China out of the years of radical revolution espoused by Mao, dismantled much of 40 years of Stalinist-style central planning and told Chinese that "to get rich is glorious".
Officials routinely decline to answer questions about Deng's health, giving the party line that: "He is as well as can be expected for a man of his age."
However, sources close to the family say Deng is losing his ability to walk and is believed to spend most of his time in a wheelchair.
