China on Tuesday introduced rules governing direct shipping links with Taiwan, ignoring a decades-old ban by the island it regards as a renegade province.
The regulations, which take effect from Tuesday, allow only wholly Chinese-owned or Taiwan-owned shipping companies or joint ventures involving Chinese or Taiwanese shipowners to sail between the two sides, Xinhua news agency said.
Hong Kong's Beijing-backed Wen Wei Po newspaper said the southeastern Chinese cities of Xiamen and Fuzhou would be the first ports to be opened to direct shipping links with Taiwan.
"The conditions for (establishing) direct shipping links are ripe," the newspaper said.
Taiwan's Nationalist government has banned direct air and shipping links with China since 1949 when Chiang Kai-shek's Nationalist troops lost the Chinese civil war to the communists and fled to the island.
With tensions easing since the late 1980s, civilian aircraft and vessels have skirted the ban by stopping over in a third country or territory such as the British colony of Hong Kong or Portuguese-run Macau.  
Taiwanese businessmen, who have poured more than $20 billion into China, are eager for direct transport links, but Taiwanese authorities have been reluctant to lift the ban.
The Nationalists, who say they are committed to reunification with China, see direct transport links as their last bargaining chip in talks with the communists.
China has threatened to invade if the island seeks independence.
Under the regulations, shipping companies must apply with the Chinese Ministry of Communications for permission to ply routes between the two sides. The rules made no mention of any need to seek approval from Taiwan authorities.
The ministry has 45 days to decide whether to allow a shipping company to sail between the two sides, according to the regulations.
The rules empower the ministry to warn and seize the unlawful income of shipping companies breaking the rules.
China has poured cold water on a proposal by Taipei to turn Taiwan's Kaohsiung into an extraterritorial port, allowing third party ships to ply routes between the two sides.  
The Taipei-based Economic Daily News said on Tuesday Taiwan President Lee Teng-hui had urged the central bank to study how to control capital outflows to China in a further bid to limit the island's economic exposure on its main rival's turf. The central bank denied the report.
Speculation that Taipei might change its China policy has mounted since Lee cautioned last week that the island's economy needed to avoid over-dependence on the mainland.
"The Chinese are not really making much progress on other fronts... They have decided to focus on the three links and apply pressure on the Taiwanese," a Western diplomat in Beijing said. The three links refer to trade, transport and mail.
On the diplomatic front, the rivalry has intensified, analysts say, with China trying hard to isolate the island and limit its contacts with other states.
Taiwan state-funded television said Vice-President Lien Chan was visiting the former Soviet republic of Ukraine,  which formally recognises Beijing. The Ukraine has denied the report.
China announced a diplomatic coup on Monday, persuading the West African nation of Niger to switch recognition to Beijing.
