China warned Britain on Tuesday against challenging it in the World Court over its decision to disband Hong Kong's elected legislature when it takes back the territory in mid-1997.
"If Britain does this, this will damage Sino-British relations," Foreign Ministry spokesman Shen Guofang told a regular news briefing.
"If the British act wilfully, create troubles and do not cooperate with the Chinese side, then Sino-British relations will be damaged," Shen said when asked about Britain's threat.
Last week, British Foreign Secretary Malcolm Rifkind denounced China's plans to disband the democratically elected legislature and proposed letting the International Court of Justice in the Hague rule on the dispute.
After more than 150 years of British rule, the capitalist territory of 6.3 million people falls back under the Chinese flag at midnight on June 30, 1997, with promises from Beijing's communist leadership that almost nothing will change.
Upon the handover of Hong Kong, a Beijing-appointed provisional legislature will take over from the elected Legislative Council, reversing democratic reforms introduced by Hong Kong Governor Chris Patten over the past four years.
Patten has lashed out at the creation of the post-colonial legislature, calling its appointment by the 400-member Beijing-backed Selection Committee last week "a bizarre farce" and a "stomach-churning" process.
He has said the provisional legislature would be a "rubber stamp" chamber that would simply echo Beijing.
Spokesman Shen said matters pertaining to Hong Kong would be China's internal affairs after July 1, 1997 and warned Britain against interference.
"This will interfere in China's internal affairs," Shen said of Britain's threat. "Playing the international card is useless."
"To cooperate with China is of benefit to Britain, otherwise it will not be beneficial," he said.
Hong Kong's first post-colonial chief executive, 59-year-old shipping tycoon Tung Chee-hwa, has defended China's controversial decision and lashed at Britain, saying the territory's colonial masters must "face the reality".
Tung has said it was irresponsible of Britain to threaten to take Beijing to the World Court over the interim chamber.
The controversial new body is dominated by pro-Beijing figures -- including 33 incumbent lawmakers and many politicians who lost to pro-democracy forces in the 1995 Legislative Council election, the first time all seats were filled by vote, either direct or indirect.
The Democratic Party, the favourite in last year's election with 19 of the 60 council seats, boycotted moves to create the provisional body, branding it anti-democratic.
The Provisional Legislative Council, as it will be known, is to sit from July 1 until a new legislature can be constituted by elections, set for 1998.
