China vowed on Tuesday to intensify a crackdown on economic disorder in 1997, citing tax evasion, financial irregularities, smuggling and counterfeiting as some ills that cost the state billions of dollars a year.
"Basically, the situation of economic disorder still has not changed. Some problems are even considerably serious," the official People's Daily said in a commentary.
Chinese authorities uncovered tax, auditing and pricing violations valued at 161 billion yuan ($19.4 billion) in the past 11 years, or an average of 14.6 billion yuan a year, the commentary said.
"Increasing the intensity of regulating and revamping economic order has become an important mission which brooks no delay," the mouthpiece of the ruling Communist Party said.
"We cannot be soft when dealing a blow to various economic crimes," the commentary said.
Tax evasion and smuggling were now rife, springing up along with market-oriented economic reforms introduced by paramount leader Deng Xiaoping in the late 1970s.
State media said taxpayers had evaded personal income tax worth an estimated 12 billion yuan since the tax was introduced in 1980.
Up to 60 percent of state-run or collective firms in China evaded taxes, the media said. It gave no figures.
"Many enterprises have two sets of accounting books and fabricate financial statements, budgets, sales and asset appraisal," the commentary said.
Chinese companies owed 35.7 billion yuan in industrial and commercial taxes in the first 11 months of 1996, up 72.9 percent from the year-ago period, Xinhua news agency said.
Beijing collected 563.9 billion yuan in industrial and commercial taxes in the first 11 months, up 1995 percent from the year-ago period.
Smuggling of goods, ranging from drugs to stolen cars, was rampant in China's thriving and porous coastal areas and inland border regions.
Chinese customs seized 5.6 billion yuan worth of smuggled goods in the first six months of 1996, latest figures showed. No comparative figures were available.
Cheng Xiusheng, an economist with the Development Research Centre under the cabinet, said economic disorder was inevitable as China abandoned central planning and embraced market reforms.
The authorities have reined in galloping inflation, allowing them to now turn their attention to restoring economic order, Cheng said.
"It can be said that inflation is under control... The next step is to revamp economic order," he told Reuters in a telephone interview.
The People's Daily said financial irregularities, including financial institutions paying exorbitant interest rates and extending huge loans to loss-making state-owned enterprises, have been "repeatedly banned but do not stop".
Counterfeiting and piracy were common and almost led to a trade war between China and the United States in February 1995 and June this year. China has declared war on piracy and clamped down on manufacturers of pirated compact discs.
($1 = 8.3 yuan)
