A Chinese court has sentenced dissident and former student leader Li Hai to nine years in prison for prying into state secrets in a trial held behind closed doors, a family member said on Tuesday.
"We're very surprised," the relative, who asked not to be identified, told Reuters by telephone.
Li had initially been charged with leaking state secrets, but his family and lawyer challenged the charges, arguing that the dissident was not a civil servant and had no access to state secrets.
The court "lacked evidence to convict (Li) of leaking state secrets. We thought he would get a lighter sentence ... (after) the charge was changed to prying into state secrets," Li's relative said.
Instead, Beijing's Chaoyang District Court sentenced Li to nine years in prison for prying into state secrets, the relative said.
"We're not convinced at all," he said.
The relative said he believed the appeal process had already started. The appeals trial was also expected to be held behind closed doors because the case involved state secrets.
"Our only hope is in the appeal," he said.
It was not clear how Li had pried into state secrets or if any other people have been arrested or charged.
The family has not been allowed to meet Li since he was detained in May 1995.
Li was first arrested in May 1990 for his role in the 1989 student demonstrations for democracy. He was released six months later and expelled from the philosophy department of the prestigious Beijing University, where he was a graduate student.
He was one of 56 signatories to a pro-democracy peace charter issued in May 1995 to coincide with the sixth anniversary of the military crackdown on the student demonstrations.
China jailed dozens of dissidents in 1996 as part of a drive for stability that followed an easing of foreign pressure over its human rights record, diplomats and activists said. Authorities jailed or sent to labour camps 12 better-known dissidents in 1996. Of the 12, former student leader Wang Dan received the harshest sentence -- 11 years -- for conspiring to subvert the government.
Western human rights activists said sending dissidents to labour camps has been increasingly favoured as a way of removing them from society without the complications or publicity of a trial.
At least 10 lesser-known political activists have been incarcerated in the northern region of Inner Mongolia. In the southwestern city of Guiyang, another seven to eight dissidents have been jailed.
At least two dissidents fled to the United States this year -- former student leader Liu Gang and veteran dissident Wang Xizhe.
