Guo Song stood impassive, his arms clamped to his side by two court policemen, as a Beijing judge sentenced him to death for bank robbery after a trial in which he was presumed guilty from the start.
Guo, who killed four bank guards and stole several payrolls, could well be dead by Wednesday, January 1, when sweeping amendments to the Criminal Procedure Law go into effect.
Standing under the insignia of Chinese communist rule -- a red badge embossed with five stars -- the judge delivered the verdict on Guo during proceedings videotaped by a court clerk.
Court hearings in China resemble theatre. Verdicts may be decided beforehand and trials are little more than farce, said one judge-turned-lawyer who asked not to be identified.
"I used to think defence lawyers were laughable," he said in an interview. "The verdict had already been decided. It was purely acting like in a play. Whatever defendants or defence lawyers said does not matter."
Defendants in China have been presumed guilty before being proved innocent. Suspects can be detained almost indefinitely, and lawyers have access to the bill of indictment only days before a trial.
All this is set to change from January 1, 1997.
"It's a big improvement compared with the past," criminal law professor Qu Xinjiu said of the revisions approved by the National People's Congress, or parliament, last March.
However, some Chinese and foreign jurists wonder whether China's fledgling modern legal system will be able to implement these reforms and doubt whether defendants will have real access to a fair trial because of the poor quality of many judges, prosecutors and police.
BIG TEST NEXT YEAR
"Next year will be a big test of whether the quality of judges, prosecutors and police can keep up with judicial reforms," lawyer Li Shuguang said in an interview.
"China's judges and prosecutors are not prepared. They will need training... They will have to change their mentality."
The amendments aim to transform judges from instruments of prosecution to evaluators of evidence, jurists said.
"No one shall be convicted without a verdict pronounced by a people's court according to the law," says Article 12 of the revised law that alters the presumption of guilt.
Robin Munro of Human Rights Watch/Asia argued that the amendments do not embrace the presumption of innocence.
"It is not correct... to say that this new law has enshrined the presumption of innocence," Munro told Reuters by telephone from Hong Kong.
"It (merely) rejects the presumption of guilt," Munro said.
The amendments, however, would allow suspects to consult a lawyer after police interrogation and set a 14-1/2 month limit on the length of police detention before trial.
After January 1, 1997, prosecutors would be required to produce in court evidence they have purportedly collected.
DISSIDENTS UNLIKELY BENEFICIARIES
Critics say the new laws would benefit common criminals rather than dissidents, many of whom were swiftly locked up in 1996 to avoid the complications of the new law.
"Where dissidents are concerned it's the Communist Party leadership that decides what happens to them... The courts are just there to carry out the political decision," Munro said.
Dissidents jailed in the last year included Wang Dan, a leader of the 1989 student-led demonstrations for democracy that were crushed by the military. Wang was sentenced to 11 years in prison in November for conspiring to subvert the government.
Critics say the concept of rule by law remains alien to China, where for centuries imperial officials wielded absolute power and their word alone was tantamount to law.
Police have promised to abide by the new law, but officials concede many police and judicial officials lack basic legal expertise and operate virtually unchecked in their own fiefdoms.
Torture is commonly used by police in the countryside to extract confessions from suspects and facilitate the collection of evidence, critics say.
Evidence collected through torture can still be used in court against defendants, critics say. Suspects have no right to remain silent in China.
Critics are concerned about an entirely new section in the Criminal Procedure Law that calls for summary trials where an offence is punishable by a jail term of less than three years.
"It's a big step backwards," Munro said. "All these beautiful new rules... for presenting of evidence, cross examining of witnesses, conducting court debate... these all go out the window."
Corruption is rife and threatens actual implementation.
"Money can buy a life sentence instead of the court handing down a death sentence," the judge-turned-lawyer said.
