In imperial China, executions were carried out by skinning, quartering, chopping a man in half at the waist or even decapitating an entire clan.
From January 1, 1997, the People's Republic of China adds lethal injection as a means of executing death row convicts. Currently, all executions are by firing squad.
However, more modern means of execution do not necessarily mean waning enthusiasm for capital punishment.
"Crime is worsening...and the Communist Party is obsessed with security," a Chinese political scientist who spoke on condition of anonymity said.
"The party believes in using draconian laws against disorder," the political scientist said.
With a string of new laws in recent years and thousands of executions a year, the party is clearly not squeamish.
The National People's Congress, or parliament, is debating amendments to the Criminal Law to increase the number of crimes punishable by death, Chinese jurists said. The amendments are due to be passed by a full session of parliament in March.
In the face of soaring crime, China executed at least 1,000 people in just the first two months of its "Strike Hard" anti-crime crackdown launched last April, the London-based human rights watchdog Amnesty International said. Thousands more executions may have gone unreported.
Crime, virtually eliminated in the years after the puritan communists swept to power in 1949, has staged a revival in the past two decades in the wake of liberal economic reforms. Capital punishment is one means China chooses to try to deter violence.
RISING EXECUTIONS
Amnesty International recorded 3,612 death sentences and 2,535 executions in China in 1995 compared with 2,496 death sentences and 1,791 executions in 1994. Some 300 people were executed in the United States between the re-introduction of the death penalty in 1977 and January, 1996.
"It's killing the chicken to frighten the monkey," one jurist said, quoting a Chinese proverb.
Amnesty International said the figures were believed to fall far short of the actual number of death sentences and executions.
Justice Ministry officials declined requests for an interview. Police declined to comment.
China does not publish statistics about the death penalty, saying these are a state secret.
Despite criticism from groups such as Amnesty International, capital punishment seems to be in China to stay.
"It's impossible for China to abolish the death penalty in the next 20 years," Yu Quanyu, vice-president of the China Society for Human Rights Studies, said.
The introduction of lethal injection as a means of execution was contained in amendments to the Criminal Procedure Law that took effect on January 1.
Currently, capital punishment is carried out at execution grounds with a single bullet fired at close range into the heart or back of the head with the convict kneeling, his ankles manacled and hands tied behind his back.
Chinese and foreign jurists were divided over China's motives for introducing lethal injection and allowing executions to be staged inside prisons.
"I strongly suspect...they are making it even more convenient to harvest organs from executed prisoners for transplant purposes," Robin Munro of Human Rights Watch/Asia said in a telephone interview from Hong Kong.
Medical facilities can be set up inside prisons to harvest organs, Munro said.
Chinese dissidents living in exile have accused China of timing executions of death row convicts to coincide with the need for transplants of organs, often for sale.
China vehemently denies the charge.
Chinese jurists argued that the introduction of lethal injection and allowing executions behind prison walls were intended to curb waste of police manpower -- not to mention increasing logistical difficulties in finding shooting grounds.
SUPERSTITIOUS VILLAGERS
"It is difficult to find execution grounds," another jurist said. "Superstitious villagers protest against executions on their land."
Many executions were held at military target ranges and along river banks, requiring huge police manpower to escort death row convicts and to stand guard to keep away curious onlookers.
Chinese laws do not specifically state the site of execution grounds.
Currently, death row convicts cannot be executed inside prisons because it is regarded as inhumane for other inmates to hear the sound of gunfire, jurists said.
The use of lethal injection would be quiet -- and save on manpower, they said.
But Chinese jurists were doubtful whether death row convicts would be given a choice between the bullet and lethal injection.
