Chinese Communist Party boss Jiang Zemin has wooed Taiwan's ruling and opposition parties to come up with constructive suggestions on reunification of the two sides, split by civil war almost five decades ago.
"We welcome Taiwan's various political parties...to exchange views with us on relations between the two sides and on constructive suggestions about peaceful reunification," Jiang told a government advisory body on New Year's Day.
Chinese newspapers carried the full text of Jiang's speech on Thursday.
Earlier this week, Jiang made a similar overture, but he made no mention of the island's political parties, instead referring to Taiwanese from all walks of life.
Taiwan's ruling Nationalist Party, which fled into exile on the island after losing the Chinese civil war in 1949, says it is committed to reunification but is in no hurry to do so. Taiwan insists on reunification under freedom and democracy and a free market economy.
The island's main opposition Democratic Progressive Party has called for "self-determination", or letting Taiwan's residents decide for themselves whether to reunify or declare independence.
China, which regards Taiwan as a rebel province, has threatened to invade if the island declares independence.
"Taiwan is our country's sacred territory," Jiang said.
"We hope the Taiwanese authorities...will stop all activities splitting the motherland and take realistic action to improve relations between the two sides," he said.
Tensions between Beijing and Taipei began to ease in the late 1980s, but relations plunged after Taiwan's President Lee Teng-hui made a trip to the United States in a bid to break the island out of diplomatic isolation imposed by China.
Ties deteriorated further last March when China conducted war games and missile tests close to Taiwan in the run-up to the island's historic presidential elections. China frowns on Western-style democracy.
Analysts said Jiang was eager for reunification to secure his place in modern Chinese history alongside Mao Zedong, who established the People's Republic, and Deng Xiaoping, who cemented the return of the British colony of Hong Kong to Chinese rule in mid-1997.
Jiang, the anointed successor of Deng, China's 92-year-old paramount leader, is seen by some Western analysts as merely a transitional figure and he has struggled to shake off that image.
Jiang's call on Taiwan to come up with suggestions on ways to reunify could go unanswered again, one Chinese analyst said.
China has been bitter since Taiwan ignored Jiang's 1995 "eight point" proposal on reunification, in which he called for leaders of the two sides to exchange visits.
Jiang was seen by some in the military and the Communist Party as weak after his earlier call for reunification fell on deaf ears, analysts said.
His latest overture to Taiwan could backfire and be used by his political opponents to attack him, another analyst said.
