China rejected on Tuesday an invitation for one of its top policymakers to visit Taiwan, saying the island must first abandon its bid to break out of diplomatic isolation.
"It is impossible," a spokesman for the cabinet's Taiwan Affairs Office said when asked if the office's director Wang Zhaoguo would accept the invitation from Taiwanese business leader Kao Ching-yuan.
The spokesman said the time for such a visit was not ripe because Taiwan had yet decided to abandon its "pragmatic foreign policy" of trying to boost its international standing.
"Taiwan...should not seek to enter the United Nations," the spokesman told Reuters by telephone. Taipei lost its seat in the United Nations when Beijing took its place in 1971.
China regards Taiwan as a rebel province and insists the island is not entitled to official links with other states.
If Wang had accepted and Taiwanese authorities had allowed him to visit, he would have been the most senior Chinese official to set foot on the island since the end of China's civil war in 1949.
Last week, a spokesman for a delegation of Taiwanese business leaders visiting Beijing quoted Wang as saying he would be happy to visit Taiwan if he had an opportunity, but that there was no definite commitment to accept.
The backpedalling by China on Tuesday indicated it was unwilling to make up with Taiwan for now, said a Chinese analyst familiar with Beijing government policy.
Ties between Beijing and Taipei were strained after Taiwan's President Lee Teng-hui made a landmark visit to the United States last year in a bid to lift the island out of diplomatic isolation.
China held war games and missile tests off Taiwan in a show of force in the run-up to the island's first presidential elections in March, which Lee won by a landslide.
Taiwan, an island with a population of 21 million, is eager to make up with its giant neighbour, the world's most populous nation with 1.2 billion people.
Last week, Taiwanese business leader Kao urged China to resume talks with Taiwan, saying the island's investors would lose confidence in China if political friction impeded ties.
But China was in no hurry to mend political fences, preferring instead to continue heaping pressure on Taiwan, said the analyst, who spoke on condition of anonymity.
"China is trying to use Taiwan's industrial and commercial sector to put pressure on the Taiwan authorities," he said.
Last month, China stepped up pressure on Taiwan to lift a decades-old ban on direct trade and transport links between the two sides by unilaterally announcing a set of regulations for such links.
Taiwan has banned direct trade, transport and mail links since 1949. Indirect trade and investment has been allowed since the late 1980s, usually through Hong Kong.
Many Taiwanese businessmen, who have poured more than $20 billion into China, are eager for direct trade and transport, but Taiwan has been reluctant to remove the curbs, which it views as its last bargaining chip in talks with the communists.
Last month, China called for political talks with Taiwan to end the state of hostility to pave the way for reunification.
Both China and Taiwan agree to eventually reunify but on very different terms.
