China hit out at Britain on Thursday, saying London's protests against Beijing's proposed amendments to Hong Kong laws after this year's handover of sovereignty were unacceptable, unreasonable and unwise.
"We cannot accept the British protest, it is also totally unreasonable and the so-called protest is unwise," Foreign Ministry spokesman Shen Guofang told a news briefing.
"The British side is always forcing its will upon others and this will not work," Shen said, adding that Hong Kong was China's internal affair after the handover and no other country had the right to interfere.
Britain lodged a strong protest on Wednesday against Beijing's plans to dilute laws guaranteeing civil liberties in Hong Kong when it regains control of the colony on July 1 after more than 150 years of British rule.
The Foreign Office said junior minister Jeremy Hanley had expressed Britain's "serious concern" over the proposals at a meeting with Chinese ambassador Jiang Enzhu.
A spokesman said Hanley told the envoy that Hong Kong's bill of rights and related legislation, which China wants to amend, were fully consistent with the Basic Law -- the post-handover constitution for Hong Kong promulgated by Beijing in 1990.
China has accused Britain of violating the Basic Law by unilaterally introducing laws guaranteeing civil liberties in Hong Kong after the handover.
Shen, the Chinese spokesman, defended China's plan to amend or repeal a list of 25 laws and ordinances, saying China was merely reversing unilateral changes made by Britain.
"It is fair and reasonable," Shen said of the proposed amendments.
Beijing is moving to replace Hong Kong's elected Legislative Council with a provisional legislature and block a lenient law that would exclude China-style crackdowns on dissent.
Shen charged that Patten's expansion of the electoral process in Hong Kong in violation of the Sino-British Joint Declaration on the handover was undemocratic.
"I think that violation of the Sino-British Joint Declaration cannot be considered as something democratic," Shen said. "We are upholding the solemnity of the Sino-British Joint Declaration."
A Chinese envoy to Hong Kong blamed the British protest on Patten, the 28th and last British governor of Hong Kong.
"This was an angry act by Chris Patten who was ashamed that his long-time confrontation with China had been unfruitful," Zhang Junsheng, deputy director of Xinhua News Agency, China's de facto diplomatic mission in Hong Kong, told reporters in the colony.
China's opponents say its planned steps fly in the face of vows that allow Hong Kong to keep its freedoms after it becomes a Special Administrative Region of China.
Patten has called Beijing's moves a "legal nonsense" while pro-democracy groups said it was a blow to democracy and human rights that would dent overseas confidence in Hong Kong.
Donald Tsang, who is responsible for drafting a budget for wealthy Hong Kong that straddles the transition, said China would need to convince investors the changes were necessary.
"If you can't convince the people of Hong Kong, people may take to the streets, some may keep their frustration in their hearts, some in the civil service may quit. Some may emigrate," he told the South China Morning Post newspaper.
The United States expressed strong concern on Tuesday and called on China to reconsider its moves.
