A court in southwest China sentenced at least five dissidents to prison terms of up to 10 years for subversion, a human rights watchdog group said on Saturday.
At least eight other dissidents were rounded up in Guiyang, capital of Guizhou province, in the same case, the New York-based Human Rights in China said.
An unknown number of the eight were sentenced, the group said. Details were not available.
The Guiyang Intermediate People's Court sentenced the five dissidents in May, 1996, but Human Rights in China said it was not able to confirm their convictions until recently.
"There were many people involved. The place was remote...It took a lot of time to verify the facts," Xiao Qiang, executive director of Human Rights in China, told Reuters by telephone.
The convictions could not be indepenently confirmed. Court officials and police could not be reached for comment.
Two of the political activists, Lu Yongxiang and Huang Zhongmin, were arrested in Beijing's Tiananmen Square on June 4, 1995 -- the sixth anniversary of a bloody military crackdown on student-led demonstrations for democracy -- while distributing copies of a daring, open letter to Communist Party leaders, the group said.
Lu, 50, a veteran dissident, and Huang, 35, a businessman, were each sentenced to five years in prison for participating in a counter-revolutionary group, spreading counter-revolutionary propaganda and incitement.
Chen Xi, 42, a lecturer-turned-businessman, received the harshest sentence -- 10 years in prison -- for organising and leading a counter-revolutionary group.
The open letter demanded the ruling Communist Party lift a decades-old ban on the establishment of new political parties and newspapers and draft a new constitution guaranteeing independence of the judiciary, democratic elections and freedom of the press.
In the letter, the dissidents threw their weight behind Zhao Ziyang, who was deposed as Communist Party chief in a power struggle that followed the 1989 crackdown.
Zhao is under virtual house arrest, sources close to him have said. He dropped from public view after May 19, 1989, when he visited students occupying Tiananmen Square and, with tears in his eyes, beseeched their leaders to end the protests. The next day hardliners clamped martial law on the Chinese capital.
On June 3 and 4, 1989 troops backed by tanks and firing automatic weapons stormed into the city, retaking the square and crushing the demonstrations with heavy loss of life.
The open letter also demanded the authorities release fellow dissidents, including former student leader Wang Dan, who was sentenced to 11 years in prison last year for conspiring to subvert the government.
The two other dissidents jailed by the Guiyang court were Liao Shuangyuan, 43, a legal adviser, and Zeng Ning, 28, a legal expert, who received four and two years in prison respectively for organising and joining a counter-revolutionary group.
China jailed dozens of dissidents in 1996 as part of a drive for stability that followed an easing of foreign pressure over its human rights record, diplomats and human rights activists say.
Beijing regularly hits out at criticism of its human rights record, regarding it as interference in its internal affairs and saying its priority is to fulfill the rights of its 1.2 billion people to food and clothing.
