A Chinese court has agreed to hear a lawsuit by veteran dissident Liu Nianchun accusing the government of illegal incarceration, but finding a defence lawyer has been difficult, Liu's wife said on Thursday.
Although Beijing's Chaoyang District Court has accepted the lawsuit, Liu's family has no money and several lawyers have come under government pressure not to take up the dissident's case, Chu Hailan said in a telephone interview.
In a separate case, Beijing's Dongcheng District Court has agreed to hear Wang Hui's lawsuit accusing police of illegally detaining her for unspecified reasons from May 16 to June 13, Wang told Reuters.
Wang, wife of jailed poet and dissident Zhou Guoqiang, also accused five guards at a detention centre in Changping county near Beijing, where she was held, of beating her up after the guards had been drinking.
She demanded 10,000 yuan ($1,200) in compensation, a public apology from the authorities and punishment of the guards.
No trial dates have been set. The courts declined to comment.
Chinese courts rarely agree to accept lawsuits filed by dissidents or their relatives. But acceptance of the case was only the first hurdle.
"It's very difficult to hire a lawyer. There are all sorts of pressures...and they (lawyers) are worried about their careers," Liu's wife said. "Also, lawyers are expensive. I can't afford them."
"I'm pessimistic...winning is impossible," she said.
International human rights groups have accused China's judiciary of serving as tools to persecute dissidents.
Wang, the poet's wife, was adamant. "I'm not afraid of being jailed again for suing them," she said.
She demanded Chinese authorities allow her husband to visit his 74-year-old mother, who is in hospital with lung cancer.
Wang said she would consider dropping her lawsuit if the authorities allowed her husband, who is suffering from kidney infection, to seek medical treatment at a hospital.
Dissidents Liu, 48, and Zhou, 41, are both serving three year sentences of re-education through labour at a camp in the northeastern province of Heilongjiang, although Zhou has been given an additional year for an unsuccessful escape attempt.
Re-education through labour is an administrative punishment that can be imposed by the authorities without recourse to prosecutors or the courts.
Chinese authorities appear to have begun favouring the administrative punishment as a way to remove dissidents from circulation without the complicated process of a judicial trial.
The New York-based Human Rights in China, which monitors the human rights situation on the mainland, applauded the court's decision to hear Liu's lawsuit, but warned against perfunctory treatment.
"Liu's case must not be given the perfunctory treatment which has always been given to dissidents' lawsuits against the government in the past," the group said.
