Beijing has pledged to open its doors ajar to imports of U.S. textiles under a new deal, but Washington has no illusions it can close its yawning textile trade gap with China, diplomats said on Monday.
Chinese and U.S. negotiators signed a new textile agreement in Beijing on Sunday in an 11th-hour deal that ended the threat of a cross-Pacific trade war and ensured U.S. access to China's textile markets.
"It (the deal) provides us with an opportunity to increase our access to China's markets in high-priority areas," one diplomat said. He declined to elaborate.
"(But) we are under no illusions that we are going to balance textiles as a single sector of our trade," a second diplomat said on condition of anonymity.
China exported $6.5 billion worth of textiles to the United States in 1995 but imported only $64 million. Diplomats attributed the sluggish U.S. textile exports to Beijing's high tariff rates and non-tariff barriers.
"Textiles are never going to be balanced but it's important that there be a market access element there," the second diplomat said.
The agreement gave China a U.S. import quota slightly larger than the previous 1994 textile pact, and China pledged to reduce its tariffs on textile imports.
Both the Chinese and U.S. sides declined to say by how much U.S. textile exports to China would increase and vice versa, or by how much China's tariffs would be cut.
"There are significant gains for U.S. industries," a third diplomat said.
"It was, for the first time, a concessionary admission on (the) part of the Chinese that they too had to do something with regard to supplying market access for U.S. products where we were competitive," he said but did not go into details.
The overall U.S. trade deficit with China -- the United States' largest after its deficit with Japan -- was seen reaching $38 billion in 1996, up from $34 billion in 1995, according to U.S. figures.
The new textile agreement may be good news for U.S. textile manufacturers and exporters, but it could be bad news for China's lumbering state enterprises.
A flood of U.S. textile imports could intensify competition and further cripple many of China's state enterprises, almost half of which are in the red, analysts said.
"U.S. textile imports will intensify competition in the already saturated domestic textile market," a Chinese economist said.
"Life will be even more difficult for a group of loss-making textile enterprises," said the economist, who asked not to be identified. "Some enterprises will be forced to bow out of the textile industry -- declare bankruptcy or merge."
State-owned textile factories in Shanghai, China's largest industrial city, registered losses of 350 million yuan ($42.2 million) in the first seven months of 1996, the China Business Times said on Monday.
The accord ended the threat of a Sino-U.S. trade war, which had loomed after Washington slapped $19 million in penalties on Chinese imports last September, accusing Beijing of shipping textiles through third countries to evade U.S. restrictions on Chinese imports.
China had threatened to retaliate by temporarily banning imports of some U.S. textiles, farm goods and alcoholic drinks but delayed the action to allow time for further talks.
Beijing announced after Sunday's deal that it was calling off its retaliatory measures, but Washington's penalties remained in force.
