A group of 56 Chinese writers, former officials and academics has petitioned Communist Party chief Jiang Zemin to save cultural relics from the gigantic Three Gorges dam which would flood huge tracts of land.
Ancient tombs and temples were threatened by a dearth of government funds and official under-reporting of those relics that warranted saving, according to the letter, a copy of which was made available to Reuters on Tuesday.
"The hearts of relic protection departments are like burning fire with 10,000 worries and misgivings," it said of the lack of funds.
About 130 historical sites, some of them dating to the Stone Age, could be flooded as soon as next year.
The sites include Qing dynasty (1644-1911) temples, an entire street from the Ming Dynasty (1368-1644) and stone carvings from the Han Dynasty (206 BC-AD 220).
Relocation of many relics had been delayed due to lack of funds, the letter said, adding that the damage would worsen unless government funds for relocation were provided.
The letter dated August 8 was signed by prominent female writer Bing Xin, former ambassador to the United States Chai Zemin and former minister of culture Wang Meng.
Others include Su Bingqi, president of the Archaeological Society, and Yu Weichao, curator of the Museum of Chinese History who is in charge of relocating relics.
Archaeologists had designated 829 buried relics near a reservoir under construction as needing protection. The sites covered a total area of more than 20 million square metres (215 million square ft), but the government has agreed to protect one tenth of the area due to a lack of funds, it said.
Some ancient tombs and relics have already disappeared under the onslaught of bulldozers, the letter said.
Construction of the controversial dam was expected to submerge 632 square km (244 square miles) of land in central China's Hubei province and the southwestern province of Sichuan.
It would force the relocation of 840,000 people from up to 200 villages and towns, according to 1991-92 estimates.
Environmentalists have described the project as a potential ecological disaster, leading to the destruction of a scenic mountain region and the extinction of endangered species.
The Three Gorges dam -- the world's biggest water control project --  was expected to ease seasonal flooding by creating a massive reservoir in Hubei to store waters from rains.
The 6,000-km (3,500-mile) Yangtze river -- China's longest -- and its tributaries have triggered floods throughout much of China's history.
The project, expected to cost $30 billion by its completion in 2009, would also help ease China's crippling shortage of electric power.
