The Geneva-based International Federation of Red Cross (IFRC) on Wednesday appealed for food aid for flood-hit North Korea, predicting disaster by the end of the year if relief did not arrive.
"The country is running out of food...they are emptying their warehouses now," Ole Gronning of Denmark, IFRC representative in North Korea, said in an interview in Beijing.
"We will have a human disaster at the end of the year if the food (aid) is not coming," said Gronning, who had been in North Korea since last November. "(By) July...there will be no food in the country."
Devastating floods in 1995 and 1996 left half a million North Koreans homeless out of a total of 23 million, according to relief organisations.
The floods have struck hard at the economy of the hermit communist state, destroying rice fields, roads, factories and livestock and swamping mines.
North Korea was forecast to consume 5.5 million tonnes of grain in 1997, but Pyongyang feared a shortfall of 45 percent, or up to 2.5 million tonnes, Gronning said.
"We already now know that the harvest will not be successful...," he said.
On Monday, North Korea admitted that it had only half the grain needed to feed its people.
Food rations across North Korea had dropped to less than a quarter of the level normally considered essential to maintain a healthy population, Gronning said.
There was no indication yet of famine but grain rations had been cut to 100 grams (3.5 ounces) per person a day -- equivalent to 900 calories -- from 450 grams (15.9 ounces).
"Signs of malnutrition are there," he said.
The IFRC aimed to raise $10 million to feed 139,000 of the worst hit victims for 11 months through October this year, but so far only $1 million had been raised, Gronning said.
About 5.2 million North Koreans were directly affected by the 1995 floods and a further 3.3 million last year.
Two earlier appeals for funds totalling more than $10 million had largely been met.
Photographs taken by Gronning in North Korea showed what he said was arable land under one metre (yard) of sand.
About two percent of North Korea's farmland had been completely destroyed, covered with sand several metres deep, Gronning said. Lack of machinery made reclamation of sand-covered arable land difficult.
North Korea was "very exposed", he said, adding that floods and hailstorms could strike again.
Pyongyang's arch-rival South Korea has been one of the 25 donor countries, pledging 1,000 (corrects from 100,000) tonnes of wheat flour and 15,000 pairs of socks.
"South Korea is coming in very big this year," he said.
Seoul suspended food shipments to North Korea after accusing Pyongyang of landing 26 commandos from a submarine last September. All but two of the group died during a manhunt.
The aid resumed after North Korea apologised and South Korea returned the remains of the infiltrators.
In January, the United States gave permission to Minneapolis-based Cargill Inc, the world's largest private grain trading company, to export 500,000 tonnes of wheat or rice to North Korea in what was expected to be a barter agreement.
