China has jailed two Mongolians for up to 15 years on charges of separatism and espionage, the London-based human rights group Amnesty International said on Thursday.
Hada, 41, former manager of the Mongolian Academic Bookshop, and Tegexi, 30, who worked in the Inner Mongolian Bureau of Foreign Affairs, were sentenced last December to 15 and 10 years in prison respectively, Amnesty said.
Chinese courts rejected their appeals last month and upheld their original sentences, it said. The pair had been held for a year in solitary confinement without charges or a trial.
"No evidence has been made public to show that Hada and Tegexi were involved in any activity which may be regarded as criminal under international standards," Amnesty said.
It called for their immediate and unconditional release.
The Amnesty report could not be independently confirmed. Officials in China could not be reached for comment on the eve of Lunar New Year holidays.
Amnesty said eight others were detained in December for alleged involvement in "nationalist separatist" activities, but were subsequently released.
Inner Mongolia, a Chinese province, is populated mainly by ethnic Mongolians but there has been little sign of anti-Chinese unrest since the early years after the 1949 communist takeover and the 1966-76 Cultural Revolution when dissent was crushed.
However, in late 1995, authorities in Inner Mongolia arrested 12 people who had demanded more democracy and an autonomous region, according to human rights groups.
Hada and Tegexi were being detained in poor conditions and their health was suffering, Amnesty said. They were living in a cell in Inner Mongolia's Number One Prison with over 30 other people, the report added.
Hada has a recurrence of tuberculosis and his neck was swollen, the group said. It was not known if he had received any medical treatment in prison.
Beijing-based Western analysts say China has tightened its grip on dissent and separatist sentiment ahead of the British colony of Hong Kong's return to Chinese rule on July 1.
"The harsh sentences passed on Hada and Tegexi are indicative of the severe attitude taken during the past year by the Chinese authorities towards suspected nationalists in...Tibet and Xinjiang," Amnesty said.
Inner Mongolia has traditionally been less restive than Tibet and Xinjiang.
Tibet has been rocked in recent years by periodic unrest, which China blames on the Himalayan region's god-king, the Dalai Lama, who fled into exile in India after an abortive uprising against communist rule in 1959.
Xinjiang borders Afghanistan, Pakistan and three mostly Moslem Central Asian states. The region has been shaken in recent months by several clashes and political killings involving separatists who want to end communist rule in Xinjiang.
"This 'crackdown' has also affected those whose peaceful religious activities are deemed to threaten 'national unity' and 'social stability'," Amnesty said.
