Chinese authorities sealed off a town in northwestern Xinjiang and paramilitary police patrolled the streets after at least 10 people were killed in a separatist riot last week, residents said on Tuesday.
"No one can leave, no one can enter," one resident said by telephone from the mainly Moslem town of Yining in the Yili Kazakh Autonomous Prefecture near the border with Kazakhstan.
Authorities closed the airport and railway station on Thursday and clamped an after-dark curfew on the town, residents said.
At least 10 people were killed, including one policeman, and some 100 wounded when 1,000 Moslem separatists of the Uighur ethnic minority rampaged through Yining on Wednesday to protest against Beijing rule, Chinese sources and residents have said.
The riot was among the most violent for many years in the restive region of Xinjiang, where Turkic-speaking Uighurs are in the majority and ethnic Han Chinese make up 38 percent of the population.
Shops and restaurants were closed in Yining and paramilitary police patrolled the streets. Police had arrested many suspects and were hunting other rioters, one Han woman resident said.
Hundreds of Uighurs had been arrested following the riot, said the leader of an exiled nationalist Uighur group in Kazakhstan in an interview in Almaty.
Local officials said the number of arrests was much lower, but refused to give further details.
"They have arrested several counter-revolutionaries and they are catching more," the woman resident said.
"The Uighurs are walking the streets and they look happy because the streets are full of them," she said in a sign of the depth of ethnic divisions. "It's just them in the streets. It's all their people. No one else is on the streets."
However, Han residents said they were not afraid.
"We are not nervous because the armed police and police are here," the woman said.
"If something happens we will...unite," another Han resident said. "There are also patriots among the Uighurs."
Officials tried to play down the riot, describing it as a small incident fuelled by "foreign hostile forces". They refused to say how many people were killed or wounded.
Yining is 50 km (30 miles) from the border with Kazakhstan, where many exiled Uighur separatists live.
In Almaty, Yusupbek Mukhlisi, leader of the United National Revolutionary Front of East Turkestan, said the riot was sparked by the execution of 30 Uighurs by the authorities last week.
However, an official of the bureau in charge of directing the clean-up operation after the riot denied that report.
"This is a pure fabrication," he said. "But I cannot tell you the reason."
The rioters attacked Han Chinese on sight, smashed cars and set fire to shops, forcing authorities to mobilise 1,000 police and paramilitary People's Armed Police to quell the violence, witnesses said. Police fired teargas to disperse the crowd.
The demonstrators, shouting anti-Chinese slogans, had marched on a government building, one official said.
The riot erupted after a Uighur criminal suspect resisted arrest by Chinese police, a Chinese source said.
Xinjiang authorities last year stepped up a crackdown on separatists and underground religious activity after clashes, bombings and assassination attempts on officials and Moslem leaders regarded as pro-Beijing.
Last May, Beijing ordered tighter controls along Xinjiang's lengthy border to block the smuggling of weapons and subversive materials from nearby central Asian states.
