Chinese police have arrested the suspected ringleader of a riot in the mainly Moslem northwestern region of Xinjiang last week that left at least 10 people dead and 144 injured, local officials said on Wednesday.
Abudu Heilili, 29, of the Uighur ethnic minority, was in police custody and under interrogation following the riot last Wednesday and Thursday in Yining near China's border with Kazakhstan, said a local Communist Party committee official.
The suspect was unemployed, and was a ringleader of a less violent anti-Chinese demonstration in Yining in August 1995, the official told Reuters by telephone.
Heilili had been released after that demonstration following "ideological education" -- a codeword for political indoctrination, he said.
Police rounded up 200 to 300 people after last week's riot, in which at least 10 people were killed and 144 injured. Many suspects had been released after questioning, officials said.
The death toll could rise, with up to seven people listed as missing, the party official said. About 90 people were treated for head wounds, and more than 10 were still in hospital.
Of the injured, 132 were civilians while the remaining 12 were members of the paramilitary People's Armed Police, a spokesman for the Xinjiang regional government said by telephone from Urumqi, Xinjiang's capital.
Authorities had issued circulars calling on local officials to deal a blow to separatism in the frontier region and warning of severe punishment for last week's rioters.
"We are resolved to deal a blow to the handful of ethnic separatist elements," said Zhang Youlian, deputy director of foreign affairs office for the Yili Kazakh Autonomous Prefecture, that administers Yining.
About 1,000 people, mostly Uighur farmers or unemployed young men, rioted in Yining last week in one of the largest and most violent demonstrations for independence in the mainly Moslem region of Xinjiang since the 1949 communist takeover.
Turkic-speaking Uighurs are in the majority in Xinjiang, where ethnic Han Chinese make up 38 percent of the population.
"We don't want the Communist Party," the demonstrators had chanted, witnesses said.
Uighur demonstrators had attacked Han Chinese with bricks, clubs and knives, and rampaged through the town, smashing and setting fire to about 20 vehicles and looting shops.
The People's Armed Police only succeeded in dispersing the rioters a day later, firing teargas to break up the crowd.
Authorities had sealed off Yining, an after-dark curfew was in force in some districts and armed police still patrolled the streets. The airport would reopen on Friday, officials said.
A Chinese source said the riot erupted after a Uighur criminal suspect resisted arrest by police.
Yusupbek Mukhlisi, leader of the United National Revolutionary Front of East Turkestan based in Kazakhstan, said the riot was sparked by the execution of 30 Uighurs in China last week. Chinese officials dismissed the report.
Yining is 50 km (30 miles) from the border with Kazakhstan, where many exiled Uighur separatists live.
Xinjiang authorities last year stepped up a crackdown on separatists and underground religious activity after clashes, bombings and assassination attempts on officials and Moslem leaders regarded as pro-Beijing.
Last May, Beijing ordered tighter controls along Xinjiang's lengthy border to block the smuggling of weapons and subversive materials from nearby central Asian states.
