Residents of a town in China's restive northwestern Xinjiang returned to work on Wednesday from the Lunar New Year holiday with officials vowing to deal a blow to separatism after a riot that left 10 people dead.
"The mayor...warned everyone to heighten their vigilance," Zhang Youlian, deputy director of the foreign affairs office of the Yili Kazakh Autonomous Prefecture, said by telephone.
"We are resolved to deal a blow to the handful of ethnic separatist elements," Zhang told Reuters.
Police had arrested between 200 and 300 people in the crackdown following the riot, officials said.
About 1,000 people from the Uighur ethnic minority rioted in the town of Yining in Yili prefecture last Wednesday in one of the largest and most violent demonstrations for independence in the mainly Moslem region of Xinjiang for several years.
Paramilitary People's Armed Police only succeeded in dispersing the rioters, who smashed and burned cars and looted shops, a day later, a spokesman for the Xinjiang regional government said by telephone from Urumqi, Xinjiang's capital.
The riot left 10 people dead and 144 wounded, he said. All the victims were Han Chinese, another official said.
The death toll could rise, with up to seven people listed as missing, said one official in Yining.
Of the wounded, 132 were civilians while the remaining 12 were members of the paramilitary armed police.
Local residents returned to work on Wednesday after the five-day Lunar New Year holidays, which ended on Tuesday, but an after-dark curfew remained in parts of the town and armed police still patrolled the streets, Zhang said.
"We resumed work today...Basically, it's normal," he said.
Authorities had sealed off the town, but planned to reopen the airport on Friday, Zhang said.
Last week, demonstrators hurling rocks and bricks rampaged through the town, attacking Han Chinese on sight and setting fire to to about 20 vehicles.
Armed police fired teargas to disperse the crowd.
Several leaders of the riot had been arrested, the regional government spokesman said, adding that a manhunt for other rioters was under way.
The leader of an exiled nationalist Uighur group in Kazakhstan said hundreds of Uighurs had been arrested following the riot.
Yusupbek Mukhlisi, leader of the Almaty-based United National Revolutionary Front of East Turkestan, said the riot was sparked by the execution of 30 Uighurs by Chinese authorities last week.
Zhang dismissed the report as a rumour.
Yining is 50 km (30 miles) from the border with Kazakhstan, where many exiled Uighur separatists live.
The riot was among the most violent for many years in Xinjiang, where Turkic-speaking Uighurs are in the majority and ethnic Han Chinese make up 38 percent of the population.
Xinjiang authorities last year stepped up a crackdown on separatists and underground religious activity after clashes, bombings and assassination attempts on officials and Moslem leaders regarded as pro-Beijing.
Last May, Beijing ordered tighter controls along Xinjiang's lengthy border to block the smuggling of weapons and subversive materials from nearby central Asian states.
