China was caught on Thursday in a no-win situation in a row between its old communist comrade, Pyongyang, and a new commercial ally, Seoul, with a North Korean official holed up in the South Korean embassy in Beijing.
"Whatever way they (the Chinese) play it... it's impossible to keep both Koreas happy," one Western diplomat said.
South Korea said Hwang Jang-yop, a senior aide to North Korean leader Kim Jong-il, and an assistant were seeking asylum at Seoul's embassy in Beijing.
North Korea accused the South of kidnapping Hwang, one of 11 secretaries on the powerful secretariat of Pyongyang's ruling Workers' Party, and urged China to sort out the mess -- in North Korea's favour.
Diplomats said they saw little opportunity for Beijing to settle the row in its backyard without disappointing the Stalinist North, one of China's few remaining socialist allies.
"The inevitable outcome is that the guy will end up in Seoul. I can't see any way around it," a second diplomat said.
Diplomats said they expected some tough negotiations on the crisis, with Hwang possibly locked inside the South Korean compound for some time.
South Korea has sent Kim Ha-jung, a special adviser to Foreign Minister Yoo Chong-ha, to Beijing for talks on the defector's fate.
If South Korea can convince China that Hwang sought asylum of his own free will and was not kidnapped, China has little choice but to allow the defector to leave for South Korea, the diplomats said.
Already Beijing was giving a hint of its position.
Chinese police blocked the sedate, tree-lined avenues leading to South Korea's consular office in Beijing, where Hwang arrived by taxi on Wednesday to seek asylum.
The cordon was protection for the compound and its high-profile guest against possible North Korean intrusions rather than to prevent the apparent defector from leaving China, diplomats said.
"The Chinese will play it according to the rules," the second Western diplomat said. "They won't stick their nose into the embassy itself. That's something they'll never do.
"It (the cordon) could be as much for the protection of the South Koreans as anything else because the North Koreans could do anything," he said. "You'd want to make sure there are no untoward incidents."
Hwang, 73, was the highest ranking Pyongyang official to seek asylum in South Korea. He was in charge of the North Korean communist party's foreign policy and a member of its powerful central committee, said Seoul officials, who rank him 24th in the Pyongyang power structure.
But Beijing must placate North Korea, whose friendship China once described as being as close as "lips and teeth".
"They'll have to find some face-saving way to resolve the problem," the second diplomat said.
"They (Chinese) turned a blind eye in the past to defections through China and that may become a lot more difficult from now on," he said.
China has called for calm in the interests of peace and stability in the Korean peninsula while it investigates.
North and South Korea were separated at the end of World War Two and fought a war from 1950 to 1953. China fought on North Korea's side in the conflict.
But capitalist South Korea has become an important trading partner and source of investment for China in recent years.
"There's far more in the relationship with South Korea for China than... with North Korea," the first diplomat said.
"China's primary interest in North Korea is that the country doesn't collapse with refugees flooding across the border and possible nuclear problems," he said.
North Korea was suspected in the early 1990s of pursuing a weapons-grade nuclear programme. Under an agreement signed with Washington in 1994 Pyongyang promised to dismantle the programme in return for safer light-water reactors.
