China and South Korea negotiated on Friday over the defection of a top North Korean who has taken refuge in Seoul's mission in Beijing while Pyongyang officials said they aimed to persuade the defector to return.
Talks in Singapore between South Korean Foreign Minister Yoo Chong-ha and Chinese counterpart Qian Qichen failed to break a deadlock over the defector, Hwang Jang-yop, 73, the most senior Pyongyang official to flee the North.
In Beijing, however, a South Korean embassy official said negotiations had begun over Hwang, who spent a second night in the embassy compound with an aide as Seoul and Pyongyang both made hectic efforts to claim him.
China has been dragged unwillingly into the row between an old communist comrade and a new business friend.
Diplomats have said China may find itself with little option but to give in to the wishes of the defector, thus angering one of its last remaining socialist allies.
Beijing tried to play for time.
"This incident happened all of a sudden, so we need more time to investigate," China's Qian told reporters after a 50-minute meeting with Seoul's Yoo in Singapore.
He urged both Koreas "to treat this matter with a cool and calm manner, to keep peace and stability".
Yoo said the two sides would meet again, but did not say where or when. He said Friday's talks were "good".
In the sedate, tree-lined diplomatic district of Beijing, dozens of Chinese police cordoned Seoul's consular section off for a second day. Hwang arrived at its door on Wednesday to seek asylum.
"They (North Koreans) are harassing us and we are a little nervous about that," said South Korean embassy spokesman Chang Moon Ik, adding that Seoul had asked Beijing to maintain tight security around the compound.
Hwang, who could face summary execution or a lifetime in the gulag if he goes back to the North, was in good health and sleeping well, Chang said. He was spending the day reading.
A North Korean official standing outside the police cordon said Pyongyang had no plans to storm the compound to recover a countryman Pyongyang says was kidnapped.
"We are waiting here for him to come out and then ask him to come back," said the official who declined to identify himself.
A group of about 10 North Koreans, badges of the late North Korean leader Kim Il-sung pinned to their lapels, returned to wait in freezing temperatures outside the compound on Friday after police asked them to leave overnight.
"If China allows him to go to South Korea then we will be disappointed," said another North Korean. "It will be regrettable."
Some commentators have suggested Pyongyang might react violently to the defection of a man ranked 24 in its hierarchy, who is a senior aide to reclusive leader Kim Jong-il and North Korea's top communist party theoretician.
Pyongyang has charged that Hwang must have been kidnapped, and has called on Beijing to sort out the mess.
Seoul has dismissed as "preposterous" Pyongyang's charges that Hwang, one of 11 secretaries on the powerful secretariat of North Korea's ruling Workers' Party, was abducted.
It was not clear whether Kim Ha-jung, a special adviser to South Korea's Foreign Minister, was meeting Chinese officials.
Kim failed to hold talks with Chinese officials when he arrived on Thursday as Beijing, apparently angered by Seoul's decision to export its latest row with Pyongyang into China, avoided a meeting, South Korean sources said.
Officials at the North Korean embassy refused to comment or confirm reports from Seoul that Pyongyang had sent a delegation to China to discuss Hwang's defection.
