Chinese police have moved North Korean diplomats away from the area around the South Korean mission in Beijing where a top-level Pyongyang official has taken refuge, witnesses said on Friday.
However, there was no sign of movement in a diplomatic impasse over the fate of Hwang Jang-yop, 73, a pillar of North Korea's Stalinist establishment, and his assistant who have sought asylum in the South.
China, finding itself in a diplomatic quandary involving its old communist comrade and a new commercial friend, has avoided direct comment and chosen instead to appeal for calm.
In Singapore, South Korean Foreign Minister Yoo Chong-ha and Chinese counterpart Qian Qichen met to discuss a South Korean appeal for safe passage from Beijing to Seoul for the defector, a senior aide to North Korean leader Kim Jong-il.
Qian said after the talks that Beijing needed more time.
"This incident happened all of a sudden, so we need more time to investigate," he told reporters.
In the sedate, tree-lined diplomatic district of Beijing, dozens of Chinese police cordoned Seoul's consular section off for a second day. Hwang, the most senior official to defect from North Korea, arrived on Wednesday to seek asylum.
"They are harassing us and we are a little nervous about that," said South Korean embassy spokesman Chang Moon Ik, adding that Seoul had asked Beijing to maintain tight security around the compound.
Chinese police moved away several North Koreans watching the compound from cars parked in side streets overnight, witnesses said.
"I still don't believe it," said one North Korean who drove up to the cordon on Friday. "Judging from this situation and his position it is not possible for him to defect.
"If China allows him to go to South Korea then we will be disappointed," said the North Korean, who declined to identify himself. "It will be regrettable."
Pyongyang has charged that Hwang, 73, one of the chief architects of North Korean communism, must have been kidnapped, and has called on Beijing to sort out the mess.
Seoul has dismissed Pyongyang's charges that Hwang, one of 11 secretaries on the powerful secretariat of North Korea's ruling Workers' Party, was kidnapped, saying he arrived at the compound in a taxi on Wednesday.
China's Foreign Ministry said it had nothing to say on Friday on the diplomatic tussle in its backyard.
It was not clear whether Kim Ha-jung, a special adviser to South Korean Foreign Minister Yoo Chong-ha, would meet Chinese officials on Friday.
Kim failed to hold talks with Chinese officials when he arrived from Seoul on Thursday as Beijing, apparently angered by Seoul's decision to export its latest row with Pyongyang into China, avoided a meeting, South Korean sources said.
However, he met the defector inside the compound.
Officials at the North Korean embassy refused to comment or confirm reports from Seoul that Pyongyang had sent a delegation led by an official at the level of vice-minister and including officials from the ruling Workers Party and the Foreign Ministry to discuss Hwang's defection.
South and North Korea were separated at the end of World War Two and fought a war from 1950 to 1953. China fought on North Korea's side in the conflict.
