Most Chinese have been slow to forgive and forget Japanese atrocities in World War Two and fear a possible resurgence of militarism in the land of the rising sun, a survey published in Beijing on Saturday showed.
The survey, conducted by the official China Youth Daily last December, showed that 99.4 percent of 15,000 people interviewed nationwide thought young Chinese "should remember" Japan's 1931-45 occupation of China.
More than 97 percent of the respondents were aged below 40, too young to have been victims of Japan's war atrocities. By Beijing's count, 35 million Chinese were killed or wounded by invading Japanese troops.
Asked what first came to their minds when Japan was mentioned, 81.3 percent of respondents said the Rape of Nanjing.
Japanese troops marched into Nanjing, China's pre-communist capital and known then as Nanking, in 1937 and engaged in an orgy of rape and massacre. Up to 250,000 Chinese were believed to have been killed.
More than 97 percent of respondents said they could not tolerate repeated attempts by Japanese officials to whitewash their wartime atrocities, including the Rape of Nanjing.
The China Youth Daily survey showed that 94.9 percent of the respondents were opposed to Japan becoming a United Nations Security Council member.
It also showed that 85.1 percent of respondents believed Japan wanted to become a military superpower and 70.7 percent saw Japan as a new threat to peace in Asia.
China itself ruffled feathers in the region last March when it intimidated rival Taiwan by conducting missile tests and war games close to the island in the run-up to Taiwan's historic presidential elections.
The sheer size of the People's Liberation Army -- the world's biggest at three million -- has caused uneasiness among China's neighbours.
China has been mired in a dispute with Japan over a group of islands in the East China Sea and another dispute with Asian neighbours over the Spratly Islands in the South China Sea.
The survey showed that 53.8 percent of respondents thought that Japanese despised Chinese, while 50.8 percent said Japanese discriminated against Chinese.
Many Chinese themselves harbour deep suspicions and are hostile toward foreigners.
More than 56 percent of the respondents said the Japanese were "cruel", 45.2 percent said "arrogant" and 45.3 percent described them as "war freaks" by nature.
But 52.7 percent of the respondents said they owned Japanese-made electrical appliances.
Many respondents were suspicious of Japanese motives for investing in China. More than half said Japanese investment aimed to control China, while 45.3 percent said Japan dumped outdated equipment in China.
On Friday, the People's Daily, mouthpiece of the ruling Communist Party, accused the United States and Japan of covering up the U.S. military's firing of uranium-tipped bullets near Okinawa during drills in December 1995 and January 1996.
The United States apologised this month.
The People's Daily said Washington's argument that the bullets were mislabelled was unconvincing and questioned why the incident was kept a secret for more than a year.
