For Moslems of the Uighur ethnic minority in northwest China, wearing neckties bearing a crescent and a star -- the national emblem of East Turkestan -- could land them in jail. But many young men are proudly defiant.
For Tibetan monks, nuns and civilians, displaying pictures of Tibet's exiled god-king, the Dalai Lama, could mean imprisonment. But almost every Tibetan family in the deeply religious Himalayan region of China has one.
Uighurs, Tibetans and other ethnic minority groups tried to resist Chinese rule for decades, but uprisings were crushed and dissent silenced under the late chairman Mao Zedong's iron-fisted rule.
With Beijing loosening its grip slightly in recent years, more Uighurs and Tibetans have dared to speak their minds, and many clamour for independence in defiance of Beijing's attempts to dilute their culture.
An anti-Chinese riot in the restive northwestern region of Xinjiang -- a region that Moslem separatists call East Turkestan -- this month left nine people dead and 198 wounded, officials said. Police arrested up to 300 people after the riot.
"Minority ethnic groups are like wild horses that are difficult to tame," a government official in Beijing said.
"They could gallop away at any time...regardless of how well fed they are," said the official, speaking anonymously. "Like a centrifugal force, their tendency is to move away.
"Ethnic minorities are an old problem, a big problem and a difficult problem to solve," the official added.
This month's Moslem riot was one of the largest and most violent demonstrations for independence in the mainly Moslem region of Xinjiang -- which means New Frontier in Chinese -- since the communist takeover in 1949.
Xinjiang, bordering Afghanistan, Pakistan and three mostly Moslem Central Asian states, was shaken last year by bombings and assassination attempts.
Tibet has been rocked periodically by riots led by Buddhist monks and nuns loyal to the Dalai Lama, who fled into exile in India in 1959 after an abortive uprising against the Chinese.
China accuses the Dalai Lama, who won the 1989 Nobel Peace Prize for his non-violent campaign for autonomy for his homeland, of fomenting unrest in Tibet.
Extremities committed during the chaotic 1966-76 Cultural Revolution in Xinjiang and Tibet have contributed to the resolve of ethnic minorities to try to bolt, analysts said.
Han Chinese, who account for more than 90 percent of China's population of 1.2 billion, have been accused of trying to dilute the cultures of Uighurs and Tibetans.
Uighurs were banned from learning their written language in the Cultural Revolution. "It's like hacking them with a knife. They'll never forget the wound," the government official said.
Han Chinese have had more success assimilating other ethnic minorities. The proud Manchus ruled China from 1644 to 1911, but few Manchus can read or write their own language.
A natural divide in looks, lifestyle, language was to blame for much ethnic unrest in more far-flung regions, analysts said.
Uighurs, like their Central Asian cousins, speak Turkic, are Moslems and abstain from pork, a main staple for Han Chinese.
"There's a big difference in the lifestyle, food, language, customs, costume and culture of Han Chinese and Uighurs. These are natural barriers," the official said.
China blames "hostile foreign forces" for much of the ethnic unrest. Kazakhstan is home to many exiled Uighur separatists.
China also has repeatedly accused Western countries of supporting Tibet's Dalai Lama.
"But why are there no disturbances in Inner Mongolia?" one analyst asked in reference to China's northern region, populated mainly by ethnic Mongolians. "That is because Mongolia did not extend its arm into China."
