North Korea said on Monday it would fire a top official marooned in South Koreas embassy in China if he sought asylum and Seoul went on alert for possible attack but said it wanted talks on the Cold War crisis.
Pyongyangs Foreign Ministry, commenting on the highest level defection yet from the Stalinist nation, saying that if leading ideologue Hwang Jang-yop had been kidnapped, then North Korea would take "decisive countermeasures".
"Our stand is simple and clear. If he was kidnapped, we cannot tolerate it and we will take decisive countermeasures," the KCNA news agency, monitored in Tokyo, quoted the Foreign Ministry as saying.
"If he sought asylum, it means that he is a renegade and he is dismissed," it said, adding that it had asked Beijing to investigate what it called the disappearance of Hwang, who took refuge in Seouls mission in Beijing six days ago.
North Koreas ambassador was believed to have met officials at Chinas Foreign Ministry on Monday.
Hwangs defection has embarrassed his hermit homeland, delighted Seoul and mired Beijing in a quandary over how to usher him out of China without offending an old communist comrade or a new capitalist friend.
But Hwang turned 74 on Monday with no sign of progress to celebrate in his appeal for asylum in the South, and still stranded in Seouls heavily guarded consulate in Beijing.
U.S. Secretary of State Madeleine Albright voiced U.S. concern over events on the Korean peninsula, saying they underlined the need for dialogue between rival North and South.
South Korea prepared for possible attacks by Pyongyang as the Cold War crisis escalated, but said confrontation over the defector would not scuttle its efforts for detente.
Another prominent defector, Li Il-nam, a nephew of North Korean leader Kim Jong-ils ex-wife, remained in a coma after being shot and critically wounded at the weekend by suspected North Korean agents near Seoul.
Security around South Koreas ports, airports and other public places had been beefed up and 10,000 police and soldiers searched for the two suspected agents who shot Li.
Seoul Foreign Minister Yoo Chong-ha said problems stemming from Hwangs defection were just the start of headaches for Seoul because of a crisis in the North.
"I believe the North Korean regimes crisis will deepen as time passes because theres no likelihood of improvement in its economic hardship and food shortages, and signs of laxity in its social order," Yoo told a meeting of South Korean diplomats.
South Koreas security-related ministers on Sunday agreed that a desperate Pyongyang resort to guerrilla attacks after Hwang, a top adviser the Norths Kim Jong-il, sought asylum.
Dour warnings from North Korean officials in Beijing of the consequences of any attempt to move Hwang to the South gave a hint of Pyongyangs willingness to retaliate.
"If they make him go to Seoul, I think there will be war," said one North Korean official who declined to be identified.
South Korean diplomats and Chinese police guarding the mission brought in extra blankets and mattresses in a sign they expected a lengthy stand-off over Hwang.
However, dozens of North Korean officials disappeared on Monday afternoon from outside the building where they have kept a round-the-clock vigil since Hwang disappeared inside.
China, an unwilling third party in the feuding between the two hostile ends of the Korean peninsula, has appealed to both sides to act calmly to resolve the affair.
Analysts say the North has suffered huge loss of face over the defection of Hwang, who was ranked high in the hierarchy of his Stalinist homeland and was the architect of its governing ideology of Juche, or strict self-reliance.
