Beijing's new mayor on Monday vowed the battle against corruption in the Chinese capital would go on but sought to put behind him a graft scandal that led to the downfall of the city's Communist Party boss.
Acting Mayor Jia Qinglin told the Beijing People's Congress, or city council, that a government crackdown on corruption had curbed wining and dining at public expense, the use of luxury cars by low-ranking officials and civil servants living in excessively large housing.
"The struggle against corruption has been crowned with new results," the mayor said. "We must unceasingly score new victories in the struggle against corruption."
Chinese Communist Party chief and state president Jiang Zemin has identified corruption as a virus that could topple the ruling party and some of China's most serious cases under communist rule have emerged in Beijing.
Officials would be required to declare their incomes and gifts received and the government would speed up supervision of the approval of major infrastructure projects, the appointment of key officials and the appropriation of funds, Jia said.
In his 100-minute speech to the opening session in Beijing's Great Hall of the People, Jia made no mention of Chen Xitong, who was ousted as Beijing's Communist Party secretary in April, 1995.
The mayor wanted to bury the scandal, analysts said.
"Jia Qinglin is an outsider...and doesn't know how deep Beijing's political waters are," one analyst said.
Jia was party secretary of the southeastern province of Fujian before being appointed as Beijing mayor last October.
The Beijing People's Congress was expected to formally elect Jia as mayor during its five-day session.
"If he can avoid the controversy, he will run away from it as far as possible," said the analyst, who asked not to be identified.
Other Beijing officials, including former mayor Li Qiyan, have previously mentioned Chen in their speeches, urging party cadres to draw a lesson from the scandal. Li has been removed and appointed a vice-minister of labour.
One academic said: "Jia Qinglin is a newcomer. Issues like these are better left unsaid. It's no good if he talks too tough. It's also no good if it's not tough enough."
Chen, 66, has been out of the public eye since stepping down as Beijing party boss after his protege, Vice-Mayor Wang Baosen, committed suicide after coming under investigation for corruption in April 1995.
Chen was sacked from the party's powerful Politburo in September 1995, the most senior official to be ensnared in a corruption scandal since the puritan communists swept to power in 1949.
Last December, Beijing Vice-Mayor Zhang Baifa, said Chen could be punished for dereliction of duty but not for any more serious offence.
Chen had accepted many expensive gifts, but more than a year of investigation into the man who presided over China's capital for most of the 1980s had uncovered no evidence of wrongdoing in exchange, Zhang said.
Chen was being held outside Beijing, pending completion of the investigation, he said.
One of Chen's sons, Chen Xiaotong, former general manager of a Sino-Japanese joint venture hotel in Beijing, has been detained. His wife was free, but his mistress was on the run, Zhang said.
