Will the death of China's paramount leader Deng Xiaoping plunge the world's most populous country into chaos and division, or will heir apparent Communist Party chief Jiang Zemin take over the reins?
Diplomats and analysts said on Thursday they expected calm before any storm.
Will Deng's anointed successor, who also holds the jobs of state President and head of the armed forces, escape the fate of Chairman Mao Zedong's chosen heir -- a man who survived less than two years when he locked horns with Deng over power?
Will Jiang reverse his mentor's economic reforms and return to Mao Zedong's orthodox communism? Will a power struggle brew behind the scenes among those eager to succeed Deng as China's de facto emperor?
The world will be watching to see which way China's political winds blow -- and how the leadership copes with a plethora of problems from unemployment, a widening gap between rich and poor, corruption and a one-party system.
"I don't think there will be an immediate power struggle," one Western diplomat said on Thursday. "The immediate concern will be to present a face of calm, stability and normality."
Deng died late on Wednesday of respiratory failure -- a complication from Parkinson's disease and a lung infection. He ws 93 by Chinese reckoning, which adds a year to one's age.
His pragmatic policies transformed a backward Stalinist state into an economic powerhouse.
"There hasn't been such a death in 20 years, of such a prominent figure," another diplomat said.
China would be obsessed with stability and security, but the country could ground to a halt for some time while the nation mourns and leaders jockey for position, analysts said.
"There's going to be a lot more emphasis on stability, more focus on internal security so it's going to be... a cautious leadership," Hong Kong-based Sinologist Tai Ming Cheung said.
"There may be a certain amount of policy paralysis, which has been there already, but beyond that I don't see any great changes," Cheung said. "There is going to be a lull."
One Chinese analyst, who asked not to be identified, said stability would be a facade.
"It'll be like a duck swimming -- on the surface it'll be calm but underneath it'll be turbulent," said the analyst, quoting a Chinese proverb.
Jiang, 70, appears to have consolidated his power base.
But his political rivals, including Qiao Shi, 72, chairman of the National People's Congress, or parliament, were expected to jostle for power in the run-up to a crucial party congress later this year, analysts said.
"I expect an increase in political jockeying," Cheung said.
"I think that Jiang is making all the running and he is in a fairly strong position, so he is the one -- barring any mistakes -- to take full advantage, but then the other people will be pushing just as hard," Cheung said.
Jiang's predecessor, Zhao Ziyang, 77, who was sacked in 1989 as general secretary of the party for showing sympathy to students demonstrating for democracy, is waiting in the wings to stage a political comeback.
Zhao has not been seen in public for more than six years and is believed to be living under house arrest in Beijing.
Most analysts say Jiang is in control, but some write him off as a transitional leader.
"He (Jiang) has been consolidating his power considerably over the last year," the first diplomat said. "He is now less dependent on Deng Xiaoping."
