China's leadership has dissolved the once-powerful personal office of 92-year-old patriarch Deng Xiaoping in what could be a sign his health is increasingly fragile, a Chinese source and diplomats said on Wednesday.
Deng's health has stirred intense speculation this week, rocking stock markets in China, Hong Kong and Taiwan on Tuesday and prompting an attempt by Beijing to calm fears.
Japanese media reported that Deng had been admitted to hospital in critical condition, while a Hong Kong newspaper said he was recuperating at home from a brain haemorrhage but was not near death.
China's official media on Wednesday made no mention of Deng's health.
The Deng office of advisers and secretaries -- or "Deng ban" as it is known in Chinese -- was dissolved shortly before the Lunar New Year, which fell on February 7, a Chinese source with close ties to the Communist Party said.
"If true, it is a signal Deng's health had deteriorated... Deng can no longer sustain a very active role in the political sphere," said a Western diplomat who had heard about the disbanding of the office.
Chinese sources told Reuters on Monday that Communist Party chief and state President Jiang Zemin and Premier Li Peng cut short out-of-town trips last weekend to return to Beijing to visit the ailing patriarch.
Deng has not been seen in public since the 1994 Chinese Lunar New Year festival, when he appeared frail and faltering.
The dissolution of the Deng office also signalled China's succession problem was virtually complete and that Jiang had further consolidated power.
"Jiang Zemin is eager to tell the world that he is now in charge... and he no longer needs to take directives from Deng's office," the Chinese source said.
The office used to issue directives to the current leadership, including Jiang, but was considered to have outlived its usefulness, the source said.
It had been headed by Deng's top aide, General Wang Ruilin, a member of the party's powerful Central Military Commission.
"Deng Xiaoping has been retired for many years... Deng's office has no direct function," the source said.
Deng, whose pragmatic policies transformed a backward Stalinist state into an economic powerhouse, retired from his last official position in 1990 and his only post now is honorary chairman of China's Bridge Association, a title that reflects his lifelong passion for the game.
Rumours about Deng's health surface periodically and often have a direct impact on China-related bourses, where Deng's demise is seen by some as a potentially destabilising factor.
Apparently trying to calm China's markets, newspapers splashed a report that economic tsar Zhu Rongji held a seminar on Deng's economic theories and reported Deng had sent his condolences for the funeral of a late defence minister.
The Japanese daily Nihon Keizai Shimbun, quoting diplomatic sources in Beijing with close ties to senior military officials, said Deng was critically ill after a brain haemorrhage.
The Chinese leadership had told senior party and government officials not to leave the country unless obliged to do so for pressing diplomatic reasons, the newspaper said.
Japan's Kyodo news agency said Deng suffered a brain haemorrhage last Friday.
Hong Kong's Ming Pao newspaper said Deng was recuperating at home and "was not about to die soon".
On Tuesday, China played down fears that Deng's health was deteriorating, saying there had been "no big change". It declined to say if there had been a small change or what could count as a major change.
