As Czech leaders finally get around to discuss a worrying surge in the trade deficit, analysts suggest a mixed bag of macro and micro-economic fixes, but most say devaluing the crown should be avoided.
Some say the deficit is a necessary product of economic reform and will turn around next year, while the gap between growth in imports, up a nominal 15.2 percent in January-August year-on-year, and exports, up 6.4 percent, will close.
Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus, who for months said there was nothing to worry about as the deficit soared, finally bowed to pressure and called a meeting for Tuesday to confront the gap.
But the meeting was abruptly postponed on Monday with cabinet officials citing the rising pressure of October's parliament session as a reason. A new date for the meeting has yet to be set, but officials say it will be "soon".
The trade deficit grew to a record 100 billion crowns ($3.68 billion) from January-August, the same as for the whole of 1995, and the markets are anxiously awaiting to see what, if anything, might be done.
Forecasts say that the current account deficit will also grow to around six percent of gross domestic product in 1996 from four percent last year.
When Klaus and three cabinet members, plus central bank Governor Josef Tosovsky and Czech Statistical Bureau chairman Edvard Outrata, finally discuss possible fixes for the rapidly expanding gap, they will have heard plenty of advice.
Many analysts say capital inflows can finance the deficit in the short term and urge moves, other than devaluation, that would gradually improve the competitiveness of Czech exporters.
Others suggest measures that could bring immediate relief, including import charges and fiscal adjustment.
GOVERNMENT SHOULD AIM FOR BUDGET SURPLUS NEXT YEAR
"The reaction should come immediately, before the deficit becomes unmanageable," said Vladimir Kreidl, economist at Prague's Patria Finance.
Klaus's government should not only pass its fifth straight balanced budget, but fight for a 1997 surplus of one or two percent of GDP. Other fiscal restrictions could be imposed to help cut domestic demand for imports, he said.
"Fiscal restriction is the most effective tool for reducing the deficit," Kreidl said, adding that the government should back private savings and a fully-funded pension system.
STRUCTURAL REFORMS NEEDED TO BOOST COMPETITIVENESS
Kreidl said more attention was needed to improve the capital markets which would strengthen currency inflow. Speeding up privatisation by sell-offs to strategic foreign investors would also boost competitiveness, he said.
"Czech exporters must become more cost competitive," said Jiri Huebner, Czech and Slovak team director for the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD).
"There is a need for substantial investments in new plant and technology...to improve productivity."
The government has contended that many of the imports which are fuelling the deficit are modernising Czech industry, which should eventually produce higher export output, but Huebner said more targeted policies were necessary.
He advocated an acceleration of depreciation on new capital expenditures and relaxing tax write-offs of bad debts to spark The government must separate investment funds from bank management to ensure shareholders' interests are a priority, not the credit activity of the parent bank, he said. "The government should prohibit bankers from the credits side of the business (from sitting) on company boards," he said.
IMPORT CURBS MAY HELP AS WESTERN ECONOMIES STAGNATE
Josef Poeschl, Czech specialist at the Vienna Institute for Comparative Economic Studies (WIIW) said that the immediate problem was the poor economic performance of West European economies.
"It is an economic law that if a stagnating economy is trading with a growing one, the latter will be faced with a deterioration of the trade balance," he said.
Poeschl suggested imposing temporary import surcharges and higher taxation on some commodities which are mostly imported.
"But if the Czech deficit does not shrink, a devaluation (of the Czech crown) will remain the only way out."
WORRIES ARE EXAGGERATED, EXPORTS WILL GROW NEXT YEAR
Some economists said the government should not panic.
"The increase of the trade deficit will stop in 1997 at 150 to 160 billion crowns," said Kamil Janacek, chief economist at Prague's Komercni Banka.
In 1997, the first effects of an investment wave will be felt, boosted by reviving demand on EU markets, especially the acceleration of economic growth in Germany, he said.
The Czechs will also benefit from a partial re-orientation of exporters toward neighbouring post-communist countries and the former Soviet Union.
Janacek said there will be a market-based weakening of the crown, from currently above parity with the central bank mark/dollar basket to below parity in the first half of 1997.
"This will help to accelerate exports, and to slow down imports," he said.
DEVALUATION WOULD DO MORE HARM THAN GOOD
"We think the country's trade deficit will likely stabilise in 1997...so, as you can guess, we have plenty to say about what the government shouldn't do," said Boris Gomez, analyst at ING Barings in Prague.
He pointed to a positive, yet gradual shift of exports from commodities to sophisticated finished goods, and development of eastern export markets with higher economic growth potential.
A crown devaluation "is not a painless cure and would do more damage than good to the small and open Czech economy that is heavily dependent on imports at this stage".
It would "generate a wage-price spiral" and hurt credibility, Gomez said. Import surcharges would also sap the economy of needed modernisation.
Gomez concludes that the government must remain committed to faster corporate restructuring, increased labour productivity growth and competitiveness, lower inflation, and continued fiscal discipline. ($1=27.18 Czech Crown)
