The Czech engineering company CKD Holding a.s. said on Thursday that it had won two contracts totalling roughly $200 million to supply trams to the city of Manila in the Philipines.
The order by Manila's MRTC for trams to be used in its massive new mass transit project -- and to be produced at the CKD Tatra plant in Prague -- is welcome news to Czech industry which has been reeling from a rapidly expanding trade deficit.
"The object of the contracts is the supply of large-capacity trams to Manila," CKD spokesman Vaclav Brom told Reuters adding the order was for more than 70 large tram units.
The Czech Foreign Ministry said in a statement issued concurrently that the CKD contract was part of a "package of contracts" with Japan's Sumitomo Corp and Mitsubishi Heavy Industries as general suppliers for the project.
CKD said one contract was for the supply of trams totalling $104 million, the assembly of which would begin in the second half of 1997 with supply scheduled for sometime in 1998.
The second contract was a joint 10-year contract in which CKD would be responsible for maintenance and technical assistance for the trams along with training of the drivers, while Sumitomo would maintain the tracks and the depots.
The maintenance contract is worth $95 million to the Czech side alone, CKD said.
The Czech foreign ministry said the contracts were signed last week with the owner of the Manila project, MRTC.
"(The contracts' signing), in cooperation with the Japanese partners, open for Czech suppliers of tram units the possibility to penetrate into other Asia markets as well," the Czech foreign ministry said in a statement.
It said that Indonesia and the Peoples' Republic of China, were strong prospects for CKD trams, "especially since Mitsubishi does not produce trams, and with success in Manila, is prepared to coooperate with CKD."
The Czech merchandise trade deficit grew to a record eight-month total of 100 billion (corrects from million) crowns from January to August, the same as for the whole of 1996.
Many analysts see the Czech electric rail industry, which supplied trams for decades to the countries of the former Soviet Bloc, as a potential area where the country can narrow its yawning trade gap.
