A senior U.S. Defence Department official on Tuesday dismissed Czech army detections of chemical agents released in the early days of the Gulf War, saying the incidents were not verifiable by American equipment.
Amid growing criticism that the Pentagon fumbled reports of U.S. troops' exposure to nerve gas agents in 1991, U.S. Assistant Secretary of Defence Theodore Prociv said the Pentagon still viewed the Czech findings as false alarms.
"What we agree to is what we can verify," Prociv, who is in charge of the Pentagon division on chemical weapons use, told reporters during a visit to the Czech Defense Ministry.
"Every now and then (during the Gulf War) we would get an alarm and we couldn't verify it. So our position is that without the verification, it's not a true detection."
Thousands of troops based in northern Saudi Arabia during the Gulf War -- mostly Americans and Britons -- have reported respiratory ailments, skin rashes and muscle pain which they believe resulted from exposure to low-level chemical agents released during several U.S. bombings of Iraqi weapons caches.
The conditions, which have been dubbed the "Gulf War Syndrome", have been linked by veterans groups to several detections of chemical fallout from the bombings, including several detections by the Czech unit.
On Saturday, the New York Times newspaper quoted Czech soldiers and combat logs as saying that U.S. commanders ignored the warnings of chemical detections made by the Czech unit in January 1991 at the beginning of the war.
Prociv, specifically speaking about the Czech detections, said U.S. equipment could not verify these warnings. He did not discuss other incidents.
"We have looked at the Czech equipment as excellent, our verification system is excellent. The Czech detections were part of problem we were experiencing with some of the other detections," said Prociv, whose visit was officially to discuss U.S.-Czech cooperation to develop better chemical detection.
The Gulf issue exploded recently when Pentagon officials admitted that more than 15,000 American troops may have been exposed to nerve gas when American combat engineers blew up an Iraqi munition depot in March 1991.
In a heated hearing of the Senate Intelligence and Veterans Affiars committee in late September, several senior senators blasted the Pentagon for dragging its heels on the issue.
Alabama Senator Richard Shelby accused the Pentagon of "a shameful campaign of obstruction" in answering veterans claims, adding: "I found that Czech chemical units...accurately reported" the presence of chemical agents at various locations.
But the Pentagon's recent admission focused on the destruction of a chemical munitions cache near the southern Iraqi town of Kamisiyah in March 1991, a few days after the end of the war, not the Czech detections.
The Pentagon on Tuesday in Washington announced that it was notifying about 20,000 U.S. Gulf War troops that they may have been exposed to chemical weapons in the Marhc 1991 incident.
The Czech army experts serving in the allied forces against Iraq detected category "G" agents such as Sarin on January 19, 1991 in a 30 square km (19 sq mile) area near the town of Khafr al-Batn, in northern Saudi Arabia near the border with Iraq.
The Czech unit said it also detected incidents of a type of mustard gas between January 20 and 24, in an area 10 km (six miles) from the King Khaled military city which housed thousands of Saudi soldiers.
