The Czech merchandise trade deficit jumped 16.4 billion crowns in July, the largest monthly increase in the country's history, but forecast tourism revenue and the structure of imports tempered analysts' concerns.
The Czech Statistical Bureau (CSU) said on Monday that the July increase put the seven-month trade deficit at 85.3 billion crowns, after a 14 billion crown shortfall in June drove the half-year deficit to 68.87 billion crowns.
"This shows that the trade gap is still widening, this is the bad news," said Radek Maly, economist at Citibank Prague.
"But when you look at the actual composition of the deficit... a large part of this is stemming from the investment needs of Czech industry."
Imports between January to July grew 15.9 percent over the same seven-month period last year, while exports, hampered especially by lower demand in Germany, were up only 7.2 percent, the CSU said.
"Exports are lagging behind our expected growth rate," said Patria Finance economist Martin Kupka. "But the services balance will help improve the account."
Machinery and transport equipment accounted for 52.5 billion crowns of the total seven-month deficit, while the balance for consumer goods actually showed an 857 million crown surplus, despite a sharp increase in domestic demand.
Comments by the Czech National Bank Governor Josef Tosovsky on Friday ruling out a devaluation of the crown to boost exports convinced analysts that the central bank was not overly concerned with the overall Czech balance of payments picture.
"There really isn't a strong convincing reason why (the crown) should be devalued at this point of development," Kupka said, adding that the country's capital account surplus still should comfortably cover the current account deficit.
The services balance will be especially helped by the expected expansion of income from tourism, as strong first half revenues raised forecasts for total income from tourism in 1996 to $3.2 billion to $3.5 billion after $2.6 billion in 1995.
"The overall balance of invisibles (services including toursim) for this year should be around $1.8 to $1.9 billion, which will decrease the current account deficit," Maly said.
Economists are forecasting the 1996 current account deficit at between five to six percent of gross domestic product, compared with about four percent last year.
The overall number of tourist visits in the country was up 9.3 percent in the first half, year-on-year, and airport arrivals were up 48.4 percent.
Czech National Bank balance of payment figures for the first half of the year -- which will give clearer picture of the balance of services -- are expected to be released in the early weeks of September.
The tourism component of the first quarter balance of payments showed a net income of $261 million, on total tourism revenue of $581 million.
The overall current account however, posted a $505 million deficit in the first quarter.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
