The Czech National Bank (CNB) has proposed merging savings bank Ceska Sporitelna, with foreign trade bank Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka a.s.(CSOB), and then privatising the new megabank which would be the largest in post-Communist Eastern Europe.
CNB spokesman Martin Svehla told Reuters that the proposal was part of a wide-ranging plan to privatise major stakes in the "Big Four" Czech banks, which had been submitted to the cabinet to prepare the banks for stiffer foreign competition.
"Continuing with the privatisation of these banks has the aim of increasing the competitiveness of banks, to fit them more towards (entry into) the European Union and to increase their performance," Svehla said.
The CNB however proposed holding off on privatisation of the new combined Sporitelna and SOB for three to five years until the effects of the merger were analysed.
Analysts said the new bank, based on 1995 results, would have combined assets of roughly 540 billion crowns ($20 billion), making it by far the largest bank in Eastern Europe and over twice the size of the next largest bank, Komercni Banka.
It is not clear when the cabinet will debate the CNB proposals, but a senior central bank official said it might be on the agenda of next Wednesday's government meeting.
Jack Schrantz, equities analyst at Creditanstalt Prague, said the merger would bring economies of scale from necessary cuts in Sporitelna's and CSOB's bloated workforces.
"There's got to be a lot of overlap. In many of these departments you would see big staffing cuts," he said.
The CNB plan calls first for quick privatisation of the state's 31.5 percent in Investicni a Postovni Banka (IPB), a suggestion endorsed by the Finance Ministry earlier this month.
Nomura and Dutch ING NV are widely seen as potential partners for IPB, although top officials have declined comment on their possible interest in IPB.
The CNB plan proposes privatising shares in Komercni Banka -- seen as the plum of the Big Four in which the state holds a 49 percent stake -- only as a final step.
Svehla said the plan was written from the perspective of the CNB as a regulator, aiming to consolidate the strengths in the core of the the Czech banking system.
Whether it has the support of the full cabinet is still unclear. Privatisation of the Big Four has been a delicate political issue despite the country's reputation as the most aggressive post-Communist reformer.
Svehla said however that there was broad agreement in the CNB and the government on the need to go forward with privatisating remaining state stakes in the Big Four, which control more than 70 percent of the country's banking activity.
Ceska Sporitelna, in which the state still holds a 45 percent stake after the government's stock-for-citizens privatisation programme, is the largest state savings bank, where most Czechs kept their money during the communist era.
It still holds a majority of Czech retail deposits.
CSOB, born as a foreign trade bank in the former communist state system, is owned by a variety of Czech and Slovak state institutions including both central banks and the Czech National Property Fund, with small stakes privately held.
"I think it will take a lot of time to agree on the merger price (with Slovak institutions)," Schrantz warned. Slovak state institutions hold nearly 26 percent of CSOB shares
The daily Hospodarske Noviny quoted CNB governor Josef Tosovsky on Wednesday as saying large banks needed strong foreign partners which could cover share purchase from their own funds.
The market value of state stakes in the Big Four is about 55 billion crowns, according to the CNB, while the total value of Big Four shares is estimated at 111 billion crowns.
Such well-funded investors do not exist domestically, and the CNB wants to find them abroad through tenders.
Finance Minister Ivan Kocarnik said earlier this month that he also wanted the state's stake in IPB to be the first to be privatised, and that a strategic foreign partner taking the stake would be the most likely option. ($ = 26.87 Czech Crowns)
