Czech President Vaclav Havel on Thursday said he was deeply disturbed by a Chinese court's 11-year prison sentence on dissident Wang Dan who was accused of plotting to overthrow the government.
Havel, himself a former dissident against a Communist government, said in a statement that after the 14-year sentence last December against Wei Jingsheng, a leader of China's small democracy movement, Wang's sentence was "unacceptable".
Wang, 27, was sentenced to 11 years in prison on Wednesday after a brief hearing. Wei was sentenced to 14 years in jail last December on a similar charge.
Havel said in the statement issued by his spokesman, that Wang's sentence "was another example of the unacceptable understanding of the position of the citizen in society."
The statement added that Havel expressed his "deep dissatisfaction" over the decision.
It said Havel "considers it his obligation to express his solidarity with those who anywhere around the world express, in a non-violent way, their free-mindedness and desire for justice and elementary human rights."
Havel, once a dissident playwright imprisoned several times by a Communist government before its fall in 1989, has been a frequent diplomatic thorn in China's side.
The Czech president said earlier this year he regretted that Taiwan, which Bejing regards as a renegade province, is not a U.N. member. However, the Czechs officially still recognise only China as a sovereign state and not Taiwan.
Havel angered China last year with a highly publicised meeting with Taiwan's Premier Lien Chan, forcing a hurried re-statement of the Czechs' official "One-China Policy".
Earlier on Thusday, the Czech foreign ministry asked China's chief diplomat in Prague, charge' d'affaires Wang Zizhen, to the ministry where a statement of protest was read.
"The Czech Republic expresses its dissatisfaction over the conduct of the trial and the judgment carried out," said a text of the statement issued by the foreign ministry.
It said that although there were differences in traditions of understanding questions of human rights in different regions, "there exist certain universal principles of maintaining human rights which are necessary to respect".
Chinese foreign ministry spokesman Shen Guofang said in Beijing that the jailing was not a human rights issue but an ordinary legal matter.
The Czech ministry statement said criminalisation of freedom of speech was "a violation of elementary human rights".
