Italy, seeking a larger role in helping to fold former East Bloc countries into NATO, believes it is better to integrate, and not isolate, fringe candidates like Slovakia and Romania, a senior Italian diplomat said.
During an official visit to Prague, Undersecretary for Foreign Affairs Piero Fassino said in an interview that Italy, as part of its new focus he called "Italian Ostpolitik", saw four countries as primary candidates for NATO's expansion.
"The position of Italy...is that the group of countries which definitely belong to NATO is Hungary, the Czech Republic, Poland and Slovenia," he said, but added "There's also a possiblity that Slovakia and Romania belong to that group."
He said it was important for Slovakia and Romania to execute agreements with Hungary aimed mainly at protecting the rights of ethnic Hungarians living in both countries.
Fassio said that before the West says "no" to Slovakia and Romania it was necessary to carefully determine whether they meet NATO's standards of democracy, but he added:
"If a country is integrated then we also have the right to require it to meet standards of the organisation it has joined."
"If it's isolated we can't demand anything," he said in the interveiw conducted late on Wednesday.
He gave an example of Turkey with which the EU has blocked establishing a free trade area because of concerns over Ankara's treatment of the country's Kurdish minority -- a move which, he said, has shown no results in solving the problem .
Both the EU and the United States have repeatedly lambasted Slovakia's government for slow democratic reforms and adopting laws threating to political opponents and ethnic minorities saying they might delay membership into "western structures".
Two such warnings came last week on the same day U.S. President Bill Clinton, without naming countries, set 1999 as his target for integrating the first wave of former Soviet bloc countries into NATO.
Fassio said it would be more useful to put fringe countries like Slovakia into the fold where more pressure can be applied.
"It is true that Slovakia is having problems fulfilling democratic principles, but the question is, 'do we isolate Slovakia or integrate Slovakia?'. I believe it is more useful to integrate it," he said.
He also stressed Slovakia's geographical position between the Czech Republic and the frontier of the former Soviet Union.
"I believe it is necessary to consider very carefully the position of Slovakia because Slovakia is in a geographically strategic place," he said.
Fassio said central and eastern Europe was now a priority of our Italy's foreign policy.
"Central Europe is a place which is key to the security of Europe, in this Italy has a direct interest in its political dynamics," he said. "And we have an interest to intenify our presence to support Italian economic considerations."
He said while Italy would "intensively" pursue stronger ties to the group of countries most likely to join NATO and the European Union, it would also instensively seek to strengthen relations with other post Communist countries.
He said this was especially true for Italy's Balkan neighbours, such as Bulgaria, Croatia and Albania.
