Czech President Vaclav Havel said on Thursday he was deeply disturbed by a Chinese court's 11-year prison sentence on dissident Wang Dan on charges of plotting to overthrow the government.
Havel, himself a former dissident against a Communist government, said in a statement that after last year's jailing of Wei Jingsheng, father of China's small democracy movement, on similar subversion charges, Wang's sentence was "unacceptable".
Wang, 27, was jailed for 11 years on Wednesday after a brief hearing.
Wei Jingsheng, freed in 1993 after serving all but six months of an earlier 15-year term for subversion, was rearrested the following year and formally sentenced in December 1996 to another 14-year term. He is now 47.
Havel's statement, issued by his spokesman, said that Wang's sentence "was another example of the unacceptable understanding of the position of the citizen in society."
The statement added that Havel expressed his "deep dissatisfaction" over the decision.
It said Havel "considers it his obligation to express his solidarity with those who anywhere around the world express, in a non-violent way, their free-mindedness and desire for justice and elementary human rights."
Havel, who as a dissident playwright was imprisoned several times by the Communist government before its fall in 1989, has been a frequent diplomatic thorn in China's side.
He angered China last year with a highly publicised meeting with Taiwan's Premier Lien Chan, forcing a hurried restatement of the Czechs' official "One-China Policy".
Earlier this year the Czech president said that he regretted that Chinese Nationalist-ruled Taiwan, which Bejing regards as a renegade province, is not a U.N. member. However, the Czechs officially still recognise only China as a sovereign state.
Earlier on Thursday, the Czech Foreign Ministry called in China's chief diplomat in Prague, charge d'affaires Wang Zizhen, to read him a statement of protest.
"The Czech Republic expresses its dissatisfaction over the conduct of the trial and the judgment carried out," said a text of the statement issued by the Foreign Ministry.
It said that, although there were differences in traditions of understanding questions of human rights in different regions, "there exist certain universal principles of maintaining human rights which are necessary to respect".
Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Shen Guofang said in Beijing on Thursday that the jailing was not a human rights issue but an ordinary legal matter.
The Czech ministry statement said, however, that criminalisation of freedom of speech was "a violation of elementary human rights".
