The Czech consumer price index rose 0.5 percent in October putting year-on-year inflation at 8.7 percent, down from 8.9 percent in September, the Czech Statistical Bureau said on Friday.
The moving 12-month average of inflation remained unchanged at 8.7 percent in October. The figures were most influenced by a full percentage point rise in food, drinks and tobacco prices during the month and a 1.2 percent rise in clothing prices.
Analysts said the overall result was in line with expectations or even a bit lower, as the second consecutive month of slowing in the year-on-year figure convinced some that the year-end rate would end below nine percent.
"This (October's inflation result) is slightly better than expected, but not a big surprise," said Vladimir Kreidl, analyst at Patria Finance said.
"Our forecast in unchanged at nine percent for average inflation (at the end of 1996), but 8.8 percent seems to be achievable," he said.
Kreidl added that October's result was aided more by a strong Czech crown keeping import prices in check and relatively slow growth in industrial producer prices which have been rising at a roughly four percent annual rate.
Industry and Trade Minister Vladimir Dlouhy told a news conference the result was expectated and "for the whole year, I would like to see (average inflation) at below 8.7 percent."
The government had forecast average inflation to slow a full percentage point in 1996 to 8.0 percent, but a surge in domestic demand kept prices stubbornly over nine percent in the first half of the year.
The Czechs have been encouraged by the Organisation for Economic Coopoeration and Development (OECD), the group of the most industrialised countries to which the Czechs now have membership, to do more to stem inflation.
"From the perspective of an OECD member, our inflation is high ...our economic policy has to lead to a lowering inflation suggested by OECD and the Maastricht treaty," Dlouhy said.
The Czech National Bank (CNB) in June tightened monetary policy by raising its key interest rates and expanding minimum reserve requirements to dampen domestic demand.
The central bank said last week the moves served to pull its key M2 measure of money supply growth at the end of August to the low end of its 13-17 percent 1996 target at 13.2 percent, from over 20 percent earlier this year.
But Kreidl said the effects of the money supply tightening should not be evident until well into 1997, and he did not expect the CNB to ease credit rates at least until then.
-- John Mastrini, Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
