Elections to the new Czech Senate over the next two weekends will only thicken the country's political fog, but an indecisive electorate has already been priced into the financial markets, analysts said on Monday.
Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus has been stuck in an uneasy political co-habitation since his centre-right coalition fell two seats short of a majority in the lower house on a strong second place showing by the Social Democrats in June.
Analysts say the Senate elections should not signal any clear shift in the political winds, and the markets will be stuck wondering if the three-party conservative government can hang on for its four-year term which runs through the year 2000.
They say only an unexpected clear victory for the opposition Social Democrats over Klaus's Civic Democratic Party (ODS) would hurt the Czech crown or capital markets.
"The markets will definitely turn down (on a Social Democrat victory), same as in the (lower house) elections," said Vladimir Jaros, research director at Prague investment house Wood &amp; Co.
But he added that market expectations "are for ODS to win".
Klaus and his team of economists and technocrats became standard-bearers for post-Communist reforms after taking power in 1992 with a 12-seat majority in the lower house.
The markets, pollsters and pundits were caught off guard when the Social Democrats -- who have been ambivalent to balanced budgets and privatisations -- did so well.
The crown fell a full percentage point on the June results, and the stock market lost more than four percent of its value before stabilising when a minority government was confirmed.
"I think investors (this time) have already included in their behaviour expectations of inconclusive results," said Zdenek Bakala, chairman of Prague-based Patria Finance.
ODS and the Social Democrats are running close in recent opinion polls at around 25 percent support each, after ODS won the June vote with 29.6 percent, with CSSD at 26.4 percent.
But since the Senate vote is a first-past-the-post poll in individual constituencies, forecasting victory is difficult when gauged only by available party preference surveys.
Local analysts see Klaus's ODS and its two coalition allies winning a majority of the Senate's 81 seats, but they do not expect a result giving the coalition or opposition a clear advantage to push for an early election in the lower house.
"I don't think we are going to be facing a risk of extraordinary (lower house) elections, and I doubt that ODS will be willing to take that risk," Jaros said.
The two-round Senate polls, beginning on Friday with runoffs the next weekend, are not likely alter the course of the country's legislative agenda.
The stock market and the Czech crown have had diverging fates since the June vote, for reasons beyond election fears.
The crown has remained strong, despite a growing trade gap, consistently trading in a tight range between 2.5 to 3.0 percent above the central bank's mark/dollar basket.
The crown got a boost in October when four Social Democrats crossed over to vote with the government in approving the first draft of the 1997 budget.
Meanwhile, the Prague Stock Exchange (PSE) has been rocked, not by the political situation, but by discontent from foreign investors unhappy with the country's opaque trading environment.
The PSE's official PX50 index has been on a steady slide since late summer, dipping below 500 last week, heading toward its historic record low of 387.
Few think the Senate elections will serve to revive the securities markets, as market reform is not a high priority.
