The head of the Czech Republic's largest bank is on a crusade to clean up the emerging post-communist banking sector from within and, he hopes, from a seat in the Senate.
Dr Richard Salzmann, the bow-tied president of Komercni Banka, says the Czech banking system is fundamentally sound and getting stronger despite a handful of recent failures among smaller institutions.
But, he says, the whole Czech economy needed a dose of "fairness and transparency" to clean up old habits of secrecy and ensure banks are not run as private fiefdoms.
He is standing for a seat in the newly-established Czech Senate at elections in November, saying he wants to help bring back "good manners" to the banking industry and restore the reputation of the Czech finance sector.
Better risk management is crucial, according to Salzmann.
He said that Komercni and the three other large banks -- which comprise about 80 percent of all Czech banking activity -- had bolstered their reserves to meet Western banking standards, and had developed more effective risk management techniques.
"As concerns 'The Big Four', (the situation) is, for sure, very good, because all these big four banks in the last years have built up huge reserves," Salzmann said during a visit to the PGA Czech Open golf tournament here recently.
"It's true that we have an unusually high proportion of risky loans in our portfolios, which is partially inherited from the past. Other (bad loans) were made in this era of euphoria, after the (1989 revolution ending Communism)."
He said from branches to front office, Komercni has stepped up risk management techniques which have now been also adopted by Ceska Sporitelna, Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka, and Investicni a Postovni Banka -- the others in "The Big Four".
"Now we are in the final stage when we are building a central risk assessment department, which supervises all kinds of risks, not only from credit but also from the capital market operations and from the foreign operations."
FAILURES EXPOSE PROBLEMS
Salzmann said he believed the recent failure of Kreditni Banka a.s., a medium-sized bank which became the eighth to shut in the post-communist era, stemmed, like others before it, from greed and naivete.
"I would blame mostly the founders of the banks, because they provided for themselves various kinds of privileges. They were, in most cases in my opinion, those who did not come with the intention to rob the money and disappear or something like that, I don't say that," Salzmann contended.
"But many of them founded the bank with false ideas that (their) bank would be able to provide themselves with easier conditions and lower prices for money for their internal use."
Salzmann said these bad lending practices spiraled until the banks were forced to raise their rates and tighten lending conditions for regular customers.
"This snowballed from the naivete at the beginning," he said.
Kreditni suffered losses reportedly at more than 10 billion Czech crowns ($381.1 million) through a series of large loan defaults and on August 8 the central bank withdrew its banking licence.
The local press has been ripe with allegations of mismanagement and murky loan operations at many of the failed institutions, but criminal investigations have yet to produce any charges.
Officials from Kreditni Banka have refused to comment on reasons for its failure, but its controlling shareholder, the large insurer Ceska Pojistovna, chalked it up simply to bad decisions by bank management on loans and loan guarantees.
Salzmann, 67, said problems in the banking system were part of a bigger problem of honesty and fairness throughout the economy.
He said that if elected, he would push to expand the enforcement power of regulators to police dubious practices in banks, investment funds, and on the capital market, which is consistently hampered by charges of insider trading.
BANKER SEEKS POLITICAL PLATFORM
"My (candidacy), is to bring to this freshly-introduced capitalism more decency...a better field for good business," said Salzmann.
The erudite banker, who often recalls the days of thriving Czech capitalism between wars, said he would work in the Senate to establish an independent capital market watchdog like the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission.
Salzmann resigned as the chairman of the Prague Stock Exchange earlier this year -- a mostly honorary position -- to allow his friend and party colleague Tomas Jezek to take over as a full-time, hands-on leader of the bourse.
Both Jezek and Salzmann will run for the Senate in separate constituencies, and both support starting up a market-supported watchdog beefed up from the currently understaffed and underfunded Finance Ministry regulation department.
But Salzmann, who said he cannot by contract retire from the bank for at least one more year, rejects charges that his membership in the Senate while heading the country's largest banking group would constitute a conflict of interest. There is no legal requirement in the Czech Republic for legislators to suspend their business interests when they enter parliament.
Salzmann insists he would never use his Senate seat to gain advantages for his bank, but he makes no apologies about using his seat to try to improve the banking and business environment overall.
"I will support all such measures to bring more fairness, decency, good manners, transparency, all those principals which are, of course, favourable for the banks. So in that sense I will be perhaps in a conflict of interest," Salzmann said.
When asked if that meant he would support laws which would separate the banks and their investment arms, many of which control major chunks of the Czech economy -- like at Komercni Banka -- Salzmann answered:
"Yes, transparency, mandatory transparency."
($1=26.24 Czech Crown)
