Czech National Bank (CNB) Governor Josef Tosovsky said that despite objections from some cabinet officials, it was too early to write off the central bank's plan to create post-Communist Europe's largest bank.
Tosovsky said he expected the full cabinet to consider "in a few weeks" the CNB's plan which includes the proposed merger of the savings bank Ceska Sporitelna a.s. with the foreign trade bank  Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka a.s. (CSOB).
"There are only some preliminary opinions of some official who saw our proposal. Because most of the members of the cabinet didn't see our proposal, so it's too early," he told Reuters Financial TV in an interview to be broadcast later.
"I don't know what will be the decision of the government."
The central bank has submitted a broad plan seeking to fully privatise state holdings in the "Big Four" largest banks, but Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus said last week the cabinet needed more concrete details.
The most controversial plan calls for Sporitelna and CSOB to merge to create a bank with over $20 billion in assets and then to privatise the state's stake in the newly-created bank several years later after the merger is analysed.
Klaus has reacted coolly to the merger plan, saying it was akin to fusing Prague's top two soccer teams Sparta and Slavia, something unthinkable for many Czechs.
The plan has also been criticised by a key Klaus adviser, Martin Kocourek, and by officials at both institutions who said they want to preserve the specific character of each bank.
But the central bank's plan, which Tosovsky said is from the point of view of a regulator to promote stability of the entire banking system, seeks to create a bank which would compete better against large western European institutions.
"We feel that it would be possible to find some closer ties between CSOB and (Sporitelna), and we see a merger could be made," Tosovsky said, but added that "it would require more professional analysis."
Tosovsky said that if the merger plan was not adopted then a strategic foreign partner "would be welcome in CSOB -- this means the fast privatisation with a foreign strategic partner, but this is only if the idea about the merger is not accepted."
A variety of Czech and Slovak state institutions, including the central banks, hold CSOB shares. Ceska Sporitelna has had some stakes privatised through the voucher-privatisation programme, but the state still holds a 45 percent stake.
The CNB and the Finance Ministry have both called for the fast privatisation of the state's roughly one-third stake in Investicni a Postovni Banka to a strategic foreign partner. Japan's Nomura and Dutch ING NV are widely seen as frontrunners seeking IPB shares.
Tosovsky said the roughly 49 percent stake in the largest commercial bank, Komercni Banka a.s. should be divided into smaller units and sold to a variety of investors, not a single foreign strategic partner.
"As concerns Komercni Banka, there is no rush as concerns the privatisation but no reason to delay as well," he said.
"(Komercni), in our opinion, doesn't need a foreign strategic partner, and there could be small stakes and more investors could be invited to enter into the this bank."
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
