Volkswagen AG Czech unit, Skoda Auto a.s., on Friday launched sales of its new sedan, the Octavia, hoping to kill off jokes about Communist-era quality, and pull the company into profit.
Officials said the new model, built on a common VW platform designed for the 1998 Audi A3 and upgraded Golf, would expand Skoda's market penetration by putting the company's first post-Communist mid-sized car in showrooms worldwide.
"Our strategic markets are in central and eastern Europe, western Europe, and we are present in some Asian markets. We expect to sell Octavias successfully in all of our 66 markets," marketing director Frank Farsky told Reuters.
The new sedan received a heroe's welcome at showrooms around the capital Prague on Friday as crowds gathered to watch dealers mount the Octavia on viewing pedastals.
Exports of the front-grilled Octavia -- a major step away from the boxy sub-compacts which made the Communist-era Skoda the butt of automotive jokes worldwide --  to Europe and beyond later this year or in the first quarter next year.
The car will be available on the domestic market with a choice of three petrol and two diesel engines, with the top-of-the-line SLX automatic model priced at 497,900 crowns, and a base model priced at 335,700 crowns.
"In the Czech market its more or less toward a luxury- class car by the nature the purchasing power and the nature of the car market itself," Farsky said.
"In western europe it is a medium sized car that will belong to the middle class market, and in asian marekts I thinik it will be toward the luxury class," he added.
Skoda will make 64,000 Octavias in 1997 at its new purpose-built plant in Mlada Boleslav north of Prague, and raise production to 90,000 in 1998.
Skoda Chairman Ludvik Kalma said earlier this year he expected 20,000 Octavias to be sold annually on the home market, with the rest exported to Europe and points East.
"I think customers who would be looking for a used car would look at a Skoda Octavia, I think that people who own a smaller car would look at Octavia," Farsky said.
The company lost 1.621 billion crowns last year due to heavy investments into the new factory, but Kalma said the firm should come close to breaking even this year.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
