Czech Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus kept his options open on whether the domination of his Civic Democratic Party (ODS) in this weekend's first round of Senate elections might encourage a quest for a larger mandate.
As results for the new upper house came in late on Saturday, Klaus reserved comment on possibly using his party's strength in the Senate races as a signal to seek new elections to the lower house in order to win back a majority government.
Klaus's ODS won 36.47 percent of the total vote on Saturday in the first test since his conservative three-party coalition lost its majority in June lower-house elections when the Social Democrats (CSSD) posted a surprising second place result.
This time the opposition CSSD won just 20.27 percent of the vote after falling about three percentage points short of the ODS's 29.6 percent in June. But voter turnout this time was very light making it difficult to draw broad conclusions.
Klaus, who like all ministers sits in the lower house, hedged his bets on possible early lower house elections.
"I've said many times this country does not need another election. It needs to function, work," Klaus said in a panel discussion on Czech Televisoin after the vote.
But he added: "If the Senate vote gives a chance to go forward, it'll be good for all of us."
The ODS put 76 candidates through to next weekend's runoff elections out of the 81 constituencies, and won three seats outright by taking more than 50 percent of the vote.
In 73 districts, ODS had the top candidate go into the runoff, while CSSD had 48 candidates in a runoff, but won no seats outright and had nobody on top in any constiuency.
Exactly seven years since the revolution which would end Communism began, only about one in three eligible Czechs voted, less than half the turnout for the previous three lower-house elections since the 1989 revolution.
Analysts said many Czechs felt that the upper house, which will have limited legislative powers and act more as an advisory body, was redundant.
Pre-election opinion polls showed many people did not did not know who was running in their district, and there was a wide misunderstanding of the two-round voting system.
But no one really knows how the dynamics will change in next weekend's runoffs or if turnout will improve.
"The situation is not as rosy as it may appear..." cautioned ODS party vice-chairman, Foreign Minister Josef Zieleniec even after the strong result for ODS was apparent.
Analysts said that it would be too soon to declare the first round vote an unmitigated success for ODS, as the second round will be much more polarised and the choices between two candidates instead of many will be distinct.
