Czech analysts on Sunday said the domination of pro-market Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus's party in the weekend's first-round Senate elections would have a neutral to mildly positive effect on local financial markets on Monday.
But they said thin voter turnout made it hard for Klaus and his three-party coalition to conclude that the electorate had swung back to their clear favour after they lost their majority in June lower house elections.
"Nobody can jump to conclusions based on these figures, because if you take the total (voter) turnout, it's nothing," said Radek Maly, economist at Citibank Prague.
"We might see a mild strengthening of the crown, but we don't think any major movement," he added.
The currency has traded in a tight range recently at around 26.9 to the dollar and 17.8 to the mark or roughly 2.5 percent above parity with the central bank's mark/dollar basket.
But Maly stressed that the market was focused more on macroeconomic fundamentals and not political influences.
Klaus's rightwing ODS on Saturday won 36.47 percent nationwide compared with 20.47 percent for the second place centre-left opposition Social Democrats (CSSD), with the rest thinly split among coalition parties and the Communists.
That after ODS won by just three percentage points at 29.6 percent over CSSD in the June general elections, costing the coalition a 12-seat majority in the lower house.
The ODS won three seats of the total 81 Senate seats outright in the first round of the Senate vote by taking over 50 percent, and put 73 of their candidates in next weekend's runoff election as the top vote getter in their district.
But only 35 percent of a confused and uninspired Czech electorate voted in the poll for the newly-created Senate, after more than 70 percent voted in the June general elections.
Miroslav Nosal, equities analyst at Prague investment house Patria Finance, said that a premature general election was probably not on the cards, and said the stock market had other concerns than party politics.
"Poor regulation and transparency is already included in the share prices, but from a fundamental point of view many stocks are quite attractive," said Nosal,
He said some foreign investors might be tempted to play on Klaus's victory early on Monday, but any gain based on the political situation would be short lived.
Unless the runoffs build on ODS's success next weekend with much higher turnout, analysts said it was unlikely that Klaus would move for new lower house polls in an effort to win back the coalition's majority in the more powerful lower house.
"If ODS sees a sweeping victory next week...then they might feel tempted for a possible early election in a year or so, but I think they should be very careful about it," said Maly.
Klaus, who as with other ministers is a member of the lower house, late on Saturday was reserved on possible early general elections.
"I've said many times this country does not need another election. It needs to function, work," Klaus said in a panel discussion on Czech Television, adding, "If the Senate vote gives a chance to go forward, it'll be good for all of us."
