A stronger showing by Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus's rightwing Civic Democratic Party in the first round of Senate elections may give a mild fillip to local financial markets, Czech analysts predicted.
But a thin turnout made it hard for the three-party coalition government, which lost its lower house majority in June, to claim it had recaptured voters' hearts, the analysts said.
"Nobody can jump to conclusions based on these figures, because if you take the total turnout, it's nothing," said Radek Maly, economist at Citibank Prague.
"We might see a mild strengthening of the crown, but we don't think any major movement," he added.
The currency has traded in a tight range recently at around 26.9 to the dollar and 17.8 to the mark or roughly 2.5 percent above parity with the central bank's mark/dollar basket.
But Maly stressed that the market was focused on macroeconomic fundamentals, not political influences.
Klaus's Civic Democratic Party won 36 percent of the nationwide vote on Saturday.
The centre-left opposition Social Democrats were second with 20 percent. The rest of the vote was thinly split among coalition parties and the Communists. Only 35 percent of the electorate voted.
Of the 81 Senate seats, Civic Democrats won three outright in the first round and 73 of their candidates go into next weekend's runoff as the top vote getter in their district.
The Civic Democrats took less that 30 percent of the vote in June's general elections, costing the coalition its majority in the lower house.
Miroslav Nosal, equities analyst at Prague investment house Patria Finance, said that a premature general election was probably not on the cards, and said the stock market had other concerns than party politics.
"Poor regulation and transparency is already included in the share prices, but from a fundamental point of view many stocks are quite attractive," said Nosal,
He said some foreign investors might be tempted to play on Klaus's victory early on Monday, but any gain based on the political situation would be short lived.
