The Czech crown firmed from the central bank fixing on Thursday, building on gains after a strong showing of the senior coalition party in Senate elections last weekend and prospects for the second round vote.
Analysts said Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus's pro-business Civic Democratic Party (ODS) was expected to take a majority of the 81 seats in the newly-created Senate after runoff elections this weekend should keep the crown firm.
The crown was trading mid-afternoon on Thursday at 26.661 to the dollar and 17.757 to the mark, or 3.05 percent above the Czech National Bank's dollar/mark basket.
"Mostly the expectations are that the ODS will win a majority in the Senate which I think is fairly likely," Citibank economist Radek Maly said.
The ODS already won three seats outright last Saturday and has 76 candidates through to the runoff this Friday and Saturday in the 77 constituencies remaining to be contested.
The crown, despite a ballooning trade deficit, has remained above well above parity with the basket, and has this week strengthened from last Friday's level of +2.45 percent.
Maly said he saw the currency staying close to Thursday's levels, and possibly getting a further bump up on Monday.
"I would personally see this level until the vote... Perhaps Monday we will see a similar situation, a quick strengthening, a quick speculative reaction," he said.
Petr Korous, a dealer at Ceskovslovenska Obchodni Banka, said that despite voter turnout of only 35 percent in the first round of the elections, the market was still firming on the ODS showing.
"There will be some bias toward a stronger Czech crown," he said. "More or less the basic impulse for that is really because of the elections, and then the subsequent recovery of the capital markets."
The Senate has limited political power, but the vote would at least confirm that ODS had not suffered a further loss of confidence after the coaltion saw its majority in the more-powerful lower house evaporate in June general elections.
This week the Prague Stock Exchange has shown its first signs of life since the summer. 
Meanwhile fixed income and crown deposit investors are getting more confident that Klaus's tight fiscal and monetary policies will not be threatened.
"Those who want to play the interest rate differential (with foreign currencies) feel quite comfortable right now," Korous said.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
