The Czech Republic has its first Senate since before World War Two, but an electoral win by the governing coalition appeared to have smothered talk of early general elections.
The three centre-right coalition parties took 52 seats in the new upper house of parliament on Saturday, but voter turnout of only 30 percent confirmed surveys showing many believe the Senate, with limited powers, is unneccessary.
Still, the result marked something of a turnaround for the coalition, central Europe's last centre-right government, which lost its majority in the more powerful lower house, the Chamber of Deputies, six months ago.
The Senate, written into the new 1993 constitution when Czechoslovakia split into separate Czech and Slovak states but not given authority until this year, was designed to be the reincarnation of the body of elder statesmen who sat in Prague until the Nazi invasion in 1939.
Klaus's Civic Democratic Party (ODS) won 32 seats ahead of the strongest opposition party, the Social Democrats, with 25.
But Klaus dampened speculation that his conservative minority government might use the victory this weekend to seek an early vote to the lower house.
While leaving his party's headquarters late on Saturday, Klaus was asked if the results confirmed his opinion, given after last week's first-round Senate vote, that early elections to the lower house should not be necessary.
"I think they did," he told Reuters. He did not elaborate.
His three-party conservative coalition won 52 seats after this weekend's runoffs for the 81-seat Senate.
After last week's first-round Senate vote, which gave Klaus's Civic Democratic Party the potential to win up to 79 seats, Klaus told Czech Television: "This country does not need another (lower house) election. It needs to function, work."
The opposition Social Democrats won 25 Senate seats, while the junior coalition parties, the Christian Democrats (KDU-CSL) and Civic Democratic Alliance (ODA) won 13 and seven seats respectively.
Analysts once viewed the Senate elections as a gauge for whether the coalition or the opposition would be in a position to seek a majority in the lower house through an early poll.
But voter turnout of only 30 percent made it hard for anybody to draw conclusions on what might be the result if early elections to the more powerful lower house were called.
"Most importantly the Senate won't be one-coloured or two-coloured as was expected, but multi-coloured," said analyst Jiri Pehe of Prague's Open Media Research Institute.
The little-reformed Communists clinched two seats and two went to independents.
