The Czech crown rose on Thursday to its highest level against its mark/dollar basket, buoyed by comments by Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus that devaluation was not needed despite a widening trade gap.
The crown rose to 4.5 percent above the cross rate of the two-currency basket late in the afternoon and dealers said that, barring any central bank intervention, the newly-liberalised currency could go still higher.
By mid-morning heavy buying had pushed the Czech currency to 4.3 percent above the basket from just under four percent at the opening.
The crown strengthened to 26.014 to the dollar and 17.591 to the mark by 1430 GMT from Thursday's central bank fixing of 26.039 and 17.638.
The central bank followed the market up at its midday fixing, setting the crown at 4.24 percent above parity with the basket, compared with 3.9 percent on Wednesday.
Traders saw the fixing as a signal that the bank was content with the crown's rise and the market responded.
"When the central bank followed the market, the banks realised it was still time to sell (foreign) currencies again and the central bank won't be taking any action," said trader Tomas Novak at Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka.
Traders said as long as the government kept talking up the crown, foreign investors would respond until the bank decided to jump in and buy foreign currency.
The catalyst for recent strength of the crown has been official comments dismissing any need to devalue the currency.
Although the trade balance showed a record monthly deficit in July of 16.4 billion crowns, the market responded to comments made by Klaus in Austria late on Wednesday.
"The first (reason for the crown's rise) is Klaus's comments in Austria," Tomas Becvar, trader at Komercni Banka, said. "Another reason of course is the following of the market by the central bank at the fixing."
At an economic conference, Klaus backed central bank Governor Josef Tosovsky's view that a stronger crown would be better for the economy in the long term.
"We think that a devaluation is not necessary and that it wouldn't be useful," Klaus told Reuters in Alpbach, Austria.
While some economists have recommended devaluing the crown to help the trade position, many said it was not fundamentally necessary as capital inflows remain strong and the balance of services, especially tourism, narrows the current account gap.
The Czech currency last dipped below the parity rate against the basket in mid-June, soon after elections stripped Klaus's conservative coalition of its majority in parliament and strengthened the hand of the opposition Social Democrats.
Klaus was finally able to form a minority government of his centre-right coalition while the centre-left Social Democrats have been conciliatory on economic issues, including a 9.3 billion crown cut in spending to balance this year's budget.
The crown has since been on a steady upward path, first hovering around three percent against the basket in recent weeks, then surging after comments by Tosovsky's on Friday.
Since February, the central bank has had the option of fixing the crown in a band of plus/minus 7.5 percent from parity with the basket instead of its previous tightly controlled plus/minus 0.5 percent band,
The move brought the crown more in line with supply and demand on the open market.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
