Czech pundits once looked at mid-November Senate elections as a possible beacon to cut through the political fog created by indecisive June lower house elections.
What is clear after the two-round vote completed this past weekend is only that many Czechs do not care about the Senate.
Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus and his centre-right coalition spent most of Sunday proclaiming that the results, in which the three parties won 52 of 81 seats in the newly created Senate, provided a strong mandate for the minority cabinet.
Klaus panned a Sunday headline in the daily Mlada Fronta Dnes calling the results in thin turnout a political "draw".
"(A draw) would be if it happened that the opposition won also in the Senate," he said in a debate on Czech Television. "That draw has been avoided."
Klaus's conservative Civic Democratic Party alone won 32 seats despite having a potential of winning 79 seats going in to the run-offs. Only a stronger-than-expected showing by the two junior partners gave the coalition control of the Senate.
The opposition Social Democrats, led by lower-house chairman and Klaus arch-rival Milos Zeman, mustered only 25 Senate seats after their strong June second-place showing moved Czech politics from centre-right domination into cohabitation.
With voter turnout a paltry 30 percent, it would be hard to argue that the Senate vote did much to alter Czech politics. Nor did it give a signal that the coalition might have enough support to seek new lower house elections.
"The result does not mean any move toward early elections... They would probably end in a draw," said political analyst Jiri Pehe of Prague's Open Media Research Insitute.
Klaus said that the vote confirmed that what the country needed was a functioning government, not new elections.
What the results primarily mean is that Klaus and his allies simply gain control of the upper house, which will be mostly a talking shop with few legislative powers.
But they are two votes shy of having a majority in the more powerful lower house, and the opposition could scuttle the legislative agenda of the coalition which remains as post-Communist Europe's last centre-right government.
Charles Robinson, an eastern Europe analyst at the independent research house Hilfe, said investors would welcome the relatively meaningless result for not giving any more power to the more interventionist Social Democrats.
"With the win there wil be certainly no added complications in getting (Klaus's) legislation through, and that's good news for stability, and it does mean that elections can be delayed until 1998 perhaps," Robinson told Reuters.
He said however that the Senate result might cause Zeman to sharpen his tactics against the government to draw deeper distinctions before any new elections might be called.
The biggest loser might be President Vaclav Havel who fought to give the Senate life after it was built into the 1993 constitution adopted after the split of Czechoslovakia, despite early moves by Klaus and others to block its creation.
Before the second-round vote, the politically neutral Havel called on his countrymen to turn out in force after just 35 percent voted in last weekend's first round.
His pleas were ignored.
On Sunday, Havel told Czech radio from his weekend retreat that politicians waged an "anti-campaign" against the creation of the Senate, and let pre-election partisan bickering take the place of discussing the choice of intelligent individuals.
Havel argued that after a few more elections, Czechs would come to realise that the Senate was important as the house of last resort in case of a constitutional crisis.
"The Senate is not dispensable," he said on Sunday.
