Czech President Vaclav Havel, former dissident playwright and leader of Prague's 1989 revolution against Communism, will undergo exploratory surgery on his lungs next week, the presidential office said on Tuesday.
In a statement, Havel's spokesman Ladislav Spacek said the president would have "a necessary operative procedure" on his lungs. A surgeon described the procedure as "medium-serious".
Havel, 60, was admitted to hospital on Monday more than a week after his office said he was suffering from pneumonia, causing him to cancel his official commitments for the rest of November and early December.
"X-ray findings cannot be specifed until a diagnostic operative measure is carried out," Spacek said. The symptoms or extent of Havel's illness have not been fully disclosed.
The Czech news agency CTK quoted the chief of staff at the Third Surgical Clinic in central Prague where Havel will be treated as saying the procedure was considered to be a "medium-serious operation as would be any lung surgery".
Havel is known to be a heavy smoker, but the illness has not been officially linked to his smoking.
The president cancelled a planned two-day state visit to Ukraine last week and on Monday called off plans to attend a summit of the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) on December 2 and 3 in Lisbon.
Spacek said the president was in "good physical and psychological condition" and is in constant contact with his office, monitoring events in the country.
Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus visited Havel on Tuesday, Spacek said.
The illness comes just as a sensitive post-World War Two reconciliation treaty with Germany, on which Havel has spent much effort, nears completion.
The treaty is to address issues arising from the Nazi occupation of Bohemia and Moravia and subsequent expulsion of ethnic Germans after the Czech lands were liberated in 1945.
German Chancellor Helmut Kohl said recently he hoped the treaty could be signed before the end of the year, and Czech politicians have been quoted in local media saying they expected a signing in mid-December.
The president's office has not commented on how his illness might affect the treaty.
Havel has had various ailments, none considered serious, during his nearly seven years as president of Czechoslovakia and later of the independent Czech Republic, after a peaceful split with Slovakia at the beginning of 1993.
He had urgent surgery last February after a polyp in his mouth started bleeding, but that incident was not considered serious.
Last January the president lost his wife Olga, who died of complications from tumors.
