The Czech crown firmed on Thursday to its highest level against its mark/dollar basket, buoyed by Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus' comments that devaluation was not needed despite a widening trade gap.
By mid-morning the crown moved to around 4.3 percent above its daily parity rate set by the Czech National Bank (CNB) against the dollar/mark basket from a four percent level in the morning.
The crown stood at 26.005 to the dollar and 17.600 to the mark at 1130 GMT.
The CNB followed the market up, fixing the crown 4.24 percent above parity with the basket after +3.9 percent on Wednesday.
Dealers said the crown could challenge 4.5 percent against parity before levelling off to end the week.
"Probably we will attack 4.5 percent (over parity)," Tomas Becvar, dealer at Prague's Komercni Banka, told Reuters.
Although the Czech trade balance earlier this week showed a record monthly deficit in July of 16.4 billion crowns, the market was encouraged by Klaus's comments.
"The first (reason for the crown's rise) is Klaus's comments in Austria," Becvar said. "Another reason of course is the following of the market by the central bank at the fixing."
At an economic conference in Austria, Klaus backed the CNB's Governor Josef Tosovsky view that a stronger crown would be better for the economy in the long-term.
"We think that a devaluation is not necessary and that it wouldn't be useful," Klaus told Reuters.
While some economists have recommended devaluing the crown to help the trade situation, many said it is not fundamentally necessary as capital inflows remain strong and the balance of services, especially toursim, softens the current account gap.
The Czech currency last dipped below the parity rate against the basket in mid-June, soon after elections stripped Klaus's conservative coalition of its majority in parliament and strenghthend the hand of the opposition Social Democrats.
But since then, the Czech currency has been on a steady march up, first hovering around three percent against the basket, then surging after Tosovsky's comments last Friday.
Klaus was finally able to form a minority government of his centre-right coalition while the centre-left Social Democrats have been concilliatory on economic issues, including a 9.3 billion crown cut in spending to balance this year's budget.
Dealers said positive preliminary results on Thursday for July's industrial production, showing a moderate recovery from disappointing June figures, also helped the crown.
