Czech President Vaclav Havel, the only man who can smoke next to militant Hollywood anti-smoker Barbra Streisand, is facing a life without his beloved cigarettes after surgery revealed a cancerous lung.
Havel's heavy smoking is a fixture of his Bohemian intellectual image, but it is widely believed that it caused the malignant tumour which was radically removed on Monday.
It certainly startled some Czechs who awoke on Tuesday to a huge headline in the tabloid Blesk which simply bleated "CANCER" next to an archive picture of a happily-smoking Havel.
But just as Boris Yeltsin's multiple by-pass heart surgery will hardly dry up a Muscovite's taste for vodka, which many blamed for the Russian president's ills, Havel's surgery probably will not cause chain-smoking Czechs to kick the habit.
"Ooh, I should quit," said Hana Haskova, a 19-year-old student reacting to news of Havel's cancer. "Well, I probably won't, but I'll be forced to think about it when I smoke."
Doctors said the surgery, which cost the 60-year-old Havel half of his right lung, gave him good prospects for a full recovery, and he might return to work soon after the new year.
But his spokesman said that Havel, a multiple-pack-a-day man, will probably be limited to being a "holiday smoker lighting up once a week with afternoon coffee."
The world sees Havel like this -- the mustached but impish Bohemian philospher-playwright crumpled in a sweater, cigarette smoke pouring from his fingers as he mulls life's problems.
His dissident musings from a prison cell won the respect of the western world and helped spark Prague's non-violent 1989 "Velvet Revolution" over communism.
"Vaclav Havel is the only person who can smoke in my presence," said Barbra Streisand, one of America's prominent anti-smokers, at a Washington picnic last year in honour of the visiting Czech President.
The unlikely rise from prison to Prague Castle made Havel one of the most famous unabashed public smokers.
But news of Havel's cancer confirmed what many here feared when he entered hospital last week with an alleged case of pnuemonia -- his ubiquitous smoking caught up with him.
Czech surgeon Dr. Pavel Pafko said after performing the operation that it would be difficult to pinpoint smoking as the primary cause of Havel's cancer.
"The composition of this tumour is problematic in relation to smoking. You can't definitely tell," Pafko told reporters.
But to many Czechs, the cause was clear:
"It has to be the smoking," was the oft-repeated phrase of workers in central Prague, many of them smokers.
"Stopping now won't help anyway. I was smoking before you were born," said Karel, 43, a maintenence man puffing away over beer in one of the hundreds of Prague's smoke-blanketed pubs.
Dr. Pavko said Havel smoked one last pre-surgery cigarette with Jan Strasky, a chain smoker who happens also to be minister of health, whose warning on smoking's link to cancer is on every legally-sold pack of cigarettes in the country.
Havel, as many Czechs, came of age smoking heavy Communist cigarettes, and has moved to more expensive western brands.
A country of 10 million people smokes 23 billion cigarettes each year. Consumption has grown from five cigarettes per day to more than six averaged out for every man, woman, and child.
Amid an influx of western brands -- U.S. Philip Morris bought a controlling stake in the former monopoly state tobacco packager, and has made Marlboro a status symbol -- Havel vetoed measures to regulate public smoking and cigarette advertising.
The president once also was blamed for a nuclear alert by lighting up while touring a power plant, but an official re-enactment of the incident declared it was photographers' flashes, not Havel's smoke, which set off the alarm.
