In May 1945, seven-year-old Madlenka Korbelova sat glued to a radio in London, listening with her exiled Czech diplomat father to news of the U.S. army's liberation of the western part of her native land.
They cheered when General George Patton's army forced Nazi soldiers out of the brewery town of Pilsen.
They cursed when Patton was forced to hold back his troops and let the Red Army take Prague according to the deal struck with the Soviet Union at Yalta months before.
"I remember the broadcasts as the Nazis were pushed back across Czechoslovakia, and I remember my parents cheering and wishing they had gone further," Madlenka, now known as Madeleine Albright, told hundreds of American and Czech veterans in Pilsen a half century later.
Weaned in London bomb shelters and reared on the Cold War, Albright has been nominated U.S. secretary of state -- the first woman to fill the post.
Albright, who returned to Prague after the Nazi occupation only to leave again after a Communist coup, was chosen by President Bill Clinton on Thursday to be the highest-ranking woman ever in the U.S. government.
Friends and diplomats who know her say Albright's life has consistently shown the influences of her father and her post-war childhood.
Her father, Josef Korbel, a close aide to Czechoslovak Foreign Minister Jan Masaryk in the World War Two government-in-exile in London, served as post-war ambassador to Belgrade and later a delegate to the United Nations.
During that period, family photos show his young daughter Marie -- Madlenka in the Czech dimunitive -- dressed in frilly traditional Czech costume to greet visiting dignitaries.
After the post-war government was deposed by communists in 1948, Korbel sent a cable from Belgrade saying he was leaving with his family on vacation.
Korbel received asylum with his family of five in America, and settled in Colorado. Madlenka started a new life at age 11.
Her father became a professor of European history and politics and eventually a dean at the University of Denver, and earned worldwide respect as an expert on 20th century Central and Eastern Europe. He died in 1977, aged 69.
Albright attended a Denver high school and then Wellesley College in Massachussetts. She earned a doctorate in political studies at Columbia University.
Albright, who married and was later divorced from newspaper heir Joseph Albright, made the Communist takeover of her homeland a frequent focus of lectures and papers.
She became a tough-talking diplomat and liked to speak of the effects of Europe's appeasement of Hitler in the 1938 Munich agreement which led to Germany's occupation of Czechoslovakia.
After the collapse of communism in Prague in 1989, playwright-turned-president Vaclav Havel asked her to advise his new democratic government.
On her first official visit to Prague as U.S. ambassador to the U.N. in 1994, she walked into the palacial Foreign Ministry and said: "I came here in 1945 when I was eight years old. This is an emotional and sentimental moment for me."
She has acted as Bill and Hillary Clinton's tour guide in her home town -- once joining Havel to hear the U.S. president play the saxophone in a jazz concert in a Prague club during a 1995 state visit.
Prague sees her as a strong advocate of Czech membership in NATO and the alliance's expansion to former Soviet satellites.
Havel, speaking recently on the prospects of Albright becoming Secretary of State, said: "She is, thanks to her origins, more sensitive to the issues which concern us."
