In May 1945, seven-year-old Madlenka Korbelova sat glued to a radio in London, listening with her exiled Czech diplomat father to news of the U.S. army's liberation of the western part of her native land.
They cheered when General George Patton's army forced Nazi soldiers out of the famous brewery town of Pilsen.
They cursed when the general was forced to hold back his troops and let the Red Army take Prague according to the deal struck with the Soviets at Yalta many months before.
"I remember the broadcasts as the Nazis were pushed back across Czechoslovakia, and I remember my parents cheering and wishing they had gone further," she told hundreds American and Czech veterans in Pilsen a half century later.
Weaned in London bomb shelters and reared on the Cold War, the diplomat's daughter, now known as Madeleine Albright, is in line to be the first woman to serve as U.S. Secretary of State.
On Thursday, the ruddy-faced girl, who returned to Prague after Nazi occupation only to leave her homeland again after a Communist coup, was chosen by President Bill Clinton to be the highest-ranking woman ever in the U.S. government.
Senate confirmation of her appointment is still required.
By the accounts of friends and diplomats who know her, Albright's life has consistently shown the influences of her father and her post-war childhood.
"Her relations to this country is deep," Czech ambassador to Washington Michael Zantovsky told Reuters. "Her's is still the Czech of a native. This country has a big friend in her."
Her father, Josef Korbel, a close aide to Czechoslovak Foreign Minister Jan Masaryk during the World War Two government-in-exile in London, served as post-War ambassador to Belgrade and later a delegate to the new United Nations.
During that period, family photos show his young daughter Marie -- Madlenka in the Czech dimunitive -- dressed in frilly traditional Czech costume to greet visiting dignitaries.
After the post-War government was deposed by communists in 1948, Korbel sent a cable from Belgrade saying he was leaving with his family on vacation. The last entry from his Foreign Ministry file showed Korbel being "sent for holidays".
Korbel received asylum with his family of five in America, and settled in Colorado. Madlenka started a new life at age 11.
The father became a professor of European history and politics and eventually a dean at the University of Denver, and earned worldwide respect as an expert on 20th century Central and Eastern Europe. He died in 1977, aged 69.
Albright became fully "Americanised" attending a Denver high school and then Wellesley College in Massachusets, but she kept Prague close to her heart -- in her academic studies and later in her career as a diplomat.
After earning a doctorate in political studies at Columbia University, Albright -- who married newspaper heir Joseph Albright and later divorced -- made the Communist takeover of her homeland a frequent focus of her lectures and papers.
As a tough-nosed diplomat she repeatedly has spoken of the effects of Europe's appeasement of Adolph Hitler in 1938's Munich agreement which led to Germany's occupation of Czechoslovakia in 1939, causing her family to flee to London.
After Prague's 1989 fall of communism, the leader of the bloodless "Velvet Revloution", the playwright-turned-president Vaclav Havel asked her to advise his new democratic government.
On her first official visit to Prague as U.S. ambassador to the U.N. in 1994, she walked into the palacial Foreign Ministry and memories came flooding back.
"I came here in 1945 when I was eight-years-old. This is an emotional and sentimental moment for me," Albright said while gazing at the palace ceiling.
She has acted as Bill and Hillary Clinton's tour guide in her home town -- once joining Havel to hear the American president play saxaphone in a smoky jazz concert in a Prague club during a 1995 state visit.
Prague sees her as a strong advocate of Czech membership in NATO and the alliance's expansion to former Soviet satellites.
Havel, recently speaking on the prosepcts of Albright becoming Secretary of State said what "matters, is the fact that she is a lady with a good knowledge of the European situation, Central European situation."
"She is, thanks to her origins, more sensitive to the issues which concern us," Havel said.
Clinton has called for the first wave of NATO expansion by the year 2000, and diplomats widely believe that the Czechs are at the top of the list along with Poland and Hungary.
"I think that the problems of this area are well understood in the heart of the American government," Albright said during of one her visits to Prague as U.N ambassador.
