The health of Czech President Vaclav Havel has improved considerably as he recuperates from lung cancer surgery last week, his spokesman said on Sunday.
Havel, 60, who had a small malignant tumour removed along with half of his right lung on December 2, required an emergency tracheostomy on Thursday to connect a respirator through his throat after he developed severe breathing problems.
"The worst is behind us," presidential spokesman Ladislav Spacek told Czech Radio on Sunday. "The tendency, the return to improvement (in Havel's health) is distinct, and we hope it will continue into the future."
Spacek took the place of Havel on the president's regular national Sunday radio programme.
The president had hoped to record at least a sentence for the show, but his condition on Sunday morning, when it was was recorded, kept him to the role of a listener, Czech radio said.
The president has been communicating by writing notes to doctors and his staff.
Czech Archbishop Miloslav Vlk led a national prayer mass for Havel on Sunday at St Vitus Cathedral in Prague Castle.
Dozens of friends and leaders around the world, including U.S. President Bill Clinton and Russian President Boris Yeltsin, have sent get-well wishes to the hero of Prague's non-violent 1989 revolution over communism.
Havel, a heavy smoker, entered the Third Surgical Clinic in central Prague on November 25 after his office said he had been suffering from pneumonia.
After the surgery, he developed pneumonia in the opposite lung and had been fighting a fever, but his spokesman said on Sunday that Havel's temperature had returned to normal.
Doctors say Havel will probably remain connected to the respirator another four to six days, and if his recovery goes well, he might be back to work as soon as mid-January.
The former dissident-playwright who helped lead Prague's so-called "Velvet Revoution" over communism has limited executive powers as president, and did not relinquish any of his duties during his surgery or his recovery.
