Finance Minister Ivan Kocarnik on Monday, for the second week in a row, skipped a meeting with the Prague bourse's governing chamber, amid growing calls for his ministry to tackle problems in Czech securities trading.
"At two o'clock (Kocarnik) cancelled his participation in this afternoon's meeting," Prague Stock Exchange (PSE) spokesman Milan Vodicka told Reuters.
The bourse's Chamber, which has been seeking stronger ministry action to ease investors' concerns about market transparency, later declined Kocarnik's return invitation for a "future" meeting at his ministry.
The meetings had been scheduled to discuss taking tougher regulatory action to address concerns of transparency and insider trading on Czech capital markets.
Jiri Spicka, director of the Finance Ministry's banking division, told Reuters that Kocarnik was "too busy with the preparation of the state budget" and "it was impossible for him to leave the ministry".
The budget has been expected for weeks to go to the floor of parliament for its second reading in the session which begins on Tuesday.
Kocarnik then invited the 18-member Chamber to his ministry for a "future" meeting, Spicka said.
The Chamber later declined that invitation, an official at the office of Chamber Chairman Tomas Jezek told Reuters.
Jezek lambasted Kocarnik on Sunday for lax regulation of the capital markets during the annual national congress of the ruling Civic Democratic Party, of which both men are members.
Jezek told the party meeting that the reluctance of finance ministry officials to more strongly regulate the capital markets was "absurd" and investors' lack of confidence could eventually do major damage the country's balance of payments.
"The capital account of our payments balance is alreday unable to level with a growing deficit in our trade balance, and the capital market needs to gain back the lost confidence," Jezek was quoted by the daily Pravo as saying.
Jezek warned that poor capital market regulation might even force a devaluation of the crown if confidence is not restored.
Jezek is leading plans to set up an independent markets watchdog akin to the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), funded by transaction fees, by the middle of next year.
The finance ministry has balked at the plan, but Jezek is widely believed to have the backing of the parliament's budget committee which he has said will probably submit legislation permitting a Czech SEC to be set up in the first half of 1997.
Kocarnik has rejected criticism that his ministry is failing in its responsibility to properly regulate the system, and says stronger regulations would be "anti-market".
Still, foreign and domestic investors have repeatedly called for steps to beef up the supervision of the Czech capital market, and the ministry has said it is considering its own plan to re-regulate securities trading.
Richard Salzmann, chairman of the largest Czech bank Komercni Banka a.s., told Pravo that "none of the more important groups want to trade on this capital market."
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
