Germany and the Czech republic will initial a long-awaited declaration on post-World War Two reconciliation between their two states on Friday in Prague, the Czech foreign ministry said on Monday.
A ceremony ending the two-year-long talks on the text will be held with Czech Foreign Minister Josef Zieleniec and Germany's Klaus Kinkel in the first part of a three-stage confirmation.
The ministry said in a statement that the two would "sign a protocol on the completion of negotiations of the Czech-German Declaration of mutual relations and their future development".
The full declaration, leaked to news media last week, contains mutual expressions of regret for the Nazi occupation from 1938 to 1945 and for excessive brutality during the post-war expulsion of ethnic Germans from former Czechoslovakia.
The text angered groups representing families of expelled Germans, known as Sudeten Germans, who complained that it did not compensate those who lost property during the expulsions.
But the Christian Social Union (CSU), the political sponsors of the Sudeten Germans, signalled on Monday it would no longer oppose the agreed text.
"By and large, the declaration will stand," Finance Minister and CSU chairman Theo Waigel told reporters.
The Bavarian-based CSU has in the past hinted it could use its weight in the government to block the declaration or oppose the Czech Republic's application to join the European Union unless the Sudeten Germans were given better terms.
But Waigel said it was a "great success" that Prague had gone as far as it had in apologising for the expulsions.
In the Czech parliament the mainstream parties have backed the declaration, but the extreme-right Republican Party and far-left Communists have ruled out voting for it in any form.
Members of the largest Czech opposition party, the Social Democrats, whose votes may be crucial for approval by parliament, said on Sunday that they still had concerns about vaguely-worded compensation for victims of Nazi aggression.
"(The party) has done all it can for the declaration to be accepted, but it still expects a bit more work (on the text)," a Social Democrat senator from the once German-annexed district of Upper Moravia, Petr Moravek, told Czech Television.
Stanislav Gross, the head of the Social Democrat caucus in the house, was quoted in the daily Pravo on Monday as saying he would not vote for the declaration in its present form.
The declaration sets up a Czech-German Future Fund with the German side paying in 140 million marks ($90 million), and the Czechs paying about one-seventh of that.
The text says the fund is to finance "projects of common interest" including joint environmental, historical, and scientific projects, youth meetings, and partnership projects.
But the text adds that: "The German side acknowledges its obligation of responsibility to all who became victims of National-Socialist violence. That is why the projects, wherever appropriate, should work mainly for the benefit of the victims of National-Socialist violence."
Diplomats said privately that the signing ceremony might take place somewhere outside Prague, but Czech officials said last week it would not take place in those areas which Germany annexed in 1938, known as the Sudetenland.
Prague is not part of the area Germany considered as the Sudetenland.
German Chancellor Helmut Kohl is expected to visit the Czech Republic, probably on January 21 and 22, to sign the text with Czech Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus.
In early February Czech President Vaclav Havel and German President Roman Herzog are expected to address the parliaments of each other's countries in ceremonies giving final approval to the declaration.
