Germany and the Czech republic announced on Monday that a long-awaited declaration on post- World War Two reconciliation would be initialled this week but politicians on both sides withheld final approval of the text.
The two foreign ministries said Czech Foreign Minister Josef Zieleniec and Germany's Klaus Kinkel would sign the document in Prague on Friday, at a ceremony ending two years of talks.
The declaration, expressing regret at both Nazi atrocities during the war and the expulsion of ethnic Germans from former Czechoslovakia afterwards, then has to be signed by the two countries' presidents and confirmed by the two parliaments.
But Germany's Christian Social Union (CSU), political sponsor of the expelled Germans, said its support for the text was not guaranteed.
"I would speak of a conditional 'yes'," Finance Minister and CSU chairman Theo Waigel told reporters. He said last-minute changes to the text could not be ruled out.
Final approval from the CSU, a partner in the Bonn coalition, would depend on assurances that the Sudeten Germans, as they are known, would be "involved at an appropriate level" in a dialogue between Prague and Bonn, he said.
The Bavarian-based CSU has in the past hinted it could use its weight in the government to block the declaration or oppose the Czech Republic's application to join the European Union unless the Sudeten Germans were given better terms.
In the Czech parliament the mainstream parties have backed the declaration, but the extreme-right Republican Party and far-left Communists have ruled out voting for it in any form.
Members of the largest Czech opposition party, the Social Democrats, whose votes may be crucial for approval by parliament, said on Sunday that they still had concerns about vaguely-worded compensation for victims of Nazi aggression.
"(The party) has done all it can for the declaration to be accepted, but it still expects a bit more work (on the text)," a Social Democrat senator from the once German-annexed district of Upper Moravia, Petr Moravek, told Czech Television.
Stanislav Gross, the head of the Social Democrat caucus in the house, was quoted in the daily Pravo on Monday as saying he would not vote for the declaration in its present form.
The Czech foreign ministry said in a statement that Zieleniec and Kinkel would "sign a protocol on the completion of negotiations of the Czech-German Declaration of mutual relations and their future development".
The full declaration, leaked to news media last week, contains mutual expressions of regret for the Nazi occupation from 1938 to 1945 and for excessive brutality during the post-war expulsion of the Sudeten Germans.
The text angered groups representing families of the Sudeten Germans, who complained that it did not compensate those who had lost property during the expulsions.
The declaration sets up a Czech-German Future Fund with the German side paying in 140 million marks ($90 million), and the Czechs paying about one-seventh of that.
The text says the fund is to finance "projects of common interest" including joint environmental, historical, and scientific projects, youth meetings, and partnership projects.
But the text adds that: "The German side acknowledges its obligation of responsibility to all who became victims of National-Socialist violence. That is why the projects, wherever appropriate, should work mainly for the benefit of the victims of National-Socialist violence."
German Chancellor Helmut Kohl is expected to visit the Czech Republic, probably on January 21 and 22, to sign the text with Czech Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus.
In early February Czech President Vaclav Havel and German President Roman Herzog are expected to address the parliaments of each other's countries in ceremonies giving final approval to the declaration.
