Czech Justice Minister Jan Kalvoda, a deputy premier and leader of a junior partner in the ruling coalition, quit the government and parliament on Tuesday for falsely using an academic title, the CTK news agency said.
Kalvoda, aged 43, resigned for falsely claiming he was a doctor of law amid a growing row over the academic credentials of Czech politicians after deputies began questioning whether they were all genuine.
"Yes, (Kalvoda resigned) and he delivered his resignation to the president," Mariana Cerna of the parliament's press office told Reuters.
Another member of parliament from a party in the centre-right ruling coalition also quit the house for the same reason, while three other deputies admitted using false titles but did not step down, the news agency reported.
Officials of Kalvoda's party, the Civic Democratic Alliance (ODA), were not immediately available for comment, and it was not yet clear who would take Kalvoda's place in the cabinet or what his status would be within his party.
Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus, head of the senior Civic Democratic Party, said he would meet on Wednesday morning with Christian Democrat chairman Josef Lux and a designated member of Kalvoda's party to assess the situation in the three-party coalition.
"It's a political swerve, it's disquieting and unsettling, and the aim of all of us is that it would happen without any teetering," Klaus told reporters after Kalvoda's resignation.
ODA's press department said it would not comment until a meeting of its party leaders on Wednesday.
Kalvoda, who headed the most pro-business party in the coalition, often bumped heads with Klaus on issues such as speeding up the deregulation of heating prices and rents and lowering taxes.
Pavla Jurkova, a member of the Christian Democrats (KDU-CSL), resigned her seat in the 200-seat lower house -- where the centre-right coalition has 99 seats -- for falsely claiming a law doctorate, CTK said.
Two members of Klaus's party also admitted that their law doctorates, used in campaign material earlier this year, were false, CTK said, but Anna Roeschova and Ondrej Zemina had not resigned their seats.
Also staying put in parliament was a member of the opposition Social Democrats, Marie Noveska, after admitting she had not finished university but still used the title doctor of law.
