Czech Justice Minister Jan Kalvoda, a deputy premier and leader of a junior partner in the ruling coalition, quit the government and parliament on Tuesday for falsely using an academic title, the CTK news agency said.
Another member of parliament from a coalition party also quit parliament for the same reason, while three other deputies admitted using false titles but did not step down.
Kalvoda, aged 43, resigned for falsely claiming he was a Doctor of Law amid a growing row over the academic credentials of Czech politicians after deputies began questioning whether they were all genuine.
"Yes, (Kalvoda resigned) and he delivered his resignation to the president," Mariana Cerna of the parliament's press office told Reuters.
Officials of Kalvoda's party, the Civic Democratic Alliance (ODA), were not immediately available for comment, and it was not yet clear who would take Kalvoda's place in the cabinet or what his status would be within his party.
He told the house however that there would be no changes in the party, CTK reported.
ODA's press department said it would not comment until a meeting of party leaders on Wednesday.
Kalvoda, who headed the most pro-business party in the coalition, often bumped heads with Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus on issues such as speeding up the deregulation of heating prices and rents and lowering taxes.
Earlier on Tuesday, Pavla Jurkova, a member of another coalition party, the Christian Democrats (KDU-CSL), resigned her seat in the 200-seat lower house -- where the centre-right coalition has 99 seats -- for falsely claiming a law doctorate.
Meanwhile two members of Vaclav Klaus's senior party in the three-member coalition, the Civic Democratic Party (ODS), also admitted today that their law doctorates, used in campaign material earlier this year, were false, CTK said.
However Anna Roeschova and Ondrej Zemina had not resigned their seats, CTK reported.
Also staying put in parliament was a member of the opposition Social Democrats, Marie Noveska, after admitting she had not finished university but still used the title doctor of law.
