The Czech coalition government on Wednesday looked to recover from the resignation of Justice Minister Jan Kalvoda, a deputy premier who joined four other politicians in admitting they used phoney academic titles.
A cabinet aide said on Wednesday that Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus and key members of the tenous three-party coalition government were waiting for Kalvoda's party to meet later on Wednesday before serious talks on his replacement can begin.
Kalvoda, leader of the Civic Democratic Alliance (ODA) a junior coalition partner, resigned his cabinet and parliament seat on Tuesday, in a speech which caught everybody off guard.
He rose to tell the house that he "wasn't happy to be the next episode of a soap opera, but the title Juris Doctor does not belong to me". Then he quit.
Kalvoda joined four more members of parliament who have admitted to using "Doctor of Law" falsely, as accusations spilled on to the floor of the chamber in a country where academic titles are more often used than first names.
Leaders of ODA, a party with four seats in the 16-member government, were to meet on Wednesday evening to consider who to nominate in Kalvoda's place, a decision which rests with the party according to the agreement which set up the cabinet.
They are expected to discuss whether Kalvoda will remain as head of the strongly pro-business ODA, which he helped establish ahead of general elections in 1992.
A member of parliament from the coalition partner Christian Democrats, resigned for the same reason on Tuesday.
But two members of Klaus's senior Civic Democratic Party, and a member of the opposition Social Democrats have said they will not step down after similar confessions.
Political analysts said that Kalvoda's confession was damaging, but Klaus's tenous government -- which lost its parliamentary majority in June elections -- can survive in tact if the ODA can agree on who can lead the party in the cabinet.
However, two factions within the ODA -- one associated with Industry and Trade Minister Vladimir Dlouhy, and anothter with minister at large Pavel Bratinka -- are likely to fight for control of the party.
"If they (ODA) does not have a good candidate quickly, the government could do some reshuffling," Jiri Pehe, director of research at Prague Open Media Research Institute, told Reuters.
The danger to the government's stability would be if the coalition agreement, pounded out after a month of tense negotiations following the June elections, is reopened.
Klaus told journalists that Kalvoda's resignation was "a political swerve, it's disquieting and unsettling" but that the government would aim to take it in stride.
The foreign exchange market, wary of any instability within the tenous centre-right cabinet reacted sharply and the crown was volatile throughout morning trading.
The usually stable currency fell 50 basis points against the Czech National Bank's mark/dollar basket before recovering when the central bank fixed the crown at 2.32 percent above parity with the basket, down from +2.75 percent on Tuesday.
By mid-day it had recovered to +2.50 above the basket.
Kamil Janacek, chief economist at the largest Czech Bank Komercni Banka, said he did not think Kalvoda's resignation would damage the government.
"The stability of the government does not depend on Mr. Kalvoda. What happened has nothing to do with the ministry itself, it's a personal thing for Mr. Kalvoda," Janacek said.
Pehe said that more phoney-title confessions might still add to the growing drama in parliament.
"In this society it plays such a role -- whether or not you have (an advanced) degree -- I suspect that there may be a few more deputies or government officials in some positions who are claiming to have degrees which they in fact do not," he said.
