The Czech Republic's tenuous coalition government sought on Wednesday to repair the damage caused by the shock departure of Justice Minister Jan Kalvoda, who quit after admitting using a phoney academic title.
A cabinet aide said Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus and key members of the three-party coalition government were waiting for Kalvoda's party to meet later in the day before serious talks on his replacement could begin.
President Vaclav Havel asked Kalvoda, leader of the Civic Democratic Alliance (ODA) a junior coalition partner, to reconsider his decision to quit.
Kalvoda, a deputy premier, resigned his cabinet posts and parliamentary seat on Tuesday in a speech which caught everybody off guard.
He quit after telling parliament that he "wasn't happy to be the next episode of a soap opera, but the title Juris Doctor does not belong to me."
He later explained his decision to Havel, who is recuperating in a Prague clinic from lung surgery on a cancerous tumour.
"The president, not being bound constitutionally by any deadline, called on Jan Kalvoda to think about his intended step for several more days," said a statement issued by the president's office after the meeting.
It said Klaus gave the president a request for Kalvoda's dismissal, as protokol requires, and added that Havel would consider it further. Kalvoda was not available for comment.
As accusations spilled across the floor of parliament, four other members had previously admitted to using "Doctor of Law" falsely in a country where academic titles are more often used than first names.
Leaders of the ODA, which has four ministers in the 16-member cabinet, were to meet later to consider who to nominate in Kalvoda's place, a decision which rests with the party according to an agreement which set up the government.
They were also expected to discuss whether Kalvoda should remain as chairman of the strongly pro-business party, which he helped to set up ahead of general elections in 1992.
Political analysts said Kalvoda's confession was damaging but the government, which lost its parliamentary majority in June elections, could survive entact if the ODA agreed speedily on who should lead it in the cabinet.
Two factions within the ODA, one associated with Industry and Trade Minister Vladimir Dlouhy and the other with minister at large Pavel Bratinka, were likely to fight for control of the party.
"If the ODA does not have a good candidate quickly, the government could do some reshuffling," Jiri Pehe, director of research at Prague Open Media Research Institute, told Reuters.
The government's stability could be endangered if the coalition agreement, pounded out in a month of tense negotiations following the June elections, was reopened.
Klaus told reporters on Tuesday that Kalvoda's resignation was disquieting and unsettling and "a political swerve" but the government would aim to take it in its stride.
The foreign exchange market, wary of any instability, reacted sharply and the Czech crown was volatile throughout morning trading.
The usually stable currency fell 50 basis points against the Czech National Bank's mark/dollar basket before recovering when the central bank fixed it at 2.32 percent above parity and then returned to Tuesday's levels later in the day.
