Slower-than-expected third quarter economic growth might force the Czech National Bank (CNB) to make a modest interest rate cut early next year, but analysts said the priority would still be to fight inflation.
The Czech Statistical Bureau (CSU) said on Thursday that third quarter gross domestic product (GDP) grew by 3.6 percent year-on-year, putting GDP 4.0 percent higher for the first three quarters of 1996.
A Reuter survey of economists on Wednesday had predicted growth for the first three quarters of 1996 of about 4.2 percent, slowing from the official 4.3 percent for the first six months, and 4.8 percent for the whole of 1995.
Analysts said that the real figures, when combined with recent results showing a rapid slowing of money supply growth, proved that while the Czech National Bank's (CNB) mid-year tightening had been effective, it may have gone too far.
"This turned out to be somewhat worse than we hoped...we do expect a slight cut in rates early next year. I think we'll wait just to see the development of prices in January," said economist Radek Maly at Citibank Prague.
Inflation has been stubborn in 1996, with the annual rate hovering above nine percent until recent months. But by November, inflation had slowed to 8.6 percent, year-on-year.
Maly however added that he expected "the central bank still will be looking more after inflation than growth".
He said the government should consider ending incremental price deregulations on energy and rents and instead quickly lift the controls to allow inflation to settle to its core rate, and allow for longer-term investment planning.
The key measure of money supply growth, M2, slowed to 13.8 percent, year-on-year, by the end of September from over 20 percent earlier in the year.
That came after the CNB's hiked its discount rate a full percentage point to 10.5 percent in June and raised minimum reserve requirements to 11.5 percent from 8.5. The M2 rate then slowed to 11.4 percent by the end of October.
"The interest rates are really high, that's why the tight monetary policy is working and slowing the growth," said Petr Kukla, a foreign currency dealer at Girocredit Banka in Prague.
"We will have to wait probably for the beginning of the second half of the next year so that the GDP can improve together with a rate cut," he said.
Domestic demand remained strong but flat at 5.2 percent for the latest quarter, and 5.3 percent for the nine-month period, but well below 1995 levels.
A major harness on growth expansion has been relatively stagnant exports, stifled by the slowdown in demand in western Europe and especially neighbouring Germany.
"The most dynamic growth influence, as it was in the first half, was the development of trade," the CSU said in its statement.
In the third quarter, the CSU said, imports were 222.9 billion crowns, a year-on-year increase of some 21.8 percent.
Imports for the first three quarters totalled 618.0 billion crowns, an increase of 14.7 percent over the previous year.
Meanwhile, the CSU said third quarter exports grew by 6.1 percent, year-on-year, to 183.7 billion crowns, putting the three-quarter combined total at 529.9 billion crowns, or 5.1 percent.
"In the area of foreign trade, dynamic growth in the importing of goods and services was seen, with the yearly growth accelerating from 9.4 percent in the first quarter to 21.8 percent in the third quarter," the statement said.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
