Czech Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus said on Thursday his ruling Civic Democratic Party (ODS) would end the governing coalition if his partners backed opposition plans to lower the pension age and boost farm subsidies.
In a blistering statement aimed not only at the opposition Social Democrats, but also his party's centrist coalition partners, the Christian Democrats (KDU-CSL), Klaus warned of a potential collapse of Czech post-Communist reforms if the plans were adopted.
Klaus said that "laws were in play whose approval we would interpret as a basic threat to the very basics of the (post-Communist economic) transformation."
It said approval of Social Democrat plans would be "something in which we could not participate, and we would have to leave the government."
It also said that steps by KDU-CSL to push through their candidate as chairman in the new Senate, as well as KDU-CSL's voting with the opposition on the new pension proposal violated the agreement which formed the coalition minority government.
ODS also objected to a plan put forward by the Social Democrats, the largest of three opposition parties, to boost state intervention to help support agriculture.
Klaus's party, which lays claim to the blueprint for the fiscal prudence and currency stability which has given the country the best investment ratings in post-Communist Europe, warned that the proposals could have devastating effects.
"We consider the current political situation in our country to be very serious, and unprecedented in a certain sense," Klaus said in a preamble to the statement.
"If these laws are passed and the threatening development happens, it would mean an imbalance and burden for the budget, and demands on the taxpayers, which we consider to be absolutely impossible and unbearable," it said.
Before falling two seats short of a majority in the 200-seat lower house of parliament in June, Governments led by Klaus approved five consecutive balanced budgets, although the 1996 account expects to actually end with a roughly 1.2 billion crowns deficit, due to lagging tax collection.
The government was able to push through its 1997 balanced budget plan last week after two Social Democrats voted with the government, and then were sacked by their party for it.
The Czech agency CTK later quoted KDU-CSL chairman Josef Lux as saying that the ODS statement did not respond to reality and his party rejected such threats, but he added that he did not see it as a signal to end the coalition.
The lower house recently agreed to continue debate -- in the first of three required readings in parliament -- on a Social Democrat proposal which would lower the retirement age to 60 years for men and 53 to 57 for women.
The plan would replace a government programme to gradually raise the pension age.
Parliament last year had approved the plan of Klaus's then-majority coalition government to raise the retirement age as a way to head off an expected crisis in financing pensions in the long term.
The soonest any of the new controversial proposals could go to parliament for a second reading would be in its February session. They must still have two more readings in the lower house, and then be confirmed by the new upper house.
The government plan, effective at the beginning of this year, sets out a gradual raising of the pension age until the 2007 when the official age would be 62 for men and 60 across the board for women, unifying a system which once allowed women with children to take an earlier retirement.
It has begun to gradually change from the Communist-era schedule of 60 years for men and 54 to 57 for women.
