Germany and the Czech Republic on Friday concluded nearly two years of sensitive talks on a joint declaration aimed at finally healing the wounds of World War Two and the communist era that followed.
German Foreign Minister Klaus Kinkel and his Czech counterpart Josef Zieleniec signed a protocol which sends forward a text expressing regret for injustices on both sides, and setting up a fund for joint projects.
The declaration expresses Bonn's sorrow for the 1938-45 Nazi occupation of the Czech lands and Prague's regret for Czech brutality in the post-war expulsion of ethnic Germans.
It marks Germany's final reconciliation with neighbours who fell under Nazi occupation.
"We Germans regret the suffering and injustice caused to the Czech people by National-Socialist (Nazi) crimes, and we are recognising our responsibility," Kinkel told diplomats and journalists after signing the protocol.
The text was approved by both governments earlier this week, and is to be signed by prime ministers in January, but politicians on both sides of the border are calling for changes before parliaments and presidents give it their final approval.
Both Kinkel and Zielenec insisted the text would not be reopened for negotiation.
Czech opponents of the text claim it fails to pay direct compensation to victims of Nazi agression, while German groups are furious that it avoids paying restitution for Prague's expropriation of property of the so-called Sudeten Germans.
The declaration sets up a Czech-German Future Fund with the German side paying in 140 million marks ($90 million), and the Czechs paying about one-seventh of that.
The text says the fund is to finance "projects of common interest" including joint environmental, historical, and scientific ones, adding that "the projects, wherever appropriate, should work mainly for the benefit of victims of (Nazi) violence."
"The declaration which we have agreed on means simply a clarification of understanding," Zieleniec said.
"This declaration is not a full stop after history. It only closes one sentence and one paragraph. It also is a semi-colon and starts a discussion on the topic of joint projects focused on the future," he added.
The main political critic in Germany is the Bavarian-based Christian Social Union (CSU) which acts as mentor to the Sudeten Germans, survivors and relatives of the 2.5 million ethnic Germans who were collectively blamed for the Nazi occupation and summarily driven out.
Leaders of Bavaria, where most Sudetens settled, had demanded changes in the text, but the Czech government has insisted it will negotiate only with Bonn.
Chancellor Helmut Kohl is due to sign the declaration with Czech Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus in January and the presidents of the two countries will then address each other's parliaments to seal the matter.
A major German daily newspaper, the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, on Friday called the declaration a political sham.
"Perhaps one day there will be a German-Czech declaration which in its honesty and sincerity does provide a historic sign of reconciliation," the daily said in a commentary.
"The great majority of the Czech nation, above all the great majority of politicians, is convinced that the Czechoslovak state was not only politically clever but also morally and legally in the right when it got rid of the German minority." ($1=1.5570 Mark)
