The ancient Czech capital has suffered invasions of dictators and demonstrators but nothing and no-one so extraordinary as Michael Jackson and his cohorts.
The controversial and self-styled "King of Pop" plays his first concert in two years when the "HiStory" world tour starts on Saturday on Prague's Letna Plain, where Communist leaders once reviewed troops and Pope John Paul II held mass.
On Tuesday, Jackson is expected to receive the kind of welcome usually reserved for heads of state when his jet lands at Prague's VIP terminal and he is wisked away in a Rolls Royce.
This tour is Jackson's first since he was cleared of child molestation charges by a U.S. court because of lack of evidence.
Like Britain's Queen Elizabeth in May, he will get a full police escort through the ancient Czech capital, but not even monarchs can compete with the huge fleet of luxury cars readied to carry the star's entourage.
Police have asked Czechs to stay away from the airport, but officials have encouraged well-wishers to come out and wave along the 15 km (10 mile) route into the city.
Jackson's Prague date has avoided the controversy at other stops on his three-month tour through Europe, Africa and Asia.
In South Korea, civic and religious groups reacted bitterly to a decision to let Jackson play two concerts in Seoul in October, saying it was unbelievable that the government agreed to to make an "amoral singer" the teenagers' idol.
A planned stop in Casablanca was cancelled by Moroccan authorities, without explanation. A concert organiser said the government did not want 100,000 youths all in the same place.
Jackson's Prague promoter, Serge Grimaux, said the normally reclusive Jackson wanted to arrive several days before the concert to mix with the thousands who throng the bridges and palaces of the Bohemian capital "like a normal tourist".
"He has a big interest in meeting people and doesn't want to be too incognito," Grimaux told reporters.
For those who don't see enough of Jackson, organisers are planning to erect a 10-metre (33 foot) water-filled statue of the singer on the same rock platform hovering above Prague where a monument to Soviet-leader Josef Stalin once stood.
Never before has the sprawling parade ground adjacent to Prague Castle prepared for a spectacle like the one planned for the expected 130,000 paying guests on Saturday.
Huge walls for two security perimeters -- to keep out those not paying the $21 for a ticket -- are being built on the Letna grounds which usually host ball fields, car parks, and a major east-west thoroughfare.
"I'm not building Alcatraz, I'm just building a perimeter for the people that have paid for their tickets to get what they deserve," Grimaux said.
