Czech fund manager Harvard Capital &amp; Consulting (HC&amp;C) said on Tuesday it paid a one million crown ($36,500) fine for illegal trading practices from 1993 to 1995, and was making amends.
In a statement HC&amp;C said that Viktor Kozeny, the young Czech-born entreprenuer who founded HC&amp;C, which is not connected to the U.S. college where he once studied, confirmed from his home in the Bahamas that the fine was paid in June.
"The discovered deficiencies from 1993 to 1995 have mostly been removed. We are working on correcting the others," HC&amp;C vice-president Boris Vostry said in the statement obtained from Harvard's Prague public relations agency.
The Finance Ministry on Monday said it had levied the maximum fine allowed by Czech law on HC&amp;C, which became one of the most visible symbols of renascent Czech capitalism during the country's privatisation wave of the early 1990s.
The firm was cited for several violations of the law on investment companies and funds and forced it to pay additional compensation, the ministry said, but did not elaborate.
Marie Jezkova, the head of the ministry's department of fund supervision, told Reuters that Harvard was cited primarily for the manipulation of assets of its publicly-held closed-end Harvard Guarantee &amp; Multiple Fund.
She said that the violations included "dealing with the assets of the fund with unprofessional care".
Jezkova said that Harvard conducted trades which "did not indicate that they were done with the aim to increase the value of the assets of the fund".
Vostry said one of the reasons for the fine was the frequent encroachment of the maximum limits for the purchase of shares in individual companies.
At the time, funds were limited to holding a maximum 20 percent stake in any one company.
Vostry did not list other infractions.
Jezkova was reacting to repeated inquiries concerning a story published last week in the U.S. magazine Fortune.
The magazine quoted a still unpublished ministry decision which it said was handed down in July, which required Harvard to pay a one million crown penalty and $6.8 million in compensation to its funds for various activities.
Jezkova declined comment on the total amount of compensation Harvard was required to pay, but she said that the ministry did impose the maximum fine allowable by law, and that Harvard did have to pay additional compensation.
She also declined to discuss any details of the decision, and said it was up others at the ministry to publish such information.
It is not clear why the decision had been kept secret.
Key ministry personnel have been unavailable during the holiday season.
The infractions described by Fortune concern Harvard's management of funds which were set up during the massive Czech voucher privatisation programme, which gave share vouchers to citizens for a nominal fee.
Kozeny, like many banks and private entrepreneurs, set up funds based on shares gained from citizens who transferred their vouchers to the funds. The citizens received shares in the funds for the vouchers.
($ = 27.34 Czech Crowns)
