The engines have started in the race to succeed Alex Trotman for the top office at Ford Motor Co.
The company on Thursday promoted two longtime Ford executives to positions that will allow them to prove if they are worthy of occupying one or more of the top spots at Detroit's No. 2 automaker.  
Edward Hagenlocker, 56, was promoted to vice chairman from executive vice president, and put in charge of a new auto components organization with 75,000 employees and revenues of $14 billion.
Jacques Nasser, 48, previously group vice president in charge of product development, was named to Hagenlocker's old job of heading up Ford Automotive Operations (FAO), the company's core car and truck business.  
Speculation has swirled for months about how Ford's board of directors plans to handle the succession of Trotman, who currently holds the titles of chairman, chief executive officer and president. Trotman reaches the mandatory retirement age of 65 in July 1998, but the board can ask him to stay on.
Complicating matters is the prospect of a Ford family member returning to a top role for the first time since 1980. Recent reports have said William Clay Ford Jr., 39, a great- grandson of company founder Henry Ford, could be named a non- executive chairman, or chairman, when Trotman leaves.  
Eugene Jennings, a retired professor of management at Michigan State University, said Hagenlocker's assignment at the head of the new parts organization could turn into a high-profile spot, and it should not be read as a demotion.
"It's the one thing that Hagenlocker needs under his belt to give him the experience he needs to run the company," said Jennings, a long-time observer of the Big Three U.S. automakers.  
Nasser has worked at Ford nearly as long as Hagenlocker. Born in Lebanon and raised in Australia, Nasser joined the company in 1968 as a financial analyst. He rose through several international assignments, earning a reputation as a "no- nonsense petrol head."
While Hagenlocker is stiff in front of the media, Nasser moves easily among reporters, entertaining them with colorful stories about cricket and his globe-trotting life abroad.  
Wesley Brown of industry consultant CSM Forecasting in Farmington Hills, Mich., said Nasser's new role also offers him a chance to demonstrate his abilities at running the company.
"It clearly puts Nasser in a position to take over from Trotman when he retires," said Brown.
For his part, Trotman was circumspect about the succession question at a news briefing Thursday, saying it was the board's decision. Asked if the board is actively working on the issue, Trotman responded: "Absolutely, in depth and frequently -- and has been for the last 20 or 30 years."
