Ford Motor Co. Thursday announced sweeping organisational changes and a major shake-up of its senior management, replacing the head of its global automotive operations.
The moves include combining Ford's four components divisions into a single organisation with 75,000 employees and $14 billion in revenues, and a consolidation of the automaker's vehicle product development centres to three from five.
As part of the management changes, Ford named group Vice President Jacques Nasser, 48, a personable, fast-rising cost-cutter, to replace Edward Hagenlocker, 56, as president of its global automotive operations.
Hagenlocker, who headed Ford's core car and truck business for nearly three years, was named a vice chairman, overseeing the new components unit, land development, technical affairs and rental car operations.
Hagenlocker, a reserved engineer who came up through Ford's truck operations, has in the past come under fire for the auto unit's lackluster financial performance. For the first half of 1996, the worldwide auto unit's profits were $1.25 billion, down from $2.24 billion a year ago.
Hagenlocker has also been criticised for the slower-than-expected start of the redesigned Taurus and the decision not to offer a fourth door on Ford's minivans.
The moves, which had been rumoured for months, intensify the race to succeed Alex Trotman, who currently holds the titles of chairman, chief executive and president. In 1998, Trotman reaches the mandatory retirement age of 65, but the board could ask him to stay on longer.
Trotman, briefing reporters on the changes at Ford World Headquarters, declined to comment on the succession issue.
Ford said it would reorganize its global product development operations for the second time in two years. The changes, which call for Ford to reduce its vehicle line directors to 11 from 17, come less than two years after the automaker embarked on its ambitious "Ford 2000" global reorganization plan, which combined the U.S. and European development groups into a single unit.
Trotman said formation of the new Automotive Products Operation will help the company streamline its component operations into a single enterprise that will be more competitive with other auto suppliers.
Trotman said Ford wants the unit to increase its sales from non-Ford customers. Currently, the vast majority of the unit's revenues come from internal Ford customers, with non-Ford automakers contributing about 5 percent.
No significant headcount changes are expected. But Trotman said an evaluation under way could result in new acquisitions as well as divestitures of existing product lines.
"We are separating the automotive components business from Ford Automotive Operations to focus senior management attention on making it more competitive in its own right," he said. "I have asked Ed Hagenlocker to take on the crucial assignment of making this happen."
Analysts applauded the move, with one saying changes to Ford 2000 are overdue because the initiative needs a sharper focus.
"What Ford 2000 taught us is that they had too many cooks working on the broth," said Eugene Jennings, a retired professor of management at Michigan State University and long-time Big Three automaker watcher.
He also approved of giving Hagenlocker responsibility for the parts business. "It puts a top officer directly in charge of the major challenge for the next 10 years -- and that's components," Jennings said.
Also named a vice chairman was Executive Vice President Wayne Booker, 62, who remains in charge of the automaker's international operations. Chief Financial Officer and Group Vice President John Devine, 52, also was promoted to executive vice president.
Ford said it promoted Vice President James Englehart, 59, to take Nasser's old job of group vice president responsible for product development. Englehart was previously vice president for the vehicle centre that developed light trucks primarily for personal use.
In the future, Ford will have three vehicle centres for car and truck development: Truck, to be headed by Vice President Jim Donaldson; Small and Medium Car, to be headed by Vice President Richard Parry-Jones; and Large and Luxury Car, to be headed by Vice President Ken Kohrs.
The small and medium-car development centre will continue to be based in Merkenich, Germany and Dunton, England, while both the truck and large/luxury car centres will be based in Dearborn, Mich. Previously, Ford had a development centre in Merkenich and Dunton for small front-drive cars and in Dearborn for large front-drive cars, for rear-drive cars, for light trucks and for commercial trucks.
"We have beeen able to simplify and streamline the organisational structure now that we are reducing our vehicle platforms by 50 percent," Trotman said. "Using the 16 vehicle plaforms and at the same time increasing the number of derivatives, we can provide a broader array of vehicles for customers in many more markets," he said.
