General Motors Corp., facing a rancorous strike by its Canadian workers, Tuesday reported a $1.3 billion third-quarter profit that was boosted by strong automotive results and an unsually low income tax rate.
The world's largest automaker said the combined net income of its North American Automotive Operations and its Delphi Automotive Systems parts businesses was $515 million. A year ago, the operations had a combined loss of $93 million, while the parent company posted a profit of $396.7 million.
Increased volume and favourable currency exchange rates helped GM to nearly triple its international operations profits to $323 million from $111 million a year ago.
"The third quarter results from continuing operations clearly show momentum as we continue to rebuild our strength in North America and grow our business in key international markets throughout the world," GM Chairman John Smith said in a statement.
The earnings, equal to $1.57 a share, compared with a profit of 39 cents a share from continuing operations. They do not include results from Electronic Data Systems Corp, which GM spun off in June. Revenues climbed to $39.1 billion from $35.3 billion in the 1995 period.
Contributing to profits was $565 million in one-time favourable items. GM recorded a $253 million after-tax gain from a reduction in the reserve to pay for plant closings, thanks to its decision to use its Wilmington, Del., facility to assemble new Saturn vehicles.
Also, GM's effective income tax rate was 2.8 percent, adding another $312 million, as the company took advantage of several tax credits, including a reinstatement of research and experimentation credits for the last half of 1996.
GM Chief Financial Officer Michael Losh told reporters during a conference call that rate is expected to return to the 27 percent range in the fourth quarter.
As it has all year, GM continued to add to its growing cash account in the third period, contributing another $1.5 billion to bring its total cash balance to $14.5 billion at the end of the quarter.
Because GM has previously set its cash goal at $13 billion, Ronald Glantz, an analyst at Dean Witter Reynolds, believes the GM board will return some of that money to shareholders.
"I thought it was a pretty decent quarter," he said. "I have a lot more confidence that they are going to raise the dividend and announce a share repurchase programme."
Glantz said the annual dividend could go to $2.00 a share from the current rate of $1.60 at the next board meeting Nov. 4. By the end of 1997, he said GM may have in place a $3 billion share repurchase programme.
GM's third quarter net profit margin from continuing operations rose to 3.7 percent from 1.3 percent. Smith said that was good news, but noted the company still has a ways to go before it reaches its average annual profit margin goal of 5 percent over an auto business cycle.
"We still have our work cut out to improve margin performance," he said.
GM delivered more vehicles worldwide in the third quarter -- 2,085,000 vs. 2,060,000 -- but its global market share slipped to 16.1 percent from 16.9 percent.
The company also lost share in the U.S. car and truck market, finishing the quarter with 30.4 percent compared with 32.2 percent. GM delivered 1,182,000 vehicles in the United States during the quarter, down from 1,235,000.
But CFO Losh said the overall volume increase represented good news for the company, and was a sign there is demand for the bevy of new models it is launching.
"It's volume that drives earnings, not market share, per say," he said.
Another positive sign was the pace of new-model launches, said Losh. Production of full-size vans at Wentzvile, Mo., and Saturn coupes in Spring Hill, Tenn., have reached full line speed, and other plants are on schedule.
GM is in the midst of launching 15 new cars and trucks. In the third quarter, the company had nine plants actively involved in changeovers. Losh said that is the most it expects to have in a given quarter, adding GM will have seven in changeovers in the fourth quarter.
However, one of those nine plants is a facility in Oshawa, Ontario, which is the target of a strike by Canadian Auto Workers. Losh declined to say how much the strike will set back the new model launch there.
Losh also declined to comment on status of talks between both the CAW and United Auto Workers. About 26,000 CAW members began walking off the job Oct. 3 over the issue of outsourcing -- the use of outside contractors. GM also has yet to reach a new labour pact with the UAW.
On Tuesday, the number of U.S. workers idled by the strike rose to 10,297 from 5,911 on Monday.
