The effects of a strike by 26,000 Canadian autoworkers will continue to ripple through General Motors Corp.'s operations even though a tentative deal was reached Tuesday after marathon talks.
GM has told about 2,000 workers at its Lordstown, Ohio, car assembly plant not to report to work when their work week begins on Friday, said company spokesman Tom Klipstine.
"There are still some problems out there in terms of having enough material to keep plants running," he said.
Negotiators for the company and the Canadian Auto Workers union settled disputes over the contracting out of work and reached a tentative agreement on a new contract, putting an end to the 19-day strike.
In addition to the striking CAW members, GM has idled 19,931 workers at dozens of assembly and parts plants in the U.S. and Mexico that depend on the Canadian operations. That figure does not include workers such as the Lordstown employees whose scheduled shifts have yet to start.
If the deal is ratified Wednesday as expected and parts resume shipments, Klipstine said it could take until the end of next week before all of GM's affected plants are operating at pre-strike levels.
One analyst estimated the strike could end up costing the world's largest automaker about 100,000 units of straight-time production in North America.
The calculation, by CSM Forecasting in Farmington Hills, Mich., assumes that all of GM's plants are back in operation by Oct. 28, and does not include over-time production.
"There's still some operations that may go down that we may have not anticipated," said Michael Robinet, managing director of CSM, an industry consulting firm. "There's going to be some ebb and flow."
GM is expected to lose production of about 51,000 units in Canada, and 45,000 to 46,000 units in the United States, Robinet said.
Of the 51,000 units in Canada, about 40 percent are GM's popular full-size C/K pickup trucks, which are made at GM's assembly complex in Oshawa, Ontario, he said.
CAW President Buzz Hargrove told reporters during a press conference after the new pact was reached that GM could restart the Oshawa truck plant as soon as Wednesday night, after the deal is ratified.
Inventories of the trucks have been tight, and the sales effects will start showing up in the October sales numbers, analysts said.
Any market share losses to competitors, however, would be tempered by the fact that Ford Motor Co. is already running at maximum capacity for its new F-Series pickups, said David Healy, an analyst at Burnham Securities Inc.
GM had sufficient inventories of cars that the strike is not expected to crimp those sales too much, analysts said.
Where GM could be hurt most is in new product launches. Production of the new Buick Century was previously scheduled to start at the Oshawa car plant on Nov. 4. But the strike could push that back until the middle or end of November, Robinet said.
GM's Oklahoma City, Okla., assembly plant will also be delayed another two to three weeks in starting production of the new Oldsmobile Cutlass and Chevrolet Malibu cars, because of a parts shortage due to the strike, he said.
Healy, who believes GM has lost production of about 65,000 units, estimated it will bring down the automaker's earnings by about $225 million after taxes. A strike at two Dayton, Ohio, brake plants in March cost GM $900 million.
"It's not a major disaster," Healy said. "It's not of the magnitude of Dayton."
