General Motors Corp, still feeling the effects of a 20-day Canadian autoworker strike, told all of its 5,000 Lordstown, Ohio, assembly workers they will be idled for two weeks, company and United Auto Workers officials said Thursday.
The plant, which makes the Chevrolet Cavalier and Pontiac Sunfire small cars, has run out of transmissions supplied by a GM parts plant in Windsor, Ontario.
Workers at another assembly plant, the Buick City complex in Flint, Mich., could also be idled on Friday or early next week, industry sources said. The plant, which employs 5,236 hourly UAW workers, makes LeSabre, Park Avenue, Eighty Eight and Bonneville, mid-sized cars.
"It's a situation we are looking at," said GM spokesman Tom Klipstine, adding the automaker continues to monitor all of its vehicle and parts production operations.
As of Thursday afternoon GM had told 23,801 assembly and parts workers in the United States and Mexico to stay home because of a shortage of parts from its Canadian operations.
The Lordstown shutdown is the second U.S. plant where GM has suspended operations completely since 26,000 Canadian Auto Workers began an escalating strike on Oct. 3. The first plant to go totally down was Detroit/Hamtramck, which makes Cadillacs.
The Lordstown plant has three crews. The first crew was told to report back Nov. 10, the second Nov. 11 and the third Nov. 12, a UAW spokeswoman said.
Losing production of the mid-sized cars is not expected to have a big impact on sales, because the automaker had between 67 and 98 days supply of those vehicles on dealer lots as of the end of September, according to Autodata Corp.
But GM could feel the impact of lost production of its popular Cavalier and Sunfire cars. The Cavalier had a 61 days supply and the Sunfire had 61. The industry generally considers 60-days supply to be ideal.
GM and CAW negotiators reached agreement on a new three-year labour pact Oct. 22. The deal was approved by CAW members Wednesday.
The Canadian operations are being brought up in stages.
