Bargainers for the United Auto Workers union and General Motors Corp. continued bargaining on Sunday but kept a tight lid on whether any progress was being made toward a new labour pact as a midnight (0500 GMT) deadline loomed.
GM spokesman Ray Deibel said talks resumed at midmorning Sunday after they adjourned Saturday evening. He declined to be more specific, or to say if GM Chairman Jack Smith is taking part in the discussions at the automaker's headquarters in downtown Detroit.
At stake is a new labour agreement for GM's 215,000 hourly UAW workers. GM employs more than half of the 390,000 UAW members who work at Detroit's Big Three automakers. It is the only one of the Big Three not to have a new three-year labour contract.
Analysts speculated that negotiators could be wrangling over contract language that would dictate how many workers to whom GM is obligated to guarantee jobs.
Bowing to UAW concerns over job security, both Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp. have agreed to new contracts that promise to keep 95 percent of their current UAW hourly workforces, except in the event of a severe industry downturn.
"I think if there's a sticking point that may be it," said Dale Brickner, a labour expert at the Michigan State University. "GM may be pushing to get that figure farther down than the UAW may be comfortable living with."
GM, the least efficient U.S. automaker, is trying to shed 12 unprofitable parts plants, and wants to exclude certain component facilities from the employment guarantee. Those include a door hardware plant in Flint, Mich., and an interior trim plant in Livonia, Mich.
In settling a 20-day strike by the Canadian Auto Workers union last week, GM was able to secure a deal that included the selling of two parts plants and flexibility to outsource UAW President Stephen Yokich had not indicated what he would do after the contract extension expires at midnight Sunday. Yokich on Friday set the Sunday deadline, but did not actually threaten a strike .
However, there was speculation Sunday the UAW could mount a plant-specific strike if enough progress has not been met by the deadline Sunday.
By hitting light truck plants, such as the sport/utility facility in Janesville, Wisc., the union could hurt the sale of some of GM's most profitable products at a time when it is trying to bounce back from the Canadian strike.
Brickner said the UAW used that strategy in the mid-1980s to hamper individual sites without shutting down the entire North American production system.
GM's U.S. operations continue to respond to the strike by 26,000 CAW workers.
More than 6,600 UAW members at GM's Buick City complex were told not to report on Monday. At the same time, however, GM was running radio ads telling first-shift workers at its Hamtramck assembly plant to report to work on Monday.
