Although General Motors Corp and the United Auto Workers are separated by crucial outsourcing issues, analysts said Monday they do not foresee the union staging a protracted strike against GM.
"I don't think there's any will to have some major explosion," said David Cole, director of the University of Michigan's Center for the Study of Automotive Transportation.
"They've been close for some time," he said.  
David Healy, analyst at Burnham Securites Inc, said the union could still hit GM with "Apache raids" that target individual plants that make high-profit vehicles, however.
Talks for a new three-year labor deal were to resume Tuesday about 8:30 a.m. EST/1330 GMT. Bargainers worked for 17 hours into the early morning Monday before calling a recess, even though a contract extension deadine expired at midnight Sunday.
UAW President Stephen Yokich said earlier Monday he plans to settle the union's differences with the company at the bargaining table, and not resort to selective strikes at profitable light truck plants, as had been speculated Sunday.
The UAW represents 215,000 members at GM, more than half of the 390,000 UAW workers who work at Detroit's Big Three automakers.
Union members had made up picket signs and drafted strike schedules Sunday night in the event they got the word to walk off the job. On Monday, one local union official said members were comfortable working without a contract.
"People understand that things have got to be done the way the negotiators do it," said Ken Summers, administrative assistant to the chairman of Local 594 in Pontiac, Michigan. "Nobody wants a strike."
Summers said Local 594, where members make the popular full-size C/K pickup trucks, has "serious" issues with GM over outsourcing, as well as health and safety issues.
Harley Shaiken, a labor expert at the University of California at Berkeley, said it's possible local disputes will inger even after a national agreement is reached, like they did following the 1993 contract talks.
"Although my sense is if GM gets a pact similar to Ford and Chrysler, which I think is the odds-on favorite, we will see many of the local disputes wrap up relatively quickly," he said.
Yokich said he intends to return to GM's headquarters for more talks Tuesday. GM Chairman Jack Smith, who was present for some of the talks late Sunday, is scheduled to appear in New York at a morning news conference with Hazel O'Leary, secretary of the U.S. Department of Energy, on renewable energy issues.
A GM spokeswoman could not be reached to determine if Smith still plans to attend the event.
