Union workers prepared to strike General Motors Corp for the second time this month Sunday night as bargainers for the company and the United Auto Workers struggled to reach a new contract agreement before a midnight deadline.
In a sign the pace of talks could be picking up, GM Chairman Jack Smith arrived at the automaker's headquarters early in the evening.
UAW members at pickup truck and sport/utility vehicle assembly plants in Pontiac, Mich. and Janesville, Wis. said picket signs had been made and strike schedules drafted.
"We don't know if we're going to work in the morning or not," said a woman answering the phone at UAW Local 95 in Janesville, who declined to give her name.
At stake is a new labor agreement for GM's 215,000 hourly UAW workers. GM employs more than half of the approximately 390,000 UAW members who work at Detroit's Big Three automakers. It is the only one of the Big Three to not have a new three-year labor contract.
Last week, the world's largest automaker settled a strike by 26,000 members of the Canadian Auto Workers union that shut down the Canadian operations and idled more than 23,000 workers at dozens of plants in the United States and Mexico.
"GM remains hopeful an agreement can be reached before the UAW's termination of the current 1993 national agreement at 11:59 p.m. tonight," GM spokesman Chuck Licari told reporters gathered at company headquarters late Sunday afternoon.
UAW spokesman Frank Joyce declined to comment on the talks. UAW President Stephen Yokich Friday said he is not optimistic a deal can be reached by the deadline.
Bargainers for UAW and GM resumed at midmorning Sunday after they adjourned Saturday evening. Analysts speculated that negotiators could be wrangling over contract language that would dictate how many workers GM is obligated to guarantee jobs for.
Bowing to UAW concerns over job security, both Ford and Chrysler have agreed to new contracts that promise to keep 95 percent of their current UAW hourly workforces except in the event of a severe industry downturn.
"I think if there's a sticking point that may be it," said Dale Brickner, a labor expert at the Michigan State University. "GM may be pushing to get that figure farther down than the UAW may be comfortable living with."
GM, the least efficient U.S. automaker, is trying to shed 12 unprofitable parts plants, and wants to exclude certain component facilities from the employment guarantee. Those include a door hardware plant in Flint, Mich., and an interior trim plant in Livonia, Mich.
In settling a 20-day strike by the Canadian Auto Workers union last week, GM was able to secure a deal that included the selling of two parts plants and flexibility to outsource Yokich has not indicated what he will do after once the contract extension expires at midnight Sunday. Yokich on Friday set the Sunday deadline, but did not actually threaten a strike. Workers have been told to stay on the job until they hear otherwise.
However, there was speculation Sunday the UAW could mount a plant-specific strike if enough progress has not been met by the deadline Sunday. By hitting light truck plants such as the Janesville facility that makes Tahoe and Yukon full size sport/utilities, the union could hurt the sale of some of GM's most profitable products at a time it is trying to bounce back from the Canadian strike.
GM's U.S. operations continue to respond to the 20-day CAW strike. The more than 6,600 UAW members at GM's Buick City complex have been told not to report Monday. At the same time, GM is running radio ads telling first-shift workers at its Hamtramck assembly plant to report to work Monday.
