General Motors Corp, battling to avoid a second strike by assembly and parts workers this month, said it was hopeful a new labor contract could be reached before an extension deadline at midnight on Sunday.
Speaking to reporters gathered at GM's headquarters here, GM spokesman Chuck Licari said GM and the United Auto Workers were still working to resolve difficult and complex issues.
"GM remains hopeful an agreement can be reached before the UAW's termination of the current 1993 national agreement at 11:59 p.m. (0459 GMT) tonight," said Licari.
At stake is a new labor agreement for GM's 215,000 hourly UAW workers. GM employs more than half of the approximately 390,000 UAW members who work at Detroit's Big Three automakers. It is the only one of the Big Three to not have a new three-year labor contract.
UAW spokesman Frank Joyce declined to comment on the talks. UAW President Stephen Yokich said on Friday that he was not optimistic a deal could be reached by the deadline. In a sign an agreement might not be reached tonight, Licari said GM Chairman Jack Smith was not at the automaker's headquarters, although he was in touch with negotiators.
Both Ford Motor Co Chairman Alex Trotman and Chrysler Corp Chairman Robert Eaton were present for the final stages of their company's negotiations and appeared at press conferences announcing a deal.
Bargainers for UAW and GM resumed Sunday morning after they adjourned Saturday evening. Analysts speculated that negotiators could be wrangling over contract language that would dictate how many workers GM would have to guarantee jobs.
Bowing to UAW concerns over job security, both Ford and Chrysler have agreed to new contracts that promise to keep 95 percent of their current UAW hourly workforces except in the event of a severe industry downturn.
"I think if there's a sticking point that may be it," said Dale Brickner, a labor expert at the Michigan State University. "GM may be pushing to get that figure farther down than the UAW may be comfortable living with."
GM, the least efficient U.S. automaker, is trying to shed 12 unprofitable parts plants, and wants to exclude certain component facilities from the employment guarantee, including a door hardware plant in Flint, Mich., and an interior trim plant in Livonia, Mich.
In settling a 20-day strike by the Canadian Auto Workers union last week, GM was able to secure a deal that included the sale of two parts plants and flexibility to outsource more products.
Yokich has not said what he will do after once the contract extension expires at midnight Sunday. He set the deadline on Friday, but did not actually threaten a strike. Workers have been told to stay on the job until they hear otherwise.
However, there was speculation Sunday the UAW could mount a plant-specific strike if not enough progress had been made by the deadline. By hitting light truck plants such as the sport/utility facility in Janesville, Wis., the union could hurt the sale of some of GM's most profitable products at a time it is trying to bounce back from the Canadian strike.
GM's U.S. operations continue to respond to the strike by 26,000 CAW workers. The more than 6,600 UAW members at GM's Buick City complex have been told not to report Monday. At the same time, GM is running radio ads telling first-shift workers at its Hamtramck assembly plant to report to work Monday.
