Nearly one quarter of ITT Automotive Inc's workers around the world will be paid a combined hourly and benefit rate of less than $10 an hour by 2000, the company's top executive said Tuesday.
ITT Automotive, a unit of ITT Industries Inc  paid 15 percent of its 35,000 workers less than $10 an hour in 1995, and 10 percent that amount in 1990, said Timothy Leuliette, president and chief executive officer of ITT Automotive.
The numbers, provided by Leuliette at the Automotive Industries' Executive Management Conference, were offered as another illustration of how auto suppliers need to continue slashing costs if they expect to remain an independent player in the fast-changing industry.
"Do we do that because we're mean?" Leuliette said of the falling rates. "No. We did that because we have to promise our customers a 3-4 percent price reduction."
Leuliette spoke as part of a panel discussion with J.T. Battenberg, president General Motors Corp's Delphi Automotive Systems, and Robert Oswald, chairman, president and chief executive officer of Robert Bosch Corp's U.S. automotive unit.
Asked how much a supplier should expect to pay workers, Leuliette said the global hourly rate for labor-intensive assemblies such as wiring harnesses is $1 to $2. More technical products are made for $10 to $12 an hour.
"If you are regionally competitive but not globally competitive, you will unlikely be a supplier to ITT," he said.
Battenberg had three areas of advice for suppliers: focus on a few product areas; continuously stress quality; and pursue international alliances with other suppliers to expand more efficiently.
"I just don't think you can be all thing to all people. It's a lesson we learned at General Motors the hard way," Battenberg said.
Oswald said suppliers need to be more than good product innovators. "At Bosch, we believe that our performance as a supplier is not based just on innovation, but also that weare meticulous in bringing that innovation to production," he said.
Meantime, Leuliette said in 2000 suppliers to ITT can expect to receive 80 percent of what they are paid now for their products.
He noted the supplier industry is under such pressure to reduce costs that firms need between eight percent and nine percent productivity growth in order to keep their present level of employees.
