General Motors Corp. told employees it has a potential buyer for four of its parts plants, but denied reports Tuesday that it is in discussions to sell the facilities to Canadian auto supplier Magna International Inc.
GM informed workers at its Delphi Interior and Lighting Systems plant in Flint, Mich., on Monday that it has a possible buyer for the facility and three others, union and company representatives said Tuesday.
The 1,200 workers at the Flint plant were not told who the prospective buyer is, said officials at United Auto Workers union Local 326.
"They did tell us that as we spoke the potential buyer was entering into discussions," said Tim Thompson, a district shop committee officer for Local 326.
The Detroit News reported Tuesday that GM is talking with Magna, of Markham, Ontario, and that a deal could be announced soon. Separately, a source with knowledge of the auto supplier industry told Reuters that Atoma International Inc., a division of Magna, won the bidding for the plants, although the deal had not been finalized.
But Delphi spokeswoman Kari Hulsey denied that Magna is a finalist to buy the plants. "It's not Magna, it's not a division of Magna," she said."
One factor that could delay the announcement is the continuing contract talks between the UAW in the United States and Canada and Detroit's Big Three automakers. If Magna does turn out to be the buyer, it may be to GM's advantage to hold off finalizing a deal. Magna has previously had a contentious relationship with the Canadian United Auto Workers union.
The buyer wants to purchase the Flint plant, one in Livonia, Mich., and two in Canada as a group. The plants employ a total of 5,100 hourly workers and make a variety of interior parts, including hinges, door panels and instrument panels, GM said.
The Flint plant, which makes hardware, and the Livonia facility, which makes interior door panels, are both Delphi plants. The fabricating facility in Oshawa, Ontario, and a seat plant in Windsor, Ontario, are managed by GM of Canada but make products for Delphi.
GM spokeswoman Hulsey would not say if the four facilities are among the 14 underperforming Delphi plants that GM has said it wants to divest.
