A gunman in military fatigues burst into a Ford Motor Co. assembly plant and opened fire Thursday, killing one and wounding two others before eluding police in a series of draininge tunnels.
Police said they trapped the man and he gave up voluntarily after a tense, four and a half-hour standoff.
Sgt. Clarence Goodlein of the Wixom police said the white male shot and killed one Ford employee and wounded another, then left the plant and shot an Oakland County Sheriff's deputy in the shoulder when police tried to confront him.
Goodlein did not identify the victims, but a Ford worker, Jim Maher, said the man killed was a foreman at the plant.
Deputy Matt Miller, 39, was listed in stable condition and was expected to undergo surgery Thursday afternoon, said Amy Middleton, a spokeswoman for Providence Park Medical Center.
The other worker, Alvin Akers, 43, was treated and released, with a bullet fragment in his arm and glass fragments in his neck.
Goodlein said authorities did not immediately know whether the gunman was a Ford employee.
"This guy came into the plant and with some kind of weapon starting shooting all over the place," said Ford spokesman Bill Carroll.
Police shut down nearby Interstate 96, which runs parallel to the plant. Workers were evacuated from the plant and production of Lincoln Town Cars, Continentals and Mark VIII luxury cars was suspended until Monday.
Carroll said the gunman opened fire in several sections of the plant before before leaving and shooting in the direction of the nearby Interstate.
Witnesses said the gunman was dressed in camouflage, with a dark cap and carried an assault-type rifle. It was not known whether he was an employee at the plant, but several said they thought he may be going on a deer hunting vacation.
One employee at the plant, who identified herself as Christy, told WWJ Radio the gunman told her, "Get out of here" before he started shooting in the plant.
"He knew what he was doing. He just started shooting, and when he ran out of ammo, he just reloaded and kept on shooting," she saiid.
The shooting is the third at a Ford plant in the Detroit area since August 1994. It also falls on the fifth anniversary of a 1991 tragedy in which a fired postal worker went on a shooting rampage at the Royal Oak, Mich., post office, killing himself and four others.
In August of this year, a Ford employee killed a security guard at a Ford climate control plant in Plymouth, Mich., then shot himself. On January 7, 1995, a Ford worker at the same factory wounded his estranged wife, killed her boyfriend, then shot himself to death.
In August 1994, a United Auto Workers official at Ford's Rouge industrial complex in Dearborn, Mich., shot two of his fellow union committeemen to death and wounded two others in a dispute over union policy.
Chrysler Corp, also has had its share of tragedy. In December 1994, a worker upset about a job assignment killed his foreman and wounded a coworker at a metal stamping plant in Sterling Heights, Mich.
