With Chairman Jack Smith behind the wheel of a shiny red EV1, General Motors Corp. rolled its first electric vehicle out of the plant Thursday, marking what it dubbed the start of a new era in the auto industry.
The car was loaded on the back of an auto-hauling truck at the Lansing Craft Centre that will take it on the first leg of its journey to the West Coast. The cars will go on sale Dec. 5 at 26 Saturn dealerships in Los Angeles, San Diego, Phoenix and Tucson, Ariz.
"When they look back on the next 100 years of the evolution of the automobile, they will agree that this car was the first in a new generation of vehicles that redefined the limits of technology and efficiency," Smith said during the drive-away ceremony.
GM spent $350 million and more than six years to develop the two-passenger, sleek-looking coupe. The car is the first and only GM vehicle to carry a GM badge, instead of a name from one of its other seven divisions.
While other automakers have developed and are selling electrically powered vehicles, GM says the EV1 is the first vehicle to be designed from the ground up as an electric car.
In his remarks, Smith called the EV1 "the most technologically advanced vehicle platform in the world," incorporating 23 new patents.
The EV1 is powered by 26 12-volt lead-acid batteries. It can travel up to 90 miles before it needs recharging. The fully equipped EV1 comes with standard features, including air conditioning, dual air bags, anti-lock brakes, power windows and door locks. It can go from 0 to 60 mph in less than nine seconds, and has a top speed of 80 mph.
GM announced in October that it will sell the EV1 through a 36-month lease at a sticker price of $33,995. Buyers who receive a $5,000 credit from the state of California will be able to lease an EV1 for $480 a month. Monthly payments without the credit would be $640. The cost does not include a wall-mounted charger, which sells for about $2,000.
Production of the EV1 began at the Lansing Craft Centre in August. GM officials will not discuss how many EV1s they intend to sell or produce annually, although the Lansing facility has the capacity to make about 2,000 of the vehicles annually.
So far, Saturn has received more than 1,000 calls from potential buyers on a toll-free line, said Joe Kennedy, vice president of sales and marketing for the division. Of that, Saturn estimates about 250 are "serious" buyers.
Talking to reporters after the ceremony, Smith said GM viewed the electric vehicle market as a long-term programme. He again would not say when the EV1 will turn a profit for GM.
"Our effort is to make the programme over time to be a business," he said. "The niche is small to start, but it will grow."
Kennedy said the initial focus is not on volume but on generating a positive shopping, buying and ownership experience. He said the company will remain flexible in its production and sales plans to adjust to demand.
"This is a totally new market, and we don't know what the demand will be on any given month of year," he said, noting that Saturn has 13 EV1 specialists who have completed two months of special sales training.
