CMS Energy Co should have no trouble meeting or exceeding the $2.40 to $2.45 a share earnings estimates that analysts forecast for all of 1996, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer William McCormick said Friday.
"We feel very comfortable we'll be at or above that range," he said in a telephone interview from the utility's Dearborn, Mich. headquarters. CMS, the parent company for Consumers Power Co, Michigan's largest utility, earned $2.27 a share on total revenues of $3.9 billion in 1995.  
Earlier Friday, CMS announced the Michigan Public Service Commission (MPSC) approved a settlement that removes the final rate uncertainty of its Midland Cogeneration Venture L.P., ending a 10-year regulatory saga involving the embattled plant.
The settlement allows Consumers Power to include the cost of buying the final 325 megawatts of power from the plant in its customer rates. Previously, CMS was granted permission to include in rates the cost of buying 915 megawatts of the plant's total 1240 megawatts of power.  
"The last significant uncertainty related to the whole Midland situation was the recovery of the remaining 325 megawatts," said McCormick, who added he has been dealing with the Midland project since he became CEO of CMS 11 years ago.
McCormick said the settlement removes the possibility of future earnings write-downs related to the project. CMS recorded an after-tax charge of $343 million in the fourth quarter of 1992 from an earlier settlement of Midland Cogeneration issues.  
CMS' stock was up $1 to $32-3/8. Trading volume on the New York Stock Exchange was 206,700, indicating trading for Friday would be more than 300,000 shares, heavier than normal, said McCormick.
CMS' construction of the facility as a nuclear power plant was abandoned in the mid-1980s. CMS finished its conversion to a gas-powered energy plant in 1990.
Midland Cogeneration, the largest cogeneration project in North and South America, is a partnership of CMS; Dow Chemical Co, Coastal Corp, Asea Brown Boveri Inc and Fluor Corp.
Approval of the settlement prompted Standard &amp; Poor's to revise its outlook on Consumers Power and CMS to positive from stable, and re-affirm its ratings on the companies.
McCormick said he believes CMS will be meeting with the debt rating agency to discuss a possible upgrade of its ratings.
