A gunman in military fatigues shot his way into a Ford Motor Co. assembly plant and continued firing Thursday, killing one person and wounding two before barricading himself in a network of drainage tunnels.
The suspect, 29-year-old Gerald Atkins of Wixom, fired repeatedly at officers in a 4 1/2-hour standoff but had given up voluntarily by late afternoon, police said.
Authorities said Atkins, armed with a high-powered assault-type rifle, fatally shot Darrell Izzard, 57, the Ford plant's manager of manufacturing planning, and wounded two Oakland County sheriff's deputies. The 18-year Ford veteran killed in the rampage was married and had three children.
Another worker in the factory was injured slightly in the neck by glass fragements from a window that was shot out.
Ford officials said Atkins had never been a Ford employee but had apparently come to the plant to talk to a woman he had been dating. He had had no prior contact with Izzard.
"He more or less shot his way into the plant," Wixom Police Sgt. Richard Howe said, adding that Atkins fired on a security office at the plant's main entrance when unarmed security guards tried to block his way.
One employee, who identified herself as Christy, told WWJ Radio the gunman told her, "Get out of here," before he started shooting.
"He knew what he was doing. He just started shooting, and when he ran out of ammo, he just reloaded and kept on shooting," she said.
Howe, the Wixom police sergeant, said that after firing shots in several parts of the plant, Atkins left the sprawling facility and shot two deputies who tried to apprehend him.
One deputy was hit in the shoulder and the other in the leg as they tried to confront the gunman outside the plant.
One of the wounded officers, Matt Miller, 39, was listed in fair condition but may need shoulder surgery, Amy Middleton, a spokeswoman for Providence Hospital in Southfield, Michigan, said.
Police shut down adjacent Interstate 96 for most of the afternoon. Workers were evacuated from the plant, and production of Lincoln Town Cars, Continentals and Mark VIII luxury cars was suspended until Monday.
Howe said Atkins fired several shots at police from a series of storm drainage tunnels underneath the plant but they managed to close off the tunnels and persuade him to surrender.
They had not established a motive for the rampage.
But a friend of Atkins said he had been having problems in a relationship with a female employee at the plant and "something cracked."
"Gerry's a very intense guy. He was in the military and was very successful in it," Ron Vahanian, a neighbor of Atkins, said. "I think there might have been problems with this girlfriend that he had that worked there."
Several workers said security at the facility, which employs about 3,200 people, was lax and identification cards were rarely checked.
Ford officials pledged to review security measures at all company facilities. "We're going to take a look at everything," Ford Automotive Group President Jacques Nasser said, adding that Thursday's incident "was probably impossible to prevent."
The shooting was the fourth at a Ford plant in the Detroit area since August 1994. It also fell on the fifth anniversary of a shooting rampage at the Royal Oak, Michigan, post office in which a fired postal worker killed himself and four others.
