Officials from Ford Motor Co pledged to review security measures Thursday after the fourth fatal shooting in two years at one of their facilities.
But executives from the automaker said there was little that plant security guards, who do not carry guns, could do to defend themselves against armed intruders.
"When somebody blasts their way into a factory, it's very difficult to prevent," said Jacques Nasser, the executive vice president in charge of Ford's automotive operations.
A gunman dressed in military fatigues shot his way into Ford's Wixom Assembly plant about 30 miles west of Detroit Thursday morning, according to police.
The man killed a manufacturing planning manager, 57-year old Darrell Izzard, and fired at people throughout the plant, sending workers fleeing in panic through the sprawling assembly complex.
Before it was over more than four hours later, several people, including two police officers, had been wounded.
The shooting came three months after a Ford worker shot and killed a security guard at Ford's Sheldon Road climate control plant in Plymouth, Mich. In January of 1995, another employee of the plant wounded his estranged wife and killed her boyfriend before killing himself.
In September 1994, a United Auto Worker union official killed two fellow union officials and wounded two others during a shooting at Ford's Rouge Manufacturing centre in Dearborn, Mich.
Throughout Thursday, radio and television stations carried calls they said they received from hourly Ford workers who complained about the stressful work environment at the Wixom plant and other Ford facilities.
But Ford spokesman Jon Harmon pointed out the suspect in the Wixom shooting, identified as Gerald Atkins, 29, was not an employee of any Ford facility. Moreover, he noted it has not been uncommon in recent months for workers at Wixom to be idled because of slow demand for vehicles made at the plant.
The plant produces the Lincoln Town Car, Mark VIII and Continental cars, which have all been experiencing soft sales. About 3,000 hourly workers, members of United Auto Workers union Local 36, work at the facility.
During a news conference, plant manager Jeff Haller described the plant's workforce as dedicated, hard-working and cohesive. He said the plant's security measures would be reviewed. Some workers told reporters they had not had their security badges checked in eight years.
UAW Local 36 President Richard Greenfield said the union was saddened by the event and had set up a counselling line. He declined to comment on the day's events because the investigation had not been completed.
