General Motors Corp. said Tuesday it agreed to sell four troubled parts plants to a new company that plans to become a major player in the competitive $22 billion automotive interior supply industry.
The new company, Peregrine Inc., is being funded by the New York investment firm Joseph Littlejohn &amp; Levy and auto industry executive Edward Gulda. No terms were announced for the sale, which has been expected for months.
Peregrine, which will have more than $1 billion in annual revenues, will be based in Southfield, Mich., and pursue contracts with car and truck manufacturers in North America as well as overseas.
"Peregrine will be one of North America's premier automotive supply companies," Gulda said in a statement. "We expect to see signficant growth in the years ahead."
Gulda is a former chief executive officer of Kelsey-Hayes, a brake systems maker that is part of LucasVarity Plc.
Peregrine also said it expected to sign an agreement with GM for future business. The Financial Post newspaper of Canada reported Tuesday that said GM has agreed to provide Peregrine with more that $4 billion in contracts over five years.
Peregrine officials could not be reached to comment.
The four plants make hinges, door and instrument panels and other interior parts, and generate combined revenue of about $1 billion a year. The plants employ about 5,500 hourly and salaried workers.
Two of the plants, in Livonia, Mich., and Flint, Mich., are part of GM's Delphi Interior &amp; Lighting Systems unit. The other two, a fabrication plant in Oshawa, Ontario, and a trim plant in Windsor, Ontario, report to Delphi and GM of Canada.
Peregrine will enter a competitive market facing major companies such as Lear Corp. and Johnson Controls Inc. Some analysts said at least one of the Peregrine plants could have have a difficult time competing. Contracts for most of what the Windsor plant supplies, for example, will run out in about two years, and the plant has not been winning new bids.
Nevertheless, there are some parts segments, such as door panels, where the industry needs all the producers that are out there, said Gregory Janicki, a vice president at industry consultant CSM Corp.
"There is such a need for all of these door panels that five companies couldn't supply them all," he said.
Moreover, companies that have been spun off from GM have a history of performing better than they did under the parent company, said Dennis Virag, managing director of the Automotive Consulting Group Inc. in Ann Arborn, Mich.
Virag cited privately held American Axel Manufacturing, a forging operation that GM sold in 1994, and engine maker Detroit Diesel Corp., which was sold in 1988.
"If you look at history, there's a very good chance that this company will do well," he said.
The Michigan plants had been on a list of 12 domestic operations GM had identified as being troubled facilities.
Sale of the Canadian plants became an issue in the three-week strike by members of the Canadian Auto Workers union in October. In the end, GM won the right to sell the two plants. Workers not kept on by the new owner will be offered jobs at other GM facilities.
Peregrine said hourly workers at the four plants who are retained will be covered by the 1996 master contracts with the United Auto Workers and Canadian Auto Workers unions. Wages, pensions and benefits for salaried and hourly workers will be about the same as they had been under GM, it said.
Peregrine will be financed with equity from Joseph Littlejohn &amp; Levy Fund II, a private partnership formed to invest in consolidating industries and corporate divestitures. Peregrine said it does not expect to incur debt other than for working capital needs.
