General Motors Corp. said Tuesday it signed a memorandum of understanding to sell four parts plants to a new company that plans to be major auto industry supplier with more than $1 billion in annual sales.
The new company, Peregrine Inc., was formed by the New York investment firm Joseph Littlejohn &amp; Levy and auto industry executive Edward Gulda. No terms were announced for the deal, which had been expected for months.
"Peregrine will be one of North America's premier automotive supply companies," Gulda said in a statement. "We expect to see signficant growth in the years ahead."
Gulda is a former chief executive officer of Kelsey-Hayes, a brake systems maker that is part of LucasVarity Plc.
The new company, to be based in Southfield, Mich., will pursue business with all car and truck manufacturers in North America and internationally, he said.
Peregrine said that, following a final agreement expected by the end of 1996, it will sign a supply agreement with GM to address "current and future business."
The four plants produce a variety of interior parts, including hinges, door panels and instrument panels, and generate combined revenue of about $1 billion a year. Hourly and salaried workers at the plants total about 5,500.
Two of the plants, in Livonia and Flint, Mich., are part of GM's Delphi Interior &amp; Lighting Systems unit. The other two, a fabrication plant in Oshawa, Ontario, and a trim plant in Windsor, Ontario, report to both Delphi and GM of Canada.
The Michigan plants had been on a list of 12 U.S. Delphi operations GM had identified as being troubled facilities.
Sale of the Canadian plants became an issue in the three-week strike by members of the Canadian Auto Workers union. In the end, GM won the right to sell the two plants.
Workers not kept on by the new owner will be offered jobs at other GM facilities.
Peregrine said in a statement that hourly workers at the four plants who are retained will be covered by the 1996 master contracts with the United Auto Workers and Canadian Auto Workers unions.
Wages, pensions and benefits for salaried and hourly workers will be about the same as they had been under GM, it said.
Peregrine will be financed with equity from Joseph Littlejohn &amp; Levy Fund II, a private partnership formed to make investments in consolidating industries and corporate divestitures.
Peregrine said it does not expect to incur debt other than for working capital needs.
