Chrysler Corp minivans have came under fire again from U.S. safety regulators, as federal officials said Tuesday they stepped up two probes involving the vehicles' doors, including an inquiry into several dozen reported collapses of a 90-pound rear hatch.
Nearly two million minivans are involved in the investigations, which also include complaints that side sliding doors on 1996 models flew open at high speeds.  
The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) said it has received reports that 39 people have been injured when the rear lift-gate on 1991-1993 Caravan, Voyager and Town &amp; Country minivans dropped unexpectedly.
The problem occurs when retaining bolts holding two cylinders that prop the door open shear, according to NHTSA. The agency has received a total of 477 complaints. The probe, first launched in May and upgraded to an engineering analysis on October 31, covers 1,271,575 minivans.  
NHTSA also upgraded a preliminary investigation into 581,686 1996-model Caravan, Voyager and Town &amp; Country minivans. It has received 19 complaints that either the right or left sliding door can come open while the vehicle is moving.
Owners have reported the doors open anywhere from a few inches to fully open at speeds ranging from 15 mph to 60 mph. No injuries have been reported from the openings. NHTSA said it was not aware of any incidents involving vehicles built during or after January 1996.  
Chrysler was the first automaker to offer a sliding door on the left side of a minivan. The feature has made the U.S. No. 3 automaker's minivans the hottest seller in the popular family segment.
A Chrysler representative could not be reached Tuesday. But the company has told the safety agency the problem may stem from incorrect dealer latch adjustments, which the company attributed to an inaccurate service manual procedure.  
Chrysler also said eight of the complaints involved vehicles that had door repairs made. Chrysler said it has corrected the manual procedure and has made three design changes to various door components.
Still, NHTSA said it has continued to receive complaints about sliding doors opening, including vehicles with no repair history.
In 1995, Chrysler agreed to replace rear liftgate latches on more than four million 1984-95 model minivans, but stopped short of recalling the vehicles. Safety officials said the doors could pop open during low-speed crashes.  
Separately, NHTSA said it upgraded an investigation into 621,000 1995 and 1996 Windstar minivans from Ford Motor Co. Regulators have received 327 complaints about brake problems on the minivans, which have led to 76 accidents and two injuries.
In addition to the incidents reported to NHTSA, Ford said it has received 64,000 warranty claims that could relate to a brake problem resulting in long stopping distances.
Also, NHTSA said it opened an investigation into Land Rover's Discovery sport/utility vehicle. It has received two complaints that the right front door opened on 1996 models.
Rover is a unit of German carmaker Bayerische Motoren-Werke AG.
