Chrysler Corp. minivans have came under fire again from safety regulators, who said Tuesday they stepped up probes into two problems, including reports that a 90-pound rear hatch door can close suddenly without warning.
Nearly 2 million minivans are involved in the investigations, which were also sparked by reports that side sliding doors on 1996 models flew open at high speeds.
The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) said it received reports that 39 people have been injured when the rear hatch door on 1991-1993 model Caravan, Voyager and Town &amp; Country minivans dropped unexpectedly.
The problem occurs when bolts holding cylinders that prop the door open shear, according to the federal safety agency. The agency has received a total of 477 complaints. The probe, first launched in May and upgraded on Oct. 31, covers almost 1.3 million minivans.
NHTSA also upgraded a preliminary investigation into about 582,000 1996-model Caravan, Voyager and Town &amp; Country minivans. It has received 19 complaints that the right or left sliding door can come open while the vehicle is moving.
Owners have reported doors opening a few inches or flying wide open at speeds from 15 to 60 mph. No injuries have been reported. NHTSA said it is not aware of any incidents involving vehicles built during or after January 1996.
Chrysler was the first automaker to offer a sliding door on the left side of a minivan. The feature has made the No. 3 automaker's minivans the hottest seller in a popular segment.
Chrysler agreed in 1995, under pressure from regulators, to replace the latches on the rear hatch doors on more than 4 million minivans but stopped short of recalling the vehicles, from the 1984 through 1995 model years. Safety officials said the doors could pop open during low-speed crashes.
Chrysler told the safety agency the sliding door problem may stem from incorrect latch adjustments by dealers, which the company attributed to problems with the service manual.
Chrysler also said eight of the complaints about side doors opening involved vehicles that had had door repairs made. Chrysler said it has corrected the manual procedure and has made three design changes to door components.
But NHTSA said it has continued to receive complaints about the doors opening on vehicles with no repair history.
Chrysler spokeswoman Michele Tinson said the automaker was working with the safety agency to resolve the complaints. Injuries reported from sudden closings of rear hatch doors have been minor, she said, noting Chrysler stood behind the safety record of its vehicles.
"Minivans are the safest vehicles on the road today," she said.
Separately, NHTSA said it upgraded an investigation into 621,000 1995 and 1996 Windstar minivans from Ford Motor Co. Regulators have received 327 complaints about brake problems, which have led to 76 accidents and two injuries.
In addition to the incidents reported to NHTSA, Ford said it has received 64,000 warranty claims that could relate to a brake problem causing long stopping distances.
Also, NHTSA said it opened an investigation into Land Rover's Discovery sport/utility vehicle. It has received two complaints that the right front door opened on 1996 models. Rover is a unit of German carmaker BMW.
Chrysler stock fell 25 cents to $34.75 on the New York Stock exchange in afternoon trading.
