Chrysler Corp said Tuesday it filed an appeal protesting a California Department of Motor Vehicle (DMV) ban on the company shipping new vehicles to dealers as a penalty for allegedly violating the state's "lemon law."
The move, which was expected, means the U.S No. 3 automaker can delay the 45-day ban taking effect for years as it pursues an appeal through the legal system.  
The ban, issued October 16, came after the DMV determined Chrysler resold 116 vehicles in 1991 and 1992 without properly disclosing to new owners the cars were so-called lemons, a term that refers to vehicles with chronic repair problems.
In its appeal to California's New Motor Vehicle Board, Chrysler called the DMV's actions a "draconian penalty." The company argues it complied with the lemon law as it was written at the time of the vehicle sales.  
Chrysler said the statute in effect at the time was vague about which vehicles repurchased by manufacturers had to be branded as lemons. Specifically, it said the law did not address disclosures relating to the resale of other vehicles bought back by automakers, such as those repurchased after informal dispute resoltions, or as part of a legal settlement.
Chrysler said it made good faith efforts to keep used car buyers informed about the vehicles they were purchasing. The company also complained about the economic ramifications of the penalty on its 240 California dealers.
"The economic harm to the dealers and their employees caused by this action has been well documented but ignored by the DMV," the company said in its appeal.
The New Motor Vehicle Board, which was set up to render an impartial view of regulatory actions, can reverse or amend the DMV's decision.
Chrysler sold nearly 170,000 new cars and trucks in California in 1995, representing close to eight percent of its annual volume, according to R.L. Polk &amp; Co.
The DMV ban, which would have taken effect November 25, was hailed by consumer advocates as the first tough stance aimed at ending the process of "lemon laundering."
