Chrysler Corp. said Tuesday it has filed an appeal protesting a California Department of Motor Vehicle (DMV) ban on shipping new vehicles to dealers in the state for allegely violating the state's "lemon law."
The move, which had been expected, means the U.S No. 3 automaker can delay any effect of the 45-day ban for years as it pursues an appeal through the legal system.
The ban, issued Oct. 16, came after the DMV determined Chrysler resold 116 vehicles in 1991 and 1992 without properly disclosing their so-called lemon status to the new owners.
Under California's lemon law, an automaker must buy back a car from a first owner if the vehicle spends 30 days in a repair shop during the first year of ownership or if a specific problem has not been fixed after three attempts.
Once the cars are repaired, automakers must notify used car customers that the vehicles were repurchased under the lemon law because of chronic problems.
In its appeal to California's New Motor Vehicle Board, Chrysler called the DMV's actions a "Draconian penalty." The company argued that it complied with the lemon law as it was written at the time of the vehicle sales.
Chrysler said the statute in effect at the time was vague about which vehicles repurchased by manufacturers had to be branded as lemons.
Specifically, it said the law did not address disclosures relating to the resale of other vehicles bought back by automakers, such as those repurchased after informal dispute resolutions, or as part of a legal settlement.
Chrysler said it made good-faith efforts to keep used-car buyers informed about the vehicles they were purchasing. The company also complained about the economic ramifications of the penalty on its 240 California dealers.
"The economic harm to the dealers and their employees caused by this action has been well documented but ignored by the DMV," the company said in its appeal.
The New Motor Vehicle Board, which was set up to render an impartial view on regulatory actions, can reverse or amend the DMV's decision.
Chrysler sold nearly 170,000 new cars and trucks in California in 1995, representing close to 8 percent of its annual volume, according to R.L. Polk &amp; Co.
The DMV ban, which would have taken effect Monday, was hailed by consumer advocates as the first tough stance aimed at ending the process of so-called "lemon laundering."
