The president of Ford Motor Co.'s automotive operations denied Thursday that the company is mulling plant closures in North America, but added that Ford is pressing employees to chop an additional $2.5 billion from its 1997 spending plans.
Jacques Nasser, president of Ford Automotive Operations, told reporters the nation's second-largest automaker is always studying alternatives for its manufacturing facilities.
"But we have no plans and we've made no decisions on plant closings," he said.
The Wall Street Journal reported Thursday that Ford was considering closing its Lorain, Ohio, car plant and consolidating its Explorer production into a single plant, at Louisville, Ky.
Nasser said Ford has no plans to reduce capacity for its Explorer sport utility vehicle. He noted that the Explorer had strong sales over the last two to three months despite increased competition.
Asked about the newspaper report, Nasser said: "I view that whole story as surprising and lacking substance."
An industry source, however, said Ford has considered closing the Lorain plant to boost profits in its core North American automotive business.
Ford might build a new, smaller sport utility vehicle previously earmarked for Lorain at a St. Louis plant that also builds Explorers, the source said.
Nasser spoke to reporters at a ceremony at Ford's Wayne, Mich., truck plant where Ford announced it has become the first major automaker to achieve the industry's top quality certification on a global basis.
Nasser, who has a reputation as an aggressive cost-cutter, has wasted no time shaking things up at the automaker's core vehicle unit since he was promoted to his current post Oct. 10.
He said Thursday that units throughout Ford have "internal stretch" targets for 1997 that combined amount to $2.5 billion. He said the targets are cost-cutting and other initiatives that would push savings beyond the regular goals for 1997.
"These are internal targets -- they're stretch targets. They're meant to provide improved customer value and shareholder value. They're what we're about," he said.
Nasser, who previously headed Ford's product development operations, said in February that it plans to cut $11 billion out of its new product spending between 1996 and 2000.
Wide-spread cost-cutting efforts are also in full swing in Europe, Nasser said Thursday. Ford's European operations, which lost $472 million in the third quarter, are looking in all areas for excess costs, but Nasser said he is not aware of any hiring freezes.
"Europe is a very sophisticated market, " he said. "We're in the midst of some very heavy launches there and extremely tough market conditions."
