Chrysler Corp. said Monday it was exploring the possibilty of extending its car production agreement with Mitsubishi Motors Corp., reversing a trend toward cutting ties with the Japanese automaker.
"We are discussing the possibility with them, but we haven't reached any conclusions or any decisions yet," said Chrysler spokeswoman Shawn Williams.
Mitsubishi Motor Manufacturing of America Inc., the company's U.S. subsidiary, currently builds the Dodge Avenger, Chrysler Sebring and Eagle Talon coupes at its assembly plant in Normal, Ill.
That agreement is set to expire after the 1999 model year. Chrysler executives have suggested in the past they want to phase out the automaker's production arrangement with Mitsubishi.
Richard Recchia, chief operating officer of Mitsubishi's U.S. unit, said in October 1995 the future relationship between the two companies would likely be based more on a partnership of components and engineering exchanges instead of complete products.
That is apparently changing.
Automotive News, a weekly trade publication, reported Monday that Chrysler Executive Vice President Thomas Gale took a team of executives to Tokyo in November to meet with Mitsubishi officials about extending the current contract through 2004.
Williams would not comment on the meeting. Gail O'Brien, a spokeswoman for Mitsubishi's Normal plant, said discussions with Chrysler have been continuing, with Mitsubishi considering numerous options.
"Talks have been ongoing, which is totally understandable based on the fact that the contract is coming up," she said. Analysts said it would make sense for Chrysler to continue to use Mitsubishi as a production partner.
Since coupe sales have fallen off in recent years, Chrysler could use its own manufacturing resources to build products where it has a greater competitive edge, such as sport utility vehicles and pickup trucks, said Michael Robinet, managing director of CSM Forecasting, an industry consultant in Farmington Hills, Mich.
"This way they can steer development dollars to some of their other platforms," he said.
Moreover, if Chrysler were to move Avenger and Sebring coupe production out of the Normal plant, it would most likely have to convert its plant in Toluca, Mexico, which currently builds the popular Sebring convertible, Neon, Cirrus and Stratus cars, analysts have said.
Robinet also noted that Mitsubishi would benfit from keeping Chrysler as a production customer. Although the Normal plant has capacity to make at least 240,000 vehicles a year, this year it is only expected to make 184,000 units, he said. Next year, the plant is forecast to produce 175,000 units.
In addition to the Avenger, Sebring and Talon, the plant makes the Galant sedan and Eclipse coupes for Mitsubishi.
According to Automotive News, Chrysler's products have accounted for 45 percent of the 177,707 units produced through November.
Chrysler was a 50-50 partner with Mitsubishi when the Normal plant, originally called Diamond Star Motors, was founded in 1985. In 1993, Chrysler sold its ownership stake back to Mitsubishi.
Last year, Chrysler said it would drop the Dodge Stealth sports car from its 1996 model year line up because of slumping sales. Mitsubishi made the Stealth and imported it from Japan. The two companies continue to supply each other with engines.
