Ford Motor Co. said Tuesday it will move 2,500 sales, marketing and customer service workers out of the Renaissance Centre over the next two years, ending a downtown Detroit office presence that dates back to 1978.
The move was prompted by General Motors Corp.'s May purchase of the landmark complex located on the Detroit River for use as its new headquarters.
Included in the deal announced Tuesday were 26 acres of land next to the centre now used for employee parking that Ford agreed to sell to GM.
No financial terms were released. Robert Rewey, Ford's group vice president of marketing and sales, said at a press conference both sides were "happy" with the deal, which has been completed.
Rewey said Ford, which occupies about 650,000 square feet in two of the center's four towers, had planned to stay in its location through 2005 when its leases expire.
"Our plans got changed -- by the new landlord," he said.
Most of the employees, who work in the Ford, Lincoln-Mercury and Customer Service Divisions, will be relocated to Ford's existing Regent Court building near the automaker's headquarters in Dearborn, Mich.
Rewey said Ford was not pressured by GM to leave early, but decided to do so because it now has space to relocate workers as a result of its ongoing Ford 2000 reorganization.
Rewey declined to say if GM will pay any of Ford's relocation costs. Those expenses could be substantial because Ford's customer assistance and business assistance centres are computer-intensive, technically sophisticated operations.
Employees will begin moving by mid-1997 and should be out of the Renaissance Centre by the end of 1998.
Fearing his urban revitalisation efforts could be hurt, Detroit Mayor Dennis Archer had encouraged Ford to stay in downtown Detroit. But Rewey said Ford could not find a suitable downtown location that would allow it to replicate the efficiencies it now enjoys at the Renaissance Centre.
He noted Ford is encouraging its outside advertising agencies and accounting suppliers to remain in Detroit.
Ford officials took pains Tuesday to point out the company remains committed to the resurgence of Detroit. Included in that is a $25 million renovation of the former Veterans Memorial Building late next summer that will serve as the new UAW-Ford Training Centre.
In October, Ford agreed to pay $40 million for naming rights to a new downtown stadium for the Detroit Lions professional football team.
But some local real estate observers said Ford's decision to leave Detroit does not bode well for the city, which is losing a long-time and prominent tenant. Even though GM will fill the space Ford is vacating, there is still a surplus of class A office space, said Joel Feldman, a broker and market analyst at Friedman Real Estate Group Inc. in Farmington Hills, Mich.
"It lessens the possibility that current vacant class A space will be able to fill up, and the spill-over effect on class B office space is diminished because of this," he said.
Ford's history with the Renaissance Centre dates back to 1972 when then Chairman Henry Ford II announced the Renaissance Centre development project, which was designed to attract business and employment that would lead to the revitalisation of downtown Detroit.
Ford said its 35,000-square-foot World of Ford exhibition and display area at Renaissance Centre will be discontinued in June 1997. Company officials said they are not sure where or how the exhibit, which is popular with marketing and sales workers, will be reconstructed.
