While the U.S. auto industry celebrated its 100th birthday in 1996 with higher sales and a new labor accord, it expects its 101st year to feature a flat environment and tougher competition from foreign shores.
Forecasts for 1997 project sales of total vehicles will be roughly the same as the 15.4 million seen for 1996. But that's not all that bad, industry executives say. It means the four-year upswing of car, sport/utilty and pickup truck sales could continue for yet another year.  
"We see moderate inflation. We see a steady continuation of economic expansion in the United States," Ford Motor Co Chairman Alex Trotman said recently.
"We're looking for the car and truck industry to fall somewhere in the 15 to 15.5 million range for 1997, which we would describe as a pretty good year," he said.
But clouds loom on the horizon, namely from Detroit's old nemisis -- Japan.
Japanese automakers, which have introduced hot new car and sport/utility vehicles this year, are set to unleash more new products in 1997.  
Honda Motor Co Ltd will soon introduce its CR-V compact sport/utility, and is scheduled to bring out new versions of its Accord sedan and Odyssey minivan.
Toyota Motor Corp, building on the momentum of its new Camry sedan, will unveil a front-wheel drive minivan called the Sienna next fall.
Meantime, the relatively weak value of the Japanese yen promises to give cost-conscious Big Three executives headaches. A weaker yen makes it cheaper for Japanese firms to produce vehicles in Japan and sell them in the U.S.  
Since April 1995, when the yen exchange value hit a high of 80 to the dollar, the yen has weakened. The rate is now about 114, meaning it takes more yen to buy one dollar.
Van Bussman, Chrysler Corp's top economist, sees the yen staying in the 110-115 range for the first three to six months of 1997, then strengthen to about 100 yen per dollar.
"I think it will be a substantial issue in 1997," Bussman said. "The yen having weakened from 80 to 110 has given them tremendous profit potential in North America."
Adds Ford's Trotman: "It's going to be tough next year because we have the weaker yen," Trotman said.  
General Motors Corp will try to reverse a slide in both sales and market share next year as it introduces 15 new cars and light trucks, including a new line of minivans.
GM will also look to improve overall competitiveness with a new three-year contract with the United Auto Workers that could allow it to shed 30,000 workers. But that deal did not come cheaply. GM endured several strikes through the year that will cost it more than $1.6 billion in 1996.
At Ford Motor Co, cost-cutting will remain a top priority next year.  
Ford, the U.S. No. 2 automaker, has scored big in the market place with its new F-Series pickup trucks and Expedition full-size sport/utility.
But car sales have lagged, with Ford being forced to slap incentives on its redesigned Taurus to push them out of dealer showrooms. Ford, which replaced the head of its core automotive operations in October, will also lose hundreds of millions from European and South American operations.
