The U.S. auto industry celebrated its 100th birthday in 1996 with higher sales and a new labour accord, but it can expect tough competition from foreign shores in the coming year.
Clouds loom on the horizon, namely from Detroit's old nemesis -- Japan.
The relatively weak Japanese yen promises to give cost-conscious Big Three executives headaches. A weaker yen makes it cheaper for Japanese firms to produce vehicles in Japan and sell them in the United States.
Since April 1995, when the yen hit a high of 80 to the dollar, the Japanese currency has weakened. The rate is now about 114, meaning it takes more yen to buy one dollar.
Van Bussman, Chrysler Corp.'s top economist, believes the yen will continue in the 110-115 range for the first three to six months of 1997, then strengthen to about 100.
"I think it will be a substantial issue in 1997," Bussman said. "The yen having weakened from 80 to 110 has given them tremendous profit potential in North America."
A look back through 1996 shows that Japanese automakers have already turned the weaker yen to their advantage through lower prices.
Industry trade publication Automotive News reported the average 1997 model year price increase at Detroit's Big Three was $386, while the average price hike for Japanese automakers was a mere $8.
"It's going to be tough next year because we have the weaker yen," Ford Motor Co. Chairman Alex Trotman said recently.
Forecasts for 1997 project total vehicle sales will be roughly the same as the 15.4 million expected for 1996. But that's not all that bad, industry executives say.
It means the four-year upswing of car, sport utilty and pickup truck sales could continue for yet another year.
"We see moderate inflation. We see a steady continuation of economic expansion in the United States," Trotman said. "We're looking for the car and truck industry to fall somewhere in the 15 to 15.5 million range for 1997, which we would describe as a pretty good year."
Japanese automakers, which have introduced hot new car and sport utility vehicles this year, are set to unleash more new products in 1997.
Honda Motor Co. Ltd. will soon introduce its CR-V compact sport utility and is scheduled to bring out new versions of its Accord sedan and Odyssey minivan. Building on the momentum of its new Camry sedan, Toyota Motor Corp. will unveil a front-wheel drive minivan called the Sienna next fall.
Among the Big Three, 1996 proved to be the year that Chrysler's raft of stylised new products took off, outshining its two domestic rivals. The No. 3 automaker has boosted U.S. market share nearly two points to 16 percent, and its calendar year sales will post their best results since 1988.
General Motors Corp. will try to reverse a slide in both sales and market share next year as it continues with the introduction of 15 new cars and light trucks, including a new line of minivans.
GM will also look to improve its overall competitiveness with a new three-year contract with the United Auto Workers that could allow it to shed 30,000 workers. But that deal did not come cheaply. GM endured several strikes through the year that will cost it more than $1.6 billion.
At Ford, cost-cutting will remain a top priority next year. The No. 2 automaker has scored big in the market place with its new F-Series pickup trucks and Expedition full-size sport utility vehicle.
But its car sales have lagged, and Ford has been forced to slap incentives on its redesigned Taurus to push them out of dealer showrooms. Ford, which replaced the head of its core automotive operations in October, will also lose hundreds of millions from European and South American operations in 1996, but sees improvements in those areas for 1997.
