Seven years after General Motors Corp created the Geo brand to entice more import buyers, the automaker is dropping the name, though it will continue to sell the Metro, Prizm and Tracker models as Chevrolet vehicles.
Chevrolet General Manager John Middlebrook said the Chevrolet image and its products have improved to the point where it no longer needed the Geo badge to attract new buyers.
Middlebrook said the move also fitted in with GM's efforts to unclutter its numerous brand images among consumers.  
GM created the Geo brand in 1989 as a sub-category of Chevrolet by renaming several Chevrolet vehicles. The name Geo, created under the direction of former GM Chairman Roger Smith, was meant to signify a world car.
GM plans no changes to the joint venture agreements that produce the Geo vehicles. The Prizm, essentially the same car as the Corolla from Toyota Motor Corp, is made by NUMMI, a Fremont, Calif.-based venture with Toyota.
Both the Metro and Tracker are produced in Ingersoll, Ontario, at CAMI, GM's joint venture with Suzuki Motor Corp.  
Middlebrook, who took over as general manager of Chevrolet in early 1996, said the move has been under consideration for some time, following the renewed strength of the Chevrolet brand.
Chevrolet, which currently has 16 different products, has introduced 18 new models since 1989. Consumer research has shown that awareness levels and purchase consideration jump between 30 percent and 40 percent when target buyers compare Chevrolet with Geo, the company said.
"It's the strength of the Chevrolet brand that's driving this," Middlebrook said.  
In a sign that GM still has an image problem with import buyers, Prizm sales lag those of its Corolla sister by a wide margin. The Prizm sold about 77,000 units through November of this year, compared with 188,000 for the Corolla.
Sales for all three Geo vehicles have fallen since reaching a high of 325,000 in the 1990 calendar year. Sales for the first 11 months of 1996 totaled 206,491. Although that was an increase of eight percent over a year ago, the vehicles carried rebates ranging from $300 to $1,000.  
In selling the Prizm as a Chevrolet, the division's 4,400 U.S. dealers will have a car similar in price and features to the Cavalier sedan.
However, Richard Scheidt, Geo brand manager, said GM did not anticipate too much duplication because traditional Geo buyers are different from typical Chevrolet buyers. For instance, he said the Prizm outsells the Cavalier in Texas.
Analysts reacted favorably to the move, saying it demonstrates another step by GM to use its marketing and advertising resources more efficiently.  
Joseph Phillippi, an analyst at Lehman Brothers, said it was also not out of the question that GM would eventually drop some of the current Geo models.
"I would guess at some point in time they would do some additional pruning," he said.
Chevrolet, which will gain some marketing efficiencies through the move, will pay for the new signs that dealers will be required to put up, Middlebrook said.
Gerald Seiner, a Chevrolet-Geo dealer in Salt Lake City, Utah, said dealers were in favor of the move because it would bring a simpler image to the Chevrolet brand.  
"Frankly, I haven't had anybody walk through the door and say they want to buy a Geo," he said.
