Labour lawyer James Hoffa, refusing to concede defeat in the Teamsters union presidential election nearly a week after his opponent claimed victory, called Thursday for a congressional investigation into the vote.
Hoffa on Tuesday formally asked U.S. Attorney General Janet Reno to impound the ballots and initiate an FBI investigation into "serious irregularities" in the election.
"We really have what I call Teamstergate," Hoffa told reporters at a news conference Thursday at the Teamsters' Detroit offices, where his legendary father, the late Jimmy Hoffa, ruled the union in the 1950s and '60s.
Incumbent Teamsters President Ron Carey on Saturday claimed victory in the hard-fought election, winning by an apparent margin of about 17,000 votes. But 41,002 ballots were set aside for further eligibility checks, and Hoffa says more than 25,000 other ballots may have disappeared.
After all eligible votes were tallied late Saturday, court-appointed Election Officer Barbara Zack Quindel accounted for 485,605 ballots returned. But last week she reported that the total number of mail-in ballots received was 511,268, an estimate based on receipts from the U.S. Postal Service.
Hoffa said he wants an explanation for the discrepancy between the ballots counted and the ballots received.
"If I lost, I lost. I just want a fair election," Hoffa said.
Carey, 60, was first elected president of the 1.4 million-member International Brotherhood of Teamsters as a reformer in 1991. His apparent re-election was lauded by AFL-CIO President John Sweeney, who had remained neutral during the campaign.
Meanwhile, Quindel decided Wednesday to void 120 Hoffa votes after finding that a Hoffa backer and former officer of Teamsters Local 743 in Chicago violated election rules by collecting and mailing ballots for other members, according to her spokesman, Jeff O'Mara.
Acting on a protest filed by Carey's campaign last week, O'Mara said Quindel decided it would be too extreme a remedy to void all of the local's ballots, estimated by the Carey campaign at more than 2,800.
The ballots were among 41,002 so-called challenged ballots that are still being checked for eligibility and have yet to be counted. Although there are enough of them to erase Carey's lead, Hoffa would need to carry the challenged ballots by a better than three-to-one margin for that to happen.
The election officer has not disclosed any interim results of the tabulation of the challenge ballots. O'Mara said he did not know when the tabulation would be completed.
Hoffa said Thursday, however, that initial tabulations of the challenged ballots have cut Carey's lead by as much as 2,400 votes. He did not disclose how many votes had been counted.
