Labor lawyer James Hoffa, refusing to concede defeat in the Teamsters union presidential election nearly a week after his opponent claimed victory, called Thursday for a congressional investigation into the vote.
Hoffa on Tuesday formally asked U.S. Attorney General Janet Reno to impound the ballots and initiate an FBI investigation into "serious irregularities" in the election.
"We really have what I call Teamstergate," Hoffa told reporters at a news conference Thursday at the Teamsters' Detroit offices, where his legendary father, the late Jimmy Hoffa, ruled the union in the 1950s and '60s.
Incumbent Teamsters President Ron Carey on Saturday claimed victory in the hard-fought election, winning by an apparent margin of about 17,000 votes. But 41,002 ballots were set aside for further eligibility checks, and Hoffa says more than 25,000 other ballots may have disappeared.
After all eligible votes were tallied late Saturday, court-appointed Election Officer Barbara Zack Quindel accounted for 485,605 mail-in ballots returned. But last week she reported that the total number of ballots received was 511,268, an estimate based on receipts from the U.S. Postal Service.
Hoffa said he wants an explanation for the discrepancy between the ballots counted and the ballots received.
"If I lost, I lost. I just want a fair election," Hoffa said.
Carey, 60, was first elected president of the 1.4 million-member International Brotherhood of Teamsters as a reformer in 1991. His apparent re-election was lauded by AFL-CIO President John Sweeney, who had remained neutral during the campaign.
Meanwhile, Quindel decided Wednesday to void 120 Hoffa votes after finding that a Hoffa backer and former officer of Teamsters Local 743 in Chicago violated election rules by collecting and mailing ballots for other members, according to her spokesman, Jeff O'Mara.
Acting on a protest filed by Carey's campaign last week, O'Mara said Quindel decided it would be too extreme a remedy to void all of the local's ballots.
The ballots from Local 743 were among the 41,002 ballots that were being checked for eligibility.
The election officer has not disclosed interim results of the tabulation of those ballots and O'Mara said he did not know when the final tally would be completed.
But Hoffa said Thursday that initial tabulations of the so-called challenged ballots have cut Carey's lead by as much as 2,400 votes.
The Carey campaign, however, said the lead was cut only by about 1,500 votes. The latest count which included the strongly pro-Hoffa Local 743, showed Carey with 230,111 and Hoffa with 214,906 with about 30,000 of the challenged ballots remaining to be processed and counted if found to be eligible, the Carey campaign said.
