Peregrine Inc. may let go up to half of the 5,500 hourly employees at the four former General Motors Corp. component plants it purchased last month, the new company's top executive said Thursday.
Peregrine Chief Executive Officer Edward Gulda, in a briefing with reporters, said workers not needed at Peregrine would be able to transfer back to GM.
People who stay with Peregrine will be paid according to the terms of the new United Auto Worker and Canadian Auto Worker contracts worked out with GM in November and October.
Peregrine was formed by the New York investment firm Joseph Littlejohn &amp; Levy to purchase the four plants from GM's Delphi Automotive Systems unit. Peregrine formally takes over the plants Jan. 1.
The plants, two of them in Michigan and two located in Ontario, make a variety of parts, including window regulators, door hardware, interior trim, structural plastics and metal stampings.
Gulda outlined several steps the new management has mapped out to streamline cost structures and expand the company's operations from the current annual revenue base of about $1 billion. He said three of the four plants are expected to turn a profit in 1997, with the fourth breaking even.
Peregrine, which will be based in Southfield, Mich., will make annual capital investments of at least $20 million a year into the four facilities, he said. Funds will come from cash generated by the operations and initial investor capital.
UAW parts workers earn about $43 an hour, including benefits -- substantially more than non-union companies pay for their workforce. But Gulda said the plants can still be competitive at those wage rates.
"Those people who say they can't be competitive with that just aren't very imaginative," he said. "It isn't a question of what individual people make in the company, it's a question of being worth what you make."
Peregrine expects its overall business to decline over the next two years as a result of past sourcing actions from GM, the company's major customer. But Gulda said future acquisitions, new GM business and internal growth will more than offset that decline.
Three to four years from now, Gulda said he expected Peregrine to generate roughly half of its revenue from non-GM customers as it expands from a regional structure to a global one. He said he would be disappointed if the firm had not doubled its revenues in five years.
Future acquisitions, which could come as soon as early next year, would complement Peregrine's existing business lines, Gulda said. He said the firm may be interested in purchasing other plants from GM's Delphi unit. He also said Peregrine might sell stock to the public, although that is at least two years away.
One of the first facilities to be upgraded will be the door hinge and hardware plant in Flint, Mich., which will receive an immediate overhaul of its stamping operations.
The plant in Livonia, Mich., which makes interior door panels and other trim components, has the most serious structural problems and will require the most significant upgrades, he said.
Gulda said the seat plant in Windsor, Ontario, is an "excellent facility." Key to its future is extending capacity and finding new business as soon as possible, he said.
Peregrine also plans to expand the mold and pain capacity at the faciltiy in Oshawa, Ontario, and improving its cost structure.
