Ford Motor Co. on Friday became the second of the U.S. Big Three automakers to align itself with the emerging auto superstore trend by announcing a new agreement with Republic Industries Inc., the parent company of AutoNation USA.
Under the agreement, AutoNation can submit proposals to acquire existing Ford or Lincoln-Mercury dealerships. The pact also covers areas Ford may want a dealership where it does not currently have one.
The move could have implications for the future of Ohio-based Mullinax Management, one of the largest dealer groups in the country, which is reported to be in merger talks with AutoNation.
Ford spokesman John Ochs said Ford has not sold any dealerships to AutoNation. A spokesman for Mullinax, based in Amherst, Ohio, could not be reached for comment.
Mullinax, which owns several large Ford dealerships, was the 11th largest dealer group in the country, based on its 1995 retail unit sales of 20,374 cars and trucks, according to industry trade publication Automotive News.
Last month, published reports began to surface on talks between Mullinax and AutoNation. The growing auto superstore chain was founded by Wayne Huizenga, who transformed Blockbuster Video into a multibillion-dollar business and owns the Miami Dolphins professional football team.
Ford's deal with Republic is a "framework agreement" that opens the door for AutoNation to submit individual proposals, Ochs said. In a statement, Robert Rewey, Ford's group vice president of marketing and sales, said the automaker believed private entrepreneurs with local community ties will continue to be the "backbone" of its franchise system.
"However, there will continue to be developments in the industry relating to other types of dealership ownership and distribution methods," he said. "We are working diligently to ensure that the new operators fit into our franchise system."
That is a change from last February, when Ford Chairman Alex Trotman told the National Automotible Dealers Association it had no plans to offer a new-car franchise to an auto superstore.
A year ago, Chrysler Corp. announced it would grant a new-car franchise to CarMax Auto Superstore in Norcross, Ga. CarMax is owned by consumer electronics giant Circuit City Stores Inc..
The move sent a shockwave through the traditional auto dealer industry, which had already been warily watching the growth of chains such as CarMax and AutoNation in the used-car segment of the business.
The new superstores quickly have become popular with consumers because they offer large numbers of newer used cars at haggle-free prices in a pressure-free environment.
The Ford announcement signals the superstores will continue to build a presence in the new-car business, analysts said. "That's big news," said William Sawyer, vice president of sales in the Detroit office of Polk, a marketing research firm. "It's definitely a change for Ford."
The move is also noteworthy, he said, because Ford has traditionally been opposed to publicly traded companies owning its franchises.
General Motors Corp. is the last of the Big Three to not have any franchise agreements with an auto superstore. GM spokesman Edward Lechtzin said the automaker was not opposed to the concept and has held talks with those groups in the past.
"We've held discussions. We'll continue to hold discussions. If one of them wants to purchase a GM dealership, we'll review it," he said.
