Haworth Inc. said Monday it received a $211.5 million payment for a patent infringement award against Steelcase Inc., ending a 17-year battle between the two Michigan office furniture giants over electrified office panels.
Of the total $211.5 million, Steelcase, the largest office furniture maker in the world, paid Haworth $96.8 million in damages and interest worth $114.7 million.
"While we don't agree with this ruling, we respect that the courts have the final word and it's time to move on," Steelcase President James Hackett said in a statement.
The two companies began warring over the issue in 1979. Haworth sued Steelcase in November 1985, alleging Steelcase infringed on its patents for pre-wired modular panel systems, which are used to build office cubicles.
Developed during the early 1970s, the technology provides a safe way for electricity to be routed through office panels, eliminating the need for extension cords and helping satisfy the growing demand for electronic office equipment, Haworth said.
The decision and damage award, which are binding and cannot be appealed, were entered Dec. 23 by a special judge appointed to determine damages in U.S. District Court in Kalamazoo, Mich.
In related rulings, the court denied Steelcase's allegations in a 1989 suit that Haworth infringed on two patents for prewired panels. It also upheld Haworth's position on a lawsuit it filed relating to computer keyboard shelves.
Steelcase won the first round of the original 1985 lawsuit when a federal court found Steelcase did not infringe Haworth's patent. Haworth appealed that decision and the U.S. Court of Appeals reversed the lower court ruling in 1989.
The case then went to a second trial that was an alternative dispute resolution before the special judge in Washington. That trial determined damages and resolved Steelcase's 1989 patent lawsuit against Haworth.
In a news release, Haworth said the award provides vindication for its role in developing the first safe method of routing electricity through movable office panels.
"But no monetary award can make things right," said President Jerry Johanneson. "No montary award can erase the gains our competitors made when they infringed our patents and used the technology that was rightfully ours."
In addition to Steelcase, eight other companies have paid more than $75 million to settle patent infringement cases brought by Haworth, it said.
Based in Grand Rapids, Mich., with a total of 19,000 workers worldwide, Steelcase had total revenues of $2.6 billion for its 1996 fiscal year, which ended in February.
Haworth, based in Holland, Mich., with more than 9,000 employees around the world, had 1995 sales of about $1.2 billion.
