Sales of light vehicle in December are expected to be down as much as 6 percent from an unusually strong month a year ago, but analysts say the pace was robust enough for 1996's total to match industry projections of 15.1 million units.
General Motors Corp. will endure the largest drop of the Big Three, with the daily sales rate off by an estimated 16 percent from December 1995, according to David Healy, an analyst at Burnham Securities Inc.
GM's sales of pickup trucks, sport/utility vehicles and minivans -- the light truck category -- will be down significantly, in large part because the automaker is up against a tough comparison from a year ago.
However, car sales will also plunge by as much as 20 percent, estimates Michael Luckey, of Luckey Consulting Group. He attributes the decline largely to the continued aftershocks of GM's labor strife this fall, which cost the automaker about 120,000 units of mostly car production.
"They're still being hurt by the strikes," he said. "I think that's still a legitimate reason for one more month here in December."
GM is scheduled to report its sales on Friday, Jan. 3. Also reporting Friday is Chrysler Corp., whose sales will be flat or up slightly from December a year ago.
Light truck sales, which have been accounting for about 70 percent of Chrysler's total, are projected to rise 8 percent, offsetting an expected 9 percent slide in passenger car sales, said Healy.
Ford Motor Co., scheduled to release its results Jan. 6, will enjoy one of its best year-to-year comparisons since March 1994, said Luckey, with sales rising between 8 percent and 9 percent against a somewhat weak performance in December 1995.
Ford's car sales are forecast to dip 3 percent to 4 percent. Last week, Ford added another $500 to the $500 rebate it was already offering on the 1997 Taurus, indicating its determination to hang on the title of the best-selling car in America. Taurus sales through November were about 10,000 units over the rival Honda Accord.
"If Taurus sales spurt up, cars might be a little bit better than that," said Luckey.
Ford's light truck sales are seen rising a sharp 20 percent, he said, thanks to the strength of its pickup trucks and popular Expedition full-size sport/utility.
Imports and transplants continued to take market share from the Big Three in December, Healy said, climbing to a combined share of 28.6 percent, up from 28.1 percent in November.
"The strong dollar and the weak yen are resulting in aggressive pricing by the Japanese makers, particuarly in intermediate and small passenger cars," he said.
For December 1996, the light vehicle seasonally adjusted annual sales rate is expected to be in the mid-14 million range, analysts said, a precipitous drop from 15.9 million a year ago, the strongest month of 1995.
However, Luckey said the U.S. Commerce Department factors used to compute the rate penalize the total by 800,000 units, meaning the real rate is stronger than it would appear.
Most analysts expect the industry to finish the year at 15.1 million units.
"It should be 15.1 million," said Luckey. "That's almost certain unless something very strange happens in December."
That total would bring the average for the last three years to an unusually stable 15 million mark. In 1995, total light vehicle sales were 14.7 million, down from 15.1 million for all of 1994.
