Chrysler Corp. said Thursday it expected strong December sales results to cap off a record year for the automaker, with total 1996 car and truck deliveries exceeding 2.4 million units.
Chrysler's year-end sales report, to be released Friday, is expected to be one of the few bright spots for December, a month in which analysts predict industry volume will fall as much as 6 percent from strong year-ago levels.
Despite an expected drop in General Motors Corp.'s December sales by as much as 16 percent from year-ago levels, analysts say automakers sold enough cars and trucks during the month to enable the full year totals to match U.S. industry sales projections of 15.1 million light vehicles.
Chrysler Vice Chairman Robert Lutz told reporters at the Los Angeles International Auto Show that he expected the automaker's total December vehicle sales to be "several percentage points" ahead of last year's sales of 177,803 cars and trucks, which was a record for the month of December.
For the full 1996 year, Chrysler's sales of more than 2.4 million units exceeded their 1988 record of 2,208,057 cars and trucks.
Light truck sales, which have been accounting for about 70 percent of Chrysler's total, are projected to rise 8 percent, offsetting an expected 9 percent slide in passenger car sales, said Burnham Securities analyst David Healy.
Healy said GM's sales of pickup trucks, sport utility vehicles and minivans -- the light truck category -- will be down significantly, in large part because the automaker was up against a tough comparison from a year ago.
Car sales also will plunge by as much as 20 percent, estimates Michael Luckey, of Luckey Consulting Group. He attributes the decline largely to the continued aftershocks of GM's labour strife this fall, which cost the automaker about 120,000 units of mostly car production.
"They're still being hurt by the strikes," he said. "I think that's still a legitimate reason for one more month here in December."
GM is scheduled to report its sales on Friday, Jan. 3.
Ford Motor Co., scheduled to release its results Jan. 6, will enjoy one of its best year-to-year comparisons since March 1994, said Luckey, with sales rising between 8 percent and 9 percent against a somewhat weak performance in December 1995.
Robert Rewey, Ford group vice president of sales and marketing, said at the Los Angeles International Auto Show that he expected December car sales to be flat with the year-ago level, but truck sales were "fantastic" and should be up sharply.
Last week, Ford added another $500 to the $500 rebate it was already offering on the 1997 Taurus, indicating its determination to hang on the title of the best-selling car in America. Taurus sales through November were about 10,000 units over the rival Honda Accord.
"If Taurus sales spurt up, cars might be a little bit better than that," said Luckey.
Ford's light truck sales are seen rising a sharp 20 percent, Luckey said, thanks to the strength of its pickup trucks and popular Expedition full-size sport utility vehicle.
Imports and transplants continued to take market share from the Big Three in December, Healy said, climbing to a combined share of 28.6 percent, up from 28.1 percent in November.
"The strong dollar and the weak yen are resulting in aggressive pricing by the Japanese makers, particuarly in intermediate and small passenger cars," he said.
For December, the light vehicle seasonally adjusted annual sales rate is expected to be in the mid-14 million range, analysts said, a precipitous drop from 15.9 million a year ago, the strongest month of 1995.
However, Luckey said the Commerce Department factors used to compute the rate penalise the total by 800,000 units, meaning the real rate is stronger than it would appear.
Most analysts expect the industry to finish the year at 15.1 million units.
"It should be 15.1 million," said Luckey. "That's almost certain unless something very strange happens in December."
That total would bring the average for the last three years to an unusually stable 15 million mark. In 1995, total light vehicle sales were 14.7 million, down from 15.1 million for all of 1994.
