General Motors Corp. took the wraps off its much awaited 1997 Chevrolet Corvette amid a shower of sparks and blaring music Monday, rounding out a day of coupe introductions at the North American International Auto Show.
The new Corvette is the fifth generation of the classic Detroit muscle car, and the first redesign since the 1984 model year vehicle. The manufacturer's suggested retail prices for the car, which starts arriving at dealerships in February, is $38,060, an increase of $270 over the previous model.
General Motors Chairman Jack Smith said the new Corvette will continue its long-time tradition as Chevrolet's signature sports car.
"It's the image car for Chevrolet. Always has been and always will be," he said.
Although its looks are similar to the old one, Chevrolet touts the new Corvette as all new from "rubber to roof."
The 1997 version carries a new 5.7 litre, small block engine that produces 345 horsepower from a smaller unit. The car also features a stiffer frame, all-new suspension, a larger interior, 70 percent more cargo room, and is easier to get in and out of.
Some critics have said the design of the new model, which has been under development for almost a decade, is too close to the current model. But Chevrolet General Manager John Middlebrook said Corvette buyers, some of the most loyal in the industry, did not want a radical design change.
"We did a lot of research and testing and the customer wanted Corvette cues," he told reporters following the introduction.
The fifth generation 'Vette, a closely guarded secret, was GM's highest profile scheduled introduction at the Detroit auto show. The company made the most of it by posting sheriff's deputies outside of the press conference who turned away executives from other auto companies who wanted to watch the introduction.
Annual production at its Bowling Green, Ky., plant is expected to be about 28,000 units, Middlebrook said. However, production for calendar 1997 will be about 20,000 because the company will not get a full year of straight-time production.
Also introduced Monday was the Mercedes-Benz CLK, a four-seat coupe that will sell for about $40,000. The new coupe shares the round front headlights of the Mercedes C-Class sedan.
Mercedes said it will offer two versions of the new coupe and three engine choices. The car will begin hitting dealer showrooms in the United States in June.
Ford Motor Co. unveiled its new ZX2 Escort coupe. Pricing was not set, but Ford officials said it would be similar to current Escort prices. Ford is aiming the vehicle at younger buyers who want performance. The new car, which goes on sale in April, will come with a 130 horsepower, 16-valve engine with a dual overhead camshaft.
Earlier, the North American Car and Truck of the Year Awards were announced. The new Mercedes SLK roadster edged out the Jaguar XK8 for the car award. Ford's new Expedition full-size sport utility won the truck award.
