"The Times They Are a-Changin" -- Bob Dylan's counter-culture anthem of the 1960's  -- is being used in a commericial for a Canadian bank and some fans are up in arms.
The Bank of Montreal is running a television commercial using the American singer's 1964 folk classic to lure baby boomers into the country's third biggest bank. The TV spot shows children running down country roads and across lush fields as a choir sings Dylan's song.
The commercial ends with a Bank of Montreal logo and the promise of a big announcement on Oct. 16.
The new campaign has drawn fire from Dylan fans angry that a big institution has co-opted this protest song from their youth. But a senior bank official said Dylan's lyrics reflect the bank's desire to change in the 1990s.
"Our view is a bank has to change because the times are changing. We thought the lyrics caught rather nicely the imperative for large institutions, like banks, that they face having to change," George Bothwell, senior vice-president of public affairs, said in a telephone interview.
Some callers to a morning radio show in Toronto were outraged at the ad campaign. The Canadian Broadcasting Corp. played the commercial and Dylan's version, then asked listeners for their reaction.
"I was appalled. The bank failed to understand the spirit of the song. It has so many associations for people our age. I hope they reconsider. They went over the line with this one," one female caller said.
Another listener said: "Bob Dylan, I can only say, shame on you."
Dylan still owns the copyright to the song but was unavailable for comment.
Some younger callers said aging baby boomers have only themselves to blame.
"I don't know why you're surprised. You had high ideals when you grew up. Then you started making money and buying cars. And all the ideals are no longer convenient so you sold out. Every single one of you. Dylan is just doing what everyone is doing," a young listener said.
Another caller scoffed at the controversy: "Baby boomers spare us the crocodile tears. A lot of people have sold out."
One listener found it ironic that in these tough economic times a bank would use a song that warned: "You better start swimming or you'll sink like a stone."
Canada's big banks, which are on track for a third straight year of record profits, have been criticized for high service fees and tight lending policies.
