Canada's six biggest banks are poised for a further round of buoyant profits when they begin reporting third-quarter earnings on Tuesday.
An improved interest rate picture, higher investment banking and dealing revenues and better loan quality are expected to drive profits in the third quarter ended July 31.
On average, earnings for the so-called Big Six are expected to be 15 percent to 20 percent higher than the third quarter of last year, analysts said.  
"I would expect more sectors of the banks to be more profitable than they were in the corresponding quarter of last year," Roy Palmer, an analyst with TD Securities, said in a telephone interview.
Bank of Montreal and Bank of Nova Scotia, Canada's third and fourth largest banks respectively, kick off the earnings parade on Tuesday.
Canada's fifth-biggest bank, Toronto-Dominion Bank, and the smallest, National Bank of Canada, report on Thursday.  
The country's top two banks, Royal Bank of Canada and Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, are scheduled to deliver their results on Thursday, September 5.
Despite a recent downturn in financial markets, analysts said securities earnings should be stronger than last year. Canada's brokerage industry is dominated by subsidiaries of the countries major banks.
The banks are also expected to benefit from lower loan losses as the industry continues to rebound from disastrous loans in commercial real estate, which collapsed in the late 1980s.  
Despite the correction in stocks earlier this summer, bank stocks have remained strong performers. Lower Canadian interest rates have helped push bank stock prices to all-time highs on the Toronto Stock Exchange.
"I think that if the combination of strong profitability couples up with lower interest rates, then it probably will set the backdrop for higher share prices," said Susan Cohen, an analyst with Deacon Capital Corp.
Analysts said they do not expect any of the banks to raise their dividends during the reporting period.  
But the string of record bank profits are expected to yield dividend hikes at the end of the fiscal year.
The big banks are on track for a third straight year if record annual profits. The group rang up a combined profit of C$5.17 billion in fiscal 1995 ended October 31, up from C$4.25 billion a year earlier.
As for 1997, Palmer said he expects a modest increase in profits.  
"Investment banking is a cyclical business. It may tail off a bit, but there is no sign of a recession yet, so I would think we could get modestly higher earnings next year," he said.
Bank of Montreal is expected to report a third-quarter profit of C$0.97 per share, up from C$0.93 per share a year ago, according to figures supplied by the International Brokers Estimates Service.
Scotiabank's earnings are seen climbing to C$1 per share in the third quarter, up from C$0.86 a share.  
Toronto-Dominion Bank is expected to post a C$0.72 per share profit, up slightly from C$0.71 per share in the third quarter of 1995.
National Bank's third quarter earnings are forecast to rise to C$0.41 per share from C$0.33 a share a year earlier.
CIBC's third quarter results are pegged at C$1.42 a share compared to last year's C$1.13 per share.
Royal Bank of Canada is seen improving to C$0.96 a share in the third quarter, up from C$0.88 per share a year earlier.
-- Reuters Toronto Bureau (416) 941-8100
