Canada's big six banks, which have long ruled the country's street corners with their vast branch networks, face a challenge to their dominance by the Internet and the rise of new "virtual banks."
Telephone and computer banking, debit cards and automated teller machines (ATMs) are rapidly transforming Canada's old-style bricks-and-mortar banking system.
New technology has eliminated the need for costly branch networks and lured offshore rivals to jump into Canada's $66.5 billion consumer banking market.
"Virtual banks have the potential to send our branch networks the way of the passenger train -- much loved, but seldom used," said Bank of Montreal chairman Matthew Barrett in a speech to Toronto's business community.
BIG BANKS PREPARE TO MEET THE CHALLENGE
The big banks, which dominate regular banking, trust and brokerages in Canada, are marshalling their forces against this cyber-onslaught.
Royal Bank of Canada, Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, Bank of Montreal, Bank of Nova Scotia, Toronto-Dominion Bank and National Bank of Canada are spending millions of dollars to develop new distribution channels and upgrade branches.
ING Groep N.V., with nearly $260 billion in assets, is by far the biggest electronic challenger. The Dutch financial services giant dwarfs Royal Bank, the country's biggest financial institution with assets of $147 billion.
ING, already a player in Canada's insurance market, plans to offer a wide range of electronic banking services through a new subsidiary, ING Trust Co. of Canada, based in Toronto.
ING is keeping a low profile until its application for a trust licence is approved, but bank officials are confident of success where others have failed.
In recent years, several foreign banks abandoned Canada because of its restrictive banking laws and stiffer than expected competition from the big domestic banks.
"It would be fair to say that we will be competing on several fronts. It won't be hard to offer better service," said Jim Kelly, vice-president of marketing for ING's Canadian operations.
ING WILL DRAW ON ITS EUROPEAN EXPERIENCE
He said ING will draw on its extensive experience in electronic banking in Europe.
Analysts have said ING can use Canada to fine tune its virtual bank before offering similar services in the larger U.S. market. But Kelly said there are no plans yet to take ING's virtual bank south of the border.
"To say we're definitely going to the U.S. would be wrong. To say that we would look at it and see if there is a market opportunity, yes, of course we would," he said.
Also eyeing Canada's consumer banking market is Citibank Canada, a unit of U.S. giant Citicorp, which is joining with Canadian fund manager AGF Management Ltd., to create a virtual trust company.
The venture is Citibank's second foray into Canadian consumer banking after abandoning a bid to establish a traditional branch system in the 1980s.
Charles Stuart, country manager of Citibank's consumer banking operations in Canada, said the joint venture gives the bank access to AGF's customer base. Citibank plans to offer customers a full-service banking package, including credit cards, access to ATM service and telephone banking.
"We're not locked into the costs of a bricks-and-mortar structure. So we can serve them through technology and that enables us to price ourselves very competitively," he said.
The Citibank/AGF venture could set a pattern for other foreign banks seeking to enter Canada with an established customer base, Stuart said.
BIG BANKS UNDER PRESSURE FROM LOCAL RIVALS
The Big Six banks are pressured by local rivals as well.
Last month, Vancouver City Savings Credit Union, the country's biggest credit union with $3.6 billion in assets, applied to open a nationwide branchless bank early next year.
While cyber competitors are poised to invade the retail market, Canada's major banks are also on the move.
The banks spent a record $1.7 billion on new technology in 1995 and that is expected to reach $1.9 billion by 1998, according to a report by accounting firm Ernst &amp; Young.
Much of the money is being poured into alternative delivery channels such as point-of-sale credit and debit cards, ATMs, telephone and computer banking.
Cards account for more than a third of all payment transactions in Canada, up from 25 percent a year ago.
Telephone and computer transactions are climbing as well. Traditional bank transactions are seen falling to 21 percent in 1998 from 38 percent last year.
Among Canadian banks, Royal Bank is the top player in telephone banking with more than 800,000 subscribers. Bank officials expect 40 percent of their eight million customers to be using alternative channels in five years.
Last month, Royal Bank joined 14 other North American banks to set up a computer banking network with computer giant IBM in early 1997.
All the banks are struggling to decide the future of their branch networks, but CIBC has taken the first steps to overhaul its 1,400 branches.
In a recent pilot project, CIBC employed greeters to guide customers to ATMs for their basic banking needs. Bank tellers were retrained to advise customers on such products as mutual funds, loans and mortgages.
Billing it as the bank branch of the future, CIBC said transaction costs had fallen dramatically, while customer lineups were much thinner.
But by using these low-cost channels, customers will expect a break on service fees, which many consumers complain are too high, Ernst &amp; Young said.
Bank of Nova Scotia has taken the acquisition route to boost its Internet services. It recently bought a 10 percent stake in iSTAR Internet Inc., an Internet solutions firm, to help develop new channels and services for the bank.
