Canada's six biggest banks are poised for a further round of buoyant profits when they begin reporting third-quarter earnings Tuesday, setting the stage for a third consecutive record year, analysts said.
An improved interest rate picture, higher investment banking and dealing revenues and better loan quality are expected to drive profits in the third quarter ended July 31.
On average, earnings for the so-called Big Six are expected to be 15 percent to 20 percent higher than the third quarter of last year, analysts said.
"I would expect more sectors of the banks to be more profitable than they were in the corresponding quarter of last year," said Roy Palmer, an analyst with TD Securities.
Bank of Montreal and Bank of Nova Scotia, Canada's third- and fourth-largest banks, respectively, kick off the earnings parade on Tuesday.
Canada's fifth-biggest bank, Toronto-Dominion Bank, and the smallest, National Bank of Canada, report on Thursday.
The country's top two banks, Royal Bank of Canada and Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, are scheduled to deliver their results Sept. 5.
Despite a recent downturn in financial markets, analysts said securities earnings should be stronger than last year. Canada's brokerage industry is dominated by subsidiaries of the countries major banks.
The banks are also expected to benefit from lower loan losses as the industry continues to rebound from disastrous loans in commercial real estate, which collapsed in the late 1980's.
Despite the correction in stocks earlier this summer, bank stocks have remained strong performers. Lower Canadian interest rates have helped push bank stock prices to all-time highs on the Toronto Stock Exchange.
"I think that if the combination of strong profitability couples up with lower interest rates, then it probably will set the backdrop for higher share prices," said Susan Cohen, an analyst with Deacon Capital Corp.
Analysts said they do not expect any of the banks to raise their dividends during the reporting period.
But the string of record bank profits are expected to yield dividend hikes at the end of the fiscal year.
The big banks are on track for a third straight year of record annual profits. The group rang up a combined profit of C$5.17 billion in fiscal 1995 ended Oct. 31, up from C$4.25 billion a year earlier.
As for 1997, Palmer said he expects a modest increase in profits.
"Investment banking is a cyclical business. It may tail off a bit, but there is no sign of a recession yet, so I would think we could get modestly higher earnings next year," he said.
Bank of Montreal is expected to report a third-quarter profit of 97 cents Canadian (70.8 cents) per share, up from 93 cents Canadian (67.9 cents) per share a year ago, according to figures supplied by the International Brokers Estimates Service.
Scotiabank's earnings are seen climbing to C$1 (73 cents) per share in the third quarter, up from 86 cents Canadian (62.8 cents) a share.
Toronto-Dominion Bank is expected to post a 72 cents Canadian (52.5 cents) per share profit, up slightly from 71 cents Canadian (51.8 cents) per share in the third quarter of 1995.
National Bank's third quarter earnings are forecast to rise to 41 cents Canadian (29.9 cents) per share from 33 cents (24.1 cents) Canadian a share a year earlier.
CIBC's third quarter results are pegged at C$1.42 ($1.04) a share compared to last year's C$1.13 ($82 cents) per share.
Royal Bank of Canada is seen improving to 96 cents Canadian (70 cents) a share in the third quarter, up from 88 cents Canadian (64.2 cents) per share a year earlier.
