Far from the hoopla of the U.S. presidential race, Jack Kemp's youngest son, Jimmy, has been tossing footballs on Canada's windswept prairie and relishing his relative anonymity.
To football fans in this small western Canada city, Kemp is better known as the quarterback of their beloved Saskatchewan Roughriders than the son of the American Republican vice-presidential candidate.
"It's nice to have your own identity. Up here I'm a Roughriders quarterback and not Jack Kemp's son. I'm proud of my dad, but it's great to be in Canada," Kemp, 25, told Reuters during a recent interview at a local sports pub.
The well-mannered, cherub-faced Kemp is finishing his third year in the Canadian Football League. He was traded to the Regina team last August after stints with the Montreal Alouettes and the now-defunct San Antonio Texans and Sacramento Gold Miners.
As the Nov. 5 election nears, Kemp said he does not get too bothered about his high-profile father. The local press has pretty much left that part of his life private.
"Kemp Just a Normal Guy," the Regina Leader-Post newspaper said in a story about the young quarterback when he arrived in town.
Before going to Saskatchewan, Kemp joined his family at the Republican convention in San Diego and pondered quitting football to work on his dad's campaign. But the elder Kemp, a former American Football League quarterback who tried out for the CFL's Calgary Stampeders in 1958, urged his son to continue playing.
"We prayed and talked about it and my dad wanted me to take this opportunity that has been given to me," said Kemp, who has since enjoyed some success with Saskatchewan.
A back-up when he arrived in Regina, Kemp was forced into the spotlight after the club's other quarterbacks fell to injuries.
Kemp had the best game of his career this month, passing for three touchdowns in a come-from-behind win against Hamilton. But the team struggled this year and failed to make the playoffs.
"I think I'm good enough to start in this league. I don't think I'm a great quarterback right now, but I need to play more and go through a training camp," he said.
Jack Kemp has kept a close eye on his son's football career. He flew to Canada three times this season when Jimmy played for Montreal and they talk frequently about football over the telephone.
"He's incredibly encouraging. Even to the point that it gets on my nerves sometimes because he is a very proud father and he thinks anything that I do is great," the younger Kemp said.
Despite living on the Canadian prairies, Kemp keeps tabs on his father's campaign. He watched the vice presdential debate on CNN and catches the programme "This Week With David Brinkley" before a Sunday game.
He said he did not have much faith in opinion polls that show the Bob Dole/Jack Kemp ticket lagging far behind the Democratic team of President Bill Clinton and Vice President Al Gore.
"I think people can change their minds easily and I think the support for Clinton is soft. I guess it doesn't look good, but I think they've got a chance," Kemp said.
Kemp does not plan to follow his father into politics, but he does not rule out getting involved at the local level.
"I'm not sure my dad was interested in politics when he was 25. My brother (Jeff) is probably more of a politican than I am, but I do care about the issues," he said.
