Shares in Canadian brewing and sports firm Molson Cos. Ltd. sank on Monday after its Molson Breweries unit lost the rights to brew Coors Light, Canada's top-selling light beer, in a dispute with Adolph Coors Co..
Investors pounded Molson's stock after an arbitration panel ruled late Friday that Molson reliquished its right to brew and sell Coors products in April 1993 when Miller Brewing Co. acquired a stake in the Canadian brewer.
Molson class A stock closed down C$0.75 at C$20.15 on the Toronto Stock Exchange after earlier sinking to C$19.50, just shy of its 52-week low.
"It was a pretty severe ruling and I think it surprised Molson, surprised Coors and, frankly, surprised the street," said Mike Palmer, an analyst with Loewen, Ondaatje, McCutcheon Ltd.
The panel said Molson breached its licensing agreement with Coors by allowing Miller, a unit of Philip Morris Cos. Inc., to buy a 20 percent stake without Coors' consent.
Molson Breweries is also owned 40 percent each by Molson Cos and Australia's Foster's Brewing Group Ltd..
The panel ordered Molson to pay Coors all the profits it earned from selling Coors beer since 1993, an amount that has yet to be determined.
Coors brands produced by Molson -- Coors Light and Original Coors -- account for 8 percent of its sales volume. Coors Light is the dominant light beer in Canada, commanding a 5 to 5.5 percent share of the beer market.
Analysts said Molson can ill afford to lose a profitable brand as it battles rival Labatt Brewing Co. Ltd. in a domestic beer market that has been flat for several years.
"You start losing volume and it has a significant impact on your profits. It's very important to Molson to negotiate a deal with Coors," said Palmer.
While Molson officials said they are willing to negotiate a new licensing agreement, Coors was keeping its options open.
"What we need to do is go through the panel's ruling and understand all of the aspects of the ruling and then analyse what our options are," said Coors spokesman Jon Goldman.
He declined to outline Coors' options for the Canadian market. But analysts speculated that Coors could cut a richer deal with Molson, ship product directly to Canada or buy a local brewer to produce Coors in Canada.
"The easiest option is to negotiate a deal with Molson. They've had a big win here so it's time to kiss and make up," said Palmer.
If there is a new deal, Coors will likely seek more control over its brands and higher royalties from Molson, said Barry Joslin, Molson's vice-president of corporate affairs.
If Molson cannot negotiate a new licensing agreement, Joslin said the brewer would consider its options, including launching a new light brand.
