Toronto, Canada's biggest city and financial capital, is bracing for a near shutdown Friday when protesters hit the streets against deep budget cuts by Ontario's Conservative government.
The so-called "Days of Protest" on Friday and Saturday are shaping up to be the biggest labour protest in Canada since the Winnipeg General Strike in 1919 in which one person died and 30 were injured after a confrontation with police and the army.
In a bid to paralyse this city of 2.2 million people, organisers hope to close businesses and disrupt services, including underground trains and Toronto's Pearson Airport, the country's busiest airport.
Thousands of unionized workers, civil servants and activists will picket outside the Toronto Stock Exchange, government offices, corporate headquarters and factories.
"I must tell you to prepare for days of inconvenience and frustration Friday and Saturday," Alan Tonks, chairman of Metro Toronto, said in a letter to residents on Thursday.
Ironically, the labour chaos comes as Toronto basks in the glow of being chosen by Fortune magazine as the world's best city for quality of life.
The protesters are furious with the government's plans to cut spending by C$8 billion ($5.9 billion) to wipe out a huge deficit by the turn of the century.
Since sweeping to power in 1995 promising a right-wing revolution in Canada's most populous province, the Conservatives have revamped labour laws, slashed welfare payments, introduced workfare and announced plans to close hospitals and trim education budgets.
"We want to put pressure on the government and its corporate supporters that we're not going to accept this anymore," Linda Torney, co-chairwoman of the "Days of Protest", said in a telephone interview.
Premier Mike Harris, who has been dubbed "Newt of the North" in reference to Republican U.S. House Speaker Newt Gingrich, vowed the protests will not stall his "Common Sense Revolution."
City officials were bracing for a disruption of Toronto's bus and subway services, which handle about 1 million commuters a day. Transit officials on Thursday won a partial injunction against picketing at subway stations.
GO Transit, the train service that links suburban communities to Toronto, warned commuters that "service may be delayed, adjusted, interrupted or even cancelled."
Air travellers can also expect delays at Pearson Airport, which handles about 65,000 passengers a day, said airport spokesman Bruce Reid.
A Canadian court ruled Wednesday that picketers cannot interfere with essential airport workers, but can set up informational pickets. Airlines have promised to re-schedule flights if there are significant delays.
Meanwhile, several major manufacturers have cancelled day shifts. De Havilland Inc., a unit of transportation firm Bombardier Inc., said 6,200 employees at its Toronto aircraft plant will be off the job Friday.
The protest will not affect General Motors Corp.'s Canadian unit, which is getting back to work after a nearly three-week strike ended earlier this week.
The Breeders' Cup, a major international horse-racing event on Saturday, will not be affected by the protest.
On Toronto's Bay Street, the heart of Canada's financial community, traders not lucky enough to get a scarce hotel room are planning to sleep in their offices.
"Some essential people will be in the office. They might grab a couch or a sleeping bag," one broker said.
Other firms are sending their employees to offices outside Toronto or telling them to work from home. Many workers are expected to take the day off.
The Toronto Stock Exchange, Canada's biggest stock exchange, is planning a "business-as-usual day," despite a large rally planned outside the exchange.
