Anti-government protests swept across Canada's biggest city Friday as demonstrators in Toronto shut down the transit system, disrupted businesses and tried to break into the Toronto Stock Exchange.
Thousands of union workers, civil servants and other citizens descended on government offices, transit stations and factories across the city, organisers said.
Over 1 million commuters stayed at home, walked, drove or cycled to work after the city's subway and bus services were shutdown, officials estimated. City officials said transit services would resume early Saturday.
But picketers did not disrupt commuter trains from Toronto's bedroom communities or interrupt service at Pearson Airport, the country's busiest. Instead of the traffic jams on the city expressways which had been expected, "It was like a Sunday afternoon," one city official said.
Toronto police said there were no major acts of violence, though a few people were arrested, mostly for misconduct.
The so-called Days of Protest was organised by labour unions to protest deep budget cuts by Ontario's Conservative government affecting many of this city of 2.2 million people.
Some critics said the protest did not succeed.
"Today's protest was a flop. Yes. They inconvenienced a lot of people, but they failed to shut down the city," said Colin Brown of Ontarians for Responsible Government, a right-wing lobby group.
"Hundreds of thousands of people didn't come to work and that is what counts," said Aleda O'Connor, a spokeswoman for the organisers.
Ironically, the labour unrest came after Fortune magazine called Toronto the city with the world's best quality of life.
Most of the protests were peaceful, but hundreds of demonstrators tried to smash into the Toronto Stock Exchange, a symbol of the business community that has supported the government's tough fiscal policies.
Protesters chanted, "Shut it down, shut it down," as they pounded on the glass doors of Canada's biggest stock market. One man wearing a mask and combat fatigues was seen hurling himself against the doors.
Riot police were moved into the vicinity of stock exchange, but did not intervene. Rally organisers later moved the raucous group away from the doors of the exchange.
"We've come to the place where the real power is ... They get their power and strength from inside this building," Jim Stanford, an economist for the Canadian Auto Workers, told hundreds of protesters outside the exchange.
In the days leading up to the protest, a siege mentality gripped Toronto's Bay Street, the heart of Canada's financial community.
At least one brokerage firm flew traders to its offices in New York and Montreal, while other brokers slept in hotel rooms or in their offices overnight.
Other companies, including the Globe and Mail newspaper, hired boats to ferry employees across Lake Ontario from nearby communities.
The demonstrators expressed fury at Ontario Premier Mike Harris' plans to cut spending by C$8 billion ($5.9 billion) to wipe out a big budget deficit by the turn of the century.
Since coming to power in 1995 on the promise of a right-wing revolution in Canada's most populous province, the Conservatives have revamped labour laws, slashed welfare payments and required recipients to work, and announced plans to close hospitals and cut education budgets.
"These cuts that Harris made are hurting the workers. This is part of the polarisation that is happening in Ontario. The anger is going to grow and grow," Syd Ryan, president of the Ontario division of the Canadian Union of Public Employees, told picketers outside a government building.
Harris, who has been dubbed "Newt of the North" in reference to Republican U.S. House Speaker Newt Gingrich, has vowed the protests will not stall his "Common Sense Revolution."
"Will they discourage us from creating more jobs? No. Discourage us from workfare? No. That's what we were elected to do and I don't expect that most of the public want us to change from that agenda," Harris told reporters.
The Conservatives, who hold their annual convention in Toronto this weekend, have seen their popularity hold at about 50 percent in recent opinion polls.
Many commuters took the delays in stride.
"I see the protesters have a point, but I think it's going to inconvenience a lot of people who don't have any other choice," said John Ivarey.
Police said one man was charged with a weapons offence after allegedly threatening picketers with a baseball bat and five protesters were charged with public mischief.
Several major manufacturers cancelled day shifts. De Havilland Inc., a unit of transportation firm Bombardier Inc., said 6,200 employees at its Toronto aircraft plant would be off the job Friday.
Other companies that closed Toronto operations included school bus operator Laidlaw Transit Inc., auto parts firm A.G. Simpson Co. Ltd., and candy maker Nestle Canada Inc.
