Protesters hit Toronto streets on Friday, paralyzing rush-hour subway trains and closing businesses in Canada's biggest city to protest deep budget cuts by Ontario's Conservative government.
Underground subway and bus service ground to a halt in this city of 2.2 million people, forcing about one million commuters to walk, drive or cycle to work or stay home.
"They're picketing all over the place, so we've postponed service," Marilyn Bolton, a spokesperson for the Toronto Transit Commission said in a telephone interview.
Unionized workers, civil servants and social activists also descended on government offices and factories on this first day of the so-called "Days of Protest."
But picketers failed to disrupt commuter trains from Toronto's bedroom communities or interrupt service at Pearson Airport, the country's busiest airport.
The Toronto Stock Exchange had expected protesters to disrupt trading, but Canada's biggest stock market opened as usual.
At least one brokerage firm flew traders to its Montreal office to work today, while other brokers slept in hotel rooms or in their offices overnight.
The stock exchange has been targeted for a major rally later today.
The protesters are furious with Premier Mike Harris' plans to cut spending by C$8 billion ($5.9 billion) to wipe out a huge deficit by the turn of the century.
Since sweeping to power in 1995 promising a right-wing revolution in Canada's most populous province, the Conservatives have revamped labor laws, slashed welfare payments, introduced workfare and announced plans to close hospitals and trim education budgets.
"These cuts that Harris made are hurting the workers. This is part of the polarization that is happening in Ontario. The anger is going to grow and grow," Sid Ryan, president of the Ontario division of the Canadian Union of Public Employees, told picketers outside a government building.
But Harris, who has been dubbed "Newt of the North" in reference to Republican U.S. House Speaker Newt Gingrich, has vowed the protests will not stall his "Common Sense Revolution."
Despite the opposition to his government, the Conservatives' popularity continues to hold around 50 percent in opinion polls.
Protesters waved placards and temporarily blocked cars from entering government parking lots, but Toronto police said there were no major incidents of violence.
One man was charged with a weapons offence after allegedly threatening pickets with a baseball bat outside a bus garage. There also were skirmishes outside a postal station.
Many commuters took the delays in stride.
"I see the protesters have a point, but I think it's going to inconvenience a lot of people who don't have any other choice," said John Ivarey.
Meanwhile, several major manufacturers canceled day shifts. De Havilland Inc., a unit of transportation firm  Bombardier Inc., said 6,200 employees at its Toronto aircraft plant will be off the job Friday.
The protest will not affect General Motors Corp.'s Canadian unit, which is getting back to work after a nearly three-week strike ended earlier this week.
