Anti-government protests swept across Canada's biggest city on Friday as demonstrators in Toronto shut down the transit system, disrupted businesses and tried to break into the Toronto Stock Exchange.
"We've come to the place where the real power is ... They get their power and strength from inside this building," Jim Stanford, an economist for the Canadian Auto Workers, told hundreds of protesters outside the exchange.
Demonstrators chanted "Shut it down, shut it down," as they pounded on the glass doors of Canada's biggest stock market. One man wearing a mask and combat fatigues was seen hurling himself against the doors.
Protest organisers later moved the rally away from the doors of the exchange.
In another part of the city, Ontario Finance Minister Ernie Eves said it was ironic that some of the groups that are protesting have huge pension funds that invest in stocks.
Protesters hit Toronto streets, paralysing rush-hour subway trains and closing businesses in Canada's biggest city to protest deep budget cuts by Ontario's Conservative government.
Subway and bus service ground to a halt in this city of 2.2 million people, forcing about one million commuters to walk, drive or cycle to work or just stay home.
Unionized workers, civil servants and social activists also descended on government offices and factories in the first day of the so-called "Days of Protest" against budget cutbacks.
But picketers failed to disrupt commuter trains from Toronto's bedroom communities or interrupt service at Pearson Airport, the country's busiest. Expected traffic jams on the city expressways also did not materialise.
In the days leading up to the protest, a siege mentality gripped Toronto's Bay Street, the heart of Canada's financial community.
At least one brokerage firm flew traders to its offices in New York and Montreal, while other brokers slept in hotel rooms or in their offices overnight.
Other companies hired boats to ferry employees across Lake Ontario from nearby communities.
The protesters are furious with Premier Mike Harris' plans to cut spending by C$8 billion ($5.9 billion) to wipe out a huge deficit by the turn of the century.
Since sweeping to power in 1995 promising a right-wing revolution in Canada's most populous province, the Conservatives have revamped labour laws, slashed welfare payments, introduced workfare and announced plans to close hospitals and trim education budgets.
"These cuts that Harris made are hurting the workers. This is part of the polarisation that is happening in Ontario. The anger is going to grow and grow," Syd Ryan, president of the Ontario division of the Canadian Union of Public Employees, told picketers outside a government building.
But Harris, who has been dubbed "Newt of the North" in reference to Republican U.S. House Speaker Newt Gingrich, has vowed the protests will not stall his "Common Sense Revolution."
"Will they discourage us from creating more jobs? No. Discourage us from workfare? No. That's what we were elected to do and I don't expect that most of the public want us to change from that agenda," Harris told reporters.
The Conservatives' popularity has held at around 50 percent in recent opinion polls.
Many commuters took the delays in stride.
"I see the protesters have a point, but I think it's going to inconvenience a lot of people who don't have any other choice," said John Ivarey.
A poll taken this week found that 67 percent of Toronto residents opposed the "Days of Action" rallies.
Protesters waved placards and temporarily blocked cars from entering government parking lots, but Toronto police said there were no major incidents of violence.
One man was charged with a weapons offence after allegedly threatening picketers with a baseball bat outside a bus garage. There also were skirmishes outside a postal station.
Several major manufacturers cancelled day shifts. De Havilland Inc., a unit of transportation firm Bombardier Inc. , said 6,200 employees at its Toronto aircraft plant would be off the job Friday.
