The Montreal Canadiens, the most storied franchise in the National Hockey League, were engulfed in sale rumours Friday, which drew a fierce denial from its owner, Molson Cos. Ltd.
Canadian newspapers reported that a consortium led by former Canadiens general manager and Hall of Famer Serge Savard was assembling a bid for the team, winner of a record 24 Stanley Cup championships since 1916.
Citing unidentified sources, Toronto's Globe and Mail newspaper reported that talks with Molson had been under way for several days.
"Don't take this story lightly. There's a very good chance that it could happen," wrote sports columnist Marty York, quoting a source at Molson.
Rejean Tremblay, a columnist for the Montreal newspaper La Presse, reported similar rumours.
Molson is the sole owner of the Canadiens and their new arena, the $150 million Molson Centre. It also owns 40 percent of Canada's biggest brewer, Molson Breweries.
"The company has not approached anyone on this subject and no one has approached us. Neither the hockey club nor the Molson Centre are for sale," Molson Chief Executive Norman Seagram said in a statement.
Analysts speculated that the Canadiens and the arena could fetch up to $300 million.
Savard, who played for Montreal from 1967-1981 and was fired last season after 13 years as the team's general manager, was unavailable for comment on Friday.
Selling the Canadiens would be a dramatic about-face for Molson. The company said four months ago the club was a key part of its heritage.
"At the Molson companies, we have two legacy assets, Molson Breweries and the Montreal Canadiens," Seagram told shareholders at the annual meeting in June.
Sports plays a huge role in selling beer in Canada and the Molson name is intertwined with Canadiens hockey. Aside from putting its name on a new arena, Molson Breweries is a major sponsor of NHL television broadcasts in Canada.
The Molson family sold the club in 1971 to Peter Bronfman, whose cousins control the Seagram beverage empire. Molson Cos. reacquired the team in 1978.
Analysts said there had been no hint from Molson that it was interested in selling the club or arena.
