The Montreal Canadiens, the most storied franchise in the National Hockey League, were engulfed in sale rumors on Friday, which drew a fierce denial from its owner, Molson Cos. Ltd..
Canadian newspapers reported that a consortium led by former Canadiens all-star defenseman Serge Savard was assembling a bid for the Canadiens, who have won 24 Stanley Cup championships since 1916.
Citing unidentified sources, Toronto's Globe and Mail newspaper reported that Savard headed the group and that talks with Molson had been under way for several days.
"Don't take this story lightly. There's a very good chance that it could happen," wrote sports columnist Marty York, quoting a source at Molson.
Rejean Tremblay, a columnist for the Montreal newspaper La Presse, reported similar rumors.
Molson is the sole owner of the Canadiens and the new C$200 million ($150 million) Molson Centre arena in which the club plays. It also owns 40 percent of Canada's biggest brewer Molson Breweries.
"The company has not approached anyone on this subject and no one has approached us. Neither the hockey club nor the Molson Centre are for sale," Molson Chief Executive Norman Seagram said in a statement.
Analysts speculated that the Canadiens and the arena could fetch up to C$400 million ($300 million).
Savard, a Hall of Famer who played with Montreal from 1967-1981, was fired by the Canadiens last year after 13 years as general manager.
Now a wealthy real estate executive in Montreal, Savard was unavailable for comment on Friday.
"I would think that if anything is going on there, the initiative is being taken by the potential buyer rather than the seller," Bill Chisholm, an analyst with Deacon Capital Corp. said in a telephone interview.
Selling the Canadiens would be a dramatic about-face for Molson. The company said four months ago the club was a key part of its heritage.
"At the Molson companies, we have two legacy assets, Molson Breweries and the Montreal Canadiens," Seagram told shareholders at the annual meeting in June.
Sports plays a huge role in selling beer in Canada and the Molson name is intertwined with Canadiens hockey. Aside from putting its name on a new arena, Molson Breweries is a major sponsor of NHL television broadcasts in Canada.
The Molson family sold the club in 1971 to Peter Bronfman, whose cousins control the Seagram beverage empire. Molson Cos. reacquired the team in 1978.
Analysts said here had been no hint from Molson that it was interested in selling the club or arena.
