U.S. mutual fund giant Fidelity Investments said on Saturday that Canadian regulators were investigating trades made by Veronika Hirsch, the star manager of their new Canadian equity fund.
Hirsch's 27-city road show to promote Fidelity's True North fund has been postponed as a result of the regulatory review, said a spokesman for the Boston-based mutual fund company.
The tour was scheduled to begin on Monday.
"Veronika Hirsch ... was recently contacted by a regulatory agency about her personal investments before she joined Fidelity," Chethan Lakshman, a spokesman for Fidelity's Canadian subsidiary, Fidelity Investments Canada Ltd., said in a telephone interview.
"At this time it is appropriate to postpone the tour and we're hopeful that the regulatory review of her trading activity will result in a favorable conclusion," Lakshman said.
He did not identify the regulator, but Canadian newspapers reported on Saturday that the British Columbia Securities Commission was looking into the matter.
Lakshman said Hirsch was not available for interviews and he was unsure of her whereabouts.
The controversy is over Hirsch's investments in a Vancouver-based exploration firm, Oliver Gold Corp., earlier this year while she was a high-profile fund manager with AGF Management Ltd. in Toronto.
Hirsch, a flamboyant stock picker compared to her sedate peers in Canada's mutual fund industry, was hired by Fidelity with much fanfare in August after only 10 months at AGF.
Fidelity is conducting its own review of Hirsch's actions before she joined the company.
During her brief stint at AGF, Hirsch bought 65,000 special warrants of Oliver Gold for herself through a private placement in April, according to statements filed with the British Columbia Securities Commission and reported by Vancouver-based Canada Stockwatch, a newsletter which tracks Canadian stocks.
Hirsch paid C$1.53 ($1.14) per warrant.
A short time later, the AGF Growth &amp; Income Fund managed by Hirsch bought 295,000 special warrants, according to the filings with the B.C. commission.
The AGF fund paid over double the price, C$3.60 ($2.69) per warrant, paid by Hirsch.
Another related issue is whether Hirsch used a false address in British Columbia to buy the Oliver Gold shares. Canadian newspapers have reported that the home address of a Vancouver stock analyst and institutional salesman was used.
Hirsch is a resident of Ontario and the Oliver Gold stock was only available to British Columbia residents.
AGF chief executive officer Warren Goldring has said Hirsch broke company rules by failing to report her personal investment in Oliver Gold. He added Hirsch could have been fired if AGF had known about the trades.
The controversy swirling around Hirsch has dominated the business pages of Canadian newspapers, but Lakshman said the publicity has not hurt Fidelity's efforts to build a higher profile in Canadian equities management.
"We have had a lot of great responses to the (True North) fund. It has been well-received and has grown to more than C$150 million ($112 million)," Lakshman said.
