Toronto stocks soared to new heights on Wednesday, powered by a rally in bank shares as foreign investors stampeded into Canada's financial markets, lured by falling interest rates and a recovering Canadian economy.
Shares in Canada's big six banks hit 52-week highs on the Toronto Stock Exchange, propelling the country's biggest stock market to its 53rd record close of 1996.
The Canadian dollar has also surged this week, hitting its strongest level since October 30, 1995.
Declining interest rates, low inflation and falling budget deficits have combined to make Canada the flavor of the month, economists said.
"Overall, foreign investors have just become enamored with Canada as a place for investment," Michael Gregory, an economist with Lehman Brothers, said in a telephone interview.
The Toronto Stock Exchange jumped 85 points to close around 5749, fueled by brisk action in interest-rate sensitive issues such as banks and utilities.
The key 300 Index has gained more than 20 percent this year, compared to about 19 percent for the Dow Jones Average and 16 percent for the Standard &amp; Poors 500.
The Bank of Canada is expected to ease interest rates again as early as this week. The central bank has cut rates 19 times since May 1995 in a bid to revive a sluggish economy.
Bank of Canada Governor Gordon Thiessen said on Wednesday that Canada's improving economy gives the central bank more latitude to set Canadian rates independent of U.S. rates.
He added Canada is now in a better position to withstand a hike in U.S. rates than it has been in recent years.
"The economic outlook is favorable. We will soon see signs of the payoff for the difficult restructuring decisions taken in both the private and public sectors," Thiessen said.
After several years of belt tightening, Canadian governments have either balanced their budgets or are on track to wipe out huge deficits.
Canada's 1.2 percent inflation rate is one of the lowest in the world and less than half the U.S. rate.
Several Canadian banks cut residential mortgage rates on Wednesday to levels not seen in about three decades.
Gregory said he expected Canada to continue to outperform the United States on the rate front and that offshore investors recognized that. "I think investors are coming to terms with the fact that Canadian interest rates -- because of low inflation and improving currency prospects -- should be below U.S. rates," he said.
"Many investors are jumping on that and the Canadian dollar is undervalued. It's cheap," Gregory said.
The Canadian currency closed around C$1.3312 (US$0.7512) on Wednesday after trading around C$1.3300 earlier in the session. The dollar broke through C$1.3300 on Tuesday, its strongest level since October 1995.
In stocks, the country's big six banks have been big beneficiaries of favorable interest rates and the overseas scramble to buy Canadian stocks.
The TSE's financial services group jumped 2.5 percent on Wednesday after soaring three percent on Tuesday. The sector has gained nearly 1,400 points since September.
Declining interest rates make bank lending more profitable and bank dividends more attractive for investors.
Soaring bank profits have also lured investors. The major banks report their year-end results in a few weeks and are on track for a third straight year of record profits.
Recent listings on the New York Stock Exchange have given Canadian banks a higher profile in the United States where they are considered cheap compared to U.S. bank stocks.
New York-based Morgan Stanley issued a bullish recommendation on two Canadian banks on Tuesday and predicted a strong fourth quarter for the entire group.
