Veronika Hirsch, the flamboyant Canadian stock picker hired recently to spearhead Fidelity Investments' drive to dominate the Canadian market, has been removed from her fund as she is probed by Canadian regulators.
The dramatic move -- just three months after Canada's so-called "Fund Diva" joined the mutual fund giant -- is a blow to Fidelity's expansion efforts in Canada, analysts said.
Hirsch, who was unavailable to comment, is embroiled in a controversy over personal trades she made before joining Fidelity, the world's biggest mutual fund company.
Her investments earlier this year in a small Vancouver company, Oliver Gold Corp., grabbed headlines and attracted the attention of the British Columbia Securities Commission.
Late Wednesday, Fidelity ousted Hirsch from her portfolio and said her status was "under discussion." Fidelity also took the unprecedented step of offering clients their money back without penalty.
The fund has grown to C$190 million ($143 million) in assets since it was launched amid much fanfare on Sept. 23.
Fidelity's head office in Boston declined to comment and referred all calls to its Canadian subsidiary.
"We acknowledge that it is highly unusual for a fund to change portfolio managers so quickly after its launch. This fee recovery programme is a proactive and voluntary response on our part to maintain investors' goodwill," Fidelity Canada spokesman Chethan Lakshman told Reuters.
Fidelity vigorously defended Hirsch when the controversy first broke several weeks ago. But it cancelled a 27-city road show last week when regulators contacted Hirsch.
At issue is her purchase of 65,000 special warrants of Oliver Gold through a private placement while she was a fund manager with AGF Management Ltd. in Toronto.
Hirsch paid C$1.53 ($1.15) per warrant, according to filings with the British Columbia Securities Commission and reported by Stockwatch, a Canadian investment publication.
Shortly afterward, Hirsch's AGF Growth &amp; Income Fund bought 295,000 special warrants at more than double that price.
Analysts said regulators are expected to review whether the trades constitute "front running", a practice whereby a fund manager tries to profit personally by buying securities he or she intends to buy later for the fund.
Another related issue is whether Hirsch, a resident of Ontario, used an address in British Columbia to buy the Oliver Gold shares, which were only offered to B.C. residents.
Lakshman contended the controversy has not damaged Fidelity's reputation or expansion plans in Canada. But analysts saw the publicity as damaging as Fidelity gears up for the critical year-end sale of retirement savings plans.
"They look kind of foolish being the ones associated with this situation. I don't think it helps their bid to become the dominant player in Canada by any stretch of the imagination," one industry analyst said.
The Hirsch case comes as Canadians are pouring billions of dollars into mutual funds. Over the last six years, investment has jumped seven-fold to C$180 billion ($136 billion).
Fidelity wants a bigger share of the Canadian market, where it ranks ninth with C$7 billion ($5.2 billion) in assets, behind leader Investors Group, with C$22 billion ($16 million).
To quarterback its effort in Canada, Fidelity poached Hirsch, a high-profile stock picker with AGF, for a rumoured C$2 million ($1.5 million) signing bonus in August.
Her meteoric rise to celebrity status began when she joined AGF in October 1995 after a successful but low-profile stint at Prudential Insurance Co. of America.
A multi-million advertising campaign put Hirsch's face on television screens across the country. She soon rivalled celebrity stock guru Frank Mersch at Altamira Management Ltd. as the country's best-known fund manager.
When Hirsch jumped to Fidelity, her blood-red nails and leather outfits appeared an uncomfortable fit with Fidelity's ultra-conservative culture, but the hiring was considered a major coup within the industry.
At the time, Fidelity Canada President Kevin Kelly said: "Veronika is one of the country's top equity managers with an outstanding track record and reputation."
Kelly was unavailable for comment on Thursday.
Industry critics argue that the Hirsch case raises key questions about the fiduciary responsibility of fund managers to their clients. It also highlights the jumble of standards governing the personal investing of Canadian money managers.
Altamira has tough rules restricting managers from investing in open-ended mutual funds, short-term government bonds and treasury bills after a controversy involving one of its fund managers.
But some industry observers say the entire industry should adopt tougher U.S. guidelines.
