The battle for Canada's Altamira Management Ltd. took a surprising twist on Wednesday when U.S. investment firm T.A. Associates Inc. launched a rival C$767 million ($572 million) bid for Canada's 12th-largest mutual fund company.
Boston-based T.A. Associates said it is offering C$38 ($28) per share for Altamira, which is also the target of a C$32 ($24) a share bid from Manufacturers Life Insurance Co. Ltd. of Toronto.
The competing offer came as two major Altamira shareholders prepared to go to court to block Manulife's C$660 million ($492 million) takeover bid for Altamira. The legal action was postponed on Wednesday after the feuding parties agreed to try to negotiate a settlement.
The shareholders, who together control 41.5 percent of Altamira, have said Manufacturers Life's offer is too low and that they were negotiating with another potential bidder.
T.A. Associates, which emerged as the mystery bidder Wednesday, is one of the largest private equity investors in the United States.
"We believe that our proposed transaction serves the purposes of all of the parties, and, more importantly, is in the long-term best interests of the unitholders of the Altamira funds," Andrews McLane, T.A. Associates' manager director, said in a letter to Altamira shareholders.
He said the offer was made on behalf of private equity partnerships managed by the Boston firm and other institutional investors.
Under the terms of the offer, Manulife would have to agree to release a group of employee shareholders from a promise to tender their shares to its offer.
Manulife already owns 30.5 percent of Altamira and has the support of a group of 40 Altamira fund managers and employees.
"We do not believe that this highly tentative proposal justifies any delay in implementation of the transaction we have agreed upon," Manulife said in a statement.
The bid is fiercely opposed by Montreal-based Almiria Capital Corp., which owns another 30.5 percent slice of Altamira, and a group led by Altamira Chairman Ron Meade.
The lawsuit launched by Almiria and the management group Tuesday was scheduled to proceed Wednesday in an Ontario court. But the court action was postponed after a last-minute accord by all parties to try to negotiate a settlement.
"The parties reached an agreement to proceed as quickly as possible to a final determination of the issues and all parties intend that Altamira will continue its business in the ordinary course," a joint statement said.
Manulife spokesperson Nancy Evans said there was no connection between the agreement and the appearance of T.A. Associates' rival offer for Altamira.
Altamira manages Canada's biggest no-load mutual fund with about C$6.2 billion ($4.6 billion) in mutual fund assets.
Manulife is the country's largest insurance company with about C$50 billion ($37 billion) in assets.
