Two major shareholders in Canada's Altamira Management Ltd. have set a mid-December deadline to resume their court action to block a C$660 million takeover bid by Manufacturers Life Insurance Co. Ltd. if negotiations to settle the dispute fail.
"The preference is to resolve this as quickly as possible," said Rick Leckner, a spokesman for Almiria Capital Corp. which owns 30.5 percent of Altamira.
"If it has to come to that (a court battle) -- sad as it may be -- it still has to be considered. But the ideal solution is a negotiated one," he said in a telephone interview.
Toronto-based Manulife, Canada's biggest insurance company, has offered C$32 a share for Altamira, the country's 12-largest mutual fund company.
The battle for Altamira took a surprising twist on Wednesday when U.S. investment firm T.A. Associates Inc. launched a rival C$38 a share, or C$767 million, bid for the Canadian mutual fund company.
Manulife already owns 30.5 percent of Altamira and has the support of a group of 40 Altamira fund managers who are shareholders of Altamira.
But the bid is opposed as too low by Montreal-based Almiria and a group led by Altamira Chairman Ron Meade which holds about 11 percent of Altamira.
The lawsuit launched by Almiria and Meade's group Tuesday was scheduled to proceed Wednesday in an Ontario court. But the feuding parties agreed to try and negotiate a settlement.
Leckner said on Thursday that those talks have not yet begun. The court action is set to resume on December 18.
T.A. Associates is one of the largest private equity investors in the United States.
"We believe that our proposed transaction serves the purposes of all of the parties, and, more importantly, is in the long-term best interests of the unitholders of the Altamira funds," Andrews McLane, T.A. Associates' manager director, said in a letter to Altamira shareholders on Wednesday.
He said the offer was made on behalf of private equity partnerships managed by the Boston firm and other institutional investors.
Under the terms of the offer, Manulife would have to agree to release the group of employee shareholders from a promise to tender their shares to its offer.
"We do not believe that this highly tentative proposal justifies any delay in implementation of the transaction we have agreed upon," Manulife said in a statement on Wednesday.
Altamira manages Canada's biggest no-load mutual fund with about C$6.2 billion in mutual fund assets.
Manulife is the country's largest insurance company with about C$50 billion in assets.
-- Reuters Toronto Bureau (416) 941-8100
