The Canadian Football League is set to hold what many fear may be its last Grey Cup championship on Sunday after a chaotic, money-losing season.
The championship between the Toronto Argonauts -- led by former Boston College star quarterback Doug Flutie -- and the Edmonton Eskimos, is the 84th league title game.
But some wonder if there will be a Grey Cup next year.
Despite returning to its Canadian roots this year after a failed U.S. expansion, the CFL is dripping red ink. All but one of its nine clubs will lose money, due to small crowds and cash bailouts to keep teams in Ottawa, Montreal and Vancouver afloat during the 1996 season.
The 120-year-old Ottawa Rough Riders franchise folded earlier this month at the end of the regular season.
So precarious are the league's finances that the cash-strapped Eskimos could not afford to fly players' wives to the Grey Cup game in Hamilton, Ontario, 42 miles (68 km) southwest of Toronto.
"The LAST Grey Cup?" asked the Toronto Star, Canada's biggest newspaper, in a front page story on Friday.
Some say the CFL needs the bigger and richer National Football League to survive.
CFL Commissioner Larry Smith said he is interested in "building a relationship" with the NFL, but that the CFL will not become a Triple A minor league.
"I have no interest in a farm system. If we could have some developmental relationships like we've done in the past with guys like Warren Moon and Joe Theismann, then that would be great," Smith said in a telephone interview.
Moon and Theismann were star CFL quarterbacks in the 1970s and 1980s before jumping to the NFL.
"What we have been doing is exploring some ideas on ways we could possibly work together. But we have not reached an agreement on anything at this point," said Greg Aiello, director of communications for the NFL.
CFL purists fear closer ties with the NFL would threaten the distinctiveness of Canadian-style football.
Canada's game closely resembles the U.S. brand, but there are a few key differences. The playing field is longer and wider. Canadian teams get only three downs instead of four to gain 10 yards and keep possession of the ball.
There are 12 players a side compared to 11, and single points are awarded for missed field goals not run out of the end zone.
Football writer and former CFL player Frank Cosentino said the NFL could help pay the salaries of developing players, but that closer ties could alienate the CFL's remaining followers.
But fans already appear to have turned off the CFL.
Average attendance slipped to 22,095 this year from 24,400 in 1995, despite a slick new "Radically Canadian" marketing campaign trumpeting the league's Canadian heritage.
In major markets such as Toronto and Vancouver, the league is considered second-rate.
A 1995 pre-season NFL game between the Dallas Cowboys and Buffalo Bills in Toronto drew about 60,000 fans. This year, the Argonauts, despite the league's best record of 15-3, averaged just 20,400 fans.
Unless there is a late surge in ticket sales, the Grey Cup game will fall short of a sell-out. "The way it looks now we may have about 36,000. We have capacity for about 40,000," organiser Matthew Moreland said on Friday.
It is a far cry from the 1950s and 1960s when the CFL attracted huge crowds and players such as Ron Lancaster, Joe Kapp, Angelo Mosca and Sam Etcheverry were household names.
Players now rarely stay long enough to become known by fans. Poor marketing has also left the CFL far behind other sports in the race for the public's entertainment dollars.
In a bid to save the league, Smith has proposed a restructuring plan to cut costs. All clubs have until January to secure enough season-ticket sales to operate next year.
Smith is confident there will be eight teams next year, but he said the CFL was prepared to operate with fewer.
There will likely be no football in Ottawa, next year after the league revoked the franchise in Canada's capital from Chicago businessman Horn Chen.
The future is also cloudy for the Montreal Alouettes -- who won the Grey Cup last year as the Baltimore Stallions, but lured few fans this season -- and the British Columbia Lions, who are in receivership.
