Quarterback Doug Flutie led the Toronto Argonauts to a 43-37 victory over the Edmonton Eskimos and the championship of the endangered Canadian Football League on Sunday.
In what may have been the last Grey Cup game, the Argonauts overcame a driving snowstorm and a gritty Eskimo club to capture their first CFL championship since 1991.
Flutie, named the Grey Cup's most valuable player, silenced critics who labelled him a fair-weather quarterback after the Argonauts lost last year's bitterly cold championship game to the Baltimore Stallions.
The former Boston College star and Heisman Trophy winner as U.S. college player of the year also won the CFL's most outstanding player award this week after leading the Argonauts to a 15-3 season, the league's best record.
"That's the full package. That's what has been missing the last few years," Flutie said after winning his second Grey Cup since 1992 when he was with the Calgary Stampeders.
Flutie completed 22 of 35 passes for 302 yards and made a 10-yard scramble for a touchdown.
Canadian newspapers have reported that the CFL's new salary cap may prevent Toronto from paying Flutie's annual salary of $1 million Canadian (about $750,000 U.S.) -- the highest in the league.
The snowy, slippery contest was a typical Grey Cup in which weather played a critical role. The steady snowfall blanketed Hamilton's Ivor Wynne Stadium for most of the game and kept field crews busy.
Despite the conditions, it was the second-highest scoring Grey Cup game. The highlights included a 91-yard kick return by the Eskimos' Henry "Gizmo" Williams which set a new Grey Cup record.
The championship capped a chaotic, money-losing season which left many fans wondering if they will see the venerable Grey Cup next year.
"After a game like this, it would be a real shame if the CFL folded," said parka-clad Bob Forbes, one of 38,595 spectators who huddled against the weather.
Despite returning to its Canadian roots this year after a failed expansion into the United States, the CFL is dripping red ink.
The Grey Cup was not a sell-out, and all but one of the CFL's nine clubs will lose money, due to dwindling crowds and cash bailouts to keep teams in Ottawa, Montreal and Vancouver afloat during the 1996 season.
The 120-year-old Ottawa Rough Riders franchise folded in Canada's capital at the end of the regular season.
The cash-strapped Eskimos could not afford to fly players' wives to the game.
Average CFL attendance slipped to around 22,000 fans a game from 24,400 in 1995, despite a slick "Radically Canadian" marketing campaign trumpeting the league's national heritage.
