Canada's Big Six banks are poised for a third straight year of record profits when they begin reporting year-end earnings on Tuesday, but analysts expect earnings growth to slow in 1997.
The group's combined profit is expected to top C$6 billion ($4.5 billion) for the year ended Oct. 31, eclipsing a record C$5.2 billion ($3.8 billion) in 1995, analysts said.
Most of the increase was due to higher investment banking and fee revenues and lower loan losses.
"It's going to be a very good quarter again, but we may be getting toward the end of very strong quarter-over-quarter growth," said Roy Palmer, an analyst with TD Securities Inc.
High-flying bank stocks may get a further boost if the group beats analysts' estimates for fourth-quarter profit gains of between 15 percent and 17 percent.
"If we get good news and they come in at or higher than analysts' estimates, I think you will see some significant strength," said Fred Ketchen, director of equity trading for ScotiaMcLeod Inc.
The Toronto Stock Exchange's financial services group jumped 176 points to close at a 52-week high of 5541.40 on Monday as analysts predicted several banks would reward shareholders with dividend hikes.
Bank shares have soared this autumn as foreign investors stampeded into Canada's financial markets, lured by declining interest rates, low inflation and a recovering economy.
The sector has added about 1,400 points since early September and powered the TSE to record heights.
Listings on the New York Stock Exchange have given Canadian banks a higher profile south of the border. Some U.S. brokers have issued buy ratings on Canadian bank stocks, which are considered cheap compared to U.S. issues.
But earlier this month, Canadian brokerage CIBC Wood Gundy lowered its recommendations on most of the group.
CIBC Wood Gundy analyst Mark Maxwell said the group's valuation multiples were averaging 1.7 times book value -- narrowing the gap between Canadian bank shares and their U.S. counterparts.
Maxwell said in a report that bank officials warned analysts that their estimates for average earnings growth of 14 percent in 1997 were too optimistic and that 8 percent was The earnings parade will kick off with Bank of Montreal on Tuesday and wrap up with National Bank of Canada on Dec. 5.
Bank of Montreal is expected to post a fourth-quarter profit of C$1.06 (79 cents) a share, up from C$0.93 (69 cents) a share a year ago, according to figures provided by the International Brokerage Estimates Service.
Bank of Nova Scotia's earnings on Wednesday are seen climbing to C$1.01 (75 cents) a share from 88 cents Canadian (65 cents) a share.
Toronto-Dominion Bank's earnings are forecast to rise to 74 cents Canadian (55 cents) a share on Thursday, up from 72 cents Canadian (54 cents) a share last year.
Royal Bank of Canada and Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce -- the country's two biggest banks -- report next week.
Royal Bank's fourth-quarter results are forecast to be C$1.02 (76 cents) a share, compared to last year's 90 cents Canadian (67 cents) per share.
CIBC is seen improving to C$1.51 ($1.12) a share in the fourth quarter from C$1.26 (94 cents) per share a year earlier.
National Bank of Canada, the smallest of the big six banks, is expected to post a 42 cents Canadian (31 cents) per share profit, up from 33 cents Canadian (25 cents) a year earlier.
