Canada's Big Six banks are cruising toward a record C$6 billion ($4.4 billion) annual profit with strong earnings from three banks and buoyant profits expected from Canada's two other largest banks next week.
Bank of Montreal and Bank of Nova Scotia -- the number three and four banks respectively -- cracked the C$1 billion ($740 million) mark this week.
Toronto-Dominion Bank fell short of the billion dollar club, but Canada's fifth largest bank still turned in a record year.
The profit parade continues when Royal Bank of Canada and Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce deliver their results on Wednesday and Thursday respectively.
"They will have whopping earnings. They will be record earnings, rest assured," Roy Palmer, a banking analyst with TD Sercurities Inc., said on Friday.
National Bank of Canada, the smallest of the Big Six, also reports its earnings next Thursday.
Bank of Montreal, Scotiabank and TD posted double-digit increases in net income this week -- with strong growth in personal, corporate and investment banking. The earnings so far have been in line with analysts' forecasts.
"There were no surprises. Just really solid quarters from everybody," said CIBC Wood Gundy analyst Mark Maxwell.
The banks' investment, brokerage and mutual fund businesses enjoyed a banner year as financial markets soared in 1996.
Royal Bank's investment arm. RBC Dominion Securities Ltd, has already posted a record profit. RBC said on Thursday its earnings jumped to C$154.3 million ($114 million) in the 12 months ended Sept. 30, up from C$77 million ($57 million) a year ago.
"In addition to two major mergers...each of our four global businesses turned in strong performances contributing to record results for the year," said RBC president Reay Mackay.
RBC recently completed its C$480 million ($355 million) purchase of brokerage firm Richardson Greenshields of Canada Ltd., and merged some operations with parent Royal Bank.
CIBC's investment unit is also expected to post bullish earnings when the bank reports its results next week.
Analysts said earnings growth for the Big Six is expected slow in 1997, particularly if bond and stock markets cool off.
However, TD Bank expects the boom to continue. "The current low level of interest rates should result in increased economic activity in Canada in 1997 and the gradual return of consumer confidence," said TD president Charles Baillie.
More dividend hikes are possible next week following increases at Scotiabank and TD.
Scotiabank raised its payout by C3 cents (2 cents) to C37 cents (27 cents) a share, its second increase of 1996. TD boosted its dividend by C3 cents (2 cents) to C28 cents (21 cents) a share.
"I would be astonished if CIBC did not increase its dividend at this time," said Palmer. CIBC last raised its dividend by C5 cents (4 cents) to C45 cents (33 cents) last June.
Maxwell said there is less pressure on Royal Bank and National Bank to raise their dividends now, but an increase may come in early 1997.
Improved credit quality also contributed to bottom lines of Scotiabank, Bank of Montreal and TD.
All three banks reported lower loan loss provisions for 1996. TD surprising analysts with a deeper-than-expected drop in its provision to C$152 million ($112 million) from C$180 million ($133 million) in 1995.
Analysts said loan losses for the Big Six appear to have touched bottom and are expected to creep higher next year.
