Royal Bank of Canada, the country's largest bank, rolled up a record annual profit Wednesday and surprised shareholders with a dividend hike.
The Toronto-based bank said net income jumped to C$1.43 billion ($1.05 billion) in the year ended Oct. 31, from C$1.26 billion ($931 million) in 1995.
Royal Bank also boosted its quarterly dividend by C3 cents (2 cents) to C37 cents (27 cents) a share, the third increase in the past 15 months. It was the third Canadian bank to raise its dividend recently.
Royal Bank was the fourth of Canada's Big Six banks to post a third straight year of record profits.
Results from Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce and National Bank of Canada, which are due on Thursday, were expected to push the group's earnings past the C$6 billion level ($4.4 billion), up from last year's record C$5.2 billion ($3.8 billion).
"We're announcing strong results ... and this dividend increase is evidence of our commitment to rewarding shareholders and enhancing shareholder value," Royal Bank Chairman John Cleghorn said in a statement.
Higher asset volumes, lower credit losses and strong performances from wealth management and investment banking fattened Royal Bank's bottom line.
The bank's brokerage arm, RBC Dominion Securities Ltd., turned in a record year due to strong financial markets.
Royal Bank's credit quality also continued to improve. The provision for credit losses fell C$140 million ($103 million) to C$440 million ($325 million) in 1996 and was expected to fall more in 1997.
Royal Bank continues to seek an acquisition in the United States, but soaring stock prices have made it very expensive.
"Indeed in some sectors of wealth management, some of the asking prices have gone right out of sight," Cleghorn told reporters during a conference call.
Royal Bank's fourth-quarter earnings were slightly better than analysts' estimates.
Earnings rose to C$1.09 (80 cents) a share in the quarter from C90 cents (66 cents) in the same period in 1995. The consensus forecast from analysts was about C$1.04 (77 cents) a share.
Royal Bank's dividend increase surprised some analysts who expected the bank to wait until early next year.
The bank is in the middle of a massive share buyback that analysts said had become expensive due to the recent surge in Canadian bank stocks.
"It (the dividend hike) is rather surprising. Maybe they won't be going as far with the buyback and this is compensation," said Roy Palmer, a banking analyst with investment dealer TD Securities Inc.
But Cleghorn said the bank will continue with its buyback of up to 10 percent of its common stock.
"We have not indicated any upside price to analysts or the press and we are continuing with our buyback programme," he told reporters.
Despite the strong results, Royal Bank's stock fell along with a sagging Toronto Stock Exchange Wednesday. The bank's shares closed down C65 cents (48 cents) to C$48.25 ($35.68).
In New York, Royal Bank's stock fell 62.5 cents to close at $35.625.
