The Canadian Football League began searching for a new leader on Wednesday after CFL commissioner Larry Smith resigned following a chaotic, money-losing season.
Smith, 45, said he will not seek a second term as commissioner when his five-year contract expires on April 1, 1997.
"I am proud to have had the opportunity to work with the CFL, but feel it's time that someone with new ideas and energy be given the opportunity of taking this league into the next millennium," Smith said in a statement released by the league.
His departure comes as many fans wonder if the embattled league will survive at all.
Despite an exciting Grey Cup championship game won by the Toronto Argonauts last month, the CFL is dripping red ink.
All but one of its nine clubs lost money this year, due to small crowds and cash bailouts to keep teams in Ottawa, Montreal and Vancouver afloat during the 1996 season.
The 120-year-old Ottawa Rough Riders franchise folded last month at the end of the regular season. The future is also cloudy for the Montreal Alouettes -- who won the Grey Cup last year as the Baltimore Stallions, but lured few fans this season.
The Vancouver-based British Columbia Lions are also in receivership.
Smith, a former running back with the Alouettes, was hired with much fanfare in 1992 after serving as an executive with a Canadian food company.
Observers said at the time that the struggling league desperately needed a solid businessman at the helm. But five years later, the league's survival is still in doubt.
His most ambitious plan was an ill-fated expansion into the United States which lasted only three seasons.
Canadian-style football failed to catch on in cities like Sacramento, San Antonio, Memphis, Las Vegas and Birmingham.
Baltimore was the only successful U.S.-based CFL club. It drew decent crowds and became the first American team to win the Grey Cup championship in 1995. But the Stallions were forced to move to Montreal when the National Football League returned to Baltimore this year.
Although Smith's expansion dream was sharply criticised by CFL purists, his supporters argued the league would have collapsed without the millions of dollars in expansion fees from U.S. teams.
Smith said he will devote the rest of his mandate to implement a cost-cutting plan to save the league. Under the plan, all clubs have until January to secure enough season-ticket sales to operate next year.
