Ontario Hydro, North America's biggest power utility, said Tuesday that it would take a huge C$2.5 billion ($1.8 billion) charge in 1996 to strengthen its financial structure.
The debt-laden, Ontario government-owned utility said its board of directors also approved a C$600 million ($440 million) charge against 1997 earnings.
The charges, related to accounting and operational changes, come as the ruling Conservative government of Canada's most-populous province ponders the privatisation of the massive utility.
The heavy writedowns add up to an estimated 1996 net loss of C$1.9 billion ($1.4 billion), Ontario Hydro said in a statement. The utility previously forecast net income of between C$600 million ($440 million) and C$625 million ($460 million).
"These decisions are driven by our determination to improve nuclear performance and to make capital and policy decisions that enable us to succeed in the business environment we face," said Ontario Hydro Chief Executive Officer Allan Kupcis.
He said the move will not affect Hydro's ability to pay down its debt, estimated at more than C$30 billion ($22 billion) due to overexpansion.
Ontario Hydro is the continent's largest electricity producer based on installed generating capacity and one of the world's biggest non-sovereign borrowers.
It operates 96 hydro-electric stations, five nuclear plants and six fossil-fuel stations.
But competitive pressures from within and outside Ontario have forced changes on Hydro in recent years.
Last June, a government commission recommended that Ontario Hydro lose its 90-year power monopoly and face competition from private Canadian power suppliers and U.S.-based competitors.
Among the operating decisions made Tuesday, the utility said it will scale back or cancel some projects. The biggest single charge was a C$1.2 billion ($882 million) writedown reflecting the costs of surplus heavy water at its nuclear operations.
The decisions will not affect employee staffing levels at the utility.
