Canada's cash-strapped public broadcaster, the CBC, cut almost 1,000 jobs on Wednesday in an overhaul that might eventually include on-air fund-raising drives and corporate sponsorships.
The Canadian Broadcasting Corp. -- faced with a C$414 million ($304 million) reduction in government subsidies -- told 996 employees that they would be laid off.
The layoff notices were part of a plan announced in September to scrap 2,400 jobs through layoffs, voluntary departures and the elimination of vacant positions.
The CBC also set a target of 800 job cuts in 1998.
"Without doubt, the next few months will be tough. However, we have some sense that on the financial front the worst may be over," Jim Byrd, vice-president of CBC English television, said in a letter to employees.
The CBC, which provides television and radio services in English and French, previously announced other measures to pare more than a third from its C$1.4 billion ($1.02 billion) budget by 1998.
The Canadian government contributed almost two-thirds of the CBC budget in the past, but the government's huge budget deficit forced deep cuts in funding for the CBC.
CBC unions said the job cuts would result in an inferior product for Canadian taxpayers.
"There's shock. There's anger. These are people with hundreds of years of experience who will walk out the door and never come back again," said Dan Oldfield, a spokesman for the Canadian Media Guild, which represents 3,000 CBC workers.
On Monday, the CBC said Radio Canada International -- Canada's voice to the world -- would close next March due to a lack of government funding.
To offset shrinking federal subsidies, CBC President Perrin Beatty said earlier this week that the broadcaster may use on-air fund-raising drives and corporate sponsorships.
Beatty recently visited the New York-based U.S. public television network PBS, which holds fund-raising campaigns and receives millions of dollars from Canadian viewers.
"It's something that is under discussion as we speak," said CBC spoksman Tom Curzon, adding that the CBC board had not made a final decision.
To boost revenues and ratings, the CBC relied on popular U.S. television shows and major sporting events in recent years. But some CBC purists complained that the broadcaster had forsaken its mandate to promote and protect Canada's identity from the U.S. cultural behemoth.
In September, Beatty said CBC would return to its Canadian roots by eliminating U.S. shows from prime time and day-time schedules by 1998.
Canadians will also see more advertisements on the CBC, including commercials for the first time on its flagship evening news show, the National.
