Shares in Canadian waste and transportation firm Laidlaw Inc soared on Tuesday as investors and analysts applauded major moves in ambulance services and waste management worth over $2 billion.
While Laidlaw's stock hit new heights on the Toronto Stock Exchange, chief executive officer James Bullock said the company is poised for strong growth with two huge deals announced after the market closed on Monday.
In a bid to become North America's top ambulance operator, Laidlaw plans to acquire Colorado-based American Medical Response Inc in a $1.12 billion cash deal and merge it with its California-based MedTrans ambulance services unit.
In the other transaction, Laidlaw has signed a letter of intent to sell its South Carolina-based Environmental Services unit for $1 billion in cash, shares and debt to Rollins Environmental Services Inc of Delaware.
Laidlaw will own 66-percent of a new combined company, Laidlaw Environmental Services Inc., which will be the dominant player in North American hazardous waste management.
The moves came a few weeks after Burlington, Ontario-based Laidlaw completed the $1.65 billion sale of its solid waste management business to Allied Waste Industries Inc of Arizona.
Laidlaw's class B stock closed up C$1.80 ($1.33) at a 52-week high of C$18 ($13) in heavy turnover of 9.3 million shares on the Toronto Stock Exchange.
Laidlaw's class A stock improved C$1.45 ($1.06) to a new high of C$17.95 ($13.23).
"We've got a (share price) target level of around C$19 ($14) and C$20 ($15) for the year and it will probably go higher when the dust settles," said Ira Katzin, an investment advisor with RBC Dominion Securities.
AMR jumped 6-3/8 to close at 39-3/8 on the New York exchange, while Rollins Environmental added 1/2 at 2-1/2.
Analysts said the Rollins deal will further consolidate a fragmented industry and may improve hazardous waste prices which have been depressed in the past four to five years.
The AMR acquisition will also boost Laidlaw's presence in the fast-growing healthcare transportation area.
"Strategically it is quite wise," Bunting Warburg Inc. analyst Ted Larkin said in a telephone interview.
"The highest growth potential is with their transportation companies. They are also able to partially spinoff the hazardous waste operations and also allow that company to regain a profile by listing on the New York Stock Exchange," Larkin said.
In a note to clients, Lehman Brothers analyst Jeff Kessler said the $40 a share offer for AMR is fair and he recommended investors tender their shares.
With combined annual revenues of about $1.3 billion, the new AMR will hold a 14 percent share of the $10 billion ambulance industry. It also gives Laidlaw access to related medical transport services which are a $30 billion market.
Bullock said AMR will immediately boost Laidlaw's earnings, but he declined to give a specific forecast.
Larkin bumped his profit forecast for Laidlaw in the 1997 fiscal year ended August to $0.71 a share from $0.70 per share. He also revised his 1998 forecast up to $0.88 per share from the low eighties.
Some analysts raised concerns that anti-trust issues may hamper the AMR deal, but Bullock said he does not foresee any problems with regulators.
The transaction with Rollins Environmental will be neutral to Laidlaw's earnings in the near term while operations are consolidated.
Bullock said staff levels may be reduced by between 15-20 percent and 20 facilities may be closed, leaving about 100 facilities in the merged firm. The integration will yield more efficient operations and savings of US$75 million annually.
