A furry hedgehog, idyllic sunsets and the meaner streets of Budapest seem unlikely moneyspinners, but such images are crowding Canada's airwaves as the annual mutual fund season kicks into gear.
Armed with high-powered ad campaigns, eager fund sellers are vying for the billions of dollars Canadians will pour into registered retirement savings plans (RRSPs).
With interest rates at 40-year lows and stocks at stratospheric heights, investors are expected to shun interest-bearing investments for higher yielding mutual funds before the March 1 deadline for RRSP contributions.
"We're in the thick of it right now and it's going to get busier and busier toward the end of the (RRSP) season," said John Wiltshire, vice-president of marketing for Investors Group, Canada's top fund company with C$25 billion ($18 billion) in assets.
TAX BENEFIT IS A DRAW
Canada introduced RRSPs in the late 1950s to allow people without registered pension plans to save for retirement. Investors can deduct the amount from their taxes for the previous year's income.
Besides being a tax benefit, RRSPs have become more popular as traditional pension benefits are scaled back.
Canadians have more than C$211 billion ($156 billion) stashed in mutual funds, an eight-fold increase from 1990. An estimated C$23 billion ($17 billion) will be added to the pot this year.
Fund companies also expect a big chunk of the C$250 billion ($186 billion) currently invested in guaranteed investment certificates and term deposits to shift into funds.
In what has become an annual rite of the Canadian winter, fund sellers flood the airwaves with promotions, hype and gimmicks to lure RRSP dollars. But, unlike the United States, Canadian broadcast rules prohibit companies from making performance claims on television or radio.
"That's why you get fuzzy advertising. They talk about lifestyle and emphasise branding," said John Kaszel, director of research for Investment Funds Institute of Canada, a lobby group representing 40 fund companies.
Soft-sell ads feature happy people in tranquil settings with simple messages such as "We're here to get you there," or "quietly creating wealth."
NEXT GENERATION THE TARGET
Some firms are targeting the next generation of investors. GT Global, a member of Liechtenstein Global Trust, launched a Kid's Kit in December to teach youngsters about mutual funds.
When a parent opens a minimum C$500 ($370) account, his child gets a stuffed "Henry the Hedgehog" toy, a certificate and a colourful book explaining "Henry's Mysterious Gift."
"This is a chance to give a gift to your kids that is tangible and gets them into the habit of investing," said CT Global President Joe Canavan.
Other ads feature smartly tailored people using words such as "discipline" and "performance" to trumpet their firm's investment strategy.
Spectrum United Mutual Funds' gritty commercials highlight its team of tough global fund managers, including one who scored a big success investing in a Budapest security company.
To add levity to the RRSP season, Bank of Montreal's campaign pricked the balloons of so-called "experts", but there was little information on the bank's own funds.
Critics complain that Canada's advertising rules insult investors' intelligence.
"Mutual fund regulators are convinced that mutual fund investors are ignorant dolts who need to be protected from themselves and the industry. The result, as far as radio and television are concerned, is a multimillion dollar river of non-information," Toronto Globe and Mail columnist Terence Corcoran wrote recently.
SCANDALS MAY MEAN TIGHTER CONTROLS
But regulators are unlikely to relax their grip on the industry. In fact, the rules could tighten after recent scandals such as the Veronika Hirsch affair.
Hirsch was a star stock picker hired last summer to spearhead Boston-based Fidelity Investments' drive to dominate the Canadian market. But she was removed from her portfolio in November amid a controversy over personal trades she made before joining the world's biggest mutual fund company.
Fidelity also offered clients their money back without penalty. "We were pleased that the number of people who did take advantage of it was less than our expectation," said spokesman Chethan Lakshman, but he did not give any numbers.
Hirsch's True North Equity Fund is now under a less flamboyant manager and has accumulated C$211 million ($156 million) in assets since its launch last September.
Hirsch's status was under discussion, Lakshman said, but a separation package was rumoured to be under negotiation.
FALLOUT PROMPTS GUIDELINES REVIEW
The fallout from the Hirsch affair prompted a review of the industry's guidlines for fund managers. "It has opened up some concerns, but those are being addressed. Now we are seeing whether more should be done," Kaszel said.
While analysts said it was difficult to assess the damage to the industry's credibility, the Hirsch affair changed how companies sell their product.
Brash campaigns built around high-profile stock pickers are out and the "team" is in, analysts said.
Canada's Big Six banks are also heavy advertisers this year as they strive to become bigger players in a industry dominated by independents.
Three banks are now among the top 10 firms, with Royal Bank of Canada number three behind Investors Group amd Trimark Investment Management Inc.
The banks were allowed to enter the mutual fund business in 1987 and now account for 29 percent of the industry's assets. Fund management fees have helped propel bank profits to record highs in recent years.
