Veronika Hirsch, a flamboyant Canadian stock picker whose high-profile move to Fidelity Investments was marred by controversy, parted with the Boston-based fund company on Tuesday.
"We've concluded the discussions and Fidelity wishes Ms. Hirsch well in her future endeavours," Fidelity spokesman Chethan Lakshman said in a telephone interview.
Hirsch was a star fund manager hired last summer to spearhead Fidelity's drive to dominate the Canadian market.
But Canada's so-called "Fund Diva" was removed from her portfolio in November amid a controversy over personal trades she made before joining the world's biggest mutual fund company.
Lakshman did not give details of the agreement with Hirsch, who has kept a low profile since her investments in a small Vancouver company, Oliver Gold Corp., grabbed headlines and the attention of regulators last November.
Hirsch's lawyer, Tom Lockwood, said on Tuesday that she is weighing her options, including offers to go on the lecture circuit or write a book.
"There's private money management prospects and there are mutual fund prospects. There have been a number of approaches made and she's considering what she will do next," he said.
At issue was Hirsch's purchase of 65,000 special warrants of Oliver Gold through a private placement while she was a fund manager with AGF Management Ltd. in Toronto.
Shortly after the warrant purchase, Hirsch's AGF Growth &amp; Income Fund bought 295,000 special warrants of Oliver Gold at more than double the price paid by Hirsch, according to filings with the British Columbia Securities Commission and reported by Stockwatch, a Canadian investment publication.
Fidelity removed Hirsch from her True North Equity Fund last November after Canadian securities regulators confirmed her personal investments were under investigation.
The dramatic move came barely three months after Fidelity poached Hirsch from AGF to lead its expansion drive in Canada where it ranks ninth with C$8.2 billion ($6.1 billion) in assets.
Canadians have more than C$211 billion ($156 billion) stashed in mutual funds, an eight-fold increase from 1990. An estimated C$23 billion ($17 billion) will be added to the pot this year, analysts forecast.
While at AGF, Hirch was the focus of a multi-million dollar advertising campaign which made her Canada's top celebrity fund manager.
When Hirsch jumped to Fidelity, her leather outfits and blood-red nails appeared an uncomfortable fit with Fidelity's ultra-conservative culture, but the hiring was considered a major coup within the industry.
Hirsch's old True North fund is now under a less flamboyant manager and has accumulated C$280 million ($208 million) in assets since its launch last September.
While analysts have said it is difficult to assess the damage to Fidelity's expansion drive, the Hirsch affair has changed how fund companies sell their product.
Brash campaigns built around high-profile stock pickers are out and the "team" is in, analysts said.
