Ontario Finance Minister Ernie Eves, buoyed by a stronger economy and an improving deficit outlook, said on Thursday his budget-paring knife would not cut as deep this year.
"I would say that the majority of the cost-cutting exercise this government has to do is behind us," Eves told reporters after delivering a fiscal update for the third quarter ended December 31.
Ontario's 1996/97 deficit is now pegged at C$7.67 billion for the year ending March 31, down C$508 million from Eves' original budget forecast. Ontario is Canada's most populous province and industrial powerhouse.
Barely four months ago, Ontario's ruling Conservatives said a further C$3 billion in spending cuts would be needed to balance the budget by the turn of the century.
Since sweeping to power in 1995 promising a "Common Sense Revolution", the Conservatives have identified about C$8 billion in cuts through the end of the decade.
With the economy now improving, Eves said: "I don't feel that I am now driven to find C$3 billion in more savings."
Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce has predicted Ontario's economy would pick up steam this year despite government cutbacks. The economy was forecast to grow 3.1 percent this year and 2.3 percent in 1998, compared to 1.7 percent in 1996.
But Eves said the province's deficit fight was far from over and he was still seeking "cost efficiencies" for the upcoming 1997/98 budget this spring.
"I don't want anybody to think we don't have a problem. We still have a C$7.7 billion problem on annualized basis in the province of Ontario," he said.
Government revenues grew faster than projected in the third quarter, up almost C$1.2 billion to C$47.8 billion for the year. Most of the increase was due to higher than expected personal, corporate and retail sales tax revenues resulting from a stronger economy, Eves said.
He said the government's controversial 30 percent tax cut had helped boost consumer confidence in Ontario. About half of the tax reduction has been implemented, with the remaining 15 percent due by 1999.
Eves said he had not ruled out speeding up that timetable, but that the government had a lot on its plate.
Last month, the Conservatives unveiled sweeping reforms that would fundamentally alter the roles of provincial and local governments in everything from health care and social spending to road maintenance and sewage.
The most controversial move is a proposed merger of Toronto, Canada's biggest city, and five surrounding municipalities, which has drawn fierce opposition from some local politicians and businesses.
CIBC said the provincial government would better its fiscal targets after downloading services such as welfare and transit to municipalities. Toronto is a potential loser under the plan because it has a large share of the province's welfare cases.
Eves said the government would push forward with its plans and on Thursday he doubled the government's restructuring fund to C$1.8 billion.
"I think people realize we can't operate in 1997 the way we operated in 1957 in the province of Ontario. There is a transition and that transition costs money," he said.
