Shivering icewine enthusiasts, battered by icy winds, headed into a snow-covered vineyard on a recent night to harvest one of the world's rarest wines.
Although Germany discovered the luscious dessert wine in the late 18th century, Canada is the world's largest producer of icewine -- capturing many international awards and helping shed an industry reputation for screw-top plonk that neither amuses nor has any pretentions.
If you can find it, this "liquid gold" can cost up to C$200 ($150) a bottle in icewine-crazy Japan -- four times the price in Canada. Japan is by far the biggest export market, but China and South Korea are also developing a taste for it.
But on this cold winter night a cup of piping hot coffee could fetch a better price than any chilled wine. "It's cold, hard work. You're outside in the dark picking frozen grapes and wondering why you're not asleep like normal people," Greg Berti, general manager of Hillebrand Estates Winery, said on a recent midnight tour of Hillebrand's icewine fields.
Most of the Canadian vintage comes from the Niagara wine region where 24 wineries produced 29,700 gallons (112,500 liters) in 1995. That is up 57 percent from 1994 but paltry compared to the eight million gallons (30 million liters) of regular wine produced yearly in Ontario, Canada's most populous province.
Some California wineries produce sweet wines but they are shunned by icewine purists because the grapes are artificially frozen. "Their wine is interesting, but it's not in the same league as icewine," Berti said.
IT MAY BE RARE BUT IT TASTES LIKE PEACHES
Although Niagara wineries say their products are unique in taste, icewine is generally amber or golden in colour with a full-flavored taste similar to honey, apricots or peaches. It is thicker than regular wine, with an alcohol content of about 10 percent, compared to 40 percent for a cognac or brandy.
Canada exports icewine to Germany, Denmark, Hong Kong, Switzerland, Taiwan, the United Kingdom and the United States. China and Korea are also emerging markets. But the biggest buyers are Japanese tourists who flock to the Niagara region by the busload -- snapping up several bottles of icewine after a visit to nearby Niagara Falls.
Hillebrand sells about 75 percent of its icewine to Japanese who tour its winery. "Their image of Canada is Banff, Anne of Green Gables and Niagara Falls, and icewine fits in with that image," Berti said.
Last summer, a group of 74 Japanese race horse owners descended on another Niagara winery and drove off with more than $10,000 worth of icewine. "They came into the winery, sampled, bought and were back in their bus in 45 minutes," recalled Debi Pratt, director of public relations for Inniskillin Wines Inc.
ALMOST AS HARD TO PRODUCE AS GOLD
It takes every grape from an entire vine to yield enough juice to make one bottle of icewine -- 10 times the amount used to make regular wines. Many grapes are lost to hungry birds, hail or harsh winter winds before they are picked.
But Canada has plenty of what is needed most to make icewine -- consistently cold weather.
The grapes -- hardy Vidal or Riesling varieties -- must be picked off the vine when temperatures are well below freezing.
Most wineries set aside part of their vineyards in October when the regular wine harvest ends. By mid-December or early January the shriveled grapes have turned a brownish hue and pickers are on call, waiting for the right weather.
Berti said Mother Nature has sometimes forced crews to pick on Christmas Eve or New Year's Eve -- although that did not happen this year.
"The wind is the biggest problem. Every hour or half hour we take a break for hot coffee and donuts," Gregory Synos, a six-year veteran of the icewine harvest, said.
The grapes are sorted and rushed to the winery where presses work into the night. The juice then goes through several weeks of fermentation, followed by a few months of ageing in oak barrels to smooth out the acidity and tanins in immature icewine.
Although Hillebrand has tried to modernise the process by using special presses and protective netting for the grapes, Berti conceded: "There is nothing efficent about it. You have to get into the fields when the getting is good."
