Canada's major banks, still smarting from last year's bank-bashing budget, are hoping for no major surprises and perhaps some tax relief from Finance Minister Paul Martin next week.
Last year, Martin stunned the banks when he rejected their bid for expanded powers in insurance. He also extended a controversial capital tax on the banks for another year.
In the run up to next Tuesday's 1997/98 budget, bankers have lobbied for a lighter tax burden which, they argue, is among the heaviest in corporate Canada.
"We feel the banks are paying more than their fair share of taxes. Particularly our concern is capital taxes," said Mark Weseluck, vice-president of banking operations for the Canadian Bankers Association.
The Big Six banks -- Royal Bank of Canada, Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, Bank of Montreal, Bank of Nova Scotia, Toronto-Dominion Bank and National Bank of Canada -- have rung up record profits in the past three years.
The group earned a combined C$6.26 billion in 1996, up 21 percent from the previous year. The banks are expected to report strong first-quarter results later this month.
At their annual meetings this year, bankers stressed they paid record taxes of more than C$5.5 billion in 1996.
But social activists argue the banks should pay more tax on what they call "excessive" profits.
In its "alternative" budget released this week, the Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives urged Martin to impose an "excess profits" tax on the banks and other financial institutions totaling C$496 million in 1997/98.
Other groups want Martin to use the existing 12 percent capital tax to encourage small business lending -- an area in which the banks have been criticized for not doing enough.
In Ontario -- where five of the six major banks are based -- the Conservative government hit the banks with a 10 percent capital tax surcharge in last spring's budget.
The banks can eliminate some or all of the tax if they invest more in small business between now and the end of 1999. Ontario Finance officials said it was too early to measure the program's performance, but several major banks unveiled small business loan programs in recent months.
Weseluck said the Ontario tax had little to do with those announcements. "The problem when you do this is that taxation gets less efficient the more they are used to boost investment in a certain part of the market which the banks are doing extensively anyway," he said.
Analysts doubted Martin would do any major tinkering on bank taxes next week.
"I don't expect any new additional taxes and I doubt if there is any tax relief. The only possible source of tax relief is that the government would not extend this capital tax," said Nesbitt Burns analyst Hugh Brown.
With bank bashing a popular sport among Canadian voters, Martin may be loathe to give the banks a tax break in what is shaping up to be an election year, analysts said.
Adding to this year's budget boredom is the absence of last year's noisy battle between the banks and insurers.
Martin shocked the banks when he slammed the door on their bid for broader insurance powers and pre-empted a government white paper on financial reforms, which was several months away from being released.
Martin has set up a task force to study those and other competition issues, including whether major banks should be allowed to merge. But reforms recommended by the task force are not expected to take effect until 2000.
((Reuters Toronto Bureau 416-941-8100))
