Canada unveiled plans on Friday to lift restrictions on foreign banks in a bid to spur competition in a sector dominated by six big domestic banks.
Draft legislation allowing foreign banks to open branches in Canada will be ready before the end of 1997. But a possible federal election may delay the passage of the bill in Canada's parliament until next year, said Doug Peters, secretary of state for financial institutions.
"Branching will encourage new banks to enter the Canadian marketplace and allow existing foreign banks greater opportunity to compete," Peters said in a statement.
He told reporters that the government needed time to develop branching rules, including a tax regime.
Foreign bankers have complained that Canada lagged behind its Group of Seven trading partners in opening up its banking sector to foreign competition.
Current rules require foreign banks to operate separately capitalized subsidiaries in Canada. The higher cost of operating a subsidiary, rather than a branch, has driven several foreign banks out of the country.
Last year a federal "white paper" on financial reforms introduced only minor changes to foreign bank rules, but parliament subsequently issued reports urging freer access to Canada's markets for foreign banks.
The number of foreign banks operating in Canada has dropped to 43 from a peak of about 60 in the 1980s. The legislation has not been written yet, but a freer market would make Canada more attractive, said Alfred Buhler, chairman of Bank of America Canada, a unit of BankAmerica Corp.
"It will slow the erosion and may reverse that trend. I think a number of banks who are not currently operating in Canada will take another hard look," Buhler said.
Canada's big six domestic banks already dominate regular banking, trusts and brokerages. But they are being challenged by the Internet and the rise of new "virtual banks."
Dutch financial services giant ING Groep N.V. is set to launch a telephone banking operation in Canada early next year and has earmarked an initial investment of $50 million for direct marketing of a range of savings and loans products.
Citicorp and Wells Fargo and Co. are also planning banking services aimed at Canadian consumers and small businesses.
Canadian bankers have said they would welcome more foreign competition as long as it is on a level playing field.
"We have absolutely no concerns about being able to compete successfully. There is a need to ensure that regulations -- tax, capital adequacy, corporate governance policies and so on -- are reasonably balanced," Bank of Nova Scotia chairman Peter Godsoe said recently.
Canadian bankers complained that their foreign rivals did not pay the same capital taxes in Canada as domestic banks. They also argued that virtual banks would not create new jobs in Canada, although critics noted that Canadian banks had shed staff recently in a move to electronic banking services.
Royal Bank of Canada, the country's biggest bank with more than $150 billion in assets, supports granting more access to foreign banks if rules barring Canadian banks from getting bigger are lifted.
Royal Bank and its counterparts have seen their international rankings slip sharply in recent years. They argue domestic bank mergers may be necessary if Canada is to remain competitive internationally.
Federal laws discourage bank mergers by limiting investors to a minimum 10 percent stake in a Canadian bank. A government task force plans to study these and other competition issues this year.
