Canada's financial markets gave an approving nod to Finance Minister Paul Martin's stay-the-course 1997/98 budget on Tuesday, with some analysts expecting a modest rally on Wednesday.
In what is expected to be an election year, the Liberal government said it will maintain pressure on the deficit while offering minor tax cuts and new spending.
Economists said Martin's assumptions on interest rates and economic growth were prudent and should enable the government to beat its fiscal targets.
"What you're going to see tomorrow? A flow of funds into the Canadian dollar briefly, quite possibly the bond market, quite possibly the stock market," said Bob Boaz, director of research for HSBC James Capel Canada Inc.
But analysts predicted the markets would settle down quickly as most of the budget details were widely expected.
"There was no big news in this budget. But he (Martin) didn't relax his fiscal resolve and that will be well received by the markets," said John Anania, an economist at Royal Bank of Canada, the country's biggest bank.
The budget had little immediate impact on the Canadian dollar, but currency traders said they expect the unit to strengthen overnight on Martin's favorable deficit targets.
Martin predicted the deficit for 1996/97 would be no more that C$19 billion, compared to a projected C$24.3 billion. The deficit is seen falling to C$17 billion in 1997/98.
In early evening trading, the Canadian dollar firmed slightly to C$1.3534 (US$0.7388) from closing levels at C$1.3546 (US$0.7382).
"We expect the Canadian dollar to appreciate overnight as a result of the positive budget," said John Nicholson, managing director of Scotia Capital Markets.
Canadian bonds strengthened shortly after the budget's release as the market welcomed news of only modest new spending initatives.
Some bond analysts expressed concern that Martin did not set a target for balancing the country's books, but overall they expected a neutral reaction to the budget on Wednesday.
"He's made some extremely conservative assumptions, we believe, with interest rates and growth that lead us to conclude he will continue to outperform his own targets," said Hank Cunningham, director of fixed income with First Marathon Securities.
The budget is expected to be well received on Canada's biggest stock market on Wednesday, after the Toronto Stock Exchange enjoyed record gains on Tuesday, analysts said.
Before the budget's release, the TSE's key 300 index posted its ninth record close of 1997, up 20 points to 6238.22. Trading was heavy with turnover of 138.4 million shares worth C$2.52 billion, the TSE's second highest value ever.
Martin did not impose new corporate, personal or excise tax increases, but the government did extend a special capital tax on Canada's big banks for another year.
