Tottenham Hotspur chairman Alan Sugar said on Thursday that English soccer clubs could face financial ruin if they follow the example of big spenders such as Newcastle United.
Sugar was speaking after Premier League club Tottenham posted a record pre-exceptional profit of 10.2 million pounds ($16 million) for the 14 months to July 31. The club increased its total dividend to 5p from 3p.
English soccer is booming as television revenue helps to fund an influx of top foreign talents and the sector is seen as increasingly attractive for investors.
English champions Manchester United, listed along with Tottenham on the London Stock Exchange, this week announced an annual profit of 15 million pounds.
But Sugar warned that the Bosman Ruling under which players effectively become free agents at the end of their of their contracts was "a devastating blow to the football industry".
Sugar said he could not see the sense in deals such as privately-owned Newcastle's recent signing of England captain Alan Shearer from Blackburn Rovers for 15 million pounds.
"Even if you win everything in sight there is no way to make it pay," he said, noting that Newcastle would not be able to recoup any of their outlay on Shearer once his contract was up.
Tottenham, who reported 14-month figures because of a change in their financial year, took an exceptional charge of 7.3 million pounds to reflect a drop in the value of their squad.
The value fell after Belgian Jean-Marc Bosman won a landmark case at the European Court of Justice which ended the transfer fee system for players who were out of contract.
Sugar, who has a 40 percent stake in Tottenham, acknowledged that profit figures were meaningless to fans clamouring for new signings following the injury-hit team's indifferent start to the season.
He said funds were available to team manager Gerry Francis to strenghten the squad but declined to say how much.
"I would hope in the next two to three weeks that we will see some signings at the club," he added, saying that the club's aim was to sign promising young players on long-term contracts.
The head of consumer electronics group Amstrad, Sugar saved Tottenham from the verge of bankruptcy five years ago when he and former England coach Terry Venables took over the club.
But the two, both working-class London boys made good, fell out spectacularly and have become locked in a series of legal battles since Sugar forced Venables to leave the club in 1993. ($1=.6395 Pound)
