Shares in English soccer champions Manchester United powered to record highs on Friday after the club's chief executive said the club was a likely bid target.
"Any successful company is an attractive takeover prospect. People are going to look at it, so it could well be the subject of more takeover proposals," chief executive Martin Edwards was quoted as telling The Times.
Britain's Press Association quoted Edwards as saying that any proposals would be given serious consideration.
"...If it arises, then we would have to look at it as and when. We would have a responsibility to talk. But it would have to be in the best interests of the shareholders and the supporters."
The speculation sent United shares soaring to record highs of over 5.0 pounds -- valuing the club in excess of 300 million pounds ($470 million).
The club responded to the swirl of speculation with a statement that its board was not aware of any bid approaches.
"...we have noted the recent media coverage suggesting that Manchester United have received an approach which may lead to an offer being made for the Company. The Board is not aware of any proposals," the club said.
The shares came off their highs after the statement but were still 42 1/2p firmer at 495p at around midday.
United shares have jumped from under two pounds at the end of January as the club won the coveted English league and F.A. Cup double.
The rise has also been fuelled by a lucrative new television deal signed by the Premier League with satellite broadcaster BSkyB which will virtually treble television income for top English soccer clubs..
United are reported earlier this year to have rejected a takeover bid from publishing group VCI which valued the club at 300 million pounds. VCI did a deal with United in January to buy the publishing rights to club videos and books.
The Times article named brewer Whitbread and media and leisure group Granada as potential bidders.
It reported that Edwards, who has a stake of around 17 percent in United, has said privately that it would require a bid of over 400 million pounds to buy the club.
Granada has strong ties with the Manchester area, operating the ITV commercial television franchise for north-west England. It is also known to be interested in developing a Manchester United magazine TV channel with the club.
But sources close to Granada effectively ruled out a takeover bid, saying that the company remained focused on digesting its acqusition of leading British hotel group Forte earlier this year.
Whitbread poured scorn on the suggestion.
"We would love to buy the club but there are as many beer drinkers in Liverpool, Newcastle and Chelsea," a Whitbread spokeswoman said, adding that Whitbread would not want to do anything to upset customers who were fans of other clubs. "The report is complete rubbish."
Share analysts say that the huge interest in soccer and the potential growth in revenue from pay-per-view television deals make a bid likely for United at some stage in the near future.
Pay-per-view is expected to be introduced before the end of the century following the planned launch of digital satellite television by BSkyB late next year. It could generate tens of millions of pounds for clubs like United, the best-supported team in the country. ($1=.6350 Pound)
