British-based exhibitions group Blenheim is seen as an ideal fit with rumoured suitor United News &amp; Media, share analysts said on Monday.
United News &amp; Media and Anglo-Dutch group Reed Elsevier have long been seen as rivals for the hand of Blenheim. However, industry sources said Reed was thought to be out of the running.
"Blenheim's strength in Europe and France in particular mean it would be a good fit (for United)," said one analyst. "The exhibitions business is also doing quite well at this stage in the cycle."
Dutch publisher VNU stirred the waters last week when it paid 500 pence a share to take a 15 percent stake in Blenheim. VNU declined comment on reports on Monday that it was set to increase its stake to 25 percent.
It said last week its 15 percent holding in Blenheim was a strategic long-term investment and said it had no intention of making an offer for the whole company unless rival offers emerged.
Its move is certain to have concentrated the mind of United News chief executive Clive Hollick, who is now reported to be weighing a bid of up to 520p per share, valuing Blenheim at some 480 million pounds ($757 million).
Blenheim shares closed 6 1/2p lower at 477 1/2p on Monday.
United News has so far refused to declare its hand. Analysts said a complicating factor was the continuing reorganisation of its businesses following its merger earlier this year with television and financial services group MAI. United News also publishes two British national newspapers.
"A bid makes a lot of sense but the timing is not good for United News," said media analyst Nick Ward of Credit Lyonnais Laing.
Blenheim, in which French utilities company Generale des Eaux has a 15 percent stake, posted pre-tax profits of 35.6 million pounds in 1995 on turnover of 202.5 million.
France was its largest source of revenue, accounting for 37 percent of earnings, followed by 26 percent from the U.S., 20 percent from Britain, 11 percent from Germany and six percent from the rest of the world.
Miller Freeman is the business magazines and exhibitions arm of United News. It operates in the U.S., Europe and Asia but analysts regard the American market as its main strength.
Analyst Anthony de Larrinaga of Panmure Gordon said a bid of around five pounds per share would represent an attractive deal for investors in both United and Blenheim.
He said that United was likely to be considering a bid between 480p and 530p per share. ($1=.6337 Pound)
