Shares in Premier Farnell dipped on Monday after the newly enlarged electronic components distributor posted half-year profits slightly below expectations.
Premier Farnell was created in April when Britain's Farnell Electronics completed a $2.8 billion takeover of America's Premier Industrial Corp -- a company twice its size.
Pre-tax profit for the six months to July 28 totalled 56.1 million pounds ($88.4 million). That was down on the pre-tax figure of 71.3 million pounds a year earlier but that had been flattered by a large one-off gain.
More pertinently, analysts had forecast profit in a range of 57.5 to 61.6 million pounds and the failure to reach that level was reflected in a 10.5p decline in the share price to 670p.
The company said that the market for electronic components has shown much lower levels of growth in 1996 than in recent years and added it did not expect any major change in conditions for the rest of the year.
"I think the evidence is we've bottomed the cycle and the signs at the moment are positive. But we are planning on a more conservative basis at this moment in time," chief executive Howard Poulson told Reuters.
Premier said its priorities were the development and international expansion of the catalogue business and further exploitation of synergies between its transatlantic operations.
Poulson said he was delighted with progress on integration following an acquisition which had transformed the company, based in the northern English town of Wetherby, into the third largest electronic components distributor in the world.
"The integration is going superbly..I am very pleased with what people have done on both sides of the Atlantic," he said.
He said he did not see any further scope for cutting costs following the acquisition.
"I think we've finished with all of the cost-cutting. This was never a deal which was built on reducing overheads and getting rid of people," he said.
"We said we would remove duplication in our two head offices -- we've done that, we've probably dropped about 150 people since we made the acquisition." The company now has some 6,500 staff, 4,000 of whom are in the United States.
"What the business is about now is building sales and building our profits that way," he added.
Premier Farnell said its sales expansion projects were on schedule and should begin to make a contribution in the fourth quarter of the year. REUTER
($1=.6350 Pound)
