Marjorie Scardino, set to become Pearson chief executive in January, rejects the tag of company insider and has vowed to carry out radical change at the British media firm "if needed".
Selecting an American woman to head a top British company was certain to raise a few eyebrows in the City of London. But initial doubts are paradoxically based on the fact that she is seen as part of the Pearson family rather than a newcomer.
"The message that this appointment puts across is that we can expect more of the same from the company. That's not what the market wanted to hear," said one media analyst.
Scardino, 49, is chief executive of business publisher The Economist Group, 50 percent owned by Pearson.
But she said that The Economist is run as an independent operation and she is not part of the Pearson establishment.
"I would like to put that one to rest - I am an outsider to Pearson," the mother-of-three told Reuters.
She said that she had spoken to the members of the Pearson board and had been assured that they were prepared to accept radical change "if needed".
She said she was well aware of press and market criticism of a lack of management focus at Pearson, a company whose activities range from the Financial Times to Australian soap opera "Neighbours".
Pearson has sold off businesses in wine, china and oil services in recent years to concentrate on three media-related areas -- Information, Education and Entertainment.
"I know this company has been broken up and put back together (by journalists and analysts) in all kinds of ways. I think I'm aware of all the possibilities."
There was more bad press on Thursday as the market questioned her qualifications.
"She's apparently been very successful at the Economist but it's not the same as running a major PLc," said one analyst.
But she received a glowing reference from Economist chairman Dominic Cadbury: "I am sure that she will move quickly to assess the Pearson business and define a new strategic direction which she will set about implementing," he said.
Profits at the Economist have more than doubled during her three years as chief executive. Scardino is also a director of U.S. food giant ConAgra Inc and British retailer WH Smith.
Born in Arizona but brought up in Texas, Scardino worked in the 1970s as a lawyer in Savannah, Georgia -- the hometown of her journalist husband.
By night she helped him with his weekly Georgia Gazette newspaper where he won a Pulitzer prize for his work.
She moved to New York in the mid 1980s where she headed the Economist's North American operations for several years.
She lives in the swish west London quarter of Knightsbridge with husband Albert. The couple have three children -- the youngest of whom is making a name for himself as an actor.
Indeed, Hal Scardino, 11, is maybe better known than his high-powered Mum. His films include Marvin's Room with Meryl Streep, Diane Keaton and Robert de Niro and The Indian in the Cupboard, for which he won a best child actor award.
"He's been in a couple of movies but I wouldn't call him a star," she said. Her other son, Will, is 16 while daughter Adelaide, 18, has just returned to the U.S. to study.
