Shares in Pearson Plc fell on Thursday as the stock market gave an initial thumbs-down to the appointment of an American woman publishing executive as chief executive of the British media group.
Marjorie Scardino, 49, chief executive of The Economist Group that is half owned by Pearson -- which publishes the Financial Times British business daily -- will succeed Frank Barlow as chief executive at the end of the year.
Her appointment ends a long period of uncertainty over the succession to Barlow, 66, who is retiring.
But market players were dismayed by her close ties with the Pearson group and the fact that a big name executive had not been brought in from outside to knock the business into shape.
"The message that this appointment puts across is that we can expect more of the same from the company. That's not what the market wanted to hear," said one media analyst.
Pearson shares fell to a low of 668 pence after the announcement. They recovered a little but still ended the day 13p lower at 675.
The company also announced that Dennis Stevenson, a non-executive director, becomes deputy chairman now and will take over from Michael Blakenham as chairman next May.
Scardino said that she was not a Pearson insider.
"I would like to put that one to rest -- I am an outsider to Pearson," she told Reuters.
She said that a trust agreement meant that Pearson directors remained in a minority on the Economist board. "We jealously guard our independence, we're not a part of the Pearson group."
Trained as a lawyer, Scardino helped her journalist husband to run the Pulitzer Prize winning local weekly the Georgia Gazette in the 1970s. The couple moved to New York in the 1980s where she headed the Economist's North American operation.
Share analysts say that her main task is to bring focus to Pearson, a sprawling media and leisure company which has a market capitalisation of almost four billion pounds ($6.3 billion).
Barlow has reshaped the company in his six years in charge, selling off the Royal Doulton china business and wine and oil industry interests. The company has focused on three divisions -- Information, Education and Entertainment. Its activities range from Australian soap opera to the Financial Times and analysts say not all pieces of the jigsaw fit.
Scardino, a mother of three, said she was prepared to make radical changes "if needed".
"I know this company has been broken up and put back together (by journalists and analysts) in all kinds of ways. I think I'm aware of all the possibilities."
She won a ringing endorsement from Dominic Cadbury, her colleague as chairman of business publisher the Economist.
"I am sure that she will move quickly to assess the Pearson business and define a new strategic direction which she will set about implementing," he said.
"She has the appropriate experience of publishing and a background as a lawyer, as well as knowing the U.S. and British environments first hand, and has a great record of success in the Economist's growing business and circulation."
Revenue has increased by almost 80 percent in her time at trhe Economist while profit after tax has more than doubled to 17.7 million pounds this year from 7.8 million in 1993. ($1=.6299 Pound)
