Shares in Pearson Plc slipped on Thursday as the stock market reacted negatively to the appointment of a relatively little-known insider as chief executive of the British media group.
Marjorie Scardino, currently chief executive of The Economist Group that is half owned by Pearson, will succeed Frank Barlow as chief executive at the end of the year.
Dennis Stevenson, who is a non-executive director, becomes deputy chairman now and will take over from Michael Blakenham as chairman at Pearson's annual meeting next May.
The appointment of Scardino ends a long period of uncertainty over the succession to Barlow, 66, who had said he planned to retire by early next year.
But the market greeted her appointment with scepticism, with market players saying they knew little about her. The shares fell to a low of 668 pence, but later recovered to 678 for a loss of 10 pence.
"The market was looking for a big hitter and she wasn't the big name it was looking for," one market-maker said in reference to Scardino.
The market was also worried by a report in the Independent newspaper that said Pearson had resolved concerns about the tax implications of selling its stake in British satellite broadcaster BSkyB but faced difficulties separating direct and indirect holdings.
The report said Pearson's indirect stake of around four percent was worth 440 million pounds ($697.4 million) at BSkyB's current share price.
Pearson, which has a market capitalisation of almost four billion pounds, is a sprawling media and leisure company with interests ranging from the Financial Times business newspaper to television soap opera.
Analysts have criticised the company for a lack of a clear strategy and it has long been seen as a potential bid target.
Scardino said she was excited to be joining Pearson.
"It is one of the few companies positioned strongly enough to take advantage of the opportunities in the rapidly changing, digital-driven international marketplace."
Blakenham, who has been chairman of Pearson since 1983 following a six year stint as chief executive, said in statement the appointments completed the succession process at Pearson.
Barlow, who has been chief executive for seven years, had agreed to extend his contract for two years after his retirement date in 1995 in order to help implement the group's strategy to focus on the media sector.
"I think Pearson's future is very favourable and Marjorie Scardino is a very good appointment," he told Reuters.
Scardino, 49, has been chief executive of the Economist since 1992, before which she headed its North American operations.
Prior to that, she was partner in a Savannah, Georgia law firm and publisher and founder with her husband of a Pulitzer Prize-winning newspaper, the Georgia Gazette.
Stevenson is chairman of aircraft leasing group GPA and is also a non-executive director of British Sky Broadcasting, J. Rothschild Assurance Plc and Manpower Inc. ($1=.6309 Pound)
