Political opposition to the BBC's call for more public funding lent added urgency on Monday to joint venture talks between the corporation and two rival pay television groups.
The two rivals for the BBC's hand are U.S.-controlled cable and satellite programmer Flextech and satellite broadcaster BSkyB, in which Rupert Murdoch's News Corp is the largest shareholder.
Both want to launch new subscription channels based on the BBC's wealth of quality programming.
The BBC is under increased pressure to beef up its commercial activities after politicians criticised its demand for an above-inflation licence fee increase.
BBC Director-General John Birt used a speech at the Edinburgh International Television Festival on Friday to launch the campaign for what he said would be the first real increase in the licence fee since 1985.
The fee, fixed by the government and payable by all television set owners, is 89.50 pounds ($139.1) annually.
Birt argued that more money was needed to ensure the BBC remains "the touchstone of quality" in the digital era.
But politicians from both main political parties appear opposed to his appeal. With a general election due by next May, party strategists believe it would be folly to support a rise.
The BBC is seeking to preserve its place at the heart of the broadcasting world as the industry gears up for a new era.
Digital technology -- in which images are transmitted as a series of binary digits rather than as varying electric signals as under the existing analogue method -- will soon make hundreds of extra channels available.
The BBC, with its huge library and production facilities, is an ideal partner for companies such as Flextech and BSkyB as they seek to compile attractive programme packages.
The BBC plans to offer a 24-hour news channel, supplementary programming and wide-screen tranmission to all licence fee payers in the digital era. Joint-venture subscription channels in areas such as drama and natural history would help fund this expansion.
The BBC reported a net benefit of 77 million pounds from commercial activity last year -- small beer compared with the 1.8 billion pounds generated by the licence fee. It is aiming to treble commercial income over the next few years.
Media industry analysts say that Flextech is in a strong position in talks with the BBC.
The two are already partners in UK Gold, a subscription channel showing vintage shows. British media group Pearson and Cox Communications of the U.S are also partners in UK Gold but Flextech is in talks to buy them out.
It could also unlock the lucrative north American market for the BBC as its parent, Tele-Communications Inc (TCI), is the largest cable television group in the United States.
A report in Sunday's Observer quoted Adam Singer, head of TCI's international division, as saying they would want any new Flextech-BBC channels to be carried on BSkyB's network as it has the widest distribution for pay channels in Britain.
But BSkyB, which is planning to launch digital satellite services offering some 200 channels in late 1997, would clearly prefer to deal directly with the BBC.
It could use its financial muscle to make the cash-strapped BBC an offer which the corporation would find hard to refuse.
($1=.6436 Pound)
