Merchant banking and Madame Tussaud's could be deemed surplus to requirements as a new management team at Britain's Pearson Plc mould a media company for the next millennium, analysts said on Wednesday.
The Pearson empire contains prize brands such as the Financial Times newspaper and Penguin books but Marjorie Scardino, who will take over as chief executive in January, has said that overall profit performance is inadequate.
Analysts say Pearson has yet to complete its 1990s journey from industrial conglomerate to focused media enterprise.  
"The definition of their three core business areas -- Information, Education and Entertainment is a little imprecise," said Mark Beilby of Deutsche Morgan Grenfell. "They may have to jettison some high value assets and focus on pinpoint areas."
Analysts cite Anglo-Dutch company Reed Elsevier as an example of a media company which has successfully identified key market areas and built up strong positions in these -- the provision of high-margin business information being Reed's speciality.  
They point out that Pearson, with a market capitalisation of around four billion stg, is not a media giant in global terms and that its capital and management time is being too thinly spread under the current structure.
Pearson's 50 percent stake in London investment bank Lazard Brothers -- which does not fit into one of the three core business areas -- is seen as a likely candidate for disposal.
"At some stage Lazards will go out of the door to make Pearson into more of a genuine media company," said Louise Barton of Henderson Crosthwaite.  
Close boardroom links between Pearson and Lazards could complicate matters. However, analysts say a sale would go a long way towards convincing doubters that Scardino is prepared to shake up the company.
The Tussauds Group, which includes London's famous Madame Tussaud's waxworks museum and a number of theme parks, is also seen as peripheral and a drain on resources for a company which could earn richer pickings from television and publishing.
U.S. consumer software publisher Mindscape is the most glaring weakness, with Pearson forecasting a 46 million stg loss this year from a business it paid $462 million for in 1994.  
"If it doesn't work, they'll have to close it down. But it might provide a positive return in a couple of years," said one analyst. Pearson is forecasting a return to profit for Mindscape in late 1997.
Pearson's uneven record has long made it potential prey for media rivals keen to pounce on its stellar assets and sell off the rest.
Recent newspaper reports suggested BSkyB was lining up a bid but the satellite broadcaster strongly denied them. Media and leisure company Granada and Reed-Elsevier have also been rumoured as possible bidders in recent months.  
"You cannot dismiss the idea that BSkyB would be interested in Pearson's television interests as it tries to build up its content," said Henderson Crosthwaite's Barton.
Pearson's television interests include the Thames and Grundy production houses and a stake in Britain's planned fifth terrestrial station.
Pearson television supremo Greg Dyke is thought to favour a de-merger of the television businesses. But analysts said such a move would almost certainly prompt a bid for that part of the business from any one of BSkyB, Granada, Carlton Communications or United News &amp; Media.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
