Glasgow-based Stakis Plc and Saudi billionaire Prince al-Waleed bin Talal are the likely purchasers of the Metropole and Princess hotel chains from Lonrho Plc, analysts said on Wednesday.
British conglomerate Lonrho, in the throes of a demerger, said last month it had received interest from potential buyers of the hotels and shelved plans to float them.
The London daily Financial Times reported on Wednesday that the sale of the chains for more than 650 million pounds ($1 billion) could be completed within the next fortnight. There was no immediate comment from Lonrho on the report.
Stakis, which has some 46 British hotels, has refused to comment on reports it planned to buy the five Metropole properties. But the hotels and casino group remains the clear favourite to clinch a deal.
"It would be an excellent fit for Stakis. It's just the size of the deal that could cause concern," said analyst Fraser Ramzan of Lehman Brothers.
Markets have speculated that Stakis was planning a rights issue to fund the purchase of the Metropole hotels, valued at about 350 million pounds.
The Metropole group comprises five business and conference hotels located in the British cities of London and Birmingham and the seaside towns of Brighton and Blackpool.
Hotelier Millennium &amp; Copthorne, floated in London this year, has effectively ruled itself out of the race. A company spokesman said Millennium had looked at the Metropole hotels but was not in talks to buy them.
Meanwhile. Prince al-Waleed is believed to be negotiating the purchase of the Princess chain, 10 properties of resorts in the United States, the Caribbean and Mexico.
Financial sources in the Gulf told Reuters this month that al-Waleed had exclusive rights to negotiate a deal at a price of $300 million. The prince has major investments in New York's luxury Plaza hotel, the Four Seasons hotel group, in the banking group Citicorp and Disneyland Paris theme park.
The hotel business is in a growth phase as economic recovery on both sides of the Atlantic help drive occupancy rates.
But there have also been a glut of hotel companies coming to Britain's market, with Jarvis Hotels and Thistle following the example of Millennium &amp; Copthorne.
And there are signs of investor indigestion, as witnessed by recent cancellations of stock market floats.
Analysts said investors were now looking much more closely at the merits of individual companies but said they still expected the sector to remain positive into 1997.
"Over the past year, people have become far more discerning about the type of hotel business they become involved in. But that does not mean they are reluctant to invest in the sector," said Greg Feehley of Kleinwort Benson.
And if that is the case, there is also no shortage of property on the market, with British media and leisure group Granada selling 17 luxury hotels in Britain and overseas.  The hotels, known as the Exclusive range, were acquired by Granada as part of the 3.9 billion pound takeover of leading British hotelier Forte last January.
American hotel companies ITT Sheraton and Marriott are reportedly among potential purchasers for the chain. A deal is expected to be concluded around the turn of the year.
