British pay television operator BSkyB said on Friday that it was considering further investment in Germany and would beam its second pay-per-view sports event into Britain later this month.
The satellite broadcaster said pre-tax profit had risen by 31 percent to 66 million pounds ($107.5 million) in the three months to September 30.
The company, in which Rupert Murdoch's News Corp is the leading shareholder, said that total paying subscribers had reached 5.65 million at 30 September, a net increase for the quarter of 146,000.
"The company has performed strongly in the first quarter and has achieved significant growth in both revenue and profits," said BSkyB chief executive Sam Chisholm.
"Our increased investment in all areas of programming and the quality and choice we offer our subscribers will maintain our impetus," he added.
Operating revenues for the three months to September 30 increased to 266 million pounds, a rise of 24 percent on a year earlier. Earnings per share were 3.9 pence, 30 percent up.
BSkyB shares rose 4p to 582-1/2p although analysts said the subscriber growth figures were "unexciting" and the profits in line with expectations.
BSkyB said in July that it would take a stake of up to 49 percent in DF1, the German digital television venture launched by Bavarian media mogul Leo Kirch. BSkyB said on Friday it was considering investments in additional German Pay TV channels.
DF1 has made a slow start but the German pay television market is expected to expand rapidly in coming years.
BSkyB said it would show its second pay-per-view event on November 9 when Mike Tyson and Evander Holyfield meet in Las Vegas for the WBA heavyweight boxing crown.
BSkyB successfully experimented with pay-per-view when Tyson fought Briton Frank Bruno in March. More than 600,000 homes paid some 10 pounds to see that fight.
BSkyB has said it plans to introduce digital satellite broadcasting into Britain late next year. Pay-per-view sports events and movies are likely to be one of the prime sources of income from the extra channels provided by digital.
Niche channels Sky Scottish and The Computer Channel were launched on Friday, bringing the total number of channels available on Sky Television to over forty.
However, Friday's planned launch of WBTV-The Warner Channel was postponed at the 11th hour on Thursday evening.
The Warner Channel -- a mixture of Bugs Bunny cartoons and vintage movies -- was apparently a victim of the legal battle being fought in the United States between Murdoch and the combined might of CNN founder Ted Turner and Time Warner.
That clash of the titans centres on whether Time Warner, the second largest U.S. cable operator, will carry News Corp's 24-hour Fox News Service in New York City. Fox is a major rival to CNN, now part of Time Warner following a recent merger. ($1=.6141 Pound)
