The planned $20 billion merger of British Telecom and MCI is certain to shake up the global telephone business, officials and analysts said Monday, as regulators started digging in for a close look at the deal.
British Telecommunications Plc and MCI Communications Corp. on Sunday announced the largest trans-Atlantic takeover in history.
The deal would create a global powerhouse vying with AT&amp;T Corp., Germany's Deutsche Telekom and a handful of other companies in a fast-changing, lucrative industry that will be a critical component of global commerce well into the 21st century.
The proposal will create work aplenty for British, American and European regulators who will review the merger, which would create a $40 billion company serving 43 million business and residential customers in 70 countries.
For consumers, it could mean better service and lower international calling charges, while the new company would aim to better support its business customers around the world.
It will cause sleepless nights for rivals such as AT&amp;T, Sprint Corp., France Telecom and Deutsche Telekom as they weigh how to respond. Sprint is allied with the French and German companies in the Global One international venture while AT&amp;T is part of a network of alliances called World Partners.
The new company, to be called Concert, plans to take on AT&amp;T's dominance in the U.S. long-distance market, where MCI now has about 20 percent of a $75 billion business, and to win part of the $100 market for residential local phone service.
It also is expected to expand in the Asia-Pacific region -- a long-held aim for British Telecom.
British Telecom's stock jumped in London and New York, where its American shares rose $5.375 to $60.875 on the New York Stock Exchange in afternoon trading.
MCI shares also rose, but only 50 cents to $30.75, well below the possible value of as much as $39 a share based on the price of British Telecom's American shares. Worries about regulatory hurdles and the time to complete the deal held back the stock, industry analysts and takeover specialists said.
The merger still needed to win approval from regulators in America and Britain.
British Telecom said it was optimistic that the European Commission would clear the merger.
British officials have said only that they were looking at the deal. AT&amp;T has already called on the U.S. Federal Communications Commission to give it thorough scrutiny.
AT&amp;T also said U.S. and European regulators should not give approval unless there is more competition in British Telecom's home market.
British Telecom Chief Executive Sir Peter Bonfield has said it could take a year for the deal to win regulatory approval.
"There are a lot of hurdles to be cleared but I think the deal will go through," one London-based analyst said.
Federal rules prohibit a foreign company from owning more than 25 percent of a U.S. telephone company if the acquiror's home market is not open to competition.
Under the merger British Telecom, which already owns 20 percent of Washington-based MCI, will issue Concert cash and stock for the remaining 80 percent. Holders of MCI stock will end up controlling around a third of the merged company.
The merged company will acquire the 9 percent stake which MCI holds in Rupert Murdoch's News Corp. media empire. MCI, perhaps wary of regulatory concerns, said on Sunday it did not plan to pursue an option to increase this to 13 percent.
