Investors on both sides of the Atlantic applauded the planned $20 billion merger of British Telecom Plc and MCI Communications of the United States Monday, boosting their shares in stock market trading.
British, European and U.S. regulators will subject the deal to close scrutiny amid strong opposition to it from rivals, including American long-distance market leader AT&amp;T Corp.
British Telecom, or BT, as it is known, said it was optimistic that the European Commission would clear the largest cross-border takeover deal in history, which will create one of the largest groups in the rapidly expanding global telecommunications sector.
Britain's communications industry regulatory agency said it was studying the details of the merger and it was too early to pass judgment.
BT Chief Executive Sir Peter Bonfield has said it could take a year to clear all the regulatory hurdles.
BT's shares powered 32-1/2 pence higher to 383 1/2p -- adding around two billion pounds ($3.3 billion) to the company's market value on huge trading volume of over 40 million shares.
MCI gained $1.25 to $31.50 in early trading on Nasdaq, while AT&amp;T fell $1.125 to $33.50 on the New York Stock Exchange.
Despite the large cost of the deal to British Telecom -- it will be the biggest-ever acquisition by a British firm -- the deal is seen as having a compelling industrial logic, linking leading phone companies on both sides of the Atlantic.
For BT shareholders the deal is also being sugared with a promise of a special one-time 35p dividend payout and a higher rate of general dividend increases in the future.
"It is positive for BT shareholders and positive for the (telecoms) sector," said Jim McCafferty, analyst at ABN AMRO Hoare Govett.
For customers, the deal promises better service and lower international calling charges, while for businesses it means a company that can support them wherever they are.
The merged company will be called Concert Plc. It will be the second-largest international carrier after AT&amp;T.
The deal values all of Washington, D.C.-based MCI at just over $25 billion. Since British Telecom already owns 20 percent of MCI, it will issue Concert stock and cash worth $20.1 billion for the remaining 80 percent. Holders of MCI stock will control a third of the stock in the combined company.
Larry Stone, BT's head of EU affairs, told Reuters he hoped the deal would be dealt with under the EU's fast-track merger rules and said he did not anticipate any anti-trust problems because the companies "operate in competitive markets."
Analysts expect British Telecom and MCI to start making overtures to major Asian players such as Japan's giant Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corp.
But while seeking an Asian partner, MCI appears to be putting another one on a backburner.
MCI is to cut its stake in a U.S. satellite television venture with media tycoon Rupert Murdoch to 20 percent from 50 percent, and has said it will probably not increase its stake in Murdoch's News Corp as originally expected.
MCI paid $1.35 billion for a stake of just under 9 percent, and could increase it to 13 percent with another $1 billion investment.
