The Office of Fair Trading (OFT) on Thursday launched a probe into the way travel companies sell foreign package holidays to millions of sun-seeking Britons.
The director-general of the consumer watchdog body, John Bridgeman, called a Monopolies and Mergers (MMC) inquiry into ownership links between leading tour operators such as Thomson and Airtours and retail travel agents.
The MMC will also be able to look at the practice among travel agents of offering holidays at a discount conditional on the purchase of specific travel insurance.
Both travel companies said they were confident they would be cleared by the 12-month MMC inquiry. But shares in Airtours plunged almost 10 percent in London, losing 69p to 644p.
Bridgeman noted that vertically-integrated companies like Thomson and Airtours supply a large proportion of a market worth seven billion pounds ($11.5 billion) and he was concerned that some of their practices could distort competition.
"I believe they have the market power to put competitors at a disadvantage, for example by de-racking (removing) or threatening to de-rack their brochures in an attempt to negotiate larger commissions," he said.
He also said they could pressurise tour operators not to supply independent travel agents on better terms or push their own holidays through in-house incentive schemes.
Thomson owns the leading Lunn Poly travel agency, while Airtours owns the number two travel agent Going Places.
Together they operate around 40 percent of British travel agents. They also supply around 45 percent of over 10 million foreign packages sold to Britons who make the annual pilgrimage to seek the sun around the Mediterranean or further afield.
Thomson, part of Canada's Thomson Corp, welcomed the probe.
"Thomson is confident that the industry at large, and Thomson in particular, will be vindicated from any allegations of anti-competitive practice," said Paul Brett, chairman and chief executive of Thomson Travel.
"We have been cleared by the OFT before in 1994 and we are sure that we will be cleared again by the MMC," he added.
Airtours deputy chief executive Harry Coe said there was no case to answer and claimed the British market offered the world's cheapest foreign holidays.
"Those behind the inquiry are the small tour operators and the small travel agents who can't stand the heat in the kitchen," he said.
But the smaller tour operators were delighted that the MMC was taking up the matter.
"Big companies are screwing the consumer and the smaller operators," said Sue Ockwell, head of the Association of Independent Tour Operators. ($1=.6072 Pound)
