Shares in Britain's newly-demerged EMI Group Plc rose on Tuesday as the stock market applauded the company's resilience to tougher conditions in the music market.
EMI, which split from rentals company Thorn Plc three months ago, said profit before tax and exceptional items rose nine percent to 112.5 million pounds ($188.4 million) in the six months to September 30. Net interim dividend per share increased by 12.7 percent to eight pence.
EMI shares, which have shed some two pounds in recent weeks on fears that global music sales were faltering after a decade of strong growth, had added 9-1/2p to 1,280-1/2p by 1330 GMT after earlier climbing to 1290p.
"These are excellent interim results from the EMI Group," chairman Sir Colin Southgate said in a statement.
"They have been achieved against a background of variable growth in the major markets and mixed results from our competitors," he added. "The increase in the interim dividend reflects our confidence in the long-term health of the music industry and EMI's position within it."
Analysts said that EMI appeared in better shape than some of its rivals in a patchy worldwide market.
"What we have seen from their competitors was poor but EMI is insulated as it does not have so much exposure to the U.S.," said media analyst Lorna Tilbian of brokers Panmure Gordon, adding: "They tend to be strong in the areas where the growth is coming through."
Panmure are forecasting full-year profit excluding exceptional items of 403 million pounds and have a target share price of 1360p.
Finance Director Simon Duffy said EMI remained confident that the global music business would continue to grow by some 6-8 percent annually in the medium to long-term.
"This year is looking a little bit below that level," said Duffy, adding that markets were mixed but that overall first half music sales growth had been 5.5 percent. However, he added that the impact for EMI was diluted by the strength of sterling.
The market's sluggishness has recently been reflected by 100 layoffs at various labels within Warner Music and 400 job cuts at PolyGram NV -- two other music majors.
EMI said that sales in the United States were almost flat and declined slightly in France. But this was offset by improvements in Japan, Britain and Germany while Southeast Asia and Latin America boasted particularly large gains.
Turnover from the EMI Music division was down marginally at around 1.1 billion pounds but analysts ascribed this to the effect of exchange rates. Better margins helped to boost operating profits in the EMI Music division to 131.9 million pounds from 124.6 million.
The HMV division, grouping record and book stores chains, had an operating loss of 11 million pounds which the company said was in line with expectations.
EMI said major releases for the key pre-Christmas quarter included the third and final Beatles Anthology album, which entered the American charts at number one. It is also releasing a triple album from The Artist Formerly Known as Prince and the debut from British newcomers the Spice Girls. ($1=.5970 Pound)
