Shares in EMI Plc, one of the world's five music majors, climbed on Tuesday after the company said that long-term prospects for the stuttering global music market were positive.
EMI, which demerged from rentals company Thorn Plc three months ago, said profit before tax and exceptional items rose 9.4 percent to 112.5 million pounds ($188.4 million) in the six months to September 30. Net interim dividend per share increased by 12.7 percent to eight pence.
EMI shares, under pressure in recent weeks on fears that music sales were faltering after a decade of strong growth, added 15p to 1,286p in a generally lower market.
"These are excellent interim results from the EMI Group," chairman Sir Colin Southgate said in a statement.
"They have been achieved against a background of variable growth in the major markets and mixed results from our competitors," he added. "The increase in the interim dividend reflects our confidence in the long-term health of the music industry and EMI's position within it."
Finance Director Simon Duffy said EMI remained confident that the global music business would continue to grow by some 6-8 percent annually in the medium to long-term.
"This year is looking a little bit below that level," said Duffy, saying that markets were patchy but that overall first half industry growth had been 5.5 percent. However, he added that the impact was diluted by the strength of sterling.
The market's sluggishness has recently been reflected by 100 layoffs at various labels within Warner Music and 400 job cuts at PolyGram NV -- another of the top five in the world music business.
EMI said that sales in the United States were almost flat and declined slightly in France. But this was offset by improvements in Japan, Britain and Germany while Southeast Asia and Latin America boasted particularly large gains.
Turnover from the EMI Music division was down marginally at around 1.1 billion pounds but improved margins helped to boost operating profits to 131.9 million pounds from 124.6 million.
The HMV division, grouping record and book stores chains, had an operating loss of 11 million pounds which the company said was in line with expectations as its international expansion continued.
EMI said major releases for the key pre-Christmas quarter included the third and final Beatles Anthology album, which entered the American charts at number one. It is also releasing a triple album from The Artist Formerly Known as Prince and the debut from British newcomers the Spice Girls. ($1=.5970 Pound)
