Granada Group, which won control of leading British hotelier Forte 10 months ago, on Wednesday reaped the fruits of its victory when it posted a 37 percent rise in annual profits to 480 million pounds ($806 million).
Media and leisure group Granada said that it was on target to keep a promise made in the heat of the takeover battle by boosting profits at Forte by over 100 million pounds per annum from the current year.
It said it had already achieved some 40 million pounds in profit improvements at Forte. Such rapid progress lifted the pre-tax, pre-exceptional profits to that 480 million pound figure, topping most share analysts' expectations.
Turnover in the year to end-September grew by 60 percent to 3.82 billion pounds as Granada grafted on Forte's hotel and roadside restaurant businesses.
Total dividend was raised by 11 percent to 13p per share.
"The key has been the speed with which we have been able to move on the Forte businesses," said chairman Gerry Robinson.
Granada took over family-controlled Forte in a 3.9 billion pound deal earlier this year after a bitter bid battle that raged over the Christmas and New Year period 12 months ago.
Analysts were surprised at the lacklustre reaction to Granada's strong results and an upbeat statement in which it said that trading had been encouraging in the first few weeks of its new financial year.
The shares, which had gained in recent days in anticipation of bumper results, slipped 7 1/2p to 885p by mid-afternoon in a generally gloomy market.
"Granada is a cheap stock on fundamentals and is backed by good management," said Greg Feehely of Kleinwort Benson.
Granada, which runs two British commercial television stations and a chain of high street rental stores, continues to reorganise following its acqusition of Forte.
It hopes to complete the sale of a group of top international hotels and the disposal of the Welcome Break chain of British motorway service areas in early 1997.
Analysts expect the hotels to raise a total of around 900 million pounds and the service areas a further 350-400 million pounds. That would help cut net debt from 3.5 billion pounds.
Granada sold the first of the 17 Exclusive hotels on Tuesday when Hong Kong based Mandarin Oriental International Ltd bought London's Hyde Park Hotel for 86 million pounds.
But Robinson said Granada planned to retain its 10.8 percent stake Granada holds in pay television operator British Sky Broadcasting. That investment is worth over one billion pounds.
The largest contribution came from the Restaurants division, which boosted profit before interest and tax by 80 percent to 217 million pounds on turnover which rose over 60 percent to 1.7 billion pounds.
The new Hotels unit contributed 168 million while Media made 163 million, up 17 percent. Profits from the high street rentals arm were marginally higher at 126 million. ($1=.5950 Pound)
