Britain's Granada Group, which won control of hotel and catering empire Forte in January, on Wednesday reported a 37 percent surge in full-year profits to 480 million pounds ($804 million).
The media and leisure group said that it would deliver on its promise to improve profits at Forte by over 100 million pounds per annum from 1996/97.
Granada chairman Gerry Robinson called the results "very satisfying". "The key has been the speed with which we have been able to move on the Forte businesses," he told Reuters.
Granada took over family-controlled Forte in a 3.9 billion pound deal earlier this year after a bitter bid battle that raged over the Christmas and New Year period 12 months ago.
The company said that Forte had responded well to its management and that it had already improved profitability there by approaching 40 million pounds.
Granada continues to reorganise following the acquisition of Britain's leading hotel group. Robinson said there was substantial interest from a wide range of potential purchasers of the luxury hotels it has put on the market.
Granada sold the first of the 17 Exclusive hotels on Tuesday when Hong Kong based Mandarin Oriental International Ltd bought London's Hyde Park Hotel for 86 million pounds.
Robinson said that Granada expected to complete the disposals by early 1997. Analysts calculate the sale of assets including the George V in Paris and Plaza Athenee in New York will raise a total of around 900 million pounds.
The Granada chairman said that the company hoped to sell the Welcome Break chain of British motorway service areas in January or February of next year. The 21 sites were acquired in the Forte deal but must be sold off because of monopoly concerns.
But he said there were no plans to sell the 10.8 percent stake Granada holds in pay television operator British Sky Broadcasting.
Group turnover in the year to end-September climbed 60 percent to 3.82 billion pounds. Total dividend was raised by 11 percent to 13p per share.
Granada shares, which had risen in recent days in anticipation of bumper results, fell by 8p to 884 1/2p in a generally gloomy market.
The largest contribution came from the Restaurants division, which boosted profit before interest and tax by 80 percent to 217 million pounds as the Forte acquisition bore fruit.
The new Hotels unit contributed 168 million while Media, including Granada's two British commercial television stations, made 163 million, up 17 percent. Profits from the high street rentals arm was marginally higher at 126 million.
