Britain's Ladbroke Group and the U.S. Hilton Hotels Corp (HHC) on Thursday unveiled an alliance to reunite the famous Hilton hotel brand around the world for the first time since 1964.
"We have been separated but now our companies are engaged," said Steve Bollenbach, HHC's chief executive officer.
"This will make Hilton the force to be reckoned with in the global hotel industry," Bollenbach told a news conference. "It will eliminate customer confusion and benefit millions of our customers worldwide."
HHC owns the Hilton name in the United States while Ladbroke holds the rights everywhere else through its Hilton International (HIC) subsidiary.
The two companies have signed an outline agreement to unify the Hilton brand, separated in 1964 when HIC was spun off from the American operation. Ladbroke acquired HIC in 1987.
In the alliance grouping 400 hotels in 49 countries, HHC and HIC intend to cooperate from next year on sales and marketing, loyalty programmes and hotel development.
Ladbroke also announced first half pre-tax profits of 72.8 million pounds ($113.5 million) before exceptional items, a 29 percent increase on last year and above analyst forecasts. The interim dividend was unchanged at 2.4 pence per share.
Ladbroke shares added 7.5p to a 1996 high of 215p in early trade before slipping back to close 2p firmer at 209.5p.
The alliance gives HHC a larger presence in the international hotel arena. It offers Ladbroke a major position in American hotels and the chance to participate in the expansion of HHC's U.S. gaming business.
The companies plan to finalise the agreement as soon as possible in order for it to become effective by early 1997.
Bollenbach and Ladbroke chief executive Peter George said the deal would be worth tens of millions of dollars when cost savings and extra sales were combined.
Share analysts applauded the alliance.
"The Hilton tie-up is more extensive than people expected. We are expecting big things from 1998 onwards," said Greg Feehely of Kleinwort Benson.
HHC intends to acquire a five percent stake in Ladbroke once the final agreement has been signed. Ladbroke has said it expects to invest significant sums in hotels and casinos developed by its partner in the United States.
"We're putting our money where our mouth is," said Bollenbach, a former Walt Disney Company executive who joined HHC in February.
He said one of his first calls at HHC was to his Ladbroke counterpart George. The two men subsequently met several times and even shared a holiday, rafting in Idaho with their wives.
Under the deal, George will join the HHC board while Bollenbach becomes a director of Ladbroke.
The Hilton hotel chain was founded in 1919 when Conrad Hilton opened his first hotel in the Texan town of Cisco.
In 1946, Hilton became the first hotel company to list on the New York Stock Exchange. HIC was spun off in 1964 and it was acquired three years later by Trans World Airlines. ($1=.6412 Pound)
