The purchase of British TV group Westcountry Television by Carlton Communications Plc slots another piece into the ITV jigsaw but analysts said on Monday it could be some time before the picture is complete.
"Westcountry was one which was on the table and Carlton have done well to snatch it but I am not convinced that there is going to be a massive rush for other ITV franchises," said Jason Crisp of Societe Generale Strauss Turnbull.
Carlton said on Saturday it had agreed to pay 85 million pounds ($143 million) for Westcountry, pipping United News &amp; Media which had also been seeking to acquire the privately-owned broadcaster.
Analysts said that high prices for takeover targets was likely to dampen down takeover activity.
The ITV commercial television sector is going through a period of consolidation under new media ownership laws. The two-licence ownership limit has been removed and replaced by a cap of 15 percent of television audience.
The Westcountry deal adds the south-western corner of England to Carlton's licences in the English Midlands and for London weekday television. Carlton, United News and Granada Group Plc are the three main players in the sector and are expected gradually to tighten their grip.
The Westcountry move was described as a "useful" addition to Carlton's portfolio but analysts said it should be seen in context, noting that its 1995 pre-tax profit of five million stg was tiny compared with Carlton's 123 million pounds operating profit from broadcast television.
Carlton pipped United News at the post for Westcountry and the two could square up again in a battle for control of HTV, the ITV broadcaster to Wales and an area of southwest England which includes the cities of Bristol and Bath.
"What this means is that there are two suitors for HTV -- Carlton and United News," said one industry source.
United News took a 20 percent stake in HTV last month but said at the time that it regarded the stake as an investment and was not planning a full bid.
The Westcountry and HTV franchise areas are usually sold as a single package to advertisers while HTV does all the transmission for its smaller western neighbour. A move for HTV, which has a market capitalisation of some 315 million pounds, would have obvious benefits for Carlton.
"Carlton can afford to pay more for HTV than anyone else because it could wring out greater cost savings," said Louise Barton of Henderson Crosthwaite.
While United News and Carlton vie for supremacy in the south, Granada is expected to take over its northern neighbour Yorkshire-Tyne Tees Television at some point.
Granada has made its intentions clear by taking a 27 percent stake in Yorkshire, a company valued at over 800 million pounds.
Granada is believed to be sitting it out, waiting for some of the froth to come off the Yorkshire share price before it moves for the rest of the company. ($1=.5941 Pound)
