Premier League Sunderland, one of the great names in the history of English soccer, said on Thursday that they hoped to raise up to 12 million pounds ($20 million) through a flotation on the London Stock Exchange.
The north-east club, which won the league title for the sixth and last time in 1936, joins a growing number of clubs seeking to capitalise on the popularity of the national game.
Premier league rivals Manchester United and Tottenham Hotspur have full stock market listings while clubs such as Chelsea trade on the secondary market.
Others are expected to follow suit as revenue from a television deal with satellite broadcaster BSkyB and higher crowds help to transform the sport's finances.
Sunderland said that the new funds would be used to add the finishing touches to a new 15 million pounds stadium, reduce borrowing and fund the purchase of new players.
"The proceeds will assist in retaining premier league status and enable the company to capitalise more fully upon the club's name, strong support and new opportunities arising from the move to the new stadium," chairman Bob Murray told a news conference.
Sunderland will leave their century-old Roker Park home at the end of the season and move to a 42,000-capacity stadium built on the site of a former colliery in the heart of the city.
The club, whose last real taste of glory came in 1973 when they won the F.A. Cup, are optimistic that the move to a new stadium will herald a period of prosperity on and off the pitch.
Sunderland were promoted to the premier league last season and forecast that increased gate receipts and television revenue would help double turnover this season to 13.6 million pounds.
Murray said that the new stadium should allow Sunderland to boost its season ticket holders from 17,000 to around 28,000. Roker Park is in a dilapidated state and large parts of the 22,000 capacity ground are vast terraces open to the elements.
Sunderland, managed by former England international Peter Reid, have only a modest playing squad without the star names of neighbours Middlesbrough and Newcastle United. They are fifth from bottom of the premier league and are likely to face a battle to avoid relegation this season.
The club conceded that staying in the premier league status was "critical" but said that it believed that increased income from the new stadium would offset lost television revenue if the team did go down.
Some 10 percent of the share issue will be made available to club employees and fans rather than institutional investors. The flotation is expected to value the club as a whole at 40-50 million pounds and share dealings will commence on December 24.
Chairman Murray and other leading shareholders, including manager Reid who has a six percent stake, have given undertakings not to dispose of any shares before early 1998.
($ = 0.596 British Pounds)
