Britain's Ladbroke Group. and the U.S. Hilton Hotels Corp (HHC) on Thursday announced a worldwide alliance that will reunite the famous Hilton hotel brand after 32 years of separation.
HHC owns the Hilton name in the United States while Ladbroke holds the rights everywhere else through its Hilton International (HIC) subsidiary.
The two companies have signed an outline agreement to reunite the brand, separated in 1964 when HIC was spun off from the American operation. Ladbroke acquired HIC in 1987.
In the alliance grouping 400 hotels in 49 countries, HHC and HIC intend to cooperate from next year on sales and marketing, loyalty programmes and hotel development.
Ladbroke also announced first half pre-tax profits of 72.8 million pounds ($113 million) before exceptional items, a 29 percent increase on last year and above analysts' forecasts.
Interim dividend was unchanged at 2.4 pence per share.
Ladbroke shares added 7.5p to a 1996 high of 215p in early trade before slipping slightly to 213p.
"This deal makes good sense to our customers, our employees and our shareholders," Ladbroke Chief Executive Peter George said in a statement.
"Through this alliance, our two companies intend to lead the hotel and gaming markets worlwide," he added.
The companies plan to finalise the agreement as soon as possible in order for it to become effective by early 1997.
HHC intends to acquire a five percent stake in Ladbroke once the final agreement has been signed. George will join the HHC board while Stephen Bollenbach, his opposite number at HHC, will become a director of Ladbroke.
The two men said that the deal would could be worth several tens of millions of dollars when cost savings and extra sales were combined.
"It seems all upside, there's hard to see a downside," said George. He added the deal had been under negotiation since Bollenbach became HHC chief executive in February and was agreed only on Wednesday night.
It provides for the formation of a jointly owned company to market and develop the Hilton brand around the world.
HHC's guest loyalty programme, which has some five million members, will be extended worldwide. The companies will also participate in each other's future hotels development.
Ladbroke will also have the chance to become a partner in some of HHC's gaming developments in the United States.
Ladbroke said operating profits from HIC grew strongly to 70 million pounds in the first half while those from its betting and gaming division climbed 17 percent to 43.6 million pounds.
($1=.6421 Pound)
