British media group EMAP Plc on Monday ended a damaging boardroom row when its shareholders voted to oust two rebel non-executive directors, who had contested changes to the company's articles.
Shareholders backed the board and voted overwhelmingly in favour of resolutions seeking the removal of dissidents Ken Simmonds and Joe Cooke in a poll called at an extraordinary general meeting.
More than 109.2 million votes were registered in favour of each of the resolutions and 12.3 million against.
"I am confident that with these two resolutions passed, the board will be fully united and ready to give full attention to your company's business," chairman Sir John Hoskyns told shareholders at the EGM.
Simmonds, who has been a non-executive director of EMAP for 15 years, struck a conciliatory tone after what had been a bitter dispute.
"Catharsis and thinking about the future are good things. EMAP is going to continue to be great," he said.
EMAP shares, which had fallen from a 1996 high of 790p in the last two months as the dispute worsened, firmed 5p to 735.
The row centred on the removal of a provision for a minimum of five non-executive directors and another change allowing a director to be ousted on a 75 percent board majority without an EGM being called.
The changes were approved at the company's annual general meeting in July. Cooke and Simmonds had continued to oppose them, arguing that they transferred too much power from shareholders to the board.
"You should ensure that the board is your board," Simmonds told the EGM. "The board may now adjust itself quietly and without any notice to you."
Hoskyns said that the board had not been able to function properly while the dispute simmered.
EMAP has been one of Britain's fastest growing companies in recent years, selling out of its original regional newspaper business and expanding its UK local radio operations and its consumer magazine interests at home and in France.
It last month reported pre-tax profit of 50.6 million pounds ($85.2 million) in the first half of its current financial year on turnover of 388.3 million pounds.'
Hoskyns, who is 69 and intends to retire in 1998, denied press reports that he backed chief executive Robin Miller as his successor. Miller joined the company in 1965 as a reporter with Motor Cycle News magazine.
He also dismissed talk of a rift between Miller and managing director David Arculus.
"Robin and David have worked in partnership since 1974. That partnership has always been based on hard thinking, vigorous argument and mutual trust," he said. ($1=.5936 Pound)
