Britons will shortly learn how much they will be asked to pay to help fund the expansion of British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) radio and television services in the multi-channel future.
The BBC has been lobbying the government to grant it an above-inflation increase in the annual licence fee, arguing that more money is needed if it is to remain at the forefront of broadcasting into the next millennium. The government is expected to announce its decision by early to mid-December.
The BBC, which calls itself "the world's most successful cultural institution", derives 95 percent of its funding from the annual fee payable by all television set owners.
The fee stands at 89.50 pounds ($150) and provided income of 1.8 billion pounds in the last financial year -- far outweighing the 77 million pound net benefit from the BBC's expanding commercial arm. The licence is guaranteed as a source of BBC funding for the next five years.
BBC Director-General John Birt launched his campaign for what he said would be the first real increase in the licence fee in over a decade at a conference in Edinburgh in August.
"If the BBC is to sustain the existing level of services; if it is to remain as creative and dynamic an institution in the 21st as it has been in the 20th century; if it is to innovate with high quality services in the new technologies...we shall need a real increse in the level of the licence fee," he said.
"Neither a new leap forward in efficiency, nor a vigorous drive to increase our commercial revenue will be enough."
The BBC is believed to be seeking a rise of around five pounds -- which would generate extra revenue of more than 100 million pounds. Annual inflation is currently 2.7 percent.
Birt's call has received a cool reponse from the ruling Conservatives and opposition Labour, wary of pinning a price rise on more than 20 million households in the run-up to a general election. The new rate would take effect in April while the election must be held by the following month.
Recent newspaper reports said that National Heritage Secretary Virginia Bottomley has settled for a five-year formula that would leave the licence fee unchanged in real terms.
The reports said that Bottomley would offer higher rises in the second and third years to help fund new digital services and commercial projects but that increases in the following two years would be pegged below inflation.
The BBC, which runs two television channels and five national radio stations and has an enviable reputation as a quality public service broadcaster, has stepped up its campaign.
"You want us to do things. We want to do them. Now please give us the means and we can get on with the job," Will Wyatt, chief executive of the BBC Broadcast division said in a recent speech.
"We have called for only a modest increase, but one which would enable us to achieve a disproportionate amount of good."
The BBC points out that it has cut its cost base by almost 20 percent over the past three years and increased programme investment by 300 million pounds.
The licence fee debate comes as the broadcasting industry is set to be revolutionised by the move to digital transmission.
Digital technology converts sound and pictures into binary digits -- a series of noughts and ones. It increases picture quality, multiplies the number of channels that can be broadcast and allows for the creation of interactive services.
Pay television operator BSkyB, in which Rupert Murdoch's News Corp is the leading shareholder, plans to launch a digital satellite service with some 200 channels into Britain from next year.
BSkyB, one of the corporate success stories of the 1990s, is Britain's leading pay television operator with more than five million subscribers. Its top package of premium films and live sports events costs subscribers 324 pounds per annum.
A terrestrial digital service, broadcast from land-based transmitters and offering some 36 channels, is expected to begin by mid-1998.
The BBC plans to use digital technology to offer all licence payers supplementary programming to its core BBC1 and BBC2 output plus a 24-hour news service. It plans to make them available via satellite and terrestrial distribution.
The BBC expects to retain a share of around a third of all viewing and listening in 2005, down from 45 percent as the number of channels multiplies and the market fragments.
The digital expansion creates fresh opportunities for the corporation to develop its BBC Worldwide commercial arm.
Worldwide is in negotiations with partners in Britain and the United States over the creation of a number of subscription channels, exploiting its strengths in areas such as comedy, drama and natural history.
Its partner in Britain is Flextech Plc, while it is working with Discovery Communications Inc on channels for international markets. Leading U.S. cable television operator Tele-Communications Inc is a major shareholder in both companies. It aims to launch its UK services in mid 1997.
Some media figures doubt the sustainability of the licence fee as subscription and pay-per-view services proliferate.
David Elstein, chief executive of Britain's new Channel 5 commercial television network, said recently that he believed that pay-per-view would eventually "consign the licence fee to history, where it belongs".
($1=.5953 Pound)
