British media company Carlton Communications Plc, boosted by a 20 percent annual profit rise, said on Wednesday that it planned a drive into pay television.
Carlton, the country's largest commercial television (ITV) company, said it aimed to build on its broadcasting strengths in the multi-channel future.
"We want to build up our interests in pay television, both as a content provider and operator. These may encompass cable, satellite and digital television," chairman Michael Green said in a statement.
"Free television and pay channels should not be seen as competitors; they are complementary businesses...Carlton wants to establish a significant presence in both markets," he added.
Green was speaking as Carlton unveiled a 20 percent rise in pre-tax profit to 295 million pounds ($492 million) for the year to September 30. Carlton increased its dividend by 17.5 percent to 11.1 pence per share.
The figures were in line with analysts' forecasts but Carlton shares fell 8.5p to 495p in a weaker market.
Carlton last month agreed to pay 85 million pounds for Westcountry Television, the ITV company which broadcasts to the south-western corner of England. It also operates the ITV licences for the English Midlands and London weekday television and now broadcasts to 22 million people.
Green confirmed that Carlton was considering investing in digital terrestrial television, which is expected to be launched in Britain in 1998 and offer viewers up to 36 channels.
"Digital Terrestrial Television will expand free-to-air broadcasting in the UK and opens the door to the establishment of further pay television services. We are examining these investment opportunities very carefully," he said.
The Independent Television Commission (ITC) recently invited applications to operate the blocks of frequencies which will carry the digital channels.
Digital terrestrial will be broadcast from land-based transmitters and viewers will not need a satellite dish to receive it. They will, however, require a set-top decoder.
Carlton already has two subscription cable channels in the UK and pay television interests in France, India and Singapore.
Operating profits from Carlton's Television division grew by only five percent to 129 million pounds as advertising revenues remained flat. But the company said the outlook for advertising revenue was good.
Carlton's video division increased profit by 21 percent to 73 million pounds as demand for pre-recorded videocassettes continued to grow.
Its film processing arm boosted profits to almost 53 million pounds -- a 27 percent jump -- as the Hollywood studios continued their policy of releasing movies to large numbers of cinemas simultaneously.
The company's products division, aiming to become the world leader in tapeless editing for the television industry, increased profits to 43 million pounds from 32 million.
