French radio group NRJ SA is aiming to break into the UK market by winning the fierce battle for a key London FM licence currently up for grabs.
NRJ, a group which has some 500 stations spread across six European nations, has focused its attention on the capital's youth, who it says are poorly served by existing stations.
"Mainstream music for young people does not exist in London. You have too many stations for adults," Marc Pallain, NRJ's head of development, said in an interview. "You have an extraordinary music scene and such a poor radio landscape," he added.  
The Radio Authority, the body which oversees UK commercial radio, is expected to announce the winner of the licence in mid-January. Its choice will be based on criteria such as programme plans and financial viability of the applicants.
The frequency was vacated by easy-listening station Melody Radio, which relocated after complaining of interference in the south-west London area. However, the winner should be able to reach a potential audience of almost six million adults.  
Twenty-five groups have put in bids, including stations aimed at gay men and lesbians, children, London's Irish community and the over-50s. The front-runners are believed to include Capital Radio, Atlantic, XFM and The Edge.
Capital Radio, which already has an FM licence and is the market leader in London commercial radio, wants to transfer its "Capital Gold" oldies station from its AM frequency.
Atlantic, backed by the UK radio arm of Luxembourg broadcaster CLT, The Edge and XFM are all music-based and aiming at a 15-34 year-old audience.  
British actor Michael Caine is chairman of The Edge and his consortium also includes Radio One DJ and Channel 4 presenter Chris Evans. talent. Its co-founder is Chris Parry, manager of British band The Cure.
NRJ's "Energy" station plans to offer a blend of rock, rap and dance music which programme director Christophe Sabot says will be aimed primarily at the under-25s.
NRJ believes its network of stations across markets such as France, Germany and Scandinavia would allow it to give new British bands a European-wide platform.
Chairman Jean-Paul Baudecroux said that a London licence would appeal to many of the company's advertisers in mainland Europe. He said that the station could help to speed the development of radio advertising in the UK by giving companies greater access to young consumers.
Pallain said that NRJ, a company with a market value of some three billion francs, would aim to expand into other British cities if it secured a berth in the capital. He said that NRJ was already in talks with potential partners.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 8793
