Shares in British Sky Broadcasting (BSkyB) rose strongly on Monday after the pay television operator cleared a key regulatory hurdle and amid reports it planned to push ahead and launch digital services in Britain next year.
BSkyB shares added 19p to 495-1/2p by early afternoon, reversing a downward pattern which has seen them shed almost two pounds ($3.3) since mid-October.
The rise was fuelled by an announcement from Britain's Office of Fair Trading (OFT) that it had accepted BSkyB's new terms for the supply of its channels to cable operators.
The stock had earlier been boosted by a report in the Financial Times that BSkyB, 40 percent owned by Rupert Murdoch's News Corporation, was poised to order the set-top boxes required to receive its digital satellite services.
"The news flow has been positive and some funds which are underweight in BSkyB have been taking the opportunity to buy," said Anthony de Larrinaga of broker Panmure Gordon, commenting on the price rise.
However, he injected a note of caution.
"We still have to see the performance for dish sales in the run-up to Christmas. The decision to push ahead with digital may be partly a reflection of weaker analogue sales," he added.
The OFT approved BSkyB's revised "rate card" -- setting out the pricing and structure for the supply of satellite channels to cable operators.
"The changes increase the flexibility of cable operators in marketing their services," OFT Director General John Bridgeman said in a statement.
But the cable industry criticised the decision and vowed to continue its fight. One option is to take the issue to the European Commission.
"We fail to see how today's announcement is in the consumers' interest," the Cable Communications Association said in a statement.
BSkyB, which supplies a diet of top-quality sport and Hollywood movies, has more than five million subscribers -- 3.3 million receiving the service via a satellite dish and almost 1.9 million on cable.
BSkyB's shares have fallen from highs in the last two months because of regulatory concerns in Britain and worries over the apparent slow take-up of the digital services of Germany's DF1, in which BSkyB and Kirch Group are partners.
BSkyB has announced plans to launch digital satellite services supplying some 200 channels into Britain late next year but recent reports had suggested that it could delay the launch.
But the Financial Times quoted Murdoch as saying that BSkyB will go ahead with a decoder box concentrating on new channels plus pay-per-view sport and films. A decoder offering access to interactive services such as home shopping would follow later.
"Now I think we will go with a straight simple box and have a second-generation box a year later. How many people really want to do home shopping and banking on their television sets or buy things, we don't know yet," Murdoch was quoted as saying.
($1=.6027 Pound)
