Wembley, England's home of soccer since the 1920s, will be the site of a new national stadium, the country's Sports Council announced on Tuesday.
The government-backed Council selected the north London venue ahead of the northern city of Manchester as the preferred location. Some 120 million pounds ($200 million) in National Lottery funding will be supplied to help turn the famous old stadium into a world class sports facility for the 21st century.
Wembley and Manchester were selected as the two leading candidates from five applicants last year. Sports Council chairman Sir Rodney Walker said that Wembley won out as it had greater potential to attract major international events.
The Sports Council has supported the English Football Association's bid to host soccer's World Cup in 2006 and the British Athletics Federation's attempts to attract the world championships in 2001.
But Manchester did not lose out completely as the Sports Council announced it had agreed in principle to provide up to 60 million pounds towards a new Stadium of the North to be used to host the Commonwealth Games in 2002, which have already been awarded to the city.
It said it would also consider backing Manchester council's bid for 20 million pound in funding for a new swimming and diving complex in the city, another Games facility.
"The Sports Council has agreed a 200 million package of financial support which will provide further opportunities for English and British sport to develop as a leading competitor on the world stage," Walker said.
A competition is to be held to select an architectural firm to design the English National Stadium at the site owned by Wembley Plc.
Architect Sir Norman Foster has already unveiled his radical plans for an 80,000-seater stadium.
In his design, Wembley's famous twin towers would be repositioned to form a new gateway to the stadium area. The stadium would also be spun round 90 degrees with a new North/South axis.
The Foster design also includes plans for retractable seating to allow spectators at field events like soccer and rugby league close proximity to the action. The seats would be moved back when track events were being held. ($1=.6027 Pound)
