British media and leisure firm Pearson, awaiting the arrival of a new chief executive, enjoyed a stock market rally on Wednesday after a trading statement which analysts said contained no nasty surprises.
Pearson shares had gained 25p to 714 1/2p by 1300 GMT as a steady trading statement confounded the pessimists who had pushed the shares down to two-month lows on Tuesday.
Texan Marjorie Scardino will take over as Pearson chief executive from January, becoming the first woman to head one of Britain's top 100 companies.
Scardino, who is moving from the 50-percent Pearson-owned Economist Group, is on record as saying that Pearson's profit performance is not good enough.
Many share analysts say that Pearson has yet to complete its 1990s journey from industrial conglomerate to focused media company and that disposals are likely.
They believe Scardino may sell off the company's merchant banking interests and its Tussauds Group theme park and exhibition unit but they expect her to take her time before beginning to mould the company in her image.
Pearson has a 50 percent stake in London merchant bank Lazard Brothers and nine percent holdings in Lazard Freres in Paris and New York.
The Tussauds portfolio includes London's famous Madame Tussaud's waxwork exhibition and theme parks such as Alton Towers in the UK and Port Aventura in Spain.
There was a sense of relief after Pearson, which has interests ranging from newspaper and book publishing to television, said that trading conditions in the second half of the current year were in line with those of the first six months.
"All in all, it's in line with expectations but that in itself is good as the last few trading updates from the company have been disappointing," said Anthony de Larrinaga of brokers Panmure Gordon.
Pearson said that total video retuning costs associated with the launch of the Channel 5 terrestrial television channel next March would rise to around 150 million pounds ($250 million).
This is almost treble the sum initially earmarked for dealing with video recorders affected by interference from the new channel's signal. But it is below the figure quoted in some recent media reports.
Channel 5 has recently been awarded an extra frequency to boost its coverage to 80 percent of the country and Pearson said its business plan showed significantly higher rates of return than in the original bid.
Pearson said the retuning costs and a major film deal with Fox would come out of the 300 million pound original funding agreed by the Channel 5 shareholders. The other shareholders are Britain's United News &amp; Media, U.S. investment firm Warburg Pincus and Luxembourg broadcast group CLT.
This year's losses from Mindscape, Pearson's ailing U.S. consumer software unit, should be in line with earlier forecasts of around 46 million pounds. Pearson also saw no real impact on its 1996 profits from the current strength of sterling.
