Shares in British media and leisure firm Pearson Plc recovered on Wednesday following a trading statement which calmed market jitters about the outlook for the company.
Pearson had dipped to a two-month low on Tuesday but bounced back after the company said trading in the second half of the current year was in line with the first half. The shares were 20 1/2p firmer at 710p by 095 GMT.
Analysts said there was relief that Pearson, which passes into the hands of new chief executive Marjorie Scardino in January, had not produced any really nasty surprises.
"All in all, it's in line with expectations but that in itself is good as the last few trading updates from the company have been disappointing," said Anthony de Larrinaga of brokers Panmure Gordon.
Pearson said that total video retuning costs associated with the launch of the Channel 5 terrestrial television channel next March would rise to around 150 million pounds ($250 million).
This is almost treble the sum initially earmarked for dealing with video recorders affected by interference from the new channel's signal. But it is below the figure quoted in some recent media reports.
Channel 5 has recently been awarded an extra frequency to boost its coverage to 80 percent of the country and Pearson said its business plan showed significantly higher rates of return than in the original bid.
Pearson said the retuning costs and a major film deal with Fox would come out of the 300 million pound ($500 million) original funding agreed by the Channel 5 shareholders. The other shareholders are Britain's United News &amp; Media, U.S. investment firm Warburg Pincus and Luxembourg broadcast group CLT.
This year's losses from Mindscape, Pearson's ailing U.S. consumer software unit, should be in line with earlier forecasts of around 46 million pounds. Pearson also saw no real impact on its 1996 profits from the current strength of sterling.
Pearson's interests range from the Financial Times newspaper, through to theme parks and television production.
The company's critics have long said it lacks focus and much attention is centred on the likely impact of Texan Scardino, the first woman to head one of Britain's leading companies.
"The key issue remains what the structure of Pearson will be. Which are the core areas and do all parts of the business fit?" said de Larrinaga. ($1=.6003 Pound)
