Shares in English premier league soccer club Sunderland Plc got strong support on their market debut on Tuesday, trading up to 740 pence to score a 25 percent premium to the offer price of 585p.
The traditional combination of solid defence and star striker is no longer enough to gain success in English soccer and Sunderland joins a growing band of clubs that have moved on to the stock market recently to build up financial strength.
Sunderland reported last Friday that the public offer of shares was 2.7 times oversubscribed. A total of 2.15 million shares were sold under the flotation.
On Tuesday, the price was quoted at 732-1/2p by 0954 GMT to value the club at just under 60 million stg. Trading volume of 134,500 shares was registered.
Manchester United, Britain's most profitable club, was the model for English soccer flotations and now European rivals are seeking to emulate them in the financial stakes.
United, floated in 1991, has grown into one of Britain's 250 biggest quoted companies, with a market value of some 380 million stg. The value of the Manchester United brand name means that revenue from merchandising is as high as gate receipts.
Shares in Premier League club Tottenham Hotspur have also been quoted on the London Stock Exchange for several years but a number of other ambitious clubs are now following suit as the game flourishes.
Former champions Leeds United joined the market in August when they were taken over by media company Caspian Group while Premier League struggler Southampton has recently unveiled plans for a listing.
Share analysts believe that the trend will continue as revenue from a lucrative new contract with pay television operator BSkyB and potentially greater riches from the screening of matches on a pay-per-view basis make the newly listed clubs an attractive investment.
"We are not at saturation point -- Sunderland and Southampton are relatively small clubs compared with Newcastle and Man Utd but they are still going to have access to some chunky television revenue," said Nick Knight, an analyst with stock broker Nomura who has researched soccer club finance.
BSkyB signed a 670 million stg deal in June to secure live rights to Premier League soccer matches until 2001.
Under the deal glamour clubs such as Manchester United and Newcastle United, which is also looking at a flotation, are forecast to more than double their television revenue to over 12 million stg from next season.
Sunderland, promoted from Division One as champions last season, are expecting television and media income to increase more than tenfold to 3.5 million stg this season.
"The key is being in the Premier League or at least in Division One and thus having the potential to get into the Premier League," said Knight.
He believes that up to 20 of the 44 clubs in the top two sections could join the market in the next two or three years.
The trend is European-wide, Italian champions AC Milan, owned by media mogul Silvio Berlusconi, having tentatively planned a flotation for 1997.
A stock market listing enables soccer club owners to tap into new sources of finance, to dilute their own personal exposure to the risks of an expensive business and make it easier to cash in on their stake at some point in the future.
Sunderland, are raising over 10 million stg through their flotation -- funds that will be used to put the finishing touches to a new 42,000-seater stadium, cut debt and buy new players.
Southampton, who will obtain their listing via a merger with a company that builds retirement homes, are also seeking funds to move to a new and larger home.
Improved facilities and a reduction in crowd violence have helped to lift crowds by over 30 percent since the Premier League was launched in 1992.
The financial manna from satellite television has also reversed the exodus of top talent from these shores.
The Premier League clubs are now able to attract foreign talent away from wealthy continental rivals. Players such as Eric Cantona, Ruud Gullit and Fabrizio Ravanelli are now gracing the English game and being paid handsomely for doing so.
The enthusiasm is such that many Premier League matches are sold out weeks in advance, prompting great optimism about the financial prospects from the introduction of pay-per-view.
BSkyB is planning to launch digital satellite television late next year and that will create the additional channel space to show every Premier League fixture live on a pay-per-view basis, although no date has been set for its introduction.
Analysts believe pay-per-view could eventually be worth as much as 100 million stg a year to top clubs.
"Pay-per-view could be worth a million pounds per game to Manchester United, that's 40 million pounds per season just from league matches," said Alon Bull, who trades in soccer club shares at brokers Winterflood Securities.
"If you add in cup and European matches you're up to around 65 million and that could grow to 100 million in two or three years especially if the games are sold to Europe and maybe even the United States."
He forecast that the potential cash bonanza from pay-per-view made the leading soccer clubs potential prey for big business interests.
"The next gear up is where you get multinational companies bidding for football clubs," said Bull. "I can see the likes of Manchester United, Spurs and Newcastle being taken out by bidders," he added.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
