British mobile telephone company Cellnet on Friday reported strong growth in its customer numbers, confirming the British cellular market is healthy, already indicated by figures from rival Vodafone Group.
Cellnet, jointly owned by British Telecom and Securicor Group, said it had 2.68 million UK customers at the end of 1996, up from 2.3 million a year earlier.
Vodafone, the market leader in Britain, on Thursday reported a 20 percent increase in UK subscriber numbers over 1996 as a whole, reaching a total of some 2.8 million in December.
The market has settled down after a period of very rapid expansion at the beginning of the decade when mobile phones were a novelty.
However, analysts were impressed by the figures from Britain's two largest cellular companies and said there were signs of an increase in the rate of subscriber growth.
"Vodafone's performance was particularly creditable since historically they have done badly in Q4 while Cellnet did well, due to Cellnet's relative focus on the consumer market," broker SBC Warburg said in a research note.
Vodafone gained a net 146,000 UK subscribers in the last three months of last year once cancellations had been taken into account and said that its performance was an improvement on the corresponding 1995 quarter.
Vodafone shares added 4p to 244p on Friday, reversing the losses suffered in a generally weak market on Thursday.
Cellnet said its subscriber base had grown by 143,000 in the last three months of last year, against an increase of 215,000 in the Christmas quarter of 1995.
But Cellnet said that 1995 had been a bumper year and noted that the growth in its customer base was significantly higher than in the two previous quarters.
Both Vodafone and Cellnet are in the process of transferring their customers from older analogue networks to more efficient digital systems.
Vodafone said that more than 1.2 million of its UK customers were now on the digital network while Cellnet said it had over 880,000 digital customers.
One-2-One and Orange ORA.L, which offer only digital services, are due to release their connection figures next week. Orange shares were 2.5p higher at 188p on Friday.
