Shares of American Medical Response Inc fell sharply Wednesday for a second consecutive session amid concern that the ambulance company was straying from its successful acquisition strategy.
The steep decline came after American Medical Response announced Tuesday an agreement to buy STAT Healthcare Inc in a stock transaction valued at $145 million.
The planned acquisition moves American Medical Response, which has bought 69 ambulance companies since 1992, into hospital emergency rooms and disease management.  
Shares of American Medical Response tumbled 2-5/8 to 31-7/8 by midafternoon Wednesday. The stock dropped three points after the transaction was announced on Tuesday.
Wall Street analysts said the deal was strategically sound from a long-term perspective, but noted that investors were wary of the company's shift into a new area.
"The skepticism, which we don't share, is related to the company's going into a business outside their consolidation within the ambulance industry," said Randall Huyser of Furman Selz.  
STAT Healthcare provides staffing for hospital emergency rooms. It also offers outpatient medical services such as kidney dialysis.
"Although the transaction makes sense to us conceptually, this new direction for the company may elicit a wait-and-see attitude from some investors who want to see success first in the new venture. Others may question how the disease management division will fit into the puzzle," Lehman Brothers analyst Jeffrey Kessler wrote in a report issued Wednesday.
Industry sources also cited the company's prediction the deal will slightly dilute earnings this year.  
In a conference call with investors and analysts on Tuesday, American Medical Response said the transaction would be accretive in 1997. It also expects cost savings of $2.5 million from the merger.
Industry analysts also noted that the acquisition would mark a logical extension of the company's existing services.
"They're taking it beyond just driving you to the hospital," said Clifford Hewitt of Sanford C. Bernstein &amp; Co Inc.
