The stock of American Medical Response Inc. fell sharply for the second consecutive session Wednesday on concern that the Aurora, Colo.-based ambulance company is straying from its successful acquisition strategy.
The steep decline came after American Medical Response announced Tuesday an agreement to buy STAT Healthcare Inc. in a stock transaction valued at $145 million.
The planned acquisition moves American Medical Response, which has bought 69 ambulance companies since 1992, into hospital emergency rooms and disease management.
The stock of American Medical Response tumbled $4 on the New York Stock Exchange to $30.50. The stock dropped $3 after the transaction was announced on Tuesday.
Wall Street analysts said the deal was strategically sound from a long-term perspective, but noted that investors were wary of the company's shift into a new area.
"The scepticism, which we don't share, is related to the company's going into a business outside their consolidation within the ambulance industry," said Randall Huyser of Furman Selz.
Houston-based STAT Healthcare provides staffing for hospital emergency rooms. It also offers outpatient medical services such as kidney dialysis.
Industry sources also cited the company's prediction the deal will slightly dilute earnings this year.
In a conference call with investors and analysts on Tuesday, American Medical Response said the transaction will add to earnings in 1997. It also anticipated cost savings of $2.5 million from the merger.
Industry analysts noted that the acquisition marked a logical extension of its existing services by branching out into the hospital emergency room and providing more services for clients.
"They're taking it beyond just driving you to the hospital," said Clifford Hewitt of Sanford C. Bernstein &amp; Co Inc.
Industry sources also noted that shareholders of STAT Healthcare were likely to be concerned about the steep stock decline because the transaction was not based on any fixed price for American Medical Response shares. The deal calls for each share of STAT common stock to be converted into one-quarter share of American Medical Response.
Officials from both companies could not be reached for comment.
STAT stock fell 87.5 cents to $7.375 on Nasdaq.
Analysts expect American Medical Response to continue its tradition of buying ambulance companies as it works to integrate the STAT acquisition.
"I think the outlook for this company is very good. There are 12,000 ambulance companies in the U.S. and they aren't geared to the needs of medical care as it is evolving," said Hewitt.
