In yet another sign that utilities are branching out far beyond their traditional markets, PacifiCorp and Protection One Inc. on Friday announced a marketing alliance aimed at boosting customer loyalty in an increasingly competitive industry.
Under the venture, customers of PacifiCorp subsidiaries Pacific Power and Utah Power will be offered a security system from regional alarm company Protection One.
The unusual alliance is viewed as the first of many creative ventures in an uncertain era of utility deregulation.
"This is the start of what is going to happen all over the place. It's a whole new business that will coattail on the aggressive nature utilities are starting to take. One-stop shopping is becoming key from a marketing position," said Ron Chebra, manager of utilities and energy industries at AT&amp;T Solutions.
Utilities are becoming increasingly attracted to security companies as they prepare to enter new markets that previously had been off-limits due to federal regulations. In recent months, utilities have bought security firms or made large investments in them.
"We're looking for new products and services that we can bring to our customer base as a way to build loyalty and ultimately build preference with our residential customers," said Rene Carroll, consumer products manager at PacifCorp.
"We've been looking at different ways of entering the home security business for over a year," she added.
The alliance will give Protection One instant access to the 1.4 million customers served by the PacifiCorp subsidiaries and extends its reach to Utah. Previously, the regional security firm served six western states.
At a recent conference on mergers in the security industry, Protection One officials declined to discuss potential revenue from the alliance, but noted that capturing even 5 percent of PacifiCorp customers would be significant.
Customers accepting the offer will receive free installation of a home security system with the purchase of a two-year agreement for monitoring services.
The security system's alarm panel also will hold thermostat and lighting controls and remote access.
The alliance is expected to be just the first step for Protection One, which is trying to take advantage of new opportunities that are emerging from deregulation of the utilities and telecommunications industries.
"We think this is the first of quite a few announcements we'll be making in the next 12 months or so," Protection One Chief Financial Officer John Hesse told Reuters at the recent security conference.
The alliance re-establishes a link between the two companies that was dissolved several years ago. Protection One began as a subsidiary of PacifiCorp in 1988, but the alarm company split off in a management buyout three years later. Protection One then became a publicly-traded alarm company in 1994.
