Loewen Group Inc., the target of a $2.9 billion hostile bid by rival Service Corp. International is letting state authorities help mount its takeover defense.
So far, seven states, stretching from Hawaii to Pennsylvania, have launched antitrust investigations into the proposed transaction that would unite the two largest funeral service companies in North America, and Loewen has been quick to publicize their probes.
It is a defense strategy that has helped thwart other takeovers and mergers as states grow more more aggressive in challenging large transactions.
"The states are serious. Many of them have become quite knowledgable," said Dennis Yao, a former member of the Federal Trade Commission and now an antitrust expert at the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania.
But while state probes can certainly cause trouble for a friendly or hostile takeover, merger and antitrust experts said those investigations have rarely killed a deal.
"As a defense, it's got limited usage. It's hard to guarantee" that it will be effective, said Steven Wolitzer, co-head of mergers and acquisitions at Lehman Brothers.
Instead, the probes tend to be most successful when the states team up with federal agencies to fight a deal. In the Loewen case, the proposed transaction also is being investigated by a Canadian agency.
Early this year, state authorities were credited with helping to scuttle toymaker Mattel Inc.'s unsolicited bid for rival Hasbro Inc.
And, in April, state and federal complaints about antitrust implications of a friendly merger between drugstore giants Rite Aid Corp. and Revco D.S. Inc. led to the collapse of that deal.
States typically become involved in mergers that would impact consumers, such as in the retail or banking sectors.
Since rejecting Service Corp.'s bid, Loewen has used the state probes as part of its defense against the unwanted bid. Last Monday, Vancouver-based funeral services company announced that Pennsylvania was the latest state to launch an investigation of the proposed deal.
Pennsylvania officials said they had been unaware that Loewen had issued a news release about its probe.
"Loewen believes that the genie is out of the bottle in terms of government interest and there certainly is a precedent of attorney generals' looking at the situation and raising concerns, which ultimately derail those kinds of offers," said a spokesman for Loewen, adding that the company has been surprised by the level of state interest.
Loewen also has filed a federal antitrust lawsuit against Service Corp.
For its part, Service Corp. has rejected the antitrust argument and said that any potential problem could be resolved by divesting controversial properties.
Industry experts estimate a combined Service Corp-Loewen would hold a 10 percent market share in the highly fragmented industry.
Pennyslvania, California and New York are considered the most aggressive states in challenging mergers.
Pennsylvania has stepped up its merger probes since 1994 and so far has investigated 17 transactions this year compared with 13 in 1995 and far fewer in the merger boom of the 1980s, said Carl Hisiro, head of the antitrust section at the Pennsylvania attorney general's office.
Merger experts also said that state attention to big mergers typically intensifies in an election year, when officials are trying to convince voters that they are committed to protecting public interest.
