Mobil Corp, widely credited with the most aggressive cost-cutting program of all U.S. oil companies, is not resting on its laurels.
The Fairfax, Va-based oil giant told analysts on Monday that it has implemented $760 million of cost savings so far this year as part of a $1.3 billion plan and expects the remaining $540 million to fall into place soon.
Furthermore, Mobil also expects to save at least another $300 million on an annualized basis by 1999 by streamlining purchases of everything from raw materials to computers.  
Mobil discussed cost-savings details after it posted a 10 percent decline in third quarter operating income due to a host of unfavorable conditions, including weak refining and marketing profits. A company spokesman confirmed the figures.
Industry analysts dismissed the earnings drop, saying Mobil's stock price had already reflected the poor industry fundamentals. Instead, Wall Street appeared more intrigued with the company's future cost-cutting plans.
"They have done an excellent job and I think they are determined to maintain the cost cutting," said Jack Aydin of McDonald &amp; Co Securities Inc.  
Some investors already have expressed concern about Mobil's ability to keep up its aggressive pace.
"People are wondering if they have squeezed everything out of the cost structure that they can and if their magic touch is over," said Smith Barney analyst James Falvey, who upgraded Mobil to a buy rating from outperform on Monday.
Chairman Lucio Noto sought to allay any concerns.
"Since we are in a very competitive industry that has significant price volatility, changes in the way we run our business are essential if we are to compete in the long term," Noto said in a news release about the company's earnings.  
Although Mobil is not expected to announce a major restructuring plan anytime soon, future savings are anticipated from purchasing and technology.
"Everybody has cut a lot of the fat and even some of the muscle," said John Parry, analyst at energy consulting firm John S. Herold Inc.
And Mobil is likely to soon start reaping benefits of its joint venture with British Petroleum Co Plc that calls for the merger of their downstream  operations in Europe.
The success of the joint venture will likely impact Mobil's plans for future savings as other firms also pursue similar pacts. Texaco Inc, Royal Dutch Shell Group and Star Enterprise are now exploring joining downstream operations. Star is a venture of Texaco and Saudi Arabia's state oil firm.
If other companies pursue such ventures and the BP pact is successful, analysts said Mobil eventually may seek a downstream partner in other parts of the world.
"I think the easy part of the cost cutting and restructuring has been announced. The key is going to be to remain on top of it," Aydin said.
