CSX Corp may be hard-pressed to top an aggressive and pricey bid for Conrail Inc. unleashed Wednesday by rival Norfolk Southern Corp.
The Norfolk Southern $100-per-share offer came just eight days after CSX agreed to acquire Conrail in a cash and stock transaction valued at $8.4 billion, or about $92.50 per share.
"This (Norfolk Southern) bid comes without any regulatory risk, is all cash and is higher. So it's one-two-three - a knockout punch versus the old bid," said Anthony Hatch of NatWest Securities.  
At the very least, CSX will likely be forced to change its cash-and-stock offer to an all-cash bid if it wants to stay in the game, railroad and merger experts said.
"The Norfolk Southern bid is a very high bid. It's a rich premium and an attractive deal for Conrail shareholders. I don't know if CSX will be able to come up with an all-cash bid," said Carole Neely of Brown Brothers Harriman.
Norfolk Southern's bid did not completely surprise Wall Street because the Virginia-based railroad last week had expressed concern about the proposed CSX-Conrail transaction.
But some were startled by the nature of its offer.  
Norfolk Southern's bid aims to lure Conrail investors by offering immediate payment for their stock. It would then place the shares in a voting trust until the deal closes.
"The Norfolk Southern offer takes the risk away from (Conrail) shareholders. You've got to be impressed with that," said one takeover stock trader.
Under last week's Conrail-CSX agreement, Conrail shareholders would be required to authorize the tender of 40 percent of Conrail shares for placement in a voting trust. The rest of the shares would be exchanged for stock at a later date and would be subject to market fluctuations.  
Shares of Conrail, which said it will review the Norfolk Southern offer, soared 11-1/4 to 96.
The bid by Norfolk Southern represents its second attempt to buy the railroad that was formed by Congress in 1976 out of the remains of six bankrupt entities. Rumors about Norfolk Southern's interest in Conrail have surfaced on Wall Street periodically ever since it unsuccessfully tried to buy the railroad from the government in the 1980s.
"They're not usually very aggreesive from a financial point of view, but they've been keeping their balance sheet clean for a long time," Hatch said about Norfolk Southern.  
CSX and Norfolk Southern are eager to capture Conrail's valuable Northeast presence amid widespread industry consolidation.
Earlier this year, Union Pacific Corp bought Southern Pacific Rail Corp  for $3.9 billion after losing a fight for Santa Fe Pacific Corp, which was won by Burlington Northern Inc for $2.5 billion in 1995.
But unlike those acquisitions in which the target was viewed as a weak market player, Conrail is considered to be a much stronger railroad - a factor that could limit any potential cost savings or benefits to the successful bidder.
"Southern Pacific and Santa Fe were both not doing well and there was a lot of turnaround opportunity. Conrail is not sick. It's not a big turnaround situation and this is not a cheap price," said Cornelius Sewell of Argus Research.
