The three-year-old partnership between British Airways Plc. and USAir Group Inc., already severely damaged by a potential competing alliance, moved closer toward collapse on Thursday when USAir said it was cancelling a key marketing agreement between the two carriers.
Arlington, Va.-based USAir said it will end the carriers' code-sharing agreement and sever the link between their frequent flier programmes as of March 29, 1997.
Code-sharing is a marketing agreement in which airlines share passengers and extend their reach to destinations they do not typically serve. Over the past several years, dozens of airlines have entered into such pacts.
In announcing the move, USAir cited the British carrier's proposed alliance with American Airlines, a unit of AMR Corp., that would link cargo and passenger services of the two powerhouse carriers.
USAir, which is 24.6 percent owned by British Airways, has fiercely opposed the British Airways-American partnership and sued both carriers, saying that they would dominate the trans-Atlantic market. A hearing on the suit is scheduled for Friday in the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York.
"Clearly, it's difficult to simultaneously sue a partner and cooperate with a partner," said Samuel Buttrick of PaineWebber.
British Airways had no immediate comment on the action taken by USAir.
Although the relationship had certainly turned rocky, most analysts had expected USAir not to sever its relationship with the British carrier until the proposed British Airways-American pact was finalised.
The proposed alliance has raised antitrust concerns, awaits regulatory approvals and is tied to other aviation issues between the United States and Britain.
British Airways and American have argued that the deal would lead to greater competition on the routes because it would only go ahead if Britain and the United States agreed to a so-called "open skies" pact.
Although surprised by the move, industry analysts said it will have little impact on USAir, which received far less revenue from the alliance than did British Airways.
At the time the partnership began in 1993, USAir was a money-losing airline that desperately needed to reduce costs and expand its global presence.
British Airways invested $400 million under the partnership, but refused to pump any more money in the carrier because of its poor financial performance.
Since then, USAir's financial position has improved amid healthier times for the airline industry, but its costs are still higher than other major U.S. carriers.
"At the time the alliance was made, USAir received the cash which it needed, but today, it doesn't need it," said Glenn Engel of Goldman Sachs.
USAir's future plans are now more uncertain with the decision to sever ties with British Airways, especially because chief executive officer Stephen Wolf has stressed that he wants to expand USAir's transatlantic presence.
"I'm a little mystified. They don't have anything to replace it with yet," said Donaldson Lufkin &amp; Jenrette analyst James Higgins.
