USAir Group Inc, determined to expand overseas, soon will be flying solo at a time when most of its competitors are entrenched in international alliances.
Industry experts said the Arlington, Va.-based airline will have a hard time finding a new partner to replace its passenger-sharing pact with British Airways Plc.
"USAir wants to duplicate something like the other major carriers have in Europe, but all the dance cards are already full," said one analyst who did not want to be identified.  
Over the past five years, cost-conscious airlines have struck marketing agreements with other carriers in order to extend their reach to new destinations that would be too expensive to serve on their own. Examples include links between Northwest Airlines Corp and KLM Royal Dutch Airlines NV and between UAL Corp and Deutsche Lufthansa AG.
On Thursday, USAir said it would terminate in March its passenger-sharing and frequent flier pact with British Airways due to the British carrier's proposed alliance with powerhouse AMR Corp.  
The move is expected to have little financial impact on USAir, which received far less revenue from the alliance than did British Airways.
Because most of the big carriers already have partners, analysts said USAir is likely to pursue international growth on its own for now.  It already is seeking the right to fly to London's coveted and restricted Heathrow Airport from several U.S. cities.
The desire for an expanded overseas role is also likely to prompt USAir to re-enter old markets, analysts said. It is best-known for its short-haul routes on the U.S. East Coast.  
"It may be that USAir may return to some of those areas," said John Steltzer, executive of airline consulting firm Worldwide Transportation Group Inc.
Although USAir has the highest cost structure of all major U.S. carriers, industry analysts said strong profit margins on long-haul flights would likely offset the expense associated with resuming service in some of those areas.
It also is likely to strike alliances with smaller European carriers that could transport passengers beyond any USAir destination.
"That would provide feed for their transatlantic operations, which they would need on that side of the ocean," said Raymond Neidl of Furman Selz.
In the longer term, however, many analysts remain convinced that USAir will need an extensive alliance or merger with another carrier.
