French holding company CGIP said on Friday it could strike a deal in the next few weeks to acquire a 28 percent stake in automotive parts firm Valeo SA from Italian businessman Carlo De Benedetti.
In a meeting with reporters, CGIP chairman Ernest-Antoine Seilliere described negotiations as nearing a "momentum."
"In the coming weeks, we could come to a conclusion," he said. He said it would be a longterm investment for CGIP.
Seilliere declined to discuss a potential price for the stake owned by De Benedetti's holding company Cerus.  
CGIP's efforts to buy a piece of Valeo moved a step closer late Thursday, when it sold half of its 20 percent stake in Crown Cork &amp; Seal Co Inc for $560.6 million.
CGIP has said that profits from the sale would be used to finace the stake in Valeo.
"Now we have sold part of our assets, obviously we are seen as serious to buy Valeo, but we still have a way to go. We are serious about what we are doing," Seilliere said.
CGIP is a holding company with industrial and information technology investments.
Seilliere said the purchase of a stake in Valeo would fit its strategy to invest in firms that have a global presence. Seventy percent of Valeo's business is outside of France, he said.
He also dismissed the potential of Valeo falling prey to the cyclical nature of the autmotive business, saying that opportunities abound in growing economies around the world.
He noted that CGIP previously held a stake in Valeo and sold it in 1993. He also said that the company does not need any significant productivity or organizational changes.  
Although Seilliere appeared hopeful that a deal for the Valeo stake will be struck, he also said that CGIP would certainly consider another investment if the Valeo acquisition falls apart. He did not name any potential companies.
Regarding its stake in Crown Cork, which now totals 10.1 percent, Seilliere said CGIP's relationship with company had not been affected by the partial sale of its investment.
"Our team is still there. Nothing has changed," he said, noting that CGIP still has more than $600 million invested in the company.
CGIP decided to sell a portion of its Crown Cork &amp; Seal holdings after investors and analysts expressed concern that packaging had grown to 50 percent of CGIP's assets, up from about 21 percent in 1986, Seilliere said.
