The three-year-old partnership between British Airways and USAir Group Inc, already severely damaged by a potential competing alliance, moved closer toward collapse on Thursday when USAir said it was cancelling a key marketing agreement between the two carriers.
Although surprised by the move, industry analysts said it will have little impact on USAir, which received far less revenue from the alliance than did British Airways.
British Airways still retains a 24.6 percent stake in Arlington, Va-based USAir.  
USAir said it would end its code-sharing pact and frequent flier programs with British Airways on March 29, 1997.
Code-sharing is a marketing agreement in which airlines share passengers and extend their reach to destinations they do not typically serve. Over the past several years, dozens of world airlines have entered into such pacts.
The USAir move cames amid increasing hostility between it and its British partner. British Airways earlier this year announced plans to form a massive alliance with powerhouse AMR, parent of American Airlines Inc.  
The move infuriated USAir, which promptly sued the two carriers and contended that their planned pact would undermine the USAir-British Airways partnership.
Although the relationship had certainly turned rocky, most analysts had not expected USAir to sever the tie until the proposed British Airways-AMR pact was finalized. That proposed alliance has raised antitrust concerns, awaits regulatory approvals and is linked to other aviation issues.
"Clearly, it's difficult to simultaneously sue a partner and cooperate with a partner," said Samuel Buttrick of PaineWebber.  
British Airways said in London that it would continue to work with USAir until the pact is terminated.
At the time the partnership began in 1993, USAir was a money-losing airline that desperately needed to reduce costs and expand its global presence. British Airways invested $400 million under the partnership, but refused to pump any more money in the carrier because of its poor financial performance.
Since then, USAir's financial position has improved amid healthier times for the airline industry, but its costs are still higher than other major U.S. carriers.
"At the time the alliance was made, USAir received the cash which it needed, but today, it doesn't need it," said Glenn Engel of Goldman Sachs.
USAir's future plans are now more uncertain with the decision to sever ties with British Airways, especially because chief executive officer Stephen Wolf has stressed that he wants to expand USAir's transatlantic presence.
"I'm a little mystified. They don't have anything to replace it with yet," said Donaldson Lufkin &amp; Jenrette analyst James Higgins.
