Drugstore giant Revco D.S. Inc. said Monday it agreed to buy regional chain Big B Inc. in a sweetened takeover valued at $380 million.
The transaction calls for Twinsburg, Ohio-based Revco to buy all outstanding shares of Big B common stock for $17.25 per share, up from Revco's unsolicited offer of $15 per share, which Big B rejected last month.
"We are very excited about the combination of Revco and Big B. I am pleased we were able to bring this process to a fast and successful conclusion," said Dwayne Hoven, president and chief executive officer of Revco.
The deal will combine the nation's second- and 10th-largest drug store chains.
The companies said Big B's board of directors unanimously approved the latest offer and recommended that Big B shareholders tender their shares.
The sale of Bessemer, Ala.-based Big B marks the latest acquisition in the rapidly consolidating drugstore industry. Rite Aid Corp. signed an agreement this month to buy West Coast chain Thrifty PayLess Inc. for $1.4 billion, and Thrift Drug Inc., a unit of J.C. Penney Co. Inc., agreed in August to buy Fay's Inc. for about $285 million.
Although Big B rejected the initial offer, its stock recently had been trading at about $16 per share on views that the company would be sold for more than Revco's original $15 per share offer.
Revco's stock traded up 12.5 cents at $29.50 a share on the New York Stock Exchange. Big B's shares were at $17, up 43.75 cents, in afternoon trading on Nasdaq.
"With Revco's financial resources, technological expertise and marketing and sales capability, we can together grow our combined company's customer base and increase our sales potential. Among other efficiencies, this combination will allow the combined company to spread costs over a larger base of stores," Hoven said.
Big B said it will work with Revco to ensure a smooth transition.
Like many other regional drugstore chains, Big B has been fighting problems that have accompanied the burgeoning clout of managed health care companies and huge discount retailers. It has been hurt by deteriorating profit margins and sales and its earnings have disappointed Wall Street.
Industry experts say Revco is well-placed to capture profits in the Southeast by taking advantage of Big B's underused distribution centre and closing overlapping stores in Georgia.
"Revco will be able to integrate Big B really quickly," said Eric Bosshard of Midwest Research-Maxus Group.
Big B's profit margins began to tumble last year due to difficulty in calculating the impact of lower prescription prices paid by managed care providers. Although it invested heaviliy in a new computer system to better track profit margins, people familiar with the company have said its newly expanded distribution centre is operating at only 60 percent of capacity.
Analysts said one of Revco's first steps will be to assess store overlap, especially in Georgia, where Revco operates 180 stores and Big B has 160 stores.
"Once they get the distribution and the stores together, it will be a real profit centre for Revco," said John Strauss, of investment advisory firm Strauss Financial Group.
Revco also said it will revise and extend its tender offer for Big B shares until Nov 15. The offer had been set to expire Monday.
The two companies also said all litigation between them will be withdrawn.
After some haggling about terms, Revco earlier this month signed a confidentiality agreement with Big B, took a peek at its books and apparently liked what it saw.
The Big B board met over the weekend and accepted the new and higher offer from Revco. Details of other offers were not immediately known, although Eckerd Corp. was viewed as a potential bidder.
Eckerd declined to comment.
Big B, Inc. operates 397 units throughout the Southeastern United States.
Revco operates 2,202 stores in 14 contiguous Midwestern, Southeastern and Eastern states.
The deal with Big B was seen as a significant acquisition for Revco, which earlier this year was involved in a failed transaction with Rite Aid. The two companies had signed a pact for Rite Aid to buy Revco for $1.8 billion, but the deal collapsed after regulators expressed concern that the union would raise consumer prices.
