Revco D.S. Inc is expected to leverage its size and experience to overcome the host of problems that pushed regional drugstore chain Big B Inc into a deal with the Ohio-based drugstore giant.
Industry experts said Revco is well-placed to capture profits in the southeast by taking advantage of Big B's underused distribution center and closing overlapping stores in Georgia.
"Revco will be able to integrate Big B really quickly," said Eric Bosshard of Midwest Research-Maxus Group.  
The two companies on Monday said that Big B had accepted a sweetened acquisition offer from Revco in a cash transaction valued at $380 million, or $17.25 per share.
It is the latest in a string of recent acquisitions in the drugstore industry. Just two weeks ago, Rite Aid Corp agreed to buy West Coast-based Thrifty PayLess Inc for $1.4 billion.
Big B initially fought a takeover by Revco, rejecting its unsolicited bid of $15 per share last month and inviting interested parties to submit formal offers.  
Like many other regional drugstores, Big B was burdened by problems that have accompanied the burgeoning clout of managed health care and huge discount retailers.
Big B's profit margins began to tumble last year due to difficulty in calculating the impact of lower prescription prices paid by managed care providers. Although it invested heaviliy in a new computer system to better track profit margins, people familiar with the company have said its newly-expanded distribution center is operating at only 60 percent of capacity.  
One of its first steps will be to assess store overlap, especially in Georgia where Revco operates 180 stores and Big B has 160 stores.
"Once they get the distribution and the stores together, it will be a real profit center for Revco," said John Strauss of investment advisory firm Strauss Financial Group.
Revco has said that the acquisition will boost its earnings in the first year of the combination.
After some haggling about terms, Revco signed a confidentiality agreement, took a peek at Big B's books and apparently liked what it saw.  
The Big B board met over the weekend and accepted the new and higher offer from Revco. Details of other offers were not immediately known, although Eckerd Corp was viewed as a potential bidder.
Eckerd declined to comment.
Revco's expanded southeast presence is expected to lead to heightened competition with Eckerd, CVS, a unit of Melville Corp, and Thrift Drugs, a unit of J.C. Penney Co .
The deal with Big B was seen as a significant acquisition for Revco which earlier this year was involved in a failed transaction with Rite Aid. The two companies had signed a pact for Rite Aid to buy Revco for $1.8 billion, but the deal collapsed after regulators expressed concern that the union would raise consumer prices.
