Billionaire investor Marvin Davis on Wednesday announced an $835 million bid for closely-held Carter-Wallace Inc., maker of Trojan condoms and Arrid deodorant.
Davis offered to buy outstanding stock of Carter-Wallace for $18 a share, reflecting a 50 percent premium over its recent trading price.
Carter-Wallace confirmed in a three-paragrpah statement that it received the offer, saying it would refer the bid to majority sharheolder The CPI Development Corp.
Shares of Carter-Wallace jumped $3.875 to $15.625 on NYSE, but remained below the $18 offer level due to market speculation that Carter-Wallace might be reluctant to sell.
"I think the board is going to be completely unreceptive to this," said one trader who specialises in takeover situations and spoke on condition he not be identified.
Based on Carter-Wallace's 46.39 million shares outstanding, the offer from the financier's Los Angeles-based Davis Companies was valued at $835 million.
Most traders gave the bid slim chance of succeeding because Carter-Wallace has previously expressed little interest in selling the company. Furthermore, insiders control about 82 percent of Carter-Wallace via common stock and a special class of shares.
"With all of that control, they can do a 'just say no defence'," said another stock arbitrager.
Carter-Wallace is dominated by members of the Hoyt family. Chief Executive Officer and Chairman Henry Hoyt Jr. is the son of the executive who took over management of the Carter Medicine Company in 1929. Family members hold other key positions.
Davis urged the company to consider its bid.
"While we recognise that controlling interest in the company's stock is held by the Hoyt family, we believe the company's board of directors will act responsibly and in the best interests of all the shareholders in considering our offer," Davis said in a news release.
Market sources speculated that Davis has been buying up shares of Carter-Wallace in recent weeks. A spokeswoman for Davis said he had a "material interest" in the company, but she declined to be specific.
The 70-year-old Davis is well-known on Wall Street for his corporate investments.
A former chairman of Paramount, he recently was one of several dissident shareholders of Mesa Inc. who tried to wrest control from oilman T. Boone Pickens. Pickens has since passed the baton to financier Richard Rainwater. The Davis spokeswoman said he is no longer involved with Mesa.
Davis also is developing a riverboat casino and entertainment centre in Boonville, Mo.
Carter-Wallace has long been viewed on Wall Street as an acquisition candidate. At the company's meeting in July, some shareholders criticised its low stock price but a shareholder proposal to consider a merger was rejected.
Just last month, Carter-Wallace named Ralph Levine to the position of president and chief operating officer of the company. Levine, who had been vice president, secretary and general counsel, was named to replace a retiring executive.
In 1994, the company ran into trouble when the federal Food and Drug Administration advised physicians to stop prescribing its Felbatol epilepsy drug due to links with a bone marrow disorder.
