- Supermarket chain Food Lion Inc. said Thursday it will buy Tampa, Fla.-based Kash n' Karry Food Stores Inc. in a transaction valued at $341 million.
The two companies had been in talks for a transaction earlier this year, but dropped those discussions in August. It was not immediately known when talks resumed.
Under the agreement, Kash n' Karry shareholders will receive $26 per share in cash. The companies also said Food Lion will refinance $221 million of Kash n' Karry debt.
Supermarket chains have been gobbling each other up rapidly in a wave of industrywide consolidation.
The deal came one day after California-based grocery giant Safeway Inc. offered $2.3 billion for the 65.5 percent of supermarket chain Vons Cos. Inc  that it doesn't already own.
Earlier this year, Dutch group Ahold NV bought Massachusetts-based grocer Stop &amp; Shop Cos. for $1.8 billion.
Salisbury, N.C.-based Food Lion is a unit of Belgian retailer Delhaize.
Food Lion is one of the 10 largest U.S. supermarket chains with more than 1,100 stores in 14 states. Kash n' Karry has 100 food stores and other facilities in west central Florida.
Shares of both companies were halted for trading shortly before the market closed. Earlier, Food Lion shares were up 6.25 cents to $8.56 on Nasdaq and Kash n' Karry stock rose 25 cents to $24, also on Nasdaq.
"This agreement will enhance competition in west central Florida by putting the financial resources of Food Lion behind the Kash n' Karry name, enabling Kash n' Karry to position itself more effectively as a viable competitor with the area's major supermarket chains," said Tom Smith, chief executive officer of Food Lion.
Food Lion said it planned to invest up to $150 million to improve Kash n' Karry stores in the next four years, with funding expected to come from Kash n' Karry cash flow from operations.
"While allowing us to continue operating our stores under the Kash n' Karry banner, it gives us access to the capital we need to accelerate our store remodeling programme and grow our business," said Kash n' Karry Chairman Ronald Johnson.
The companies said the transaction will increase earnings per share for Food Lion and result in cost savings. They were not specific.
They also said the deal, which is expected to close by early 1997, has been been approved by Kash n' Karry's board of directors. The board will also recommend that Kash n' Karry shareholders support the merger.
Institutional investors who together own more than 51 percent of Kash n' Karry common stock also support the deal, the companies said.
Food Lion said it has received a commitment from Chase Manhattan Bank to arrange and syndicate a new credit facility that will replace Food Lion's current borrowing facility and provide financing for the deal.
PaineWebber Inc. submitted a fairness opinion to Kash n' Karry's board and is acting as financial advisor to Kash n' Karry in connection with the transaction.
