The U.S. food industry, besieged by years of slow growth, wants to whip up new business from people who don't cook.
Armed with a new study that predicts consumer spending on ready-made foods will accelerate in the next 10 years, food firms are reaching out to a generation that doesn't know the difference between baking powder and baking soda.  
"Consumers aren't looking anymore for a cake mix.  They want the slice of cake," said John Gray, executive director of the International Foodservice Distributors Association, which helped fund the study released this week.
Industry executives this week said they are developing fresh strategies to feed 18-to-24 year olds -- a generation that grew up with working mothers and microwave ovens.
"Cooking from scratch is diminishing: many consumers in 2005 will never have cooked a meal from basic ingredients," said the study by consulting firm McKinsey &amp; Co Inc titled "Foodservice 2005: Satisfying America's Changing Appetite."  
The study confirms trends that food manufacturers and food distributors already are seeing: harried consumers bypass the fresh meat and spice aisles of a supermarket in favor of sections selling barbecued chicken and ready-made salad.
The study projects the food industry will grow 1.6 percent per year to nearly $800 billion a year by 2005.  The foodservice sector is expected to capture nearly all of the anticipated incremental sales, pegged at $100 billion.  
"There is going to be a whole new plethora of different foodservice opportunities," said William Eacho, president and chief executive officer of  Atlantic Food Services, a Virginia-based foodservice distribution company.
Tomorrow's supermarkets are expected to have drive-up windows where consumers can buy ready-made meals.
Executives also envision stores that group food by meal categories so that shoppers can head right to the breakfast aisle instead of wandering throughout the store.  
The changes are expected to be especially challenging for food manufacturers, who may see shelf space for their products shrink as stores provide more ready-made products.
Nabisco Holdings Corp already is experimenting with ways to ensure its products are not lost in the shuffle.  The maker of items such as Oreo cookies and Grey Poupon mustard wants to leverage its brand popularity into ready-made meals.
"As a major food manufacturer, we ought to have our fair share of that growth," said Henry Lambert, president of Nabisco's food service company.  
That may mean developing a Grey Poupon-based sandwich spread for supermarket sandwiches or working with a dessert manufacturer to sell individual slices of cheesecake that contain Oreo cookies, Lambert said.
And demand for those kinds of products is expected to grow as consumers spend less time preparing meals.  Industry experts estimate people now spend about 20 minutes preparing a meal versus two hours of preparation time about 50 years ago.
"The meal is not the social setting of the evening anymore. It's a nuisance," said Robert Stauth, chairman and chief executive officer of food distributor Fleming Cos Inc.
