Investor Carl Icahn resumed his campaign to break up RJR Nabisco Holdings Corp. Monday by moninating a slate of directors he wants to replace the existing board members.
Icahn, who holds a 7.3 percent stake in RJR, named his intended nominees to RJR's board in a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
In a letter to RJR Chairman Steven Goldstone that was attached to the SEC filing, Icahn reiterated his request that RJR spin off its Nabisco Holdings Corp. unit immediately.
Icahn, who began a campaign to split up RJR last year, said in his letter that the company's stock price had lost more than 20 percent recently while the company has lost market share to rival Philip Morris Cos. Inc.
RJR Nabisco Holdings said in response to Icahn that the slate of directors he submitted was weaker than the one assembled last year by Icahn and fellow investor Bennett LeBow, who had teamed up for a while in an effort to separate RJR's tobacco operations from its food businesses.
"Mr. Icahn's slate appears for the most part to be a group of lawyers, consultants and retired people with records that will not withstand scrutiny," RJR said in a statement.
RJR, which owns 80.5 percent of Nabisco, repeated that it favored a spin-off of the food unit but said this is not the right time to split up the company.
"We plan to do it when a spinoff will not endanger the company," RJR said. "But an attempt to spin off Nabisco in the current political and legal environment could do serious damage to the company, the tobacco industry and our shareholders," it added.
Icahn said in his letter that his proposed slate of directors will be headed by Thomas Rattigan, former chief executive officer of PepsiCo Bottling International and former chairman of G. Heileman Brewing Co.
"The management hasn't demonstrated that they're doing anything better than they were doing last year, so why not try again?" Rattigan said in a telephone interview.
Rattigan said the nominated directors intend to pursue a global settlement of tobacco litigation claims. He was not specific about those plans, but said any global settlement must be an industrywide effort.
"It's in the interest of everybody that some sort of global settlement be undertaken to permit these companies to get on with their corporate existence and do what they should be doing," Rattigan said.
In the letter to Goldstone, Icahn also said that the board nominees would raise the company's annual dividend to $2 per share and maintain that rate after the spin-off of Nabisco.
RJR raised its annual dividend last March to $1.85 per share from $1.50.
According to a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Rattigan was hired by Icahn as a consultant on Nov. 1 for $2 million.
Icahn and LeBow failed earlier this year in a similar attempt to force a spin-off of the tobacco unit.
Icahn and LeBow split up after their defeat last year, although both said they would continue to individually press for an immediate spinoff.
Shares of RJR closed up 25 cents at $29.25 on the New York Stock Exchange.
