The executive tapped to lead a a dissident slate of directors in a proxy fight against RJR Nabisco Holdings Corp said the current management has shown little progress in solving the company's problems.
"The management hasn't demonstrated that they're doing anything better than they were doing last year, so why not try again?" said Tom Rattigan, who was nominated to the slate Monday by investor Carl Icahn.
Last year's similar effort by Icahn and investor Bennett LeBow was overwhelmingly defeated by shareholders.  
As of October 25, Icahn held a 7.3 percent stake in RJR.
The dissident slate supports an immediate spinoff of RJR's 80.5 percent owned Nabisco Holdings Corp food business.
RJR insists it also wants to spin off Nabisco, but says this is not an appropriate time to split up the company.
Rattigan told Reuters in a telephone interview that he began speaking with Icahn several months ago about a potential role and signed up with the investor on November 1.
"It appears to be an opportunity to get in and play a role at a company that seems to be having some major league problems," he said. Shares of RJR closed up 1/4 at 29-1/4.  
A former top executive at PepsiCo Bottling International and G. Heileman Brewing Co, Rattigan dismissed RJR's criticism that the slate does not contain any tobacco industry experts.
"Based on (RJR's) performance to date, I think that's good news," Rattigan said.
Rattigan said the slate intends to pursue a global settlement of tobacoo litigation claims. He was not specific about those plans, but said any global settlement must be an industry-wide effort.  
"It's in the interest of everybody that some sort of global settlement be undertaken to permit these companies to get on with their corporate existence and do what they should be doing," Rattigan said.
In a letter to RJR chief executive officer Steven Goldstone, Icahn also said the board nominees would raise the company's annual dividend to $2 per share and maintain that rate after the spinoff of Nabisco. RJR raised its annual dividend last March to $1.85 per share from $1.50.
According to a filing with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, Rattigan was hired by Icahn's as a consultant on November 1 for $2 million.
Icahn noted in the letter to Goldstone that he will pay the expenses of the proxy fight and vowed not to enter into any agreement, merger or understanding at the company if the new board takes control.
