One day after rival bidders sent its stock on a rollercoaster ride, Conrail Inc was set Tuesday to formally consider a $9 billion takeover offer from Norfolk Southern Corp.
The company's board of directors was widely expected to reject the unsolicited Norfolk Southern offer in favor of a friendly $8.4 billion deal with CSX Corp.
"My guess is, at this point, that they stick with the CSX proposal," said Brian Routledge of Prudential Securities .  
Conrail's board was slated to meet Tuesday ahead of a Wednesday deadline to respond to the Norfolk Southern offer.
A Conrail spokesman declined to comment on the timing of its decision, but Wall Street experts expected the company to issue an announcement on Wednesday.
Conrail agreed on Oct. 15 to be bought by CSX in a cash and stock transaction valued at $8.4 billion, or $92.50 per share. Norfolk launched its $100-per-share bid on Oct. 23.
Since then, Norfolk Southern and CSX have vehemently attacked each other's offers and landed in court.  
The CSX-Norfolk Southern relationship between took a new twist Monday when the companies announced they were holding discussions about their bids, but offered conflicting accounts about the talks. Uncertainty about those talks prompted sharp stock declines on Monday.
Industry experts said Conrail is likely to defend the lower CSX bid by citing the strategic benefits of the transaction and the lack of potential legal problems associated with the friendly deal. Legal expoerts have said that Pennsylvania takeover law could impede a Norfolk Southern acquisition of Conrail.  
Experts also speculated that Conrail may try to convince CSX to sweeten its offer in an attempt to appease shareholders who may be upset by the rejection of a higher bid.
Railroad industry experts have said that CSX likely cannot afford to match Norfolk Southern's $100 cash offer, but may be able to restructure the bid to increase the cash portion of the transaction.
"I think it is a strong likelihood that any positive reaction from Conrail's bid toward the Norfok Southern bid will force CSX to sweeten their bid," said Carole Neely of Brown Brothers Harriman.
