Norfolk Southern Corp is widely expected to raise its $9.1 billion offer for Conrail Inc in an attempt to ignite shareholder unrest over the company's acceptance of a lower offer from CSX Corp.
Industry analysts speculate that Norfolk Southern could raise its $100 per share bid by as much 10 percent without diluting its balance sheet or the benefits of a merger.
"If they raise their bid, it will put the icing on the cake. It will take a bid that is superior and widen the gap further," said Carole Neely of Brown Brothers Harriman &amp; Co.  
Conrail and CSX earlier revised their October merger pact to increase the amount of cash in the transaction.
Shareholders reacted angrily to the new transaction, which effectively offsets recent stock erosion and does not significantly raise the value of the transaction.
Based on the new terms, the Conrail-CSX transaction values shares of Conrail at about $8.463 billion, or $93 per share, versus an original value of $8.418 billion, or $92.50.
Wall Street analysts said Norfolk Southern, which has long pursued Conrail, will likely seek to capitalize on the shareholder dissatisfaction.  
"I do believe we will, in very short order, hear something from Norfolk Southern," said Renee Johansen of Wheat First Butch Singer.
In addition to revising its pact with CSX, Conrail formally rejected Norfolk Southern's cash bid. The CSX-Conrail agreement calls for a cash and stock transaction.
Norfolk Southern could not immediately be reached for comment on the speculation it will raise the bid. However, the company said it plans to review its options and called the CSX-Conrail pact inferior to its offer.  
"I think the price is getting rich, but I think there is at least a 50-50 chance (Norfolk Southern) comes back at least one more time," said Brian Routledge of Prudential Securities.
They also said the dissatisfaction with the new deal was not limited to traders of takeover stocks.
"I've heard similar complaints from everybody," said one analyst who did not want to be identified, referring to large institutional holders of Conrail shares.
But experts also noted a higher bid from Norfolk Southern may still not be enough to wrest the railraod from the grasp of CSX.  
Instead, Conrail's future track may be determined by a federal judge in Philadelphia who is slated to hold a November 12 hearing on a Norfolk Southern lawsuit that contends the Conrail-CSX pact is illegal.
Pennsylvania corporate law, which allows a company's board to act in the interests of groups other than shareholders, is viewed as an obstacle to Norfolk Southern's efforts to buy Conrail.
"I think the court is going to play a big role," Johansen said.
Indeed, concern about the Pennsylvania law were viewed as contributing to a decline in Norfolk Southern shares on Wendesday. The company's stock fell two to 87-1/8.
"People know it's the higher bid, but historically speaking, in most of the cases, hostile deals in the rail sector don't make it," Neely said.
