Fast-growing Republic Industries Inc., which is led by Florida entrepreneur Wayne Huizenga, said Thursday it would buy Alamo-Rent-A-Car Inc. for $625 million in a move to sharply expand its automobile business.
The deal comes less than six weeks after the collapse of Huizenga's $4.3 billion plan to buy security firm ADT Ltd.
"Leisure travel is a fast growing segment of the automobile rental industry and Alamo's innovative leadership in this growth sector of the automobile rental marketplace is consistent with our strategy of building consumer-oriented, service related businesses with recognised brand names and strong management," Huizenga said in a statement.
Republic is expected to use Alamo to expand its burgeoning auto business rooted in used-car company AutoNation USA.
Huizenga "wants to be the largest used-car sales, leasing and rental provider. It makes sense to have the Alamo fleet as a warehouse for his vehicles," said Andrew Jeffrey, analyst at Robertson Stephens &amp; Co.
Alamo is the fourth-largest rental car company in the United States, with a fleet of about 130,000 vehicles. Alamo operates in 42 states in the United States and has operations in 10 European countries and Canada.
Alamo founder and Chairman Michael Egan, who owns about 94 percent of the company, will continue as chairman of Alamo.
Huizenga said Republic's AutoNation USA car business will benefit from Alamo's strong relationships with manufacturers and other automotive suppliers.
"The combination of Alamo with Republic's 'like-new' automobile retailing concept is an exceptional fit that will enable AutoNation USA to accelerate its business plan and create a unique, dedicated and predictable source of inventory for our megastore distribution system," he said.
Republic bought used-car company AutoNation earlier this year and opened its first superstore about two weeks ago in Florida. It plans to open three or four more AutoNation stores this year and quickly expand the chain so there are some 80 stores around the nation by the end of the decade.
AutoNation will be supplemented by Republic's recent $95 million purchase of used-car superstore firm CarChoice Inc.
Investors praised the latest acquisition by Republic, bidding the company's stock up $2.875 to $33.625 on Nasdaq. The deal will be accounted for as a pooling of interests.
In addition to the automotive industry, Republic specialises in electronic security and solid waste companies. Huizenga also owns the professional Florida Marlins baseball, Panthers hockey and Dolphins football teams.
Huizenga suffered a setback in late September when his plan to buy security firm ADT was called off after weeks of uncertainty. Although the stock deal was viewed positively from a strategic standpoint, it fell apart due to volatility in Republic's stock and the inability of the companies to revise terms of the transaction.
Analysts saw little chance of that happening with Alamo.
"I think Alamo provides Republic everything that ADT did, plus more, from the auto side," said Jordan Hymowitz of Montgomery Securities, who rates Republic shares as a buy.
Republic also said it will pursue more car deals.
"We're interested in growing in virtually every segment of the automobile industry," spokesman Ronald Castell said, citing rental, used cars, repairs and financing.
The acquisition of Alamo marks the latest in a flurry of transactions in the rental car industry.
On Wednesday, ADT said it planned to sell its U.S. auto-auction business, ADT Automotive. The unit is the nation's second-largest automobile auction company, and its sale would mark ADT's complete exit from that business after it sold its European auto-auction unit last year.
Last month, hotel and real estate operator HFS Inc. bought Avis Inc., the world's second largest car rental company, for about $800 million. HFS has said it will pursue another similar acquisition and launch an initial public offering for part of its rental car subsidiary next year.
Ford Motor Co., which owns Hertz, in July announced it was expanding its rental car business with the acquisition of Budget Rent-a-Car. Ford already had owned part of Budget.
Meanwhile, Chrysler Corp. wants to sell subsidiaries Dollar Rent-A-Car and Thrifty Rent-A-Car.
