The outcome of a bidding war for Conrail Inc is increasingly likely to be decided by its investors, who will ultimately determine if the railroad should strike an $8.5 billion deal with CSX Corp when a $10 billion offer is also on the table.
Wall Street experts said Conrail was unlikely to be swayed from its planned merger with CSX despite a higher bid lobbed Friday by Norfolk Southern. "Nothing has changed. I think a lot will depend on what happens with the shareholder vote," said Jeff Medford of William Blair &amp; Co.  
Conrail has agreed to a stock and cash transaction with CSX valued at about $8.5 billion. Norfolk Southern, which had already outbid CSX, earlier Friday sweetened its all-cash offer to $10 billion.
Shareholders are considered key to the Conrail-CSX transaction because Pennsylvania corporate law prohibits CSX from buying more than 20 percent of Conrail in a tender offer without their approval. A shareholder meeting is slated for mid-December.  
Some shareholders have expressed unhappiness with the proposed CSX transaction. Conrail "won't win the shareholder vote," predicted one arbitrager.
Arbitragers, who have been among the most vocal opponents of the Conrail-CSX deal, said that Norfolk Southern would further strengthen its position by aggressively urging  Conrail shareholders to defeat the CSX proposal.
"It's got to be like Bob Dole's marathon, but with a more successful conclusion," said one, referring to the 96-hour campaign blitz launched by the losing U.S. presidential candidate in the days before this week's election.  
Norfolk Southern chairman David Goode declined to be specific about the company's plans to woo shareholders.
"The numbers in our bid speak for themselves. It should be readily apparent that it's a superior offer. We're willing to talk to all of the constituencies involved, including shareholders and others who are interested in this, and we are doing that," he told Reuters in a telephone interview.
Conrail has said it will review the new Norfolk Southern offer, but the Philaelphia-based railroad also has defended the CSX transaction as a better strategic match.  
"We have high regard for Norfolk Southern and its board, but we simply do not believe that a sale of Conrail to Norfolk Southern is in the best interest of Conrail and its constituencies," Conrail wrote Norfolk Southern on Thursday before the bid was raised.
The new Norfolk Southern bid reflects an 18 percent premium over CSX's plan, which values Conrail at about $93 per share. Norfolk Southern has raised its bid to $110 per share.
Shares of Conrail rose 2-1/4 to 95-1/4 after the new bid.
Wall Street experts said Conrail and CSX, which already revised the terms of their transaction once, may feel pressured again to increase the portion of cash in their deal. However, most industry experts do not expect a revised bid to top the offer made by Norfolk Southern.
