Raising the stakes in the escalating battle for Conrail Inc., Norfolk Southern Corp. on Friday sweetened its hostile bid for the railroad to $10 billion in cash.
Norfolk Southern's original offer of $9.1 billion was already higher than a proposed $8.5 billion transaction planned between Conrail and CSX Corp., but the new bid of $110 per share further widened the gap.
"Our increased offer demonstrates our total commitment to this combination," Norfolk Southern Chairman David Goode said in a statement.
Philadelphia-based Conrail said it would review the new offer, but noted that it previously had determined the union with CSX was a better fit.
On Wednesday, Richmond, Va.-based CSX and Conrail revised the terms of their planned cash and stock transaction to give shareholders more cash. The Conrail-CSX union values Conrail shares at about $93.
Shares of Conrail jumped $3.375 to $96.375 on the New York Stock Exchange.
Wall Street earlier this week had speculated that Norfolk Southern would raise its bid to as much as $110 per share in the hope of igniting unrest with Conrail shareholders, some of whom already have expressed dissatisfaction with the CSX deal.
Industry sources also said Conrail was unlikely to be swayed from its planned merger with CSX.
Instead, they said the outcome of the bidding war was increasingly likely to be decided by Conrail's shareholders, who will ultimately determine if the railroad should strike the $8.5 billion deal with CSX when there is a $10 billion offer on the table.
"Nothing has changed. I think a lot will depend on what happens with the shareholder vote," said Jeff Medford of William Blair &amp; Co.
Shareholders are considered key to the Conrail-CSX transaction because Pennsylvania corporate law prohibits CSX from buying more than 20 percent of Conrail shares in a tender offer without their approval. CSX is seeking to acquire 40 percent of Conrail shares in a cash tender offer, with the remaining 60 percent to be exchanged for stock.
A shareholder meeting is scheduled for mid-December.
Takeover experts, who have been among the most vocal opponents of the Conrail-CSX deal, said that Norfolk Southern would further strengthen its position by aggressively urging Conrail shareholders to defeat the CSX transaction.
"It's got to be like Bob Dole's marathon, but with a more successful conclusion," said one, referring to the 96-hour campaign blitz launched by the losing U.S. presidential candidate in the days before this week's election.
Goode declined to be specific about Norfolk Southern's plans to woo Conrail shareholders.
"The numbers in our bid speak for themselves. It should be readily apparent that it's a superior offer. We're willing to talk to all of the constituencies involved, including shareholders and others who are interested in this and we are doing that," he said in a telephone interview.
Norfolk Southern said its latest offer of $110 a share was superior to CSX's bid because it was not contingent on regulatory approval and would provide immediate cash payment to Conrail shareholders.
Wall Street experts said Conrail and CSX, which already revised the terms of their transaction once, may feel pressured to again increase the portion of cash in their deal. However, most industry experts do not expect a revised bid to top the offer made by Norfolk Southern.
