The next stop for railroad industry consolidation is likely to be a Philadelphia courtroom, where a judge next week may decide if Norfolk Southern Corp can block a proposed union between Conrail Inc and CSX Corp.
Wall Street's attention turned to the Nov. 18 hearing after Conrail on Wednesday rejected a $10 billion offer from Norfolk Southern and reaffirmed its commitment to the CSX transaction, without revising terms of the $8.5 billion pact.  
It was the second time that Conrail rebuffed an offer from Norfolk Southern that topped the CSX transaction.
Although Conrail shares rose earlier this week on the view that CSX would sweeten terms of the pact for a second time, analysts and traders expressed little surprise that the deal was not revised.
"I think that CSX is probably awaiting the outcome of the court challenge next week," said Brian Routledge of Prudential Securities.  
In rejecting the Norfolk Southern bid, Conrail and CSX also dangled the prospect of a sweeter deal in front of shareholders, but made no promises. The two companies said they are pursuing talks about increasing the value of the transaction once the deal is consummated.
Shareholders have expressed unhappiness with the Conrail-CSX deal, which is a cash and stock transaction that values Conrail at about $93 per share. Norfolk Southern has offered to buy Conrail for $110 per share in cash.  
According to Pennsylvania corporate law, Philadelphia-based Conrail is permitted to act in the interest of groups other than shareholders in determining the best partner. Conrail has contended that a union with CSX is a better strategic fit despite Norfolk Southern's higher offer.
"They have an iron-clad contract and they're just waiting to get into court," one arbitrager said about CSX and Conrail.
U.S. District Court Judge Donald Van Artsdalen has scheduled a hearing for next Monday to consider Norfolk Southern's suit to block the Conrail-CSX merger.  
Meanwhile, Norfolk Southern said it was not surprised by the latest rejection of its offer and accused Conrail's board of ignoring its fiduciary responsibility.
Norfolk Southern ran a full-page advertisement in the New York Times and Wall Street Journal on Wednesday, urging shareholders to support its bid.
