Mattel Inc president Jill Barad said the proposed acquisition of Tyco Toys Inc is not expected to face antitrust problems and should fuel earnings in the first year of the transaction.
"The market shares are still low even when you look at the category breakdowns," she said in a telephone interview.
Mattel, the nation's largest toymaker, earlier announced plans to buy third-place Tyco in a stock transaction valued at about $755 million. The combined market share of the companies would be less than 20 percent of the overall toy market.  
Barad said the deal includes a topping fee of $40 million, which would payable to Mattel if another company lured Tyco with a higher bid.  It also calls for a break-up fee of $15 million if the transaction were not completed within a year.
The transaction is expected to be completed in the first half of 1997.
Barad declined to specify anticipated cost savings associated with the transaction, saying "there are a lot and they cover many categories."  She also said it was too early to assess the potential impact of the deal on Tyco's workforce.  
Barad said she approached Tyco about a transaction on Sept. 29 in a solitary meeting with Tyco chief executive officer Gary Baughman.  Representatives of both companies met again on Oct. 14.
The proposed transaction would significantly boost Mattel's position in the boys' toy market - an area that it sought to expand earlier this year with an unsolicited bid for number two toymaker Hasbro.  However, Mattel was forced to withdraw that offer after its proposal ran into fierce opposition on antitrust grounds.
"We really believe that the boys' toy business is a very important one.  We have never had big market share in that category," Barad said.
Any overlap in specific markets is not expected to be large enough to create antitrust concerns, Barad said.
For example, she noted Mattel's Hot Wheels holds a nine percent market share position in the "wheels" toy category and Tyco holds a 10 percent stake with Matchbox.
"It's very fragmented," Barad said, adding that the wheels category will become even more crowded as Hasbro emerges with a new product line.
