Mattel Inc., seeking to expand in the market for boys' toys, agreed to buy third-ranked Tyco Toys Inc. for $755 million, the companies said Monday.
The proposed union will combine Mattel's Barbie dolls, Hot Wheels miniature cars and Fisher-Price toys with Tyco's Matchbox cars, Sesame Street toys and radio-controlled vehicles.
"We really believe that the boys' toy business is a very important one. We have never had big market share in that category," Mattel President Jill Barad said in a telephone interview.
Under the agreement, Tyco shareholders will receive Mattel stock valued at $12.50 per Tyco share, representing a 78 percent premium above Friday's closing price for Tyco stock.
Shares of Tyco jumped $4.50 to $11.50, while Mattel fell 75 cents to $29.875, both on the New York Stock Exchange.
The proposed transaction follows Mattel's unsuccessful effort earlier this year to acquire No. 2 rival Hasbro Inc. Mattel, the nation's largest toymaker, was forced to withdraw its unwelcome bid due to widespread concern about its effect on competition.
Mattel said the Tyco transaction was expected to be completed in the fist half of 1997 and would add to its earnings in the first year. The boards of both companies have approved the merger.
The proposed transaction followed discussions that began with a Sept. 29 meeting between Barad and Tyco Chief Executive Officer Gary Baughman. Representatives of both companies met again on Oct. 14.
Industry experts said the proposed acquisition will accomplish many of the same goals for Mattel as the failed Hasbro transaction.
"It's been something they have been trying to do for years and years," said Smith Barney analyst Jill Krutick of Mattel's desire to boost its presence in boys' markets.
"The outstanding worldwide potential for Tyco's well-known brands will be fully realised through this merger with Mattel," Mattel Chairman John Amerman said in a statement.
Although the union will combine two of the nation's biggest toymakers, Barad said antitrust issues were not expected to be significant. She noted that the combined companies will hold less than 20 percent market share in the highly fragmented industry.
"The market shares are still low even when you look at the category breakdowns," she said in a telephone interview.
Tyco, based in Mt. Laurel, N.J., had 1995 revenues of $709 million. Mattel, based in El Segundo, Calif., had 1995 sales $3.6 billion. No. 2 toy maker Hasbro had 1995 sales of $2.8 billion.
But some analysts cited concern about antitrust implications, citing potential market overlap of Mattel's Hot Wheels and Tyco's Matchbox units, two leading miniature car brands.
"I think it's going to be a long process in getting the OK of regulators. After the Hasbro debacle, anything Mattel does at this point will be looked at by the regulators," said one analyst who did not want to be identified.
For money-losing Tyco, the acquisition will represent the culmination of its turnaround efforts. The toymaker last year cut 10 percent of its work force as part of a restructuring aimed at returning to profitability.
With its deep pockets, leading market presence and long global reach, Mattel would easily capitalise on Tyco's products, analysts said.
"Mattel clearly has ways to enhance the revenue growth of Tyco and expand it internationally. Mattel is getting into a fairly cleaned-up situation," Smith Barney's Krutick said.
The proposed combination will also strengthen Mattel's position in plush toys, where Tyco is a market leader.
Barad said the deal includes a fee of $40 million that would be payable to Mattel if another company lured Tyco with a higher bid. It also calls for a break-up fee of $15 million if the transaction is not completed within a year.
Barad declined to specify anticipated cost savings associated with the deal, saying, "There are a lot and they cover many categories." She also said it was too early to assess the potential impact of the deal on Tyco's work force.
