Forget about the pink Porsche. Barbie soon may have a whole fleet of cars at her disposal.
Seeking to expand in the market for boys toys, Mattel Inc said Monday it will buy third-ranked Tyco Toys Inc in a $755 million union that will wed the makers of Barbie dolls and Matchbox cars.
The move is considered hugely significant for top toymaker Mattel, which earlier this year pursued Hasbro Inc for similar reasons. Mattel was forced to drop its unsolicited Hasbro offer due to concerns about antitrust implications associated with joining the nation's top two toymakers.
Industry experts said the proposed acquisition will accomplish many of the same goals as the failed Hasbro transaction.
"Its been something they have been trying to do for years and years," said Smith Barney analyst Jill Krutick of Mattel's desire to boost its presence in boys' markets.
The proposed union will combine Mattel's highly successful product line, which includes Barbie, Hot Wheels and Fisher-Price, with Tyco's Matchbox, Sesame Street toys and radio control vehicles.
Shares of Tyco jumped 4-3/8 to 11-3/8 in afternoon trading. The stock transaction values shares of Tyco at about $12.50 each.
For money-losing Tyco, the acquisition will represent the culmination of its turnaround efforts. The toymaker last year cut 10 percent of its work force as part of a restructuring aimed at returning to profitability.
With its deep pockets, leading market presence and long global reach, Mattel is likely to easily capitalize on Tyco's products, analysts said.
"Mattel clearly has ways to enhance the revenue growth of Tyco and expand it internationally. Mattel is getting into a fairly cleaned-up situation," Krutick said.
But some analysts cited concern about potential antitrust implications, even though Tyco holds a far smaller market presence than Hasbro. They specifically cited potential market overlap of Mattel's Hot Wheels and Tyco's Matchbox units.
"I think it's going to be a long process in getting the OK of regulators. After the Hasbro debacle, anything Mattel does at this point will be looked at by the regulators," said one analyst who did not want to be identified.
In a telephone interview with Reuters, Mattel president Jill Barad said antitrust concerns are not expected to be an overwhelming issue in the transaction. She noted that the combined companies will still hold less than 20 percent market share in the highly-fragmented industry.
The proposed combination will also strengthen Mattel's position in plush toys, where Tyco is a market leader.
