Diamond Shamrock Inc said it plans to close its merger with Ultramar Corp on December 3 and announce a new organizational structure shortly thereafter.
In a meeting with security analysts, chief executive officer Roger Hemminghaus said Diamond Shamrock is close to the sale of its telecommunications business and its natural gas exploration and production operations in Bolivia.
Hemminghaus also said that the new Ultramar Diamond Shamrock Corp will eagerly scour the industry for refining and marketing acquisitions and joint ventures.  
"There are bound to be some opportunities that are out there for us," Hemminghaus said.
Diamond Shamrock and Ultramar announced in September a merger that will create a new company with a combined equity value of more than $2.3 billion.  Hemminghaus, who will become chairman and chief executive of the new company, noted that opportunities will come from consolidation occuring elsewhere in the energy industry.  He noted a combination being discussed by Texaco Inc and Royal Dutch/Shell Group's Shell Oil Co "means there are going to be some quality assets that become available in certain markets."
Asked whether his new company would be interested in a joint venture similar to others taking place in the industry, Hemminghaus said "You bet we would".
He flatly dismissed speculation that Diamond Shamrock entered the pact with Ultramar because it was being targeted as an acquisition candidate.
"This was in no way a defensive move on our part," he said, adding Diamond Shamrock was not approached by another firm.  He also said Diamond Shamrock had considered a transaction with Unocal Corp, which on Monday announced the sale of downstream assets to Tosco Corp.
"Had this deal (Ultramar) not gone through, we would have been looking very seriously at this (Unocal) opportunity.  If the timing had been a little bit different, we would have been out there looking at it," he said.
Diamond Shamrock anticipates the union with Ultramar will result in cost savings and synergies that will add $0.20 per share to earnings in 1997 and $0.60 per share in 1998.
The merger with Ultramar marks the second major transaction for Diamond Shamrock since last December, when it bought National Convenience Stores Inc.
Hemminghaus said cost savings of that transaction have exceeded preliminary estimates.  Savings this year are expected to be $31.5 million compared with earlier estimates of $20 million and estimated savings for 1997 are now set at $46.5 million, he said.
