A threatened proxy fight at Ashland Inc, coming at a time of widespread oil industry consolidation, may force the Kentucky-based energy company to restructure its diverse holdings.
Sources close to Ashland said the company is considering strategic alternatives, although it has not yet determined whether major action is necessary.
Meanwhile, Providence Capital Inc, which has been involved in similar efforts at other firms, is expected to pressure Ashland to enhance its value by breaking up its operations.  
Widely considered a regional oil refiner, Ashland owns 56 percent of Ashland Coal Inc, a substantial chemicals business and a highway construction unit. It makes Valvoline motor oils and owns SuperAmerica convenience stores.
Some industry analysts have said that Ashland, which is trading at around $46 per share, would be worth more than $60 per share if its businesses were separated.
Providence has formally told Ashland that it has nominated a three-man slate for election to the board at the January 30 annual shareholders' meeting. Shareholders will be asked to fill six slots on the 16-member board.  
Ashland spokesman Dan Lacey said the company has hired First Boston Corp to advise it on the proxy issue. A source familiar with the situation said Ashland also may discuss strategeic alternatives with investment firm Wasserstein Perella &amp; Co, which has worked with Ashland in the past.
Sources said New York-based Providence is not seeking control of Ashland, but instead wants to push a restructuring. Founded in 1991 by a group of merger experts at Jefferies &amp; Co, previous investments have included California Microwave, Duplex Products Inc and Ideon Group Inc It also has invested in Russia.  
Ashland earlier this month acknowledged Providence's interest, noting that it holds 100 shares of Ashland's 64 million outstanding common shares.
Ashland has declined to comment further on Providence, noting that it is prohibited from discussing the issue until it files documents with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, a move that is expected by mid-December.
Providence and Wasserstein also declined comment. Sources said both Ashland and Providence recently have held meetings with institutional investors to discuss shareholder value.  
Industry experts think Ashland is primed to participate in industrywide consolidation, especially as Ashland veteran and Chief Executive Paul Chellgren moves into the role as chairman. He is replacing retiring longtime Chairman and former Chief Executive John Hall.
"Under his leadership, Ashland could be restructured along individual lines of business. If done correctly, we think it could lead to an increase in shareholder value of 25 percent or more," Bear Stearns &amp; Co analyst Fred Leuffer said in a report issued Monday.
The push for a restructuring comes as giant oil firms join forces to combat poor refining profits. Texaco Inc and Shell Oil Co are mulling an alliance of U.S. refining and marketing operations, while Mobil Corp and British Petroleum Co Plc have a similar venture in Europe.
And smaller refiners also are seeking partners. Diamond Shamrock Inc has proposed a merger with Ultramar Corp, Tosco Corp is buying Unocal Corp's West Coast refining assets and just last week refiner Valero Energy Corp said it was seeking an alliance for its natural gas services unit.
