Ashland Inc has quashed a threatened proxy fight by restucturing its core business, but the independent refiner must still prove its ability to prosper in an industry plagued by poor profit margins.
A series of actions unveiled Monday by Ashland was viewed as a significant step to convince investors that management will not stand by and watch profits erode.
"The question now is whether they can deliver. I think there will be more to come," said James Falvey, analyst at Smith Barney.  
Ashland earlier announced a series of steps aimed at enhancing profitability. They included a restructuring of business units, a share buyback program, the evaluation of strategic alternatives for its non-core exploration unit, and a program to evaluate and cut costs.
The Kentucky-based refiner has recently been pressured by a New York investment firm that had nominated a three-person slate for election to the company's board of directors at the January 30 annual meeting.
In announcing the restructuring on Monday, Ashland also announced Providence Capital Inc had withdrawn its slate.  
"They have addressed all the major issues we raised. We feel the plan is genuine and that they are sincere about defining a new era at Ashland," Herbert Denton, president of Providence Capital, told Reuters in a telephone interview.
Denton said representatives of Ashland met with Providence last week. Ashland also recently has met with institutional investors.
Although shares of Ashland showed little reaction to Monday's plan, analysts noted the stock has risen about $10 per share since September on views of a restructuring. The stock was trading unchanged at 46-5/8 in afternoon trading.  
Analysts widely expect Ashland to sell the exploration unit and participate in widespread consolidation taking place throughout the industry. The company did not disclose any cost-cutting targets or timeframe to implement the actions.
But analysts said the restructuring is a solid reflection on company veteran and chief executive officer Paul Chellgren, who is set to move into the role of chairman to replace retiring John Hall.
"I think this is positive. This is a quicker-than-expected start on restructuring," said Fred Leuffer of Bear Stearns &amp; Co, who values the exploration unit at $425 to $450 million.
Analysts also said that the restructuring is likely to be an evolutionary process.
"It's not going to happen tomorrow. The results will prove themselves over time and if they don't, there will be further initiatives," said Barry Sahgal of Ladenburg, Thalmann &amp; Co.
Meanwhile, Denton said his group will continue to monitor the company's progress.
