Ashland Inc. Monday announced a wide-ranging restructuring programme aimed at pumping up profitability in an era of weak refining margins and widespread energy industry consolidation.
The move by the Ashland, Ky.-based energy company appeased a New York investment firm, which withdrew its plan for a proxy fight at the company's annual shareholder meeting next month.
"Ashland's No. 1 priority is to improve returns in its refining and marketing segment," Chief Executive Officer Paul Chellgren said in a statement. "Many of the elements in the plan announced today focus on that priority and are aimed at continuing to build a basis for the long-term competitiveness of this business."
Under the plan, Ashland will restructure its business units to form a petroleum group consisting of its refining businesses, SuperAmerica retail convenience stores and Valvoline motor oil. The group will be led by Ashland executive Fred Brothers, who has run the company's chemicals business.
Ashland also said it will reduce 1997 capital expenditures for Ashland Petroleum to $150 million from $175 million and limit capital expenditures for refining to $100 million. It said the remaining $50 million in Ashland Petroleum's 1997 capital budget will be earmarked for petrochemical and branded marketing expansions.
The company will evaluate alternatives for its exploration unit, with the target of completing an evaluation and any resulting business transaction before the end of 1997.
It will review other options for strategic alliances amid widespread developments in the refining and marketing sector.
Ashland said it will authorise the repurchase of up to 1 million shares of its common stock annually in an attempt to eliminate dilution of its stock.
It also said it was halting a programme to offer up to $100 million in Ashland common stock. To date, about $50 million in common stock has been sold under the programme.
The company said it would evaluate corporate general and administrative expenses.
The actions were viewed as a significant step to convince investors that management will not stand by and watch profits erode.
"The question now is whether they can deliver. I think there will be more to come," said Smith Barney analyst James Falvey.
Ashland recently was pressured by Providence Capital Inc., a New York-based investment firm that nominated a three-person slate for election to the company's board of directors at the Jan. 30 annual meeting.
Providence President Herbert Denton said in an interview that he was satisfied by the plan. Representatives of Ashland met with Providence last week.
"They have addressed all the major issues we raised. We feel the plan is genuine and that they are sincere about defining a new era at Ashland," he said in a telephone interview.
Ashland stock rose 12.5 cents to $46.75 in afternoon trading on the New York Stock Exchange. Analysts noted the stock has risen about $10 per share since September on views that a restructuring would be forthcoming.
They said the restructuring was a good reflection on CEO Chellgren, a company veteran who is set to replace retiring Chairman John Hall.
"I think this is positive. This is a quicker-than-expected start on restructuring," said Fred Leuffer of Bear Stearns &amp; Co.
