The proposed union of Boeing Co and McDonnell Douglas Corp dramatically raises the stakes for survival in the defense industry, which already has experienced intense consolidation.
Global players, including Northrop Grumman Corp, Raytheon Co and Hughes Electronics Corp, are expected to seek partners in a new cycle of mergers.
"This has broken an uneasy truce in the defense industry," said Jon Kutler, president of Quarterdeck Investment Partners Inc, which specializes in aerospace and defense.  
Although the pace of defense mergers recently has slowed from the booming levels of early 1996, the Boeing-McDonnell Douglas combination is expected to trigger a resurgence of activity, industry experts said.
"This transaction establishes a level of scale that is going to urge additional consolidation. It's clearly going to drive us toward, instead of eight or 10 large firms, three or four mega-corporations," said James Schwendinger, director of Deloitte &amp; Touche's aerospace and defense practice.  
Northrop Grumman is viewed as a leading buyer of defense electronics properties. Shares of the company jumped 1-3/4 to 81-1/8 on views that the Boeing-McDonnell Douglas transaction may speed up its acquisition plans.
"All of a sudden, the scale of Northrop Grumman has been diminished by this merger," said one defense industry source who did not want to be identified.
Formed in 1994 from a union between Northrop and Grumman Corp, the company earlier this year bought Westinghouse Electric Corp's defense business for $3.6 billion in one of the biggest defense deals of 1996.  
A spokesman for Northrop Grumman declined to comment on merger activites, but noted that electronics is a growing part of the company's business.
"We have clearly embarked on a strategy of transforming the company from primarily an airplane builder to electronics," said Tony Cantafio.
Meanwhile, current defense industry leader Lockheed Martin Corp, which early this year bought Loral Corp for $9.1 billion, is viewed as well-positioned to compete against the new and larger Boeing. Lockheed Martin said in a statement on Monday that ongoing industry consolidation is vital.  
"They've gone from being king of the hill to having to share it. They're in an extremely strong position," Kutler said of Lockheed Martin.
The defense sector already has seen several consolidation cycles due to declines in federal spending. But those deals were dwarfed by the latest $13.9 billion merger announced on Sunday.
Industry experts said prices and bidding is expected to intensify for attractive properties, noting that reported seller Hughes Electronics is likely to benefit. Industry sources previously targeted McDonnell Douglas as a potential buyer of Hughes.  
A spokesman for Hughes could not be reached for comment, but the company previously has said in an SEC filing that it would consider acquisitions and consolidation.
Hughes is a unit of General Motors Corp.
The Boeing-McDonnell Douglas combination also is expected to trigger consolidation around the globe.
"This may set the stage for a whole new set of (buyers) from Europe," said Thomas Gallagher, head of the aerospace division at CIBC Woody Gundy, who expects cross-border consolidation in Europe to intensify.  
"The key dimension of defense today is scale. This business takes a huge amount of investment," Gallagher said.
