The proposed union of Boeing Co. and McDonnell Douglas Corp. dramatically raises the stakes for survival in the defence industry, which already has experienced intense consolidation.
Global players, including Northrop Grumman Corp., Raytheon Co. and Hughes Electronics Corp., are expected to seek partners in a new merger cycle.
"This has broken an uneasy truce in the defence industry," said Jon Kutler, president of Quarterdeck Investment Partners Inc., which specialises in aerospace and defence.
Although the pace of defence mergers recently has slowed from the booming levels of early 1996, the Boeing-McDonnell Douglas combination is expected to trigger a resurgence of deals, industry experts said.
"This transaction establishes a level of scale that is going to urge additional consolidation. It's clearly going to drive us toward, instead of eight or 10 large firms, three or four mega-corporations," said James Schwendinger, director of consulting firm Deloitte &amp; Touche's aerospace and defence practice.
Northrop Grumman is viewed as a leading buyer of defence electronics properties. Shares of the company jumped $1.125 to $80.50 on views that the Boeing-McDonnell Douglas transaction may speed up its acquisition plans.
"All of a sudden, the scale of Northrop Grumman has been diminished by this merger," said one defence industry source who did not want to be identified.
Formed in 1994 from a union between Northrop and Grumman Corp., the company earlier this year bought the defence business owned by Westinghouse Electric Corp. for $3.6 billion in one of the biggest defence deals of 1996.
A spokesman for Northrop Grumman declined to comment on merger activites, but noted that electronics was a growing part of the company's business.
"We have clearly embarked on a strategy of transforming the company from primarily an airplane builder to electronics," said Tony Cantafio.
Meanwhile, current defence leader Lockheed Martin Corp., which early this year bought Loral Corp for $9.1 billion, is viewed as well-positioned to compete against the new and larger Boeing. Lockheed Martin said in a statement Monday that ongoing industry consolidation was vital.
"They've gone from being king of the hill to having to share it. They're in an extremely strong position," Kutler said of Lockheed Martin.
The defence sector already has seen several consolidation cycles due to declines in federal spending. But those deals are dwarfed by the latest $13.9 billion merger announced Sunday.
Industry experts bidding was expected to intensify for attractive properties, noting that reported seller Hughes Electronics was likely to benefit. Industry sources previously targeted McDonnell Douglas as a potential buyer of Hughes.
A spokesman for Hughes could not be reached for comment, but the company previously has said that it would consider acquisitions and consolidation. Hughes is a unit of General Motors Corp.
The Boeing-McDonnell Douglas combination also was expected to trigger consolidation around the globe.
"This may set the stage for a whole new set of (buyers) from Europe," said Thomas Gallagher, head of the aerospace division at CIBC Woody Gundy, who expects cross-border consolidation in Europe to intensify.
"The key dimension of defence today is scale. This business takes a huge amount of investment," Gallagher said.
