Western Resources Inc. Wednesday offered to buy the rest of ADT Ltd. for $3.5 billion in cash and stock in a deal that would transform the Kansas utility into the nation's top provider of electronic security services.
The move marks the latest step in Western's aggressive strategy to dominate the highly fragmented security industry, which has grown increasingly attractive to utilities and telecommunications companies.
Topeka, Kan.-based Western Resources, which already owns 27 percent of ADT, said it would take its unsolicited bid for the rest of ADT directly to that company's shareholders. It also said it would call a special meeting of shareholders to replace the existing ADT board of directors.
"We have demonstrated our belief in ADT's future through our investment. The benefits of this transaction are compelling, offering a natural extension of our respective businesses," Western Resources Chairman John Hayes said in a statement.
Hayes advised ADT of the offer in a letter in which he noted that ADT previously said it was not interested in a transaction with Western Resources.
"We firmly believe that this combination will provide significant benefits to our respective shareowners, customers and employees not available to either company on its own," Hayes wrote to ADT Chairman Michael Ashcroft.
Western said it would pay $22.50 for each share of ADT, consisting of $15 in Western Resources common stock and $7.50 cash. The offer would give ADT holders a 12 percent premium over Tuesday's closing stock price of $20.125 on the New York Stock Exchange.
Industry experts said the bid was deliberately low and merely reflected an opening salvo in a hostile transaction.
"The price is a low-ball price. There is a very good chance this deal will be done at a higher price," said Andrew Jeffrey, analyst at Robertson Stephens &amp; Co.
ADT shares climbed $3.125 to close at $23.25 on the New York Stock Exchange on views that a transaction will take place at a higher price. Western Resources' stock rose 12.5 cents to close at $31.375, also on NYSE.
"I feel this stock will go to $25 to $30 on earnings in 1997. Anything below that range is not acceptable," said Rosario Ilacqua of Rothschild Inc.
Boca Raton, Fla.-based ADT said it would review the offer and advised shareholders to await a recommendation from its board.
Long considered a leader in the electronic security industry, ADT earlier this year was to be acquired by Republic Industries Inc. for $5 billion in a deal valued by ADT at $29 a share. But the deal collapsed in September after months of uncertainty due to volatility in Republic's stock price.
In a telephone interview, Western President Dave Wittig declined to discuss a potential higher bid, noting only that shares of ADT have appreciated considerably in recent months.
"I think that what we're putting on the table is a fair and full price," Wittig said.
Western Resources has spent much of 1996 laying the groundwork to buy the rest of ADT. It opposed Republic's bid for ADT and has agreed to buy six security properties this year, including Westinghouse Electric Corp.'s security business for $368 in a deal announced on Monday.
Last week, Western Resources announced plans to sell its natural gas assets to focus on its electricity and security businesses.
Although Western Resources has long been considered a potential buyer of ADT, the company was not yet expected to pursue a transaction.
Wittig said Western Resources did not pursue an offer for ADT while Republic was bidding because Western was consumed with its hostile $1.9 billion bid for Kansas City Power and Light. That transaction is still not resolved, but Western Resources is holding merger talks with the Kansas City, Mo.-based utility.
"They've got a lot on their plate, but as far as wanting to run the electronic security business, this is the way to do it," Jeffrey said.
The electronic security business has grown increasingly attractive to utilities and telecommunications companies in recent months as they prepare to enter new markets that previously were off-limits due to government regulation. The phone companies and utilities hope to add protection to their menu of services and expand in homes and businesses.
