The Prague Stock Exchange continued to gain ground on Thursday, but analysts said they are not convinced the beleaguered bourse's fortunes have turned around, attributing the rise to thin domestic buying.
The PSE sputtered its way through most of autumn, losing close to 20 percent as key investors sold off positions, tired of a market characterised as unregulated and murky.
The bourse has showed signs of rebounding recently -- gaining in 15 of the past 16 sessions -- but analysts said they saw little change in market sentiment, and mostly domestic trading as investment funds settle positions before year-end.
The PX50 index was up 0.25 percent at 519.5 at its daily price fixing on Thursday, putting the bourse 8.3 percent higher than its low in mid-November.
"This doesn't really look like a rebound to me. (Mainly) there's a bit of domestic buying and some of the local brokers are just bidding up the market," Alex Angell of the brokerage Wood and Company told Reuters.
Despite being eastern Europe's most-capitalised bourse, the Czech market has long been plagued by inadequate legislation that investors complain fails to provide protection for minority shareholders.
Under the Czech Republic's Securities Act, which was devised to handle the logistics of the government's massive voucher privatisation scheme, the Securities Registry (SCP) is bound by law to provide services such as moving securities to and from client accounts.
Since the SCP does not reveal any details of transactions, including prices and volumes, brokers have taken to the SCP because of its privacy and faster settlement process.
The problems have restrained the PSE which sees on average $4-$6 million of stock changing hands each day, compared with $15 million turnover in Warsaw, a much smaller market.
"There are clearly investors who have decided to stay away from this market because of its opaqueness and are still on the sidelines," said one international trader.
"This is the case especially at the end of the year when a lot of local funds push prices all over the place in order to get a desired result on their books for the year," he added.
But many analysts said that all hope is not lost for the bourse.
With the market near, or at its bottom, many shares are looking quite cheap, and a lot of larger foreign and domestic investors that have waited out the current downtrend will probably start to get back into the market, though maybe not not before year's end.
"I expect most of the buying to come in the New Year, but I think it means that investors already familiar with the market should do something now," said Danial Gladis, head of the brokerage Atlantik Financni Trhy.
Market officials have also begun taking steps to correct the problems which should slowly lure back disenchanted investors.
In April, parliament approved a series of market reforms to compel companies and fund managers to be more open and accountable. A key element tackles the chronic problem of slow and irregular reporting of company earnings and actions.
The PSE itself has taken several steps to brings more transparency to the market, stressing in particular the need for the early creation of an independent watchdog, though analysts said a lack of political will to establish the body remains.
They added that the often-mentioned mid-June launch target for an oversight commission probably will not be met.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
