Czech consumer inflation continued its gradual downtrend in November, but analysts said they do not expect a loosening of the central bank's tight monetary policy in the short-term.
The Czech Statistical Bureau (CSU) on Monday said November inflation, month-on-month, was 0.5 percent, the same as in October, putting the year-on-year rate at 8.6 percent, down from 8.7 percent the previous month.
The key sliding average inflation figure, which uses 1993 as a base, edged up slightly to 8.8 percent from 8.7 percent in October, but is down from 9.3 percent in November 1995.
"The year-on-year figures basically look good. There is a very moderate but still further decrease and it appears the year's average inflation will land just below nine percent," Martin Kupka, an economist at Patria Finance told Reuters.
The CSU said in a report that the biggest influence on the November inflation rate was food, drinks and tobacco products which rose 0.4 percent in the month, along withy clothing, up 0.9 percent, and transportation, which rose 1.3 percent.
Together these three categories accounted for 80 percent of the inflation figure, it said.
Most analysts agreed that there seems little chance the Czech National Bank (CNB), the central bank, will ease its tight monetary policy in the near future despite the sustained downtrend in CPI.
Curbing inflation has been at the heart of almost all of the CNB's policies. This summer the CNB raised its key discount rate one percentage point to 10.5 percent, and hiked minimum reserve requirements to 11.5 percent from 8.5 percent of deposits to squeeze off surging domestic demand.
The moves have appeared to signficantly slow growth in the money supply, which is now at the lower end of the central bank's 13 to 17 percent growth target.
"These (inflation) figures may give the CNB some room to move rates, but I doubt they will do it immediately. The CNB seems to like to set its policies in January," said Boris Gomez, an analyst at ING Barings.
"The key question remains how the government will limit wage growth, until this is answered, I doubt the central bank will make any major policy changes toward inflation."
Added another local economist: "I think this slow downtrend is sustainable since the central bank's measures may be seen even more in the coming months, though it must be careful to ensure GDP growth which has been lagging lately."
Czech GDP grew 4.0 percent year-on-year in the second quarter of this year according to preliminary data, slowing from a 4.3 percent growth in the first quarter.
The CSU originally forecast 5.1 percent growth this year after 4.8 percent last year, but lowered the estimate to 4.8 percent in November due in large part to the central bank measures.
Another signal inflation will continue to ease, and in turn push rates down, is the favourable development of industrial producer prices, which stood 4.1 percent higher, year-on-year, in October, down from 7.8 percent in October 1995.
"Of course the central bank may ease rates, but I would be cautious. I would expect it to wait until maybe halfway through next year," said Patria's Kupka.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
