Czech Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus has thrown his support behind the creation of an independent market regulator, but analysts said on Monday it will take more than that to revive confidence in the embattled Prague bourse.
Klaus, speaking after a meeting on financial market regulation on Sunday, said the market was moving from its first phase, when it was created under the mass voucher privatisation programme of 1992-95, towards becoming a standard market.
He added that everybody understood that this process would happen gradually.
But analysts and traders said that while the moves are a welcome start, only concrete results will now be able to lure investors back to the market.
"It shows a trend that the government knows there is a problem and is working on solutions," said Jan Sykora, a broker at Wood and Company.
"But confidence in the Czech market has been decimated and there is a strong lack of confidence, especially among foreign investors...who now want to see real results, and not just proclamations."
Added Radim Bajgar of ING Barings: "It's positive, but we have heard these announcements before -- results will be the best medicine for the market."
While markets in Poland and Budapest have posted solid gains this year, the Prague Stock Exchange has sputtered, especially since the beginning of September when a bear run triggered by a foreign investor selloff took some 20 percent out of the ailing bourse.
These investors, and some local players, have been highly critical of the lack of transparency on Czech markets, and particularly about the failure of the Securites Centre, where the overwhelming majority of trades are registered, to release detailed price information.
"A lot international clients shudder when you mention the Czech market. They just don't know what real prices here are because so little information comes from the Securities Centre, where so much of the trading occurs," said one fund manager.
Until now, Klaus has showed little enthusiasm for a plan by PSE Chairman Tomas Jezek to create a body modelled on the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC).
Klaus has long believed market regulation, now conducted by a department in the Finance Ministry, should be minimal.
But he capitulated on Sunday, saying "there is a dominant opinion that there is little transparency on the our capital market".
"As a long-term solution we want to create an independent capital supervision (body). That requires legislation and an number of other things," said Klaus following the meeting.
He also announced that all prices of OTC deals registered at the central securities centre (SCP) would be published from February 1. He gave no indication of whether the names of buyers and sellers would also be released.
Jezek wants to create a Czech SEC by 1998 but Klaus gave no indication of when he thought it could be set up.
Klaus said that as a first step the market supervision department of the Finance Ministry would be transformed into a "Securities Bureau" also from February 1, 1997.
It would remain under the ministry but would have more staff and an 11-member advisory commission for the bureau would also be set up including market participants. The bureau would intensify control of investment funds and companies, he said.
Analysts said that once more regulation did find its way to the market, those same investors who have shunned Czech shares will probably return.
"Because most foreign investors have such a poor view of this market, they are under-invested here. So once you start to create better conditions, you should see it translate into a strong positive trend next year," Sykora said.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
