Czech Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus has thrown his support behind the creation of an independent market regulator, but analysts said on Monday it would take more than that to revive confidence in the embattled Prague bourse.
Klaus, speaking after a meeting on market regulation on Sunday, said the Czech bourse was moving towards becoming a normal market after its creation under the mass voucher privatisation programme of 1992-95.
Everybody understood this process would happen gradually, he said. But analysts and traders said that while the moves were a welcome start, only concrete results would be able to lure investors back to the market.
"It shows a trend that the government knows there is a problem and is working on solutions," said Jan Sykora, a broker at Wood and Company.
"But confidence in the Czech market has been decimated and there is a strong lack of confidence, especially among foreign investors...who now want to see real results, and not just proclamations."
While markets in Poland and Budapest have posted solid gains this year, the Prague Stock Exchange has suffered. Since the beginning of September, a bear run triggered by a selloff by foreign investors has wiped about 20 percent off the market.
Radim Bajgar of ING Barings called Klaus' comments positive, but results would be the best medicine for the market.
Foreign investors and some local players have been highly critical of the lack of transparency in Czech markets -- particularly the failure of the Securites Centre, where the overwhelming majority of trades are registered, to release detailed price information.
"A lot international clients shudder when you mention the Czech market. They just don't know what real prices here are because so little information comes from the Securities Centre, where so much of the trading occurs," said one fund manager.
Until now, Klaus has showed little enthusiasm for a plan by PSE Chairman Tomas Jezek to create a body modelled on the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC).
Klaus has long believed market regulation, now conducted by a department in the Finance Ministry, should be minimal. But he capitulated on Sunday.
"As a long-term solution we want to create an independent capital supervision (body). That requires legislation and an number of other things," Klaus said after the meeting.
He also announced that all prices of OTC deals registered at the Central Securities Centre (SCP) would be published from February 1. He gave no indication of whether the names of buyers and sellers would also be released.
Jezek wants to create a Czech SEC by 1998 but Klaus gave no indication of when he thought it could be set up.
Klaus said that as a first step the market supervision department of the Finance Ministry would be transformed into a "Securities Bureau" with more staff from February 1, 1997.
Analysts said that once more regulation was imposed, investors who have shunned Czech shares would probably return.
"Because most foreign investors have such a poor view of this market, they are under-invested here. So once you start to create better conditions, you should see it translate into a strong positive trend next year," Sykora said.
