Czech economic growth is expected to continue slowing down in the third quarter, but analysts said the central bank's fight against inflation still comes first, and interest rates will remain untouched.
The Czech Statistical Bureau (CSU) is scheduled to release third quarter real GDP figures at 0900 local time (0800 GMT) on Thursday.
A Reuters survey of local economists showed growth was expected to ease to about 4.2 percent for the first three quarters of the year, year-on-year.
That compares with a rise in gdp of 4.8 percent for the same period in 1995. GDP growth for the first half of 1996 was 4.3 percent.
But analysts said that even though the central bank's tight monetary policy is restricting the economy, they saw no chance of a loosening in interest rates in the near future.
"Interest rates have been very high and that has taken its toll...but I don't think we're going to see a move in base rates yet," Susanne Hallergard, an economist at ING Barings told Reuters on Wednesday.
"It's an inflation versus growth battle and the central bank appears much more willing to sacrifice growth to push inflation down."
Added Martin Kupka of Patria Finance: "Whether the central bank touches rates will depend on inflation, and not GDP, especially in the first few months of next year."
Analysts said they expected a sharp year-on-year drop in GDP growth for the third quarter alone, since last year's 6.3 percent figure was skewed by the resumption of production at Skoda Auto after a break to retool for its new Felicia model.
They added, however, that while the CSU was recently forced to cut its original year-end forecast of 4.8 percent growth from 5.1 percent, the economy should accelerate in the fourth quarter to meet the target.
"Given private consumption developement and fixed capital investment, I expect fourth quarter growth to be greater, and put the full year figure at close to five percent," said Kamil Janacek, chief economist at Komercni Banka.
He added that an economic upturn in Germany, a major trading partner, could also begin to show some effects in GDP later in the year.
CSU officials have blamed lower foreign capital inflows, lower profits of domestic companies and higher costs of credit following central bank tightening moves earlier this year which have resulted in the lower growth of investment demand.
In the summer, the central bank hiked its key discount rate by one full percentage point to 10.5 percent, and implemented a series of measures incluing repo rate hikes and raising minimum reserve requirements to choke a burgeoning money supply.
The moves have shown their effects recently, with the M2 money supply, which measures currency, demand deposits, time and savings deposits, and foreign currency deposits, easing to 9.8 percent in October from 11.6 percent in September.
In addition, inflation has continued its gradual easing, dippping to 8.6 percent year-on-year from 8.7 percent the previous month, its fourth straight monthly decline.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
