The Prague Stock Exchange, battered and bruised in 1996, should recover next year as officials implement plans to shore up confidence in the sagging bourse, analysts said.
Many an analyst had predicted similar bullish fortunes for the bourse in 1996, only to be undermined by lack of commitment on the part of government officials to strengthen minority shareholder rights and increase market transparency.
But a new commitment from Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus and bourse officials to clean up the market has once again triggered an optimistic outlook for the coming year.
"Because most foreign investors have such a poor view of this market, they are under-invested here," said Jan Sykora of Wood and Company.
"Once you start to create better conditions, you should see it translate into a strong positive trend next year," Sykora said.
The bourse started 1996 with a bang, rising 36 percent over the first three quarters to put the PX50 index at a year-high of 582.0 in September.
But it went out with a whimper as investors stepped up criticism of the lack of transparency in Czech markets and particularly of the failure of the Central Securites Registry (SCP) to release detailed price information. Most off-market trades are registered at the SCP.
While smaller exchanges in Budapest and Warsaw built on earlier gains, the PX50 dropped by nearly a quarter to just above 500 points, a level where it continues to linger at.
After months of decline, government officials finally threw their support behind the creation of an independent supervisory body for the market, but it will take months to develop it.
Until then, the finance ministry is supposed to transfer its market oversight department into a separate office which will get more resources from the government to do its job.
Until recently, Prime Minister Klaus had showed little enthusiasm for a plan by PSE chairman Tomas Jezek to create a body modelled on the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC).
Klaus has long believed market regulation, now conducted by the finance ministry, should be minimal.
But he capitulated in mid-December saying an independent body was needed, and then surprisingly announced that all prices of OTC deals registered at the Securities Centre would be published from February 1.
"An absolute priority for 1997 is the creation of an SEC-type body," Jezek told Reuters. "It is a positive step in the development of our market. I hope it will show our commitment to making the market more transparent."
Though it may not be a panacea to the market woes, analysts agree that the oversight commission would be the most important step the PSE could take in 1997.
"The lack of regulation was one of the main reasons for the bourse's fall and with improved market regulation, the stable political situation and good corporate earnings growth, the PSE should perform well," said Miroslav Nosal of Patria Finance.
He added that Patria expects the PX50 index to rise by about 20 percent next year to "around the 600 level".
But transparency is not the only issue that will effect the bourse in 1997, analysts say.
Once the toast of post-Communist Europe's transformation process, the Czech economy has, like the market itself, underperformed this year.
Growth in industrial production has slowed, compared with 1995, amid a broader slowing in GDP growth which stood at 4.0 percent year-on-year for the first three quarters, putting full year original estimates of 5.1 percent virtually out of reach.
In addition, the central bank's constant struggle to keep inflation in check has pushed interest rates up sharply, cooling private consumption and hurting the bottom lines at many Czech firms.
"Investment costs have been significantly higher for a lot of companies, and we are seeing this eat into the bottom lines of smaller firms that can't raise money abroad," said one foreign analyst.
But many blue chip firms such as telephone monopoly SPT Telecom have continued to invest heavily this year, and according to Anna Bosong, an Eastern European equities analysts at ING Barings, should show a marked improvement next year.
She said that ING has forecast a contraction in earnings per share (EPS) of 4.9 percent for the Czech market in 1996, but sees a turnaround in 1997 to an increase of 10.9 percent.
"Czech firms have been investing heavily in improving capacity and basic infrastructure and this should come back to help in the coming year, improving earnings performance as well," she said.
