The Czech Republic may have reached the final of Euro '96 but the supporters are far from happy.
"It wasn't like this under Communism," they say.
Once a refrain uttered only by those longing for the old days of planned economies and a four-hour workday, the phrase has been heard with alarming regularity since the country's football union announced plans to cancel live broadcasts of matches on public television beginning in 1998.
Instead, the Czech-Moravian Football Association (CMFS), will begin broadcasting only pay-per-view first division matches in its 1998-99 season as part of a marketing agreement signed recently with the Dutch firm Nethold.
For once the supporters are not complaining about the quality of the football, simply the fact that they can no longer watch their national team in action.
"Soccer is not public entertainment anymore, but pure business," Jaroslav Vacek, of STES, the CMFS's marketing partner, was quoted as saying in the weekly newspaper, Prague Post.
Vacek did not discuss specific details of the deal but it is believed to be worth about 100 million crowns ($3.7 million) annually, which should translate into a rise in television revenues of about 80 percent for each of the first division's 16 clubs.
But that is not a view which goes down well with the millions of fans in a soccer-crazed country who crowd around televisions on Fridays to watch the cream of Czech soccer.
There is increasing bitterness that goal line now means bottom line, that Czech soccer now means cheque soccer.
"The game must evolve, but this is a little too much. Money and profit aren't the only things in the world," said Dusan Suchanek, an accountant in Prague.
"I think a lot of fans are tired of hearing about economics in their daily lives and now it's invaded soccer. This is one of the strongest ties we have as a nation and without television access many may leave the game behind."
Since the fall of communism in 1989, Czech sport in general, and soccer in particular, has been hit by a mass exodus of athletes in search of greater wealth and opportunity in the West.
This summer, they stunned the soccer world when they reached the final of Euro '96 with a band of relatively unknown players and only lost to Germany in extra-time.
Soon, the likes of Patrik Berger, now with Liverpool, and Karel Poborsky, signed by Manchester United, were capitalising on a flood of money into English soccer brought about, in large part, by lucrative television contracts.
Indeed, with the creation of the Premier League four years ago and the decision by satellite broadcaster British Sky Broadcasting Plc to make football one of its core programming focuses, Britain's top 20 clubs are now among the richest in Europe.
With each club expected to receive 10 million pounds ($16.7 million) a year out of a total 670 million pound BSkyB package from next year onwards, television rights alone will help bankroll the further expansion of plush, all-seater stadiums and lucrative player signings.
"We hope that the pay-per-view system, which has been successfully implemented in western Europe, will develop in the Czech Republic too and that the local market with television rights will expand. Soccer should only profit from it," Vacek said.
But patience is running short after the German firm UFA, which holds the rights to televise Czech World Cup qualifying games, put a $1 million price tag on the team's away games, a move which meant that Czech viewers missed the first live broadcast of a key national team game in 21 years.
It ended in a 1-0 loss to Yugoslavia but, even so, the complaints from disappointed fans were heard up and down the country.
"This would never have happened under communism. Since we won the European Championship in 1976, I have not missed a game. This is progress?" said Jan Krupka as he sat glumly on a bar stool watching an old soccer video.  REUTER
