Czech annual average consumer inflation eased slightly in 1996, not as much as original government forecasts but still pleasing analysts.
The Czech Statistical Bureau said on Thursday that its key sliding average inflation figure, which uses 1993 as a base, closed the year at 8.8 percent, down from 9.1 percent for 1995.
Despite missing the government's original eight percent forecast, analysts said they were optimistic the central bank's tight monetary policies were hitting the mark, bringing inflation back under control after a strong first half surge.
"The final outcome on average inflation is a success because of its favourable development in the second half of the year," Martin Kupka, an economist at investment bank Patria Finance told Reuters.
"Of course in the longer run, we still need to see a more rapid decrease in inflation," he added.
The CSU said month-on-month inflation for December was 0.5 percent, unchanged from November, putting consumer prices 8.6 percent higher, year-on-year, steady with the previous month.
CSU chairman Edvard Outrata told Reuters that 1996 core inflation remained around five percent with government price dergeulations comprising the rest.
But he said 1997 inflation would rest on whether or not the government decides to take further, stronger steps on freeing up energy and housing prices.
The CSU said that price increases in foodstuffs, leisure and textile sectors accounted for some 80 percent of the monthly CPI rise.
The CSU said industrial output slowed in November to an increase of only 1.4 percent, year-on-year, from a 5.3 percent rise in output in October while industrial wages were 17.1 percent higher for the first 11 months of the year.
After the release of the figures, Industry and Trade Minister Vladimir Dlouhy said wage growth without productivity increases stemmed from a lack of industrial restructuring.
"We thought it (inflation) would be lower, and what I see, aboveall, is a fundamental wage problem," he said.
"The slower restructuring in some companies...is also a source of inflation, because it is generating of inflationary money, mainly through rising wages, without a respective effect (in output)" Dlouhy added.
The government battled wage growth throughout the economy with wage controls, ended in 1995, which tied rising wages to correspnding increases in industrial output.
Pay rises in 1996, not matched by an increase in productivity, have accelerated an already large trade deficit, by sparking domestic demand which has in turn caused higher inflation and made exported goods less competitive.
Boris Gomez of ING Barings Capital Markets warned attempts to further force down inflation in 1997 may be thwarted if wage growth cannot be brought under control.
"The December CPI figure was positive since even though there a strong Christmas shopping spree by Czechs...But we still are concerned about the effects of wage growth since it will be tough for the government to cap it," he said.
Most analysts agreed that the central bank would continue its tight monetary policies at least for the first quarter of 1997, in order to keep a lid on inflationary pressures.
The Czech crown too is expected to remain stable in the short-term despite lingering problems in forcing inflation down. Traders said the crown was unaffected by December's CPI figures since they were in line with forecasts.
The crown was fixed by the cental bank on Thursday at 3.72 percent above its dollar/mark basket midpoint, slightly stronger than its +3.57 percent fixing the previous day.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
