Czech annual average consumer inflation eased slightly in 1996, pleasing analysts even though the rate overshot original government forecasts.
The Czech Statistical Bureau said on Thursday that its key sliding average inflation figure closed the year at 8.8 percent, down from 9.1 percent in 1995.
Despite missing the government's original eight percent forecast, analysts said they were optimistic the central bank's tight monetary policies were bringing inflation back under control after a first half surge.
"The final outcome on average inflation is a success because of its favourable development in the second half of the year," said Martin Kupka, economist at investment bank Patria Finance.
"Of course in the longer run, we still need to see a more rapid decrease in inflation," he told Reuters.
The Bureau said month-on-month inflation for December was 0.5 percent, unchanged from November. This put consumer prices 8.6 percent higher than the same month last year, also unchanged from November.
Bureau chairman Edvard Outrata told Reuters that 1996 core inflation remained around five percent, with government price deregulation accounting for the rest.
But 1997 inflation would depend on whether the government took further, stronger steps on freeing up energy and housing prices, he said.
Price increases in the foodstuffs, leisure and textile sectors accounted for about 80 percent of the monthly CPI rise.
Other Bureau data showed that industrial output slowed in November to an increase of only 1.4 percent year-on-year, from a 5.3 percent rise in output in October, while industrial wages were 17.1 percent higher for the first 11 months of the year.
After the release of the figures, Industry and Trade Minister Vladimir Dlouhy said wage growth without productivity increases stemmed from a lack of industrial restructuring.
"We thought it (inflation) would be lower, and what I see, above all, is a fundamental wage problem," he said.
"The slower restructuring in some companies...is also a source of inflation, because it is generating inflationary money, mainly through rising wages, without a respective effect (in output)," Dlouhy added.
The government battled wage growth throughout the economy with wage controls, ended in 1995, which tied rising wages to corresponding increases in industrial output.
Pay rises in 1996, not matched by an increase in productivity, have accelerated an already large trade deficit, by sparking domestic demand which has in turn caused higher inflation and made exported goods less competitive.
Boris Gomez of ING Barings Capital Markets said that attempts to force inflation down further in 1997 might be thwarted if wage growth could not be brought under control.
"The December CPI figure was positive even though there was a strong Christmas shopping spree by Czechs...But we still are concerned about the effects of wage growth since it will be tough for the government to cap it," he said.
Most analysts agreed that the central bank would continue its tight monetary policies at least for the first quarter of 1997 to keep a lid on inflationary pressures.
The Czech crown is expected to remain stable in the short-term despite the problems in cutting inflation. Traders said the crown was unaffected by December's CPI figures since they were in line with forecasts.
The central bank fixed the crown on Thursday at 3.72 percent above its dollar/mark basket midpoint, slightly stronger than its +3.57 percent fixing the previous day.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
