The Czech December trade deficit should rise to 16 billion crowns from 14.3 billion in the last month of 1995, ending the worst Czech trading year on another sour note, a Reuters poll of economists showed on Friday.
Czech 1996 trade figures are to be released by the Czech Statistical Bureau (CSU) at 9 a.m. (0800 GMT) on Monday.
Most economists surveyed said they expect steady growth in the deficit but few surprises.
"I expect that the figures will be in-line with the development throughout 1996," Martin Kupka, an economist at Patria Finance told Reuters.
Whatever the December deficit, the full-year trade gap is guaranteed to be a record given that the January-November figure reached 140.1 billion crowns, already far beyond 1995's record total shortfall of 95.7 billion crowns.
Most analysts agreed a 15-17 billion crown December gap, after a 16.6 billion crown shortfall in November, would match prevailing trends and the concensus forecast of a 1996 deficit of 155-165 billion crowns.
The foreign exchange and money markets are expected to show little reaction over the figures -- as the worsening Czech trade balance has been long built into crown rates -- as long as the results do not vary greatly from the estimates.
Analysts say the trade balance has been hurt by a downturn in western European economies. Effects of a recovery in demand have yet to make an impact on Czech exports.
CSU figures consistently show the rate of import growth exceeding export growth, though the gap has narrowed in recent months.
Czech exporters told the CSU in a survey released earlier this month that, among other suggestions, they would want a 20 to 25 percent devalution of the crown against a mark/dollar basket to help boost lagging exports in 1997.
In comments to the CSU survey, the exporters said that if there would not be a devaluation of the still strong Czech currency, then they expect the governmnet to adopt administrative measures such as higher tariffs and surcharges to regulate imports.
The government and central bank, however, have repeatedly ruled out a devaluation of the crown to boost exports.
Analysts point to mid-1997 as a crucial time in which the import wave -- which is aimed at modernising industries -- must show results in productivity growth and competitiveness.
"There are concerns of the effect this has on the current account deficit," said one London-based economist.
"There is a question of the sustainability of the current account deficit. If you have a significantly higher figure than 15 or 16 billion crowns for December, I think people will get a little bit edgy," he added.
The current account stood at a deficit of $3.1 billion for the first three quarters of the year, in the latest available figures, spurred by the spiralling trade deficit which stood at the time at $4.1 billion.
Economists have said the current account deficit for 1996, forecast at roughly seven percent of gross domestic product, could be financed in the short to medium term through the capital account surplus and strong central bank reserves.
However, the deficit might start putting pressure on reserves in the second half of 1997.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
