The often-praised Czech economy may be starting to show cracks, as slower growth highlights concern over a widening trade gap and the pace of industrial restructuring, analysts said on Monday.
Over the years, economists have hailed Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus and his policies which have produced one of the lowest inflation rates in the region, good GDP growth and an unemployment rate of about three percent.
Many of those same analysts, however, are now saying that while the economy is not yet in serious trouble, much remains to be done, particularly in industrial restructuring.
The latest round of bad news came on Monday, when the Czech Statistical Bureau released figures showing the trade balance finished 1996 with a record deficit of 160.33 billion crowns, up from a 95.7 billion crown shortfall the previous year.
While most economists, after several mid-year revisions, had predicted the deficit, some are beginning to voice concerns over Czech industry's export competitiveness.
"As far as the export of our raw materials and semi-finished products are concerned, (the development) is very unfavourable over the last year," Kamil Janacek, chief economist at Komercni Banka said.
"We are undergrowing competition from other transforming economies. More and more we are unable to compete with some semi-finished products from Ukraine, for example, having in mind the average cost level with the Czech Republic," he added.
Since 1992 the economy has moved from recession to 4.8 percent consumption-driven real growth in 1995, as inflation fell from double digits to below nine percent.
Unemployment remains around three percent, and official statistics say nearly 70 percent of the economy is made by companies in, at least nominally, private hands.
Most Czechs are fully employed, buying truckloads of western goods, and living in state-controlled housing.
But real economic growth has begun to wane, with third quarter GDP slowing to 3.6 percent, year-on-year, from 4.0 percent growth in the second quarter.
And the spiralling trade deficit has put pressure on the current account, which showed a deficit of $3.1 billion crowns for the first three quarters according to the latest figures, while the capital account was in surplus by some $2.0 billion.
Most analysts agree that a flood of funds since the beginning of the year -- an estimated 25-30 billion crowns have entered the country in crown-denominated Eurobonds alone -- should keep the situation from deteriorating this year.
And, they add, foreign reserves are adequate.
But, said Janacek: "The problem is if in the medium-term a continuing current account deficit of about eight percent of GDP is financeable or not."
Boris Gomez of ING Barings said one problem is the lack of reliable data to chart whether the wave of imports, spurred mainly by raw material and machinery imports, will translate into economic restructuring.
He expects exports to become stronger this year as key west European markets wake up from their recent slumber, and other central European economies gain strength.
"The key period will be the end of this year when the trade deficit will have to have stabilised or there will be a lot of pressure," he said.
Added one London-based economist: "You can get all of the imports you want, but then you have to do something with them.
"There are a lot of people who talk about how this (the imports) will help down the road, but the assumption here is huge -- that management actually knows what it is doing with all of its structural advantages," he said.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
