The United States on Tuesday raised the stakes in a battle to supply NATO aspirants in central Europe with advanced fighter aircraft by offering the Czechs free use of seven Navy Hornet jets for five years.
Representatives of the U.S. Navy, on behalf of the U.S. government, offered to lease the Czech Republic seven McDonnell Douglas F/A-18 "Hornet" fighter planes under a no-cost, five-year agreement, McDonnell Douglas Corp.said.
Czech officials reacted warmly to the offer, saying the support of the U.S. government was welcome, but that it did not guarantee success for the bid.
"We welcome the U.S. government's support but we will look at all bids. We have experts who will examine all of them and investigate which is the best," said Petr Necas, chairman of the parliamentary defence committee after a meeting with U.S. Navy vice-admiral John Allen Lockard.
On offer are six single-seat F/A-18A and one two-seat F/A-18B aircraft currently used by the U.S. Navy.
The offer also includes the supply, at cost, of replacement parts, pilot and ground personnel training programmes and support equipment. "Supply and service costs will be the subject of further discussions," a company statement said.
"The advantage of the lease is that it allows the Czechs to quickly obtain the Hornets, and they would gain almost immediate operational and maintenance experience with these aircraft," McDonnell Douglas spokeswoman Barbara Anderson told Reuters.
"As opposed to purchasing, they can take that experience and then make a more sound purchase decision later," she added.
Also competing for post-Cold War business in central Europe are U.S. Lockheed Martin, which makes F-16s primarily for the U.S. Air Force, the Anglo-Swedish consortium of SAAB and British Aerospace,, which makes the Gripen, and France's Dassault Aviation makers of the Mirage.
Necas expressed disappointment that governments from other competing countries had failed to step forward formally to lend their support, saying it appeared the U.S. was far more active in the pursuit of a contract.
"I have to say that it's too bad for the Czech side that the activity of the French, Swedish or British governments from the perspective of cooperating (with their companies)...isn't comparable with that of the U.S.," he said.
The Czech government, seeking to prepare for eventual membership in NATO, has been debating whether to buy any aircraft as proposed cuts in defence spending have clouded the debate over the upgrading of the fleet.
The Czechs, along with Poland and Hungary, are seen as leading candidates for early NATO membership, when the western security alliance expands.
Czech defence officials have said they have the will but not the wallet to buy brand new Western-made advanced fighters, but are keeping their options open as a battle over the long-term military budget goes on.
They have said they would need about 24 fighters to replace their ageing Soviet made MiG-21s to be more compatible with NATO, but at more than $20 million per fighter, new western planes are too pricey.
Czech pilots could begin training in the planes in six months, with delivery of the aircraft 18 months after the contract is signed, the statement said.
To strengthen its bid, McDonnell Douglas also said that it is preparing to locate component production for the Hornet at Czech Aero Vodochody a.s. regardless of whether new or leased aircraft are chosen to re-equip the Czech Air Force.
Cooperation could also include Czech engineering concern Skoda a.s., the firm added.
