The United States on Tuesday raised the stakes in a battle to supply NATO aspirants in central Europe with advanced fighter aircraft by offering the Czechs free use of seven Navy Hornet aircraft for five years.
Representatives of the U.S. Navy on behalf of the U.S. government offered to lease the Czech Republic seven McDonnell Douglas F/A-18 "Hornet" fighter planes under a no-cost, five-year agreement, McDonnell Douglas said in a statement.
"The offer (to the Czech government) is for the no-cost, five-year leasing of six single-seat F/A-18A and one two-seat F/A-18B aircraft," said the statement, issued by the Prague representative of McDonnell Douglas Corp.
The offer included the supply, at cost, of replacement parts, pilot and ground personnel training programmes and support equipment.
Also competing for post-Cold War business in central Europe are U.S. Lockheed Martin, which makes F-16's primarily for the U.S. airforce, the Anglo-Swedish consortium of SAAB and British Aerospace, which makes the "Gripen", and France's Dassault Aviation makers of the "Mirage".
The Czech government, seeking to prepare for eventual membership in NATO, has been debating decisions on buying any aircraft as proposed cuts in defence spending have clouded the debate over the upgrading of the fleet.
The Czechs, along with Poland and Hungary, are seen as leading candidates for early NATO membership, when the western security alliance expands.
Czech defence officials have said they have the will but not the wallet to buy brand new western-made advanced fighters, but are keeping their options open as a battle over the long-term military budget goes on.
They have said they would need about 24 fighters to replace their ageing Soviet made MiG-21s to be more compatible with NATO, but at more than $20 million per fighter, new western planes are too pricey.
It was not yet clear whether the aircraft in the U.S. offer would be used or new, and the Prague spokesman for McDonnell Douglas was not immediately available for further comment.
"Supply and service costs will be the subject of further discussions," the statement said.
Czech pilots could begin training in the planes in six months, with delivery of the aircraft 18 months after the contract is signed, the statement said.
To strengthen its bid, McDonnell Douglas also said that it is preparing to locate production of components for the Hornet at Czech light jet maker Aero Vodochody a.s. "regardless of whether new or leased aircraft are chosen to re-equip the Czech Air Force".
Cooperation could also include Czech engineering concern Skoda a.s., it added.
