The Czech Statistical Bureau (CSU) on Monday issued forecasts for 1997 predicting a slight economic upturn, but analysts warned burgeoning trade and current account deficits are clouds looming on the horizon.
After a sluggish 1996, the CSU said it expects real GDP growth for 1997 of 4.0-5.0 percent following an estimated 4.1 percent growth rate for 1996 while average annual inflation should ease to 7.5-8.0 percent from 8.8 percent.
The CSU added in its wide range of forecasts that the current account deficit, spurred by a spiralling trade gap, should grow to 137-145 billion crowns from an estimated 110.6 billion crown shortfall in 1996.
Analysts said the figures were more or less in line with expectations, but warned widening current account and trade deficits -- both seen growing to record numbers in 1997 -- could undermine the economy.
"I think they are credible forecasts, but not very encouraging," David Lubin, an economist at HSBC Midland told Reuters.
"It's okay for a country to run a current account deficit of nine percent of GDP but only if you believe in the future the economy will generate trade surpluses big enough to repay the debt that's being accumulated to finance the deficits."
According to the CSU estimates, the current account shortfall should be between 8.6-9.1 percent of GDP in 1997. It forecast the trade deficit to widen to 202-212 billion crowns from a deficit of 160.3 billion crowns last year.
At the heart of the trade gap was a 12.7 percent rise in imports in 1996, due in large part to firms investing in new machinery and materials, badly-needed as part of the country's economic restructuring.
Meanwhile exports stagnated, rising only 3.5 percent for the year. But the CSU said it expects exports to grow 4.5-6.5 percent in 1997, while import growth should ease slightly to 9-12 percent.
"Some improvement (in imports) can only be expected in the second half of 1997 due to the influence of investment into new technologies and some pro-export measures," the CSU said.
But analysts say it is still too soon to know if the vast imports of machinery and materials in 1996 will be properly put to use, and whether managers can make this newly-acquired capital translate into a more competitive industrial sector and cover the deficit currently being run up.
"I'm not sure that the Czech economy is making sufficient progress at the corporate level, the micro-economic level, to generate those trade surpluses," said one local economist.
"It seems to me that the Czech economy still has a sort of fundamental competitiveness problem," he added.
After fighting through a recent downturn, the Czech Republic's largest trading partner, Germany, appears poised to make a recovery in 1997. Government officials have often said that this should help bolster sagging Czech exports.
But if the German economy does warm up, the Bundesbank may raise interset rates to keep it from overheating, attracting a flood of funds that has entered the Czech Republic bolstering its capital account.
"What they gain on the current account on the balance of payments from the German upturn, they might lose somewhat on the capital account," Lubins said.
The CSU said growth in average nominal wages -- a factor the central bank has warned must be brought under control if inflation targets are to be met -- is expected to be 14.5-16.5 percent, down from the 1996 forecast increase of 18.4 percent.
Some analysts, however, said the drop may not be enough to stem inflationary pressures.
"This (wage growth) is much more than this economy can afford -- maybe around 12 percent is acceptable," said Vladimir Kriedl, an economist at Patria Finance.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
