The Czech crown, boosted recently by demand brought about by a wave of Eurobond issues, is showing no sign of losing strength, prompting market speculation on Wednesday of possible central bank intervention.
The Czech National Bank (CNB) has said it is monitoring the development of the crown, but is prepared to allow the market to decide its rate within the fluctuation band.
Since the start of 1997 the currency has gained some three percentage points against its fixing basket, mainly on foreign buying to finance a wave of some 30 billion crowns ($1.1 billion) in new crown Eurobond issues.
Analysts said that while the crown may hold steady over the next day or two, it should again test 5.5 percent above its parity level next week.
"I don't expect much of a move higher this week, but next week the crown could again test +5.5 percent," said Martin Strauch, a dealer at Citibank.
Jakub Perina of Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka added: "A lot depends on London traders because they are very interested right now."
The Czech crown is fixed daily at up to plus or minus 7.5 percent of the mid-point of a basket comprising 35 percent dollars and 65 percent marks.
On Wednesday, the Czech National Bank (CNB) fixed the crown at 27.712 to the dollar and 16.846 to the mark, putting the currency 5.05 percent above the mid-point.
"If the crown does not exceed its fluctuation band, the central bank will not intervene," CNB Spokesman Martin Svehla told the econoimc daily Hospodarske Noviny on Wednesday.
Last February the CNB widened the corridor within which it fixes the crown each day to plus or minus 7.5 percent of parity, from plus/minus 0.5 percent.
Since then the foreign exchange market, and not the central bank, has been much more of a force in determining the crown's rate within this controlled float.
Several dealers, however, confirmed to Reuters that the CNB had contacted them on Tuesday when the crown hit 5.3 percent above parity, and said they took the move as a signal that intervention was possible whn the currency hit plus 6.0 percent.
"The market was a little spooked by this move, and the crown fell immediately," said one London-based analyst. "But it regained its strength today, and I think many people now expect some intervention if it moves much higher."
CSOB's Strauch said: "They (the CNB) could be ready to intervene at some point, possibly +6.0 percent, but it depends on whether it appears to have strength to move even higher at that point."
The main underlying reason for foreign interest in the Czech crown is the large interest rate differential between the Czech Republic and western countries.
In the middle of 1996 the CNB raised the discount rate to 10.5 percent from 9.5 percent and increased minimum reserve requirements on primary deposits to 11.5 percent from 8.5 percent. Interbank money market rates up to three months hover around 12.5 percent.
Though interbank market rates eased some 60 basis points, or 0.6 percentage points, in January, the central bank and government officials have both expressed reluctance to officially lower rates because of strong demand for money and investments.
Analysts said rates are still high enough, howeer, to continue attracting large inflows of capital.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003 ($ = 27.68 Czech Crowns)
