The Prague Stock Exchange, boosted by strong blue chip gains, hit a year-high on Thursday, but analysts said any strong bullish sentiment was tempered by a lack of liquidity and low foreign investor interest.
At the heart of the bourse's rise has been a resurgence of the market's two most-capitalised issues -- SPT Telecom and CEZ -- which account for over one-third of the PX50 index.
Both hits 52-week highs to push the index 1.93 percent higher to 591.3, but analysts cautioned that the market was still plagued by a lack of liquidity, which was distorting price movements.
"Volumes are very thin, when you come to the market looking for a bigger parcel of shares it doesn't take much interest to move the prices. But the truth is, not a lot of foreign money is flowing in," said Jan Sykora of Wood and Company.
SPT Telecom shares, which account for 20 percent of the PSE's market capitalisation, jumped 169 crowns to 3,744, while CEZ, which accounts for 14 percent, rose 51 crowns to 1,210.
Dealers said they did not see any fundamental reasons for SPT shares to rise much further, but that CEZ could climb slightly higher since it lagged other blue chips during last year's mid-summer rally.
The PSE has recently showed signs of life after a fourth quarter 1996 slump took 25 percent off the index after a lack of commitment on the part of government officials to strengthen minority shareholder rights and increase market transparency undermined the market.
The index has gained 9.6 percent so far in 1997, and a new commitment from Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus and bourse officials to clean up the market is slowly luring back many disgruntled foreign investors.
Though it may not be a panacea to the market woes, most analysts agree that the oversight commission could be the most important step the PSE could take in 1997.
"Foreign investors have definitely been heartened by official movement on cleaning up the market," said one foreign broker.
"The market will probably edge up slightly with such low liquidity. Hopefully when 1996 earnings begin to come in the bourse will have a new impetus," he added. Company results are expected to begin flowing in at the beginning of March.
Factors outside the bourse floor are also contributing to the market's rise.
Radek Vavra of Citicorp Securities in Prague said that given the current strength of the currency, the crown, and several other technical factors, the market should continue firming.
He added that he was seeing strong foreign investor interest, giving the rally potential "to continue over the next week before it levels off in two to three weeks".
The crown has gained some three percent against its dollar/mark basket since the beginning of the year, and analysts have predicted it will hold its value or strengthen further in the coming weeks.
In late afternoon trading on Thursday the crown was 5.16 percent above its basket mid-point, upslightly from the central bank's daily fixing at +5.12 percent.
