The Czech Republic took both reverse singles matches from India on Sunday clinching a berth in the second round of the Davis Cup, but lost its number one player, Petr Korda in the process.
Jiri Novak gave the Czechs a 3-2 victory with a straight set 6-1 6-4 6-3 victory over Mahesh Bhupathi after Korda, who announced he was retiring from Davis Cup play, had brought his team level with a 5-7 6-3 6-4 6-1 win over Leander Paes.
Novak barely broke a sweat against Bhupathi, who is ranked more than 400 places lower, needing just 90 minutes to dispatch the Indian number two.
Jumping out to a quick start, Novak, ranked 67th in the world, took the first set 6-1 and went up 5-0 in the second before losing his rythmn, and four consecutive games. But he regrouped to hold serve in the tenth game for the set.
He then broke Bhupathi twice in the third set to clinch the tie. "This is one of the biggest matches I have won in my life," said an elated Novak following the match.
Korda, ranked 33rd in the world, also had little trouble in his matchup with Paes, overpowering the Indian at the net and unleashing powerful groundstrokes from the baseline.
He squandered five break points in the first set, while Paes, ranked 105th in the world, took advantage of the only one he had to take the first set in 53 minutes.
But Korda showed no signs of a cold that has plagued him throughout the week, quickly getting back on track to take the next three sets.
"Overall though, I am still really happy both myself and the team performed," said Olympic bronze medalist Paes.
After the win, Korda said he would no longer play for the Czechs in the Davis Cup, complaining of the demands it put on a player.
"There was a lot of pressure on me for this match, but I showed the kind of player I am," he said.
"I have thought about retiring (from Davis Cup) for a while and it's time to leave. It is a very tiring, draining experience and I think you should leave at the top. Now is the right time."
Korda, who was once ranked as high as fifth in the world, has been the anchor of the Czech team since his debut in 1988, compiling a 30-12 overall record, including three wins against India this weekend.
The loss of Korda is the second setback for last year's semifinalists, after Czech number two Daniel Vacek bowed out of action to concentrate more on his performance on the ATP tour.
