Czech consumer inflation continued its gradual downtrend in January, but analysts said they do not expect a loosening of the central bank's tight monetary policy in the short-term.
The Czech Statistical Bureau (CSU) on Monday said January inflation, month-on-month, was 1.2 percent, putting the year-on-year rate at 7.4 percent, down from 8.6 percent the previous month.
The key sliding average inflation figure, which uses 1993 as a base, edged down to 8.7 percent from 8.8 percent in December, and was down from 9.1 percent in January 1996.
"The January number is very good, about one percentage point lower than a year ago," Kamil Janacek, cheif economist at Komercni Banka told Reuters.
"If prices and some deregulations develop accoridng to plan in the next months, and thanks to producer prices being under five percent...there is a high probability that 1997 inflation could end at around, or just under, eight percent," he added.
The CSU said in a report that the biggest influences on the January inflation rate were food, drinks and tobacco products which rose 1.3 percent in the month, transportation which rose 3.6 percent and housing which rose by 1.3 percent.
It added that of the 1.2 percent month-on-month rate, seasonal influences accounted for 0.23 percent, putting the seasonally-adjusted monthly rate at 0.97 percent.
CSU figures show price deregulation influenced the seasonally-adjusted rate by 0.63 percent, while seasonally-adjusted core inflation was 0.34 percent.
Despite the downtrend, most analysts agreed that there seems little chance the Czech National Bank (CNB), the central bank, will ease its tight monetary policy in the near future despite the sustained downtrend in CPI.
Curbing inflation has been at the heart of almost all of the CNB's policies, and both CNB and government officials have said they expect rates to remain high, at least over the near term.
"The month-on-month rate appears favourable," Boris Gomez, an analyst at ING Barings, said.
"While there may be some room for it, I doubt the central bank will lower rates immediately -- maybe in the second quarter at the earliest," he added.
Last summer the CNB raised its key discount rate one percentage point to 10.5 percent, and hiked minimum reserve requirements to 11.5 percent from 8.5 percent of deposits to squeeze off surging domestic demand.
The moves have appeared to signficantly slow growth in the money supply, which is now at the lower end of the central bank's 13 to 17 percent growth target.
But central bank officials have warned that wage growth -- which was up 21.2 percent in nominal terms in December according to preliminary figures -- and its influence on inflation is a growing concern.
"The government has to somehow limit wage growth. It's just too high and this must be addressed before the central bank will move rates," said one London-based economist.
Foreign exchange traders said the crown was unaffected by January's CPI figures since they were in line with forecasts.
The crown was fixed by the central bank on Monday at 5.28 percent above its dollar/mark basket midpoint, slightly stronger than its +5.14 percent fixing from last Friday.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
