The Prague Stock Exchange, as expected, backed off last week's year-high on a round of profit taking on Monday, but analysts said market sentiment remains bullish for the coming weeks.
After a strong rise last week, market heavyweights SPT Telecom, CEZ and Komercni Banka, which combined account for over one-half of the PX50 index, all fell sharply to drag the index down 0.28 percent to 598.0.
"The market has corrected a little bit, but there seems to be good support at this level," Marco Anderegg of Patria Finance told Reuters.
"Foreign investor interest remains solid and towards the end of last week broader issues were gaining interest so it looks solid for a lot of the market," he added.
SPT Telecom shares, which account for 20 percent of the PSE's market capitalisation, closed down 75 crowns at 3,700, while CEZ, which accounts for 14 percent, was off 28 crowns to 1,202 and Komercni, with market cap of 11 percent, lost 25 crowns to 2,620.
"We saw some of the blue chips such as Komercni and SPT rebound in late deals, which could show that the market's weakness will be short-lived. I expect to see prices begin rising again soon," said one local trader.
The PSE has since a steady uptrend in 1997 after a fourth quarter 1996 slump took 25 percent off the index after a lack of commitment on the part of government officials to strengthen minority shareholder rights and increase market transparency undermined the market.
The index has gained 9.7 percent so far in 1997, and a new commitment from officials to clean up the market is slowly luring back many disgruntled foreign investors.
Bram Buring of Brno Broker Group said the correction could last for several weeks as lower-than-expected company results begin to flood in, possibly taking as much as five percent from the index before it rebounds.
But, he added: "Foreign investors are definitely interested and kicking starting the market...and we expect that to continue on but things have overheated a little at the moment."
Analysts added that the recent strong performance of the crown should also boost the equities market since investors are shielded from wide currency fluctuations.
The crown has gained over three percent against its dollar/mark basket since the beginning of the year, and analysts have predicted it will hold its value or strengthen further in the coming weeks.
In late afternoon trading on Monday it was holding steady at 5.32 percent above its basket mid-point, up slightly from the central bank's daily fixing at +5.28 percent. The crown was fixed on Friday at 5.23 percent.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
