A wave of high-yielding Czech crown Eurobonds that has flooded the debt market since the beginning of the year has begun to ebb, as interest rates ease and arbitrage opportunities decline, analysts said on Tuesday.
"The Euro-madness is definitely over. We may see a couple more issues but those will be mainly by issuers who are active in the Czech Republic," Ota Otepka, chief bond trader at ING Barings, told Reuters.
Since the start of the year, issuers have rushed to take advantage of a stable, strong currency and interest rates above 11 percent, flooding the market with nearly 30 billion crowns ($1.1 billion) worth of Eurobonds in just over four weeks.
Dealers said that with interest rates so high, and a crown that is 65 percent linked to the mark but yielding seven to eight percentage points above it, the appetite for crown Eurobonds had appeared insatiable.
But interest rates have eased some 60-70 basis points since the start of the year and yields have dropped, spoiling the appetite for many investors.
"Maybe lead managers were overly optimistic about the potential placing capabilities and appetite of foreign investors," said Jan Pudil of WoodCommerz.
"Of course this hunger has been filled quite substantially. At this stage we are at the level where these investors are now satisfied," he added.
More than 20 bond issues were launched in crowns by a host of top-rated, retail-friendly names, lured by its reputation as one of Europe's most stable currencies.
German media group Bertelsmann AG launched on Tuesday a one billion crown one-year bond with a 10.5 percent coupon, but the rate of issuance has slowed.
Analysts estimate about 90 percent of the crown bonds were bought by retail investors from Germany, the Benelux countries and Switzerland.
Investors saw a great chance of picking up high-yield, low-risk paper but issuers and managers were presented with an easy arbitrage opportunity since rates were so high.
But Pudil said that issuers, once awash in opportunities for currency swaps, were now hard pressed to find advantageous rates allowing many to place bonds with coupons above 10 percent, a psychological minimum level.
"You have a three-year swap now at 10.25 percent and if you were to bring a cross-currency swapped three-year Eurobond, you get a coupon below 10 percent and you can't sell something to west European retail investors at below 10 percent," he said.
Another trader added: "A lot of the issues were swap driven, but swap prices have fallen below the Eurobond yields and this has stopped the arbitrage possibility."
"We also may see declining interest in buying Czech Eurobonds because the crown is so strong that its security is declining," he added.
The crown was fixed at a record high against its dollar/mark basket on Tuesday at 5.51 percent above the parity midpoint, some three percentage points higher than at the beginning of the year.
Traders added that two and three-year bonds are almost impossible to launch now, given the lack of arbitrage options. Most issuers had preferred short-dated bonds anyway due to an inverted yield curve which meant higher coupons are available at shorter maturities.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003 ($ = 27.92 Czech Crowns)
