The Czech crown fell sharply on Thursday following central bank comments that it was not satisfied with the currency's recent rise, but dealers said the crown remains attractive and should stabilise by week's end.
One of post-Communist Europe's most stable currencies, the crown has consistently reached record highs in recent weeks, fuelled by demand brought about from a wave of more than 30 billion crowns in Eurobond issues since the start of the year.
But while the crown was still well above its mark/dollar basket trading at 3.48 percent above parity, it was down over 60 basis points from its opening and some 200 points lower from Tuesday's record fixing at +5.51.
Analysts said, however, that the country's high interest rate differential and the country's overall economic stability should limit any further drop.
"For this week, we may see the crown slightly weaker, but the crown is still very attractive and I do not see space for much furthening weaking of it," said Jiri Becvar of BNP-Dresdner in Prague.
The central bank's repo rate remains solidly at 12.4 percent, while its discount rate has been at 10.5 percent since it was raised a full percentage point last June.
The fall comes on the heels of Wednesday's comment by the central bank it has the option of intervening on the market when necessary.
"Intervention (on the market) is our normal instrument, and we can use it whenever we are not satisfied (with the crown's exchange rate)," CNB spokesman Martin Svehla told Reuters.
"The other question is whether we are satisfied? You heard (CNB) governor (Josef Tosovsky) saying there is 'no reason' for the crown to be like this. It signals that the central bank is not fully satisfied with this development," he added.
He declined to elaborate, and said these were just "general" comments.
Breta Tichanek of ING Barings said he expected the crown to trade within the range plus four to plus five percent from the basket midpoint throughout the day.
"I think it's partially because of yesterday's comment (by the CNB) and the closing of some postions and speculative flows," he said.
The depth of the fall also took the market by surprise initially, with many dealers saying they had been prepared for an early attack on +4.25 percent, but expected London dealers to take profits and then stabilise.
"In fact there were new buyers after some brief consolidation and the index dropped to +3.45," said Petr Korous of CSOB.
"There are a lot of long positions and they have to be covered so the market may squeeze them. If there is nothing special I am very sceptical that we can see the crown index weaken much more than to around +3.00," he added.
Some crown dealers have said the central bank had been putting out feelers in the market recently, though most did not expect to see any intervention, especially after the weakening on Thursday.
The CNB has not intervened since last February when it propped up the crown after widening the fixing corridor to plus/minus 7.5 percent against the basket from 0.5 percent.
