The Czech crown, battered down by central bank comments in recent days, rebounded on Friday bolstered by a wave of foreign currency selling though dealers cautioned the market remains very nervous.
In late afternoon trading, the crown was at 4.70 percent above its mark/dollar basket parity, up more than 50 basis points from the open but still some 80 basis points from Tuesday's record fixing at +5.51.
"Some bigger foreign players pushed the crown up, selling hard currency for crowns," said Jiri Ubry of ING Bank.
Added Martin Strauch of Citibank: "There were some break-even sellers in the market and the crown has now rebounded to near its peak before the central bank's comments."
One of post-Communist Europe's most stable currencies, the crown has consistently reached record highs in recent weeks, fuelled by demand brought about from a wave of more than 30 billion crowns in Eurobond issues since the start of the year.
But the market made an about face on Wednesday after the central bank said it has the option of intervening on the market when necessary.
The crown fell over 200 basis points against parity as many London traders bailed out over the next two days.
Petr Korous of bank CSOB said some profit taking was also pushing the crown higher, and that there still appeared to be a large number of traders with long positions of hard currency against Czech crowns that may now sell off.
"When there were these comments from the central bank, a couple of big players may have bought hard currency because they had never held a long position before and got nervous," Korous said.
"It looks like now they are slightly losing patience and getting rid of their positions at slightly higher than what we saw just three days ago," he added.
Dealers said they have seen few indications that the central bank was again on the verge of intervening, adding that they did not expect any action since the crown was not likely to rise above the five percent parity level.
The CNB has not intervened directly on the market since last February when it propped up the crown after widening the fixing corridor to plus/minus 7.5 percent against the basket from 0.5 percent.
Few dealers predicted the crown would rise much further since the market was so nervous, but noted the crown appeared to have good support at around 4.5 percent above parity.
"It's tough to predict the crown's direction right now becuase it's so volatile in relation to any comments about it," said Citibank's Strauch.
Korous also noted that the current stalemate in parliament where the ultra-right Republican and Communist opposition deputies have used stalling tactics to drag out debate for four days over a sensitive post-World War Two reconciliation agreement with Germany could create more instability.
"I feel that we won't go to the levels we saw recently because there is some nervousness over the political scene here,especially when the ruling politicians have no idea how to eliminate the obstructions they are causing," he said.
