Czech industrial output growth slowed in 1996, but analysts said they were more concerned with a sharp rise in wages that is dulling the country's competitive edge and exacerbating the impact of a widening trade deficit.
The Czech Statistical Bureau (CSU) said on Monday that industrial output, in real terms, rose 1.5 percent in December, putting output 6.8 percent higher for the whole of 1996, down from 9.2 percent for the previous year.
It also said nominal industrial wages grew 17.4 percent last year, after 17 percent growth in 1995.
While analysts said they were not surprised by the output figures due to a continued slowdown in the economies of the Czechs' biggest trading partners, they said wages were growing far too fast.
"I think the slowdown in output is not a big surprise given the problems with economies abroad and the stronger than expected crown," said Vladimir Kreidl, an economist at Patria Finance, who said he expects output to remain steady in 1997.
"The wage growth and trade deficits are by far the two most troublesome developments in the economy. Nominal wages should not be growing by more than 12 or 13 percent, which would be in line with productivity," he added.
The crown has strengthened by some three percentage points against its currency basket since the beginning of the year, pushed higher mainly by demand from some 30 billion crowns worth of crown-denominated Eurobond issues.
The strength of the crown has also negatively effected the trade deficit, stifling exports as the gap grew to a record of more than 160 billion crowns for 1996.
"The Czech Republic is a strong country but it's got to deal with some of the sypmtoms of success such as these very large capital inflows that have driven the currency too high," said Jonathan Garner, director of research at Robert Fleming.
Added Patria's Kreidl: "Wage growth could effect inflation but foreign competition is so strong that we haven't seen that impact yet, and probably won't. But at the same time, Czech companies are losing competitiveness."
The Czech crown is fixed daily at up to plus or minus 7.5 percent of the mid-point of a basket comprising 35 percent dollars and 65 percent marks.
On Monday, the central bank fixed the crown at 28.357 to the dollar and 16.737 to the mark putting the currency 4.65 percent above the mid-point.
Many investors have flocked to the crown given the Czech Republic's stable political and economic climate, and its high interest rates.
Most analysts agree, however, that the central bank can ill afford to cut rates at the present, given the necessity to keep inflation and the money supply in check.
"There has to be some break in the development of nominal wages in industry. It will be difficult to do. Monetary policy must remain tight...there is no place for lower rates," said one analyst.
In the middle of 1996 the CNB raised the discount rate to 10.5 percent from 9.5 percent and increased minimum reserve requirements on primary deposits to 11.5 percent from 8.5 percent. Interbank money market rates up to three months in the Republic hover around 12.5 percent.
Though rates eased some 60 basis points in January, the central bank ond government officials have both expressed reluctance officially to lower rates because of strong demand for money and investments.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
