The Czech central bank, for the second time in a week, said on Tuesday that it was prepared to intervene to stop the crown from strengthening further, pushing the crown lower and prompting a sell-off by London traders.
"Our starting point is that parity is a base, and this is the right level (for the crown)," Jiri Pospisil, the head of the Czech National Bank's (CNB) monetary department, told an economic conference.
After the comment, the crown was still well above its mark/dollar basket midpoint at 28.750/dollar 16.873/mark, or 3.68 percent over parity with the basket, but down nearly 100 basis points from the CNB's daily fixing at +4.65 percent.
"There is a debate going on at the central bank over the nature of the appreciation of the exchange rate, and on the most suitable way to react to it," Pospisil, who is also on the CNB board, said.
"The debate has not been finished but our possibilities are clear: either we can react through interest rates or through direct intervention on the market," he added.
One of post-Communist Europe's most stable currencies, the crown consistently reached record highs in late January and early February, fuelled by demand brought about by a wave of more than 30 billion crowns in Eurobond issues since the start of the year.
The crown's surge has also been boosted by investors taking advantage of interest rate spreads against major currencies and an inverted yield curve.
Dealers said Pospisil's comments had shaken the market, especially some foreign investors, and could force the crown down further before it finds support.
"This has really shaken the market badly," said one London analyst. "I think a sell-off could push it down to as low as three percent above parity before finding some support."
It was the second time in the past week that central bank comments have pushed the crown sharply lower.
Last Wednesday the central bank said it had the option of intervening on the market when necessary, prompting London dealers to bail out over the next two days and pushing the crown down some 200 basis points against parity.
Despite Pospisil's words, dealers said that it did not appear that any intervention was imminent as it could not lower rates due to concerns over controlling the money supply and inflation.
"I think the central bank is trying to make the crown more volatile by its comments, but I'm not sure if it is ready to do anything real such as intervene," said Breta Tichanek of ING Bank. "They are just trying to push the crown back to parity by letting the market do it in its own way," he added.
The CNB has not intervened since last February when it propped up the crown after widening the fixing corridor to plus/minus 7.5 percent against the basket from 0.5 percent.
The CNB's repo rate remains solidly at 12.4 percent, while its discount rate has been at 10.5 percent since it was raised a full percentage point last June. Meanwhile, inflation in January slowed to 7.4 percent, year-on-year, from 8.6 percent in December.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
