The Czech Republic's trade deficit nearly doubled in January, year-on-year, as exports stagnated, and analysts said they saw little change in the trend of the burgeoning trade shortfall.
The Czech Statistical Bureau (CSU) on Monday said the January trade deficit hit 13.6 billion crowns compared with a 7.86 billion crown deficit in January 1996.
The CSU added that imports, led by continued strong inflows of machinery and raw materials, grew by 8.2 percent year-on-year, while exports contracted by 2.5 percent, spurred by a sharp 11.8 percent decrease in raw material exports.
"The figures are better than expected...the market expected above 15 billion crowns...but I don't think it will mean any change in the trade (balance's) development," said Petr Tomek of Zivnostenska Banka.
The bureau did not issue a revised end-year 1996 figure for the trade balance, which hit a record 160.3 billion crowns. It has forecast the 1997 trade deficit to rise to about 215 billion crowns.
The CSU said overall nominal imports for January firmed to 60.04 billion crowns from 55.5 billion for the same month last year, while exports totalled 46.45 billion, down from a previous 47.63 billion.
Boris Gomez of ING Barings said that while January's trade figures were an improvement from December, where the monthly figure was 17.996 billion crowns, the beginning of the year is traditionally a period of slowing trade.
"We're not overly encouraged since historically the first two months of the year we usually see relatively lower deficits because of generally weaker trade flows," he said.
"We are hoping for a stabilisation of the deficit. If what happened last year when the deficit picked up pace in the second quarter, it's not good, though we are banking on import growth slowing a bit given the tight monetary environment."
Last summer the central bank tightened its monetary policy, raising its discount rate one full percentage point to 10.5 percent, and minimum reserve requirements on primary deposits to 11.5 percent from 8.5 percent. Interbank money market rates up to three months in the Republic hover around 12.5 percent.
Analysts added that the trade figures were also influenced by the strengthening of the currency, the crown, which gained some three percentage points against its dollar/mark basket in January, boosted by demand brought about by a wave of over 35 billion crowns worth crown-denominated Eurobonds.
"If the Bundesbank sees it policy down the road of keeping the mark relatively weak to help the economy, that's not good news for the Czechs, nor are the rumblings that the economic recovery of the EU may be slower than expected," Gomez said.
CSU figures showed EU countries accounted for more than 60 percent of both imports and exports with the Czech Republic.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
