Czech trading firms saw the trade deficit nearly doubling, year-on-year, in the first quarter of 1997, while analysts said the figures were in line with forecasts and the crown firmed on the news.
A survey of importers and exporters by the Czech Statistical Bureau (CSU), released on Wednesday, showed the trade deficit should rise to about 45 billion crowns ($1.6 billion) for the quarter, up from a 27.1 billion crown gap for the first quarter 1996.
Analysts said the survey figures were realistic given the January shortfall of 13.6 billion crowns, adding the first quarter was usually a slow period for trade and the deficit should grow substantially after the quarter.
"It's more or less in line with our forecasts, but I think the deficit situation will gradually worsen throughout the year," Martin Kupka, an economist at Patria Finance told Reuters.
The CSU itself has issued a forecast for the overall 1997 trade deficit to rise to between 211-219 billion crowns after last year's record shortfall of 160.3 billion crowns, but it has not issued its own quarterly estimate.
The CSU said in a statement the survey included estimates from firms which accounted for 20 percent of all import business last year, and 36 percent of exports.
It said 170 firms were polled in the survey, of which 67 percent responded.
"The real question lies in how much the deficit will accelerate after the first quarter," said one London-based analyst. "Last year we saw a sharp increase in the pace of growth in the deficit and if that occurs again, it could be a problem."
The survey showed total imports were expected to rise in the first quarter by some 10 percent, year-on-year, with raw materials, foodstuffs and machinery imports accounting for most of the growth. Total imports in the first quarter of 1996 were 174.3 billion crowns.
Import prices were expected to edge about two percent higher overall, though prices of chemicals and related products, beverages and tobacco should ease slightly.
It said total exports for the quarter should remain static at last year's 147.2 billion crown level. Export prices should rise by about 2.5 percent, year-on-year.
Ironically, the forecast reassured the foreign exchange (forex) market, after the crown lost ground on reports that several German banks were expecting a weakening of the currency and were not recommending clients to buy Czech state debt.
Forex dealers said the crown fell by as much as 50 basis points against its dollar/mark basket midpoint because of the reports, but recovered some 30 basis points to 3.55 percent above the midpoint, or 28.430 to the dollar and 17.017 to the mark after the forecast.
"I think 45 billion crowns is the amount that probably all economists were expecting...The crown began to rebound right after the forecast was released," said Jiri Ubry of ING Bank. ($ = 28.46 Czech Crowns)
