The Prague Stock Exchange's 1997 bull run ground to a halt on Thursday as investors took profits, and analysts predicted prices would continue falling in the short-term.
The PX50 index, which has shot up over 16 percent  this year to a two-year high on Tuesday of 629.0, retreated 14.0 points, or 2.23 percent, to close at 613.6 on Thursday.
Leading the bourse lower were its three biggest issues -- SPT Telecom a.s., power utility CEZ a.s. and Komercni Banka a.s. -- each of which fell more than 2.2 percent at the fix.
The profit-taking came as little surprise.
"It's a very thin market and when you see a little profit-taking like we are, the market kind of collapses," said Jan Sykora of brokers Wood and Company. "I am afraid that the trend will probably continue."
Analysts said they expected Komercni to be hardest hit of the blue chips, after rising more than 600 crowns ($20), or over 25 percent, since the start of the year. Komercni closed down 4.9 percent on Thursday.
They added that SPT, which has gained over 500 crowns, or more than 12 percent, in 1997, also looks expensive at current levels.
"The blue chips should cool off now and pull the market a bit lower," said one local trader. "But they will not fall completely out of favour since they are the only shares on the market that are liquid enough to buy or sell when you want."
After a disappointing 1996 which saw the PSE underperform its rivals in Budapest and Warsaw, the Prague bourse has been revitalised this year as foreign investors begin to return to a market they once abandoned because it was too "murky".
Czech authorities, seeking to improve the tarnished image of the country's capital markets, are taking steps to increase transparency and boost investor confidence.
The Central Securities Registry (SCP) began from February 4 to publish, with one day's delay, the price and other information about each stock trade it registers. The SCP is where some 60 percent of share transactions are executed.
The Prague Stock Exchange's governing chamber has also agreed to publish the prices of off-market trades conducted by its members from March 3.
As a first step towards setting up an independent securities commission, the Finance Ministry's markets supervision department has been transformed into a Bureau for the Control of Securities with an 11-strong advisory board, including market players.
The moves appear to be working with many investors finding it time to stop neglecting the market by adding Czech weight to their investment portfolios.
"We are seeing a lot of new money coming into the country and a lot of investors buying. I think this will continue," said Dan Gladis of Atlantik Financi Trhy.
"I don't think the correction will be that deep because of this and after a period of stabilisation we should see the market rise again," he added.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
