Profit-taking and changing market sentiment pulled the Czech crown lower on Thursday, and dealers said they expected a further weakening of the currency since there were few fundamentals to support it.
Once one of Europe's most stable currencies, confidence in the crown has been shaken badly in the past two weeks as the market became nervous following central bank comments that it was overvalued and that interest rate cuts may be in the air.
In late afternoon trading, the crown was at 28.873 against the dollar and 17.090 to the mark, implying +2.74 against basket midpoint after opening at +3.53 percent.
Dealers said it had been pushed lower as thoughts turned to actions and investors ran to take profits while they could.
"The fall is part profit-taking, and part change in market sentiment," said Breta Tichanek of ING Bank in Prague.
"We are really seeing an outflow of investment from the crown at this moment, but I don't think it will last for more than a couple of weeks," he added.
At midday the central bank followed the early trend with its daily fixing, putting the crown/dollar at 28.784, and the crown/mark at 17.040, or +3.03 against the basket.
The pullout follows recent media reports that German banks see the crown moving lower and are advising clients to stay away from Czech bonds.
The crown had strengthened since the beginning of the year by about three percent against the basket as demand from a wave of over 35 billion crowns worth of crown-denominated Eurobonds.
"The market has been very nervous and I think the German media reports were the last straw for some investors. They have decided to take their profits now and run," said a London-based trader.
At the crown's peak earlier this month -- before talk of possible central bank intervention on the market -- it rose to +5.5 percent over parity.
Many investors had boosted the crown as they looked to take advantage of a high interest rate differential with western Europe but the central bank comments, coupled with an easing of interbank market rates have taken away much of the crown's lustre.
"I think the market is on a calm wave...we expect further tests for the Czech crown weakening. We see also movement on the money market and money market derivatives," said Petr Korous of Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka.
Prague Interbank Offered Rates (PRIBOR) on Thursday traded in a range of 11.5-12.5 percent, down about 60-70 basis points from the beginning of the year.
ING's Tichanek said there was little chance the currency would come close to returning to its highs earlier this month, adding the crown was having trouble finding strong support at current levels.
Further damaging confidence in the crown is the country's burgeoning trade deficit.
The Czech Statistical Bureau has forecast a 1997 shortfall of between 211-219 billion crowns after last year's record deficit of 160.3 billion crowns and analysts say that later in the year the crown will find itself under increasing depreciation pressure because of this.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
