Rival bidders in the privatisation of French defence electronics firm Thomson-CSF will need to woo planes-to-missiles group Aerospatiale to stand a chance of winning the deal, analysts said.
France is selling Thomson-CSF as part of a defence industry restructuring which will affect state-owned Aerospatiale's business and the government has said it will ask Aerospatiale's chairman for his opinion about the offers.
The government on Tuesday said it had ruled out Aerospatiale from bidding for Thomson-CSF either on its own or as part of a group because it is a public sector company already.
A defence ministry official said on Thursday that if Aerospatiale, as a state-owned firm, had entered the bidding it would have meant "the state upsetting the equitable handling of the privatisation procedure".
The government, through Aerospatiale, would have been throwing its weight behind one of the bidders, he said.
Engineering group Alcatel Alsthom had enlisted Aerospatiale, and family-owned Dassault Industries, in its pitch for Thomson-CSF, to rival that of books-to-missiles group Lagardere.
Because Aerospatiale has close ties with Thomson-CSF on a number of programmes, it would be directly affected by the sale and the government said it would consult Aerospatiale chairman Yves Michaud on offers for Thomson-CSF.
Lagardere responded to the news by asking for a formal process to gain access to financial and industrial information on Aerospatiale to allow it to mount its bid for Thomson-CSF.
But an analyst at a large French brokerage said relations between Lagardere and Aerospatiale were bad and the chances of Alcatel winning Thomson-CSF had improved.
"The chances of Lagardere (getting Thomson-CSF) are less today," he said.
Aerospatiale and Lagardere compete directly in the same markets and products, notably in missiles and satellites.
Lagardere has long considered it and not Aerospatiale should be the French centre for a European consolidation in missiles and satellites.
Lagardere has tried to persuade Daimler-Benz Aerospace (DASA) to merge its missiles and satellites with its own joint ventures with British companies, instead linking up with Aerospatiale.
Aerospatiale said it was "pleased that the government, in its role of shareholder, will consult Aerospatiale's chairman on the parts of the offers for Thomson-CSF which will affect Aerospatiale."
Alcatel Alstom declined comment.
Newspaper La Tribune reported earlier this month that Alcatel, Dassault Industries and Aerospatiale had agreed a plan to carve up Thomson-CSF's capital between them if Alcatel won the bidding.
In that plan, Dassault would sell its holding in aircraft avionics firm Dassault Electronique to Thomson-CSF, and Thomson-CSF would sell its estimated four billion francs worth of missiles activities to Aerospatiale, boosting its presence in tactical missiles to better rival Lagardere's Matra/BAe Dynamics joint venture with British Aerospace Plc.
