Shares in French resorts company Club Mediterranee jumped almost 20 percent on Monday as investors welcomed the appointment of the head of Euro Disney to the ailing holidays group.
Club Med announced last Friday it was replacing its chairman Serge Trigano with Philippe Bourguignon, head of the Disneyland Paris theme park, and surprised the market with a net loss for the 1995-96 year of 743 million francs ($131.3 million).
"Bourguignon knows the business well. He has credibility...he is probably one of the best guys to choose," analyst Thibaut Simonnet at broker Ferri said.
Bouguignon is credited with the turnround in the last two years of Disneyland Paris, which suffered initial heavy losses after opening in 1992 to hostile French media reports and an indifferent public.
Club Med traded up 20 percent to 427 francs, on volume of 956,611 shares at 1152 GMT, while the market was up 0.43 percent.
Bourguignon, who takes up the new post in March, has 14 years' experience at hotels group Accor and gained valuable experience from Euro Disney, Simonnet said. Bouguignon's job at the theme park was probably made easier by the fact that Walt Disney Co held 39 percent of Euro Disney.
Simonnet forecast a pretax pre-exceptional profit for Club Med in 1996-97 of 200 million francs and held his "buy" recommendation on the company. That forecast still represented a weak operating margin of 2.5 percent on annual turnover of eight billion francs.
Another French brokerage, Oddo, upgraded the stock to "overweight" from "underweight" and pointed out that Bourguignon had managed to triple gross operating profit at Euro Disney in three years and boosted sales by a fifth.
Oddo upgraded its forecast earnings per share for 1996-97 to 11.1 francs from a previous estimated 12.3 francs, and 22.7 francs for 1997/98 from 18.5.
Bourguignon steps in at an opportune time as Club Med has set aside 820 million francs in restructuring provisions to pay for the closure of seven holiday villages and 100 head office job losses.
The provisions will make it easier for Club Med to return to profit in 1997, analysts said.
It is simplifying its marketing by dropping the mid-range "Trident" product and offering only the Club Med at the upper end of the market and Club Aquarius at the lower segment.
It stands to make some money from the planned sale of a minority stake in an Italian business but will not get anything from disposing of its loss-making cruise liners.
The company still enjoys a strong brand and has a strong financial structure, with an acceptable debt/equity ratio of 60 percent. The expiry of a cross-shareholding pact means the company is open to outsider investors.
What remains to be seen is how the employees will react to the arrival of Bourguignon as a professional manager, in the place of Trigano, whose family founded the company and ran it as a family business even though it no longer owned Club Med. (1$ = 5.659 French Francs)
