French pharmaceuticals and beauty products firm Sanofi on Tuesday posted a 1996 net profit rise of 11 percent, helped by a return to profit in the beauty sector in the second half of the year.
The company announced net earnings for the full year 1996 of 1.74 billion francs ($308 million), compared to 1.58 billion a year ago, on sales of 23.65 billion, which were up three percent.
Earnings per share rose eight percent to 16.80.  Analysts had been expecting an average earnings per share figure of 17.3 francs, according to Edinburg Financial Publishing, and 17.1 francs according to Jacques Chahine Finance in Paris.
The year was "satisfactory", finance director Jean-Claude Leroy told a news conference.
It was marked by the continued high level of research efforts. That is right in line with our policy for the short term which is progressing nicely and preparation for the long term through research," he added.
Healthcare sales rose five percent but turnover in the beauty segment fell by the same percentage, he said.
The overall profit rise was helped by "major success in the clinical development of new products in the healthcare sector," the group said.
There had been very weak economic growth in Europe, with the exception of Britain, and that had resulted in increased competition, Sanofi said in a statement with its results.
In the beauty segment, selective distribution of luxury goods was hit by that sluggish consumption and sales for the sector fell five percent to 3.8 billion francs on a like-for-like basis from 1995. There were no new beauty product launches last year.
But the sector, after a 74 million loss in the first half, posted operating profit for the second half close to that of the year-ago period. In the full year operating profit was 236 million francs, against 331 million in 1995.
Yves Rocher posted growth in both sales and net earnings while Nina Ricci reported declines in sales and earnings due to difficulties in the industry, Sanofi said.
Leroy said sales of Yves Saint Laurent fell two percent to 2.8 billion francs, while Roger &amp; Gallet's turnover was under 300 million francs. Sales from Oscar de la Renta were above the 300 million level while Van Cleef &amp; Arpels was close to that.
In healthcare, pharmaceutical sales continued to grow in all geographic areas, except in the United States where there was competition from generic products. Diagnostics saw sales up four percent, hindered by difficult market conditions.
Healthcare operating profit rose 5.5 percent to 3.7 billion francs after taking in account higher research and development spending. Research accounted for 16 percent of group turnover.
The year was marked by relative stability of the French franc in comparison with other major world currencies, with the exception of the Japanese yen.
Net debt to equity ratio at the end of 1996 was 11 percent versus 13 percent a year ago. Cashflow rose 12 percent to 3.1 billion francs.
The group, 38-percent held by oil major Elf Aquitaine, had previously forecast a 10 percent rise in 1996 net profit. It gave no forecast for 1997 profit and the 1996 dividend would be set at the board meeting due on March 20.
($ = 5.646 French Francs)
