Sophie L'Helias, ex-Wall Street lawyer, shareholder lobbyist and columnist, has added author to her CV with the publication this month of a book on French corporate governance.
"The Return of the Shareholder", published by Gualino, is essentially a guide for anyone involved in corporate life or owns shares, and maps out French corporate governance and the British and U.S. models.
L'Helias, 33, has shaken up the sometimes cosy boardrooms of French firms with campaigns to boost shareholder value and hold boards accountable to small investors, notably through a proxy shareholder solicitation of Channel Tunnel operator Eurotunnel SA /Plc.
L'Helias, whose rapid-fire English and scathing American humour belie her French origins, has drawn on her international legal training and advocacy experience to analyse French corporate practice, which she concludes is in need of reform.
"The French model will inevitably undergo significant change in coming years as the current procedures which govern the workings and control of companies and the balance of power between the directors on the one hand and investors on the other, have shown themselves to be inappropriate," she writes in the opening chapter.
CONSTRUCTIVE CRITICISM OR SLANGING MATCH?
A glaring gap in the French landscape is a lack of an obligation for companies to issue a compliance statement, which serves as a benchmark to judge firms on their code of conduct.
That forces an adversarial role on shareholders who have to ask firms what their view of best practice is.
The corporate governance issue is not a fad but goes to the heart of the complex relationship between company managers and investors, and relates to the performance and expectations of each side, she argues.
"Constructive dialogue" is how L'Helias terms the future relations between directors and shareholders, rather than the "dialogue of the deaf" which characterises many of the thumbnail sketches she scatters throughout the book, such as Alcatel Alsthom, International Business Machines and British Gas Plc Plc.
The book comes at a time of great change as the French system of "managed capitalism" evolves to a new system of what could be called "shareholder capitalism".
The old regime reserved a special role for the government and saw firms run with an eye to serving the national interest and those of family owner-managers and employees, L'Helias says.
But with the rollback of the state through privatisations, the increasing presence of British and American investors, and the long-awaited arrival of private pension funds, French boards are having to adapt to new performance standards.
Company boards are being pushed to explain strategies, focus on objectives and increase shareholder returns, she adds.
HAVE LAW DEGREES, WILL LOBBY
L'Helias organised a ground-breaking proxy vote solicitation for a key Eurotunnel shareholders meeting in June 1996. With the backing of one of the Eurotunnel shareholders association and Investir magazine, she secured proxies for a blocking minority of 33 percent of the votes.
The aim was to ensure the small shareholders' voice was heard as the company negotiated with its bankers on a restructuring of its 70 billion franc ($12.2 billion) junior bank debt.
L'Helias also acted in 1995 for a New York-based fund, Elliott Associates, which was pushing for the board of a French investment fund, Cie d'Investissement de Paris (CIP), to narrow the discount on its shares relative to net asset value.
The following year, the investment bank SBC Warburg consulted L'Helias as it prepared an offer to buy out CIP from majority owner Banque Nationale de Paris (BNP).
BNP, which had launched a buy out for CIP, rejected the SBC Warburg offer, and completed it own buy-out.
L'Helias was educated at universities in Saarbruck, Germany, Paris' Sorbonne, Pennsylvania in the United States, and gained an MBA at the Insead European business school at Fontainebleau in France.
She was a lawyer in a Wall Street law firm in the 1980s buy-out boom and worked briefly in the London office of Merrill Lynch and opened her Franklin Global Investor Services (FGIS) consultancy in 1994.
"I am not a shareholder activist," she said. She plays an advocacy role, typically retained by a big shareholder who wants her to persuade companies to improve returns. The aim is not to humiliate managements but to use reason and argument. "Most of the time, the work is quiet and but sometimes it goes public -- like in Eurotunnel," she said.
L'Helias also writes a column on corporate governance in the separate French and Swiss Agefi financial newspapers. ($ = 5.718 French Francs)
