Labour unions at beleaguered French carmaker Renault SA called on Monday for a one-hour strike at all its factories in France, Belgium and Spain amid reports that the company will announce big job cuts.
Renault said chairman Louis Schweitzer would this week meet representatives of a Belgian assembly plant, closure of which has already been announced, but declined comment on reports that 3,000 jobs will also go in France this year.
The Belgian government and the northern Flanders region also said they would sue Renault over procedural issues after European Commissioner Karel Van Miert said the group had not followed European directive on consulting unions.
Eight unions from Belgium, France and Spain called the one-hour strike and said they planned to take legal steps to thwart the decision to close the Belgain Vilvoorde plant.
"(We call) for a one-hour strike at all Renault sites in Belgium, Spain and France on March 7 during the day of action in the entire Belgian car industry against the Vilvoorde closure," the unions' statement said.
A Renault spokeswoman said Schweitzer had agreed to meet staff this week at the Belgian plant, where 3,100 jobs will go, but the time and place had not been set.
On Thursday he will attend a works council meeting in Paris to face angry French workers who fear job cuts in on top of the Belgian closure.
The Renault spokeswoman had no comment on newspaper reports that it was preparing to announce a plan to cut about 3,000 jobs in France this year. But an industry source said somewhat fewer than 3,000 posts would go in 1997.
Renault's troubles were highlighted by statistics showing new car sales in France slid 24.6 percent last month after tumbling 33.6 percent in January.
The two-month drop reflected the market's weakness since a French state rebate programme, which had underpinned demand, ended in September.
Faced with declining demand and gross overcapacity, Renault is being forced to cut production but must do so without French government support.
With French unemployment at 12.7 percent and a general election due next year, the centre-right government of Prime Minister Alain Juppe has refused to back a plan to cut 40,000 jobs in the car industry over six years.
French radio and newspapers gave blanket coverage to the labour dispute, with Le Figaro newspaper quoting the economy minister for Belgium's Flemish region as saying the closure was "an act of economic terrorism".
Thousands of workers from Renault Belgium, supported by steelworkers, marched through Brussels to protest against the shutdown which is expected to save 825 million French francs ($144 million) a year. Belgian workers called for a Renault boycott.
But on the French stock market, brokers said the company had to reduce output and restructure. Renault stock was down 4.02 percent at 141 francs at 1243 GMT, but that was due to profit-taking as the shares have risen 20 percent since last Wednesday.
"The big problem in the auto sector is overcapacity, a problem which no-one has dared to touch for 20 years for obvious labour reasons," said a broker. "The fact that Renault is tackling it is a good sign."
Renault shed 1,641 jobs last year and 1,735 in 1995.
Newspapers said charges for the job-cutting plans, on top of an operating loss at the group estimated at two billion francs or more, would result in a full year loss of more than five billion francs for the group in 1996.
The car firm was privatised in stages in 1994 and 1996.
Renault has four assembly plants in France, two in Spain, one in Portugal and one in Slovenia. ($ = 5.718 French Francs)
