Labour unions at beleaguered French carmaker Renault SA said on Monday that they were calling for a one-hour strike at all Renault plants in France, Belgium and Spain.
This was in reaction to an announcement last week that of Renault's Vilvoorde plant near Brussels would close and reports that job will go in France, they said in a statement.
Earlier a Renault spokeswoman said chairman Louis Schweitzer had agreed to meet staff this week at the Belgian plant, where 3,100 jobs will go, but the time and place were not set.
Last Thursday's surprise announcement by the privatised car firm that it would close Vilvoorde stirred a political storm at home and abroad, and a denunciation from Belgian Prime Minister Jean-Luc Dehaene.
The Renault spokeswoman had no comment on newspaper reports that it was preparing to announce some 3,000 job cuts in France this year. But an industry source said somewhat fewer than 3,000 posts would go in 1997.
An official with the CGT union said Schweitzer was also expected to make a rare appearance at a staff works meeting in France on Thursday.
"Schweitzer has let it be known that he'll explain the situation the company finds itself in on Thursday at an extraordinary staff works council meeting," the official with the Communist-led CGT, Renault's biggest union, told Reuters.
Renault's troubles were highlighted by statistics showing new car sales in France slid 24.6 percent last month after tumbling 33.6 percent in January.
The two-month drop reflected the market's weakness since a French state rebate programme, which had underpinned demand, ended in September.
Faced with declining demand and gross overcapacity, Renault is being forced to cut production but must do so without French government support.
With French unemployment at 12.7 percent and a general election due next year, the centre-right government of Prime Minister Alain Juppe has refused to back a plan to cut 40,000 jobs in the car industry over six years.
French radio and newspapers gave blanket coverage to the labour dispute, with Le Figaro newspaper quoting the economy minister for Belgium's Flemish region as saying the closure was "an act of economic terrorism".
Thousands of workers from Renault Belgium, supported by steelworkers, marched through Brussels to protest against the shutdown which is expected to save 825 million French francs ($144 million) a year. Belgian workers called for a Renault boycott.
But on the French stock market, brokers said the company had to reduce output and restructure. Renault stock was down 4.02 percent at 141 francs at 1243 GMT, but that was due to profit-taking as the shares have risen 20 percent since last Wednesday.
"The big problem in the auto sector is overcapacity, a problem which no-one has dared to touch for 20 years for obvious labour reasons," said a broker. "The fact that Renault is tackling it is a good sign."
Renault shed 1,641 jobs last year and 1,735 in 1995.
Newspapers said charges for the job-cutting plans, on top of an operating loss at the group estimated at two billion francs or more, would result in a full year loss of more than five billion francs for the group in 1996.
The car firm was privatised in stages in 1994 and 1996.
Renault has four assembly plants in France, two in Spain, one in Portugal and one in Slovenia.
($ = 5.718 French Francs)
