French defence electronics firm Thomson-CSF, soon to be sold by the state, posted 1996 results on Wednesday showing a return to profit after three years of heavy losses.
Thomson-CSF reported a net attributable profit of 745 million francs ($129 million) compared with a net loss of 791 million for 1995. Sales were up 2.2 percent at 36.27 billion.
The return to the black was mainly due to the sale of Thomson-CSF's 19 percent stake in the troubled state-owned bank Credit Lyonnais.
"Thomson-CSF has been able to return to a profitable footing, as the bank no longer weighs on the accounts of the company, which is now completely centred on defence electronics," chairman Marcel Roulet told an analysts' meeting.
The state, after a bungled first attempt, is trying to privatise Thomson-CSF as part of a defence industry restructuring which may have an impact on the entire European sector.
Roulet said he expected the terms and conditions drawn up by the government on the privatisation would be published soon. "It is a question of a few days or a week." The Privatisation Commission has to vet the terms to allow the sale to go ahead.
French engineering and telecommunications giant Alcatel Alsthom has teamed up with fighter-aircraft maker Dassault Aviation and state-owned Aerospatiale to bid for Thomson-CSF.
Missiles-to-publishing group Lagardere is also bidding, supported by British Aerospace Plc (BAe).
Thomson-CSF said in a statement that operating profit rose 5.6 percent to 2.07 billion francs despite a reduction in military budgets and tougher markets. The improvement was due to better competitiveness following restructuring efforts pursued over a number of years.
The net result was dented by an exceptional charge of 824 million francs, compared with 753 million in the prior year, to cover restructuring costs tied to the shrinking of markets and cost-cutting measures, it said.
Pre-tax pre-exceptional profit rose 12 percent to 2.04 billion francs, reflecting the productivity gains and lower financial charges. Financial costs fell to 27 million francs from 135 million, due to lower interest rates and favourable currency movements.
Consolidated pretax profit was 1.30 billion francs, versus a loss of 437 million, which included a 101 million franc hit from its the sale of its holding in Credit Lyonnais.
The previous three years' losses at Thomson-CSF were essentially due to falls in the value of Credit Lyonnais shares, which were taken on Thomson-CSF's accounts to reflect its equity stake.
Europe, excluding France, contributed more than 10 billion francs in sales for the first time, compared with less than four billion in 1995. "The European market accounts for 28 percent of the consolidated turnover, against only 10 percent at the end of the 1980s," it said, adding this was due to its policy of external growth through acquisitions.
Its holding in profitable semiconductor maker SGS-Thomson contributed 588 million francs, up from 477 million in 1995. Net debt fell to 900 million from 2.3 billion.
With an order book worth more than 67 billion francs at the end of 1996, the firm should see an increase in turnover over last year on a like-for-like basis, it said.
Thomson-CSF stock closed up 1.55 percent at 196 francs, while the market was up 0.55 percent.
