The French government said on Tuesday it was ready to relaunch the privatisation of defence electronics firm Thomson-CSF and appointed key executives to oversee the sale.
"The government has just taken the decisions necessary for the privatisation of Thomson-CSF to enter the operational phase," the industry and finance ministries said in a joint statement.
An attempt to sell the whole Thomson electronics group last year floundered when the independent Privatisation Commission rejected the sale of parent company Thomson SA to the missiles-to-publishing conglomerate Lagardere Groupe for a symbolic one franc.
The government said on Tuesday it would make Marcel Roulet, formerly chairman of both Thomson SA and Thomson-CSF, responsible for the sale of the defence subsidiary on a full-time basis. He will now only be chairman of Thomson-CSF.
It also appointed Thierry Breton, formerly a deputy chairman of French computer maker Cie des Machines Bull, as chairman of Thomson SA and its wholly-owned consumer electronics unit, Thomson Multimedia (TMM).
Breton will be responsible for privatising TMM and will shortly make proposals on the sale, the statement said.
"First of all, it is the signal that the two things are really separate, with two different men who will exclusively work on Thomson-CSF and the handling of the privatisation of TMM," an industry ministry official said.
"The second signal is that, effectively, we are relaunching the TMM privatisation with a new head who will soon make proposals to the government on the procedure," he added.
The government will inject 11 billion francs ($1.9 billion) of fresh capital into TMM by the summer, following approval from the European Commission.
TMM, which makes television sets and video cassette recorders, will be sold gradually through an opening up of its capital, the statement said.
A source close the deal said the TMM sale would follow the lines of the past Bull privatisation -- a trade sale accompanied by a list of conditions, rather than a stock market flotation.
TMM would need sound finances to float on the bourse but is losing money and requires industrial partners who would take a medium-term view rather than stock market investors, who look to the short term, the source said.
An industry source said the boards of Thomson SA and Thomson-CSF met on Tuesday morning to discuss the terms and conditions of Thomson-CSF's privatisation.
A key objection by the Privatisation Commission to the government's first sale attempt was the planned sale by Lagardere of loss-making TMM to the South Korean Daewoo Electronics group, again for one symbolic franc.
Lagardere wanted to retain Thomson-CSF and merge its Matra Defense Espace unit with Thomson to create an integrated defence company with radar, satellite and missile interests.
The government has now decided to sell Thomson-CSF, 58 percent owned by Thomson SA, separately from TMM.
Detailed terms and conditions are expected to be announced shortly, opening the way for companies to make fresh bids for Thomson-CSF. Both Lagardere and Alcatel Alsthom have said they are interested.
TMM last week posted a 1996 net attributable loss of 3.1 billion francs, which included hefty provisions for factory closures and the expected loss of up to 10,000 jobs.
But it expects to break even at the operating level next year and be profitable from 1999 when U.S. patent revenues come on stream.
Thomson-CSF announced last week it returned to profit in 1996 after three years of losses, showing a net attributable profit of 745 million francs.
