The French government said Tuesday it was ready to relaunch the privatisation of defence electronics firm Thomson-CSF and appointed key executives to oversee the sale.
"The government has just taken the decisions necessary for the privatisation of Thomson-CSF to enter the operational phase," the industry and finance ministries said in a statement.
An attempt to sell the whole Thomson electronics group last year floundered when the independent Privatisation Commission rejected the sale of parent company Thomson SA to conglomerate Lagardere Groupe for a symbolic one franc.
The government said Tuesday it would make Marcel Roulet, formerly chairman of both Thomson SA and Thomson-CSF, responsible for the sale of the defence subsidiary on a full-time basis. He will now be chairman only of Thomson-CSF.
It also appointed Thierry Breton, formerly a deputy chairman of French computer maker Cie des Machines Bull, as chairman of state-owned Thomson SA and its wholly owned consumer electronics unit, Thomson Multimedia.
Breton will be responsible for privatising Thomson Multimedia and will shortly make proposals on the sale, the statement said. TMM, which makes television sets and video cassette recorders, will be sold gradually, the statement said.
The government will inject 11 billion francs ($1.9 billion) of fresh capital into TMM by the summer, following approval from the European Commission.
A key objection by the Privatisation Commission to the government's first privatisation attempt was a planned sale by Lagardere of money-losing TMM to the South Korean Daewoo Electronics group for one franc.
Lagardere wanted to retain Thomson-CSF and merge its Matra Defence Espace unit with Thomson to create an integrated defence company with radar, satellite and missile interests.
The government has now decided to sell Thomson-CSF, 58 percent owned by Thomson SA, separately from TMM.
Detailed terms and conditions are expected to be announced shortly, opening the way for companies to make fresh bids for Thomson-CSF. Both Lagardere and Alcatel Alsthom have said they are interested.
Thomson-CSF announced last week that it returned to profit in 1996 after three years of losses, showing a net profit of 745 million francs ($130 million).
