The French government set out on Wednesday the procedure for privatising defence electronics company Thomson-CSF, including minimum financial terms and conditions.
The terms and conditions mark the government's second attempt to sell Thomson-CSF through a private sale after a first effort failed last year when the state tried to sell it as part of the Thomson SA electronics group.
The successful bidder or group would become the majority owner by acquiring more than 50 percent of Thomson-CSF's capital and voting rights, the finance ministry said in a statement.
The government said on Tuesday it hoped to pick the winning bidder by June 30.
Firms bidding must have at least five billion francs ($868 million) in equity capital and the same amount in 1995 turnover in non-consumer and defence electronics, it said on Wednesday.
The government repeated it would hold a "golden share" which gives it an effective veto over changes in ownership to protect the state's strategic defence interests.
The statement said that in the case of a group bid, the lead company must plan to hold more than a third of Thomson-CSF's capital and voting rights.
Bidders must declare themselves by 1100 GMT on March 28. The finance ministry would tell the candidates whether they were eligible within five working days, the ministry said.
Offers must be delivered by 1100 GMT on May 7 and bidders must make an irrevocable offer to buy Thomson-CSF within four months of that date. In a group bid, the partners must set out planned individual holdings and the contractual relations that exist between the companies, the statement said.
Missiles-to-publishing conglomerate Lagardere indicated in a statement that it was likely to make a bid. But it said it would need information on French state-owned defence and aviation group Aerospatiale.
Thomson-CSF has a number of joint projects with Aerospatiale, which the government ruled out as a sole or joint bidder on Tuesday due to its state ownership.
Engineering group Alcatel Alsthom had allied itself with Aerospatiale and combat plane maker Dassault Aviation to bid for Thomson-CSF.
"Like all the candidates, we are ready to take into account the business electronics and defence activities of Aerospatiale in our industrial plan, with the sole concern, for us, of strengthening Thomson-CSF," Lagardere said.
This was consistent with Lagardere's approach to the Thomson-CSF sale and the spirit of dialogue that it wanted to develop between itself and Aerospatiale, it said.
Lagardere wanted to know how it would gain access to industrial and financial information on Aerospatiale which would be indispensable for a serious bidder, it added.
The Privatisation Commission thwarted the government's first attempt to sell Thomson SA last year to Lagardere, which in turn wanted to sell the loss-making Thomson Multimedia unit to Daewoo Electronics of South Korea for a symbolic one franc.
Thomson-CSF's capital consists of 119.5 million shares, of which 41.7 percent is in public hands. The rest is owned by Thomson SA and Sofivision, with the state holding one share. Thomson SA is state-controlled.
Some 6.65 million Thomson-CSF shares will be reserved for employees and former staff.
The privatisation is part of the state's aim to restructure the defence industry around a few "national champions" as a step towards wider European consolidation.
Lagardere said the exclusion of Aerospatiale showed a concern for equitable treatment and reduced Alcatel's industrial plans for Thomson to the "correct proportions".
Thomson-CSF makes radars, tactical missiles, radios and integrated complex systems as a defence contractor.
