The battle for Thomson-CSF heated up on Wednesday as the French government announced terms for its privatisation and rival companies made clear they would fight for control of the profitable defence electronics firm.
The sale, part of the state's restructuring of France's defence industry around a few "national champions" as a step towards wider European consolidation, has dragged on for months and provoked bitter public opposition, but the government and bidders forged ahead on Wednesday.
As expected, books-to-missiles conglomerate Lagardere made clear its intention to bid and engineering group Alcatel Alsthom said it planned a joint offer with combat plane maker Dassault Industries.
Both bidders said their offers would allow for far-reaching co-operation with state-owned aircraft and defence company Aerospatiale, a necessity since Aerospatiale and Thomson already co-operate on many projects.
"Like all the candidates, we are ready to take into account the business electronics and defence activities of Aerospatiale in our industrial plan, with the sole concern, for us, of strengthening Thomson-CSF," Lagardere said.
Alcatel and Dassault said they were pleased by the government's statement Aerospatiale was directly concerned by a defence sector restructuring resulting from Thomson-CSF's sale.
"This confirms the industrial logic elaborated by Alcatel and Dassault, whose plan develops the possibility of major cooperation between Aerospatiale and a privatised Thomson-CSF," the joint Alcatel-Dassault statement said.
On Tuesday, the government excluded Aerospatiale from the bidding because it is state-owned. It has previously said it planned to merge Dassault and Aerospatiale later this year.
The government's announcement of terms and conditions marks its second attempt to sell Thomson-CSF through a private sale after a first effort failed last year when the state tried to privatise it as part of the Thomson SA electronics group.
France's Privatisation Commission thwarted the government's first attempt to sell Thomson SA last year to Lagardere, which planned to hold onto Thomson-CSF and sell loss-making Thomson Multimedia unit to Daewoo Electronics of South Korea for a symbolic franc.
On Tuesday the government said the successful bidder would become the majority owner by acquiring more than 50 percent of Thomson-CSF's capital and voting rights.
In the case of a group bid, the lead company must plan to hold more than a third of Thomson-CSF's capital and voting rights, the Finance Ministry statement said.
The government hopes to pick the winning bid by June 30.
Firms bidding must have at least five billion francs ($868 million) in equity capital and the same amount in 1995 turnover in non-consumer and defence electronics, it said on Wednesday.
The government repeated it would hold a "golden share" which gives it an effective veto over changes in ownership to protect the state's strategic defence interests.
Bidders must declare themselves by 1100 GMT on March 28. The Finance Ministry would tell the candidates whether they were eligible within five working days, the ministry said.
Offers must be delivered by 1100 GMT on May 7 and bidders must make an irrevocable offer to buy Thomson-CSF within four months of that date. In a group bid, the partners must set out planned individual holdings and the contractual relations that exist between the companies, the statement said.
Thomson-CSF's capital consists of 119.5 million shares, of which 41.7 percent is in public hands. The rest is owned by Thomson SA and Sofivision, with the state holding one share. Thomson SA is state-controlled.
Some 6.65 million Thomson-CSF shares will be reserved for employees and former staff.
