Boeing Co. may expand into aerospace services and is on the lookout for foreign partners, Chairman and Chief Executive Phil Condit said Friday.
Seattle-based Boeing already has big ambitions and is awaiting regulatory approval from U.S. and European authorities for a merger with McDonnell Douglas Corp., which would create a firm with annual sales of $48 billion and 200,000 employees.
"I do have goals to increase Boeing's presence on a global basis ... so that we are more active in a lot of countries," Condit told reporters. "One of the areas that is very interesting is the broader ... service area."
Boeing's core activities would remain civil aircraft, defence and space, and any new business will build on its knowledge of its aerospace customers, he said.
Condit cited as an example its airline training joint venture with FlightSafety International, announced on March 10.
"That joint venture will have operations in a number of countries ... It also gives us a presence and a place to understand (customers') needs more directly," he said. "I think it is possible to continue those kind of things, looking at other service opportunities."
Condit said he met European Competition Commissioner Karel van Miert in Brussels earlier this week and reiterated that he expects approval of the MDD merger.
"I don't see any restrictions at this point," he said. "The overlap of the businesses is very little, so we're not faced with significant plant closures, we don't have products that overlap." he added, "There will be a lot of discussion, a lot of data, but in the end it will be approved."
Boeing expects the McDonnell merger to generate around $1 billion of savings, mainly by cutting head office staff, Condit said. The biggest task will be to get 200,000 people working togther efficiently, he added.
Condit played down anticompetitive fears expressed by European rival Airbus Industrie, especially in helicopters, saying they were in different markets. Boeing makes twin-rotor, heavy lift helicopters, while McDonnell Douglas makes light, commercial products, he said. With four U.S. helicopter makers, industry obervers have said there was room for consolidation, he added.
Condit denied it was in Boeing's interest to force its U.S. suppliers to stay away from partnering Airbus on its A3XX large plane project, as alleged by Airbus partner Daimler-Benz Aerospace .
Boeing wants its subcontractors to "have a broader business base, to spread overhead costs and deliver more economical products," he said. It also wants to expand collaboration with foreign companies, such as British Aerospace Plc.
Condit said there are no conflicts for BAe, which is an Airbus partner, in working with Boeing.
