European aircraft consortium Airbus Industrie on Friday attacked as "anti-competitive" a deal under which the U.S. airline Delta will buy new aircraft exclusively from its archrival Boeing for the next quarter century.
Delta Air Lines Inc said on Thursday it had named Boeing Co as its sole aircraft supplier for the next 25 years, as it announced a $6.7 billion order for 106 Boeing aircraft. Options would bring the total to 644 aircraft.
The Delta deal, potentially worth more than $15 billion, follows a similar "exclusive" deal between Boeing and AMR Corp's American Airlines.
"We are not afraid of competition, we can sell our planes on their own merits," said an Airbus spokeswoman. She said Boeing was trying to buy out the competition with exclusive deals which lock an airline into a long-term commitment.
"It's destroying competition" in the long term, she said.
Such deals could be bad for airlines and passengers if Boeing, which is already in a dominant position globally, forced out Airbus and gave the U.S. manufacturer room to raise prices, she said.
"If Airbus is forced out of the market, prices would go up, which is not in the interests of the public."
Asked if Airbus was planning an anti-trust action on the Delta deal, she said: "If we were asked by any of the official instances (authorities), we will of course be ready to talk to them."
Boeing, which has around 60 percent of the world civil aircraft market, is merging with McDonnell Douglas which has around 10 percent. The merged group would have annual sales of $48 billion.
That merger plan is being investigated by the European Commission
Delta's deal with Boeing will allow it to streamline its fleet, reduce maintenance and training costs and retire older planes to lower operating costs.
American Airlines said last November it would buy planes solely from Boeing to 2018. It ordered 103 jets and took options on more than 500 in a deal that could be worth well over $30 billion.
Airbus, which ad 1996 sales of $8.8 billion, is a consortium of four European companies that are in talks to convert it from a partnership into a limited liability company by 1999.
The four partners are French state-owned Ste Nationale Industrielle Aerospatiale, British Aerospace Plc, Daimler-Benz Aerospace, a unit of Daimler-Benz AG and Construcciones Aeronauticas SA (CASA) of Spain.
