Even before Cie de Suez head Gerard Mestrallet has confirmed he is considering a merger with utilities group Lyonnaise des Eaux, the market is already betting that will run the new group.
Brokers, fed by newspaper reports and market rumours, are convinced financial conglomerate Suez and Lyonnaise will merge to create a utilities group with an estimated market capitalisation of 79 billion francs ($13.9 billion) that will give new life to both companies.
A decision on who would head a merged group could play a key role in determining which company gains the upper hand in running the combined entity.
Two elements argue for the merger. Suez, after selling key assets to make good property losses, has a big cash hoard and 50 billion francs in capital -- but little industrial identity.
And at Lyonnaise, chairman Jerome Monod, 66, is preparing his retirement. A merger would not only financially strengthen the company but give fresh leadership.
Odds are heavily in favour of Mestrallet who took over Suez two years ago after a boardroom battle ousted then chairman Gerard Worms. Mestrallet was brought in from Suez's Belgian unit Societe Generale de Belgique (SGB).
"He's the favourite," said an analyst, who declined to be named. "He has done an impressive job."
"Mestrallet has shown his worth," an investment banker said.
He sold key assets including investment bank Banque Indosuez and is credited for bringing Suez back to profit.
The company made a 1995 net attributable loss of 3.96 billion francs, due to provisions for property losses, but analysts expect it to report a 1996 net profit of about 1.15 billion francs.
Mestrallet has narrowed Suez's focus to utilities, held through its Tractebel subsidiary owned by SGB. But the company has been left with an "identity problem".
Suez had become a "piggy bank," stuffed with cash and equity capital, while Lyonnaise needs funds to finance its expansion.
Mestrallet, 47, son of a shopkeeper, graduated from the elite Ecole Polytechnique and the Ecole Nationale d'Administration (ENA) and worked as chief of staff to Jacques Delors at the French Finance Ministry before his boss became president of the European Commission.
His rival for power is Guy de Panafieu, the number two to Monod at Lyonnaise.
De Panafieu, 53, is also a graduate of ENA, the fast-track school for senior posts in government and industry. He managed the integration of the troubled Dumez construction firm since its 1990 acquisition by Lyonnaise.
But de Panafieu, although seen as having handled Dumez well, is too closely identified with Monod, the analyst said.
"I do not really see it. He is in Monod's shadow and it is not in the spirit of the times to continue the same line."
In buying Dumez, Lyonnaise inherited foreign contracts which cost hundreds of millions in provisions as disputes grew. Lyonnaise, already struggling with property losses, had to sell assets to fund provisions for those contract disputes.
"The company has lost time and has sold everything. It does not have a lot of asset support", said the analyst.
One outside contender is Christine Morin-Postel, who heads Suez's Credisuez unit, and who negotiated the sale of four billion francs of property loans to the Whitehall Street "vulture fund" led by broker Goldman Sachs.
The sale, among the biggest in French real estate disposals, is seen as the key to bringing Suez back into profit.
Morin-Postel, 50, also knows Lyonnaise well, having held the international development post and a directorship in the GTM Entrepose construction subsidiary. Last July, British leisure group Rank Organisation Plc made Morin-Postel a non-executive director. ($ = 5.689 French Francs)
