French missiles-to-publishing conglomerate Lagardere confirmed on Thursday it will make an offer in the privatisation of defence electronics firm Thomson-CSF when the deadline falls due.
A Lagardere spokesman said the company would make its intentions known on Friday, but he gave no details.
The French government set March 28 as the deadline for intentions to bid for its 58 percent stake in Thomson-CSF, with firm and final offers due by May 7 and a decision by June 30.
Engineering giant Alcatel Alsthom has said it is making a joint bid with privately-owned Dassault Industries, which would bring in radar maker Dassault Electronique and in the wake of a successful bid, would cooperate with state-owned Aerospatiale.
Thomson-CSF makes missiles, radars, aircraft avionics, training simulators and telecomunications systems. It made 1996 net attributable profit of 745 million francs ($131.4 million) on sales of 36.27 billion francs.
Analysts view the Thomson-CSF sale as a key step in rationalising the fragmented French industry, which is needed to prepare a consolidation in Europe. The task is made all the more urgent as U.S. firms merge rapidly to form defence and civilian groupings which dwarf their foreign rivals.
France currently has three missile firms - Lagardere's Matra, Aerospatiale and Thomson-CSF, three satellite poles - Alcatel, Aerospatiale and Matra, two military communications players - Thomson-CSF and Alcatel, and two radar makers - Thomson-CSF and Dassault Electronique.
Thus the government, in its sale terms and conditions, called for the biggest possible industrial grouping around Thomson-CSF, to cut out duplication in scarce research and development funds and boost the economies of scale.
The terms did not set any nationality restrictions for bidding, which sparked speculation British electronics giant GEC Plc could throw its hat in the ring or line up behind Alcatel, to gain an entry into Thomson-CSF.
Alcatel chairman Serge Tchuruk has said he hoped to agree defence deals with GEC and Daimler-Benz Aerospace AG (Dasa) of Germany if he won the prize.
Meanwhile, British Aerospace Plc has said it is "standing by to provide assistance" to a bid from Lagardere, with which it has the Matra BAe Dynamics missiles joint venture.
For the Dassault family, joining Alcatel for the Thomson-CSF bid means a chance to keeping control of its Rafale combat jet, a 25-year, multi-billion franc acquisition for the French air force and navy. Potential export sales add further allure.
A banker close to the deal said since electronics make up maybe a third of the value of a modern jet, a win by Lagardere of Thomson-CSF could give it a majority of value in the Rafale once its Matra missile systems are added. That would give it a potential claim to be the prime contractor, ousting Dassault, and boosting its margins. ($ = 5.668 French Francs)
