Air France, wracked by labour strife on Easter weekend at its domestic unit and facing increased competition in regional markets, held on Friday to its aim of breaking even in 1997 and being privatised quickly.
The company will officially lose its national monopoly from April 1, when domestic air travel in the European Union is opened up to competition from European carriers.
Jean-Claude Baumgarten, special adviser to Air France chairman Christian Blanc, speaking in a telephone interview from Osaka, Japan, said "Yes" when asked if the group was on track for break-even and a share sale in late 1997 or early 1998.
The group is maintaining its estimate of a 200-million franc loss for 1996/97 at the Air France international airline while losses at the Air France Europe domestic wing should be less than a forecast 800 million, he said.
Those results should allow the group to be sold later this year or early in 1998, he said. But first, Blanc must push through a merger between Air France and Air France Europe.
The merger move sparked a surprise strike on Friday by Air France Europe ground staff, who are protesting against their pay and conditions being brought in line with those of Air France employees when the merger goes ahead in September.
Similar pay concerns lie behind a two-day strike starting on Easter Monday, called by Air France Europe flight crew.
Junior Transport Minister Anne-Marie Idrac sounded a cautious note in an interview in Friday's edition of the French newspaper Le Monde.
"The privatisation of Air France is written in the 1993 law...But the merger between Air France and Air France Europe has to be completed before launching the privatisation," she said.
"The market has to be ready to absorb Air France shares ...the company's accounts need to inspire confidence. The question is whether six months will be enough. It is in the light of this recovery that we will set the final calendar," she said.
Baumgarten said Air France Europe, formerly Air Inter, should be close to break-even in 1997/98 and that last year's launch of low-price "Le Shuttle" services between Paris and Toulouse, Marseilles and Nice was paying off.
The Shuttle is a key part of Air France's hold on the domestic market, which together with European traffic, contributes 42 percent to group sales. It is this market which is under attack from European carriers such as British Airways Plc (BA) through its French TAT European Airlines unit.
France is the biggest domestic market in Europe, he said.
Last year saw a savage price war, with ticket discounts of 20 percent, which bled privately held Air Liberte into bankrupcty and acquisition by BA and merger with TAT. French airline AOM was also engaged in the domestic competition.
The Shuttle "is at least breaking even," Baumgarten said. It has helped Air France Europe regain market share lost to high-speed TGV intercity trains and rival airlines, and has stabilised yields - as measured in revenue per passenger per kilometre transported - at minus one percent compared to minus 20 percent. The load factor - the number of passengers carried - was also climbing.
Baumgarten said the three-city service showed France was ready for a shuttle product, which could be rolled out to other French cities and feed the Paris Charles de Gaulle airport.
"The name of the game is extending the network," he said. But because the big carriers such as Air France, BA, KLM and Lufthansa have invested heavily in building up their hubs, they will draw on small regional airlines to add the domestic spokes to feed the hub.
Leasing, chartering, code-sharing and franchises with low-cost companies equipped with small planes are the tools to building up that network, he said. Air France currently has relationships with Britair and Eurowings for European coverage.
With more feeder routes, Air France can boost long-haul traffic through the Paris hub, also benefiting its U.S. partners Delta and Continental and Japanese ally Japan Airlines (JAL), he said.
