The board of utilities group Lyonnaise des Eaux, involved in merger talks with holding company Cie de Suez, was due to meet on Wednesday afternoon to approve the 1996 accounts, a company spokeswoman said.
Suez and Lyonnaise are negotiating a merger which could put assets of the cash-rich holding company at the disposal of the utilities company with global ambitions.
Lyonnaise will publish its results on Thursday morning, which analysts expect to show net attributable profit of between 1.0 and 1.5 billion francs, after a 1995 profit of 906 million.
But more importantly, the market is hungry for details of the merger, specifically the financial terms and the industrial strategy, analysts said.
The boards have to address scepticism over whether there really is an industrial sense to the merger, or whether the deal is no more than a glorified capital increase for Lyonnaise through Suez, which owns a 16.8 percent stake in Lyonnaise.
Some of the potential industrial integration may have been curtailed with undertakings that Suez's indirectly-held services subsidiary Tractebel will be kept independent in Belgium.
And if this is to be a pure financial injection, a payment of a Suez special dividend to shareholders before any merger may erode that benefit.
"This is a major transaction. The objectives have to be clear," said an analyst. "There has to be a clear strategy, there must be an industrial logic behind this link-up," he added.
So far the market has fed on rumours and speculation on a share swap of two Suez shares for every one Lyonnaise. Some analysts believe the merger makes sense in general terms, but want to know what the combined group would look like in detail.
"Does one plus one make one-and-a-half or two?" asked the analyst. "Vague talk of synergies is not enough."
Another analyst wanted to know how the operating units will be brought together, what subsidiaries will be sold and how the proceeds will be used to develop the group.
Lyonnaise has activities in water distribution, waste treatment, energy production, construction and communications.
Suez has sold its Banque Indosuez investment bank and property assets to focus on providing services to local authorities, mainly held in its Tractebel unit.
The two groups have performed weakly throughout the nineties and have lacked a strategy, said the second analyst. The new combined company must show it has a direction and can provide a return to shareholders.
Investors in Suez stock have effectively lost a third of their money if they bought shares in 1987 when the company was privatised at 317 francs per share, he said.
Lyonnaise, saddled by a 1990 purchase of the Dumez construction group and property losses, has shown a poor return on equity of five or six percent, a rate bettered by an investment in bonds, he added.
Suez stock was up 0.35 percent at 286.90 francs at 1100 GMT, while Lyonnaise was down 1.26 percent at 547 francs.
Some of the questions being asked are, what will Suez do with units unrelated to services, like its Sofinco consumer credit house? Will Lyonnaise keep its loss-making construction firm GTM-Entrepose ?.
How fast will Suez pursue its disposal plan for financial assets and how will the cash be invested?
Suez said on Tuesday it would pay an unspecified special dividend in June to reflect capital gains on the sale investment bank Banque Indosuez.
A big Suez shareholder, the Saint-Gobain glass-making company, called on Tuesday for a 10 percent payment on Suez's financial assets estimated at a total 34 billion francs. Total Suez assets are estimated at 50 billion, including Tractebel.
Suez said on Tuesday that its board was unanimously in favour of a merger with Lyonnaise. Both the Lyonnaise and Suez boards will have special meetings on April 11 to dicuss the terms of the merger.
