Eurotunnel, operator of the Channel Tunnel, admitted on Thursday it took too long to get people off a blazing train last November but insisted that the fire was not its fault.
"Our service was safe in that we got everybody out of that train without serious injury in an extremely serious fire," Eurotunnel co-chairman Robert Malpas said.
"It took too long. They were in that club car too long," Malpas told a news conference at the French end of the tunnel.
Thirty-four people were slightly injured in the November 18 blaze, in which a train carrying a truck in flames tried to drive out of the tunnel quickly but broke down before it could.
The injuries occurred when smoke from the burning truck filled the tunnel and seeped into the club car where the truck drivers and other passengers were travelling.
Eurotunnel officials were criticised for delays in evacuating the passengers into a central service tunnel which runs between the two rail tunnels.
At Thursday's news conference, Eurotunnel officials unveiled a package of new safety measures and procedures which reversed a key element of its previous safety policy.
Under the new procedures, in the event of an emergency, passengers will be taken immediately off the train and into the nearest of 600 emergency cross-tunnel passages leading to the service tunnel.
"The most important policy change is that it (a train) will no longer drive through. The instruction will be to stop and get people out straightaway, whereas before it was to drive through -- and if it had to stop, to uncouple the club car," Malpas said.
French judicial authorities are still investigating the exact cause of the fire, which broke out on a truck-carrying shuttle train and severely hit Eurotunnel's passenger and freight services between Britain and France.
No lives were lost in the blaze.
Procedural changes would include more systematic checks on trucks at the time of loading, better surveillance of departing shuttles and more direct contact with the railway control centre, Eurotunnel said.
It also planned to install additional fire suppression systems in the rail tunnels by 1999.
Eurotunnel said it expected to re-open heavy goods vehicles (HGV) shuttle services before the middle of June and complete repairs on the south tunnel by mid-May.
"The changes we have announced today will make the system even safer and give us the confidence to re-open our HGV shuttle services," co-chairmen Malpas and Patrick Ponsolle said in a statement.
Eurotunnel said traffic carried in March by the Le Shuttle tourist service dipped to 153,796 vehicles, including coaches, from some 158,494 a year earlier, though there were only two departures an hour compared to the normal four departures an hour before the fire.
"These figures are close to those for March 1996, so are very satisfactory, particularly taking into account the fact that our capacity has been reduced by half due to the repair works currently being carried out in the tunnel," it said.
While Le Shuttle results fell, traffic on the high-speed Eurostar passenger train service shot up to 500,899 passengers in March from 389,069 in the year-ago period.
The amount of rail freight transported also rose, increasing to 230,753 tonnes from 207,417 in March 1996.
