France said on Friday it would not allow Britain's General Electric Co Plc (GEC) to bid for the state's stake in defence electronics group Thomson-CSF for national security reasons.
GEC said it regretted the rejection but indicated it had not given up, saying it was talking to two French groups which are allowed to bid -- missiles-to-publishing group Lagardere Groupe and Alcatel Alsthom, an electronics and engineering company.
The Finance Ministry said it had received offers for the 58 percent stake from Lagardere and Alcatel, which is bidding with defence company Dassault Industrie.
"The government has declared as admissable the proposals by Lagardere Groupe and the one by Alcatel Alsthom and Dassault Industrie," the Ministry said in a statement.
"However, because the sale to a foreign company of more than 50 percent of the share capital of Thomson-CSF goes against the interests of national security, the proposal by GEC has not been admitted," it added.
Industry Minister Franck Borotra told French television that GEC could still play a role in the Thonson-CSF privatisation if it found common ground with either of the French bidders.
"GEC, which believes it can play an important role in this restructuring, has to approach the two candidates which have been admitted to see what kind of agreement, what kind of negotiations can take place about the place they can have in the restructuring of the European defence industry around Thomson-CSF," Borotra told LCI television in an interview.
London analysts say it was never likely GEC would be allowed to win the tender over French companies. But they say it might yet gain a stake by teaming up with a French partner.
GEC said it had bid for Thomson because it believed it could be brought together with GEC-Marconi to create a world leader in defence electronics and enable Europe to compete better with U.S. companies.
"The fragmented structure of the European defence electronics industry will not sustain a strong competitive position in world markets in the next century," it said.
"This can be achieved only through an integrated electronics defence capability efficient in its operations and effective in the deployment of its resources," GEC said.
In Paris, the ministry said the government had encouraged the accepted candidates to set out their plans for French and European industrial partnerships when they submitted final offers for Thomson-CSF.
Firm offers are due by May 7 and the government hopes to make a decision by the end of June.
Last year, Lagardere and its South Korean ally Daewoo Electronics won the bidding for Thomson-CSF's then parent, Thomson SA, beating Alcatel.
Thomson SA held the state stake in Thomson-CSF and all of consumer electronics group Thomson Multimedia (TMM).
But the government suspended the deal in December after the independent Privatisation Commission objected to the terms of TMM's sale to Daewoo.
