France said on Friday it would not allow Britain's General Electric Co Plc (GEC) to bid for the state's stake in defence electronics group Thomson-CSF for national security reasons.
But GEC indicated that it had not given up, saying it was talking to two French companies which will be allowed to bid -- electronics-to-publishing group Lagardere Groupe and Alcatel Alsthom, an electronics and engineering company.
The Finance Ministry said it had received offers for the 58 percent stake from Lagardere and Alcatel Alsthom, which is bidding with defence company Dassault Industrie.
"The government has declared as admissable the proposals by Lagardere Groupe and the one by Alcatel Alsthom and Dassault Industrie," the Ministry said in a statement.
"However, because the sale to a foreign company of more than 50 percent of the share capital of Thomson-CSF goes against the interests of national security, the proposal by GEC has not been admitted," it added.
GEC said it regretted the rejection but said it was in talks with both Lagardere and Alcatel.
London analysts say it was never likely GEC would be allowed to win the tender over French companies. But they say it might yet gain a stake by teaming up with a French partner.
In London, GEC said in a statement that the French government had encouraged it to open talks with Lagardere and Alsthom. It gave no further details.
GEC said it had bid for Thomson because it believed it could be brought together with GEC-Marconi to create a world leader in defence electronics and enable Europe to compete better with U.S. companies.
"The fragmented structure of the European defence electronics industry will not sustain a strong competitive position in world markets in the next century," it said.
"This can be achieved only through an integrated electronics defence capability efficient in its operations and effective in the deployment of its resources," GEC said.
In Paris, the ministry said the government had encouraged the accepted candidates to set out their plans for French and European industrial partnerships when they submitted final offers for Thomson-CSF.
Firm offers are due by May 7 and the government hopes to make a decision by the end of June.
One defence consultant in Paris said that GEC's bid had been a bold move to "flush out" France's strategy in its defence restructuring.
GEC and other British firms wanted to know whether e France was ready for a transnational restructuring, which would build European groups strong enough to compete with U.S. giants such as Lockheed Martin and merger partners Boeing and McDonnell Douglas.
That integrated model could include the Airbus Industrie civil aircraft consortium, which groups France's Aerospatiale, British Aerospace Plc, Daimler-Benz Aerospace AG (Dasa) and Casa of Spain.
The alternative was more modest collaboration with joint ventures. "It's about control," said the consultant, who requested anonymity. GEC's move had been a test of whether the French were willing to give up their 51 percent majority in defence companies.
The answer came back loud and clear on Friday: no.
An investment banker close to the Thomson-CSF sale said GEC was in a strong position as it had ties to both Lagardere and Alcatel. It could, for example, negotiate a big slice of Thomson-CSF after the company was sold to one of the French companies.
Last year, Lagardere and its South Korean ally Daewoo Electronics won the bidding for Thomson-CSF's then parent, Thomson SA , beating Alcatel.
Thomson SA controls consumer electronics group Thomson Multimedia (TMM).
But the government suspended the deal in December after the independent Privatisation Commission objected to the terms of TMM's sale to Daewoo.
