France's second rebuff in a week to British group General Electric Co Plc (GEC) -- this time over nuclear merger talks -- underscores its concerns over controlling strategic industries, analysts say.
State-controlled nuclear engineering firm Framatome said on Monday its main shareholders had told it that a mooted merger between Framatome and Anglo-French joint venture GEC Alsthom was unlikely.
GEC, an engineering and electronics company, had wanted 50 percent of the new group but that this was contrary to the French government's wishes, it said.
Framatome's statement follows Friday's refusal by the French government to allow GEC to bid in the privatisation of defence electronics firm Thomson-CSF -- again because the state was not prepared to sell a half share to a foreign firm.
"It's about control," said one restructuring specialist who declined to be identified.
Concerns over industrial leadership are a common thread in the French government's thinking, while British managers are seeking to improve shareholder returns, analysts said.
Majority ownership of at least 51 percent is the least the French government seems willing to contemplate in strategic sectors, analysts said. But even where ownership is split 50-50 -- as in the GEC Alsthom engineering group -- the French still effectively held control, the restructuring expert said.
"Strategically the U.K. companies, on behalf of their shareholders, are saying 'We can't justfify any more 49s or 50/50s that don't have some element of operational control, because we don't think shareholder returns are actually maximised in that way," he said.
GEC Alsthom is jointly owned by GEC and Alcatel Alsthom. It makes power generating plants and France's high-speed TGV trains, and had been in talks to merge with Framatome. Alcatel owns 44 percent of Framatome directly.
France, whose first attempt to privatise the Thomson parent company collapsed last year when a South Korean company's involvement failed to get past the privatisation watchdog, raised the issue of foreign ownership again on Friday when it rejected a bid by GEC.
French Finance Minister Jean Arthuis insisted on Saturday that Paris was open to foreign firms taking part in French bids for the state's 58 percent in Thomson-CSF. "The government is ready to examine offers which include partnerships," he said.
He indicated that a foreign partnership would help France's ambition to create a big European defence company strong enough to rival the U.S. titans.
But analysts say France, while wanting a European defence restructuring, is determined to stay in the pilot's seat.
The government says Alcatel and missiles-to-publishing firm Lagardere are eligible to bid for Thomson-CSF and is encouraging GEC to talk to them as they prepare final offers.
An investment banker close to the Thomson-CSF sale said the British business approach was essentially pragmatic and driven by bottom-line considerations.
It was not inconceivable, given weak margins and the strength of GEC Alsthom's competitors, that GEC could one day sell its share in the joint venture to Alcatel, the banker said.
GEC Alsthom competes with the likes of U.S. General Electric Co, the Swiss-Swedish Asea Brown Boveri joint venture and Siemens AG of Germany.
