Air France announced on Monday the start of a transatlantic alliance with two major U.S. carriers, Delta Air Lines and Continental, as part of a strategy to form global links vital to the French state-owned carrier's future.
Delta and Continental  unveiled registration facilities at Air France's central hub at Paris Charles de Gaulle airport, marking the official transfer of flights and operations from Paris Orly airport.
The alliances were announced last October.
Under the move, Air France's global hub at Charles de Gaulle is now linked to five major U.S. hubs -- New York's JFK airport, Atlanta and Cincinnati belonging to Delta and New York-Newark and Houston belonging to Continental.
"Through our partnership with Air France, we see a very good opportunity to flow traffic over the Delta hubs in the U.S. to Paris and beyond (the) Air France CDG hub," Bob Coggins, Delta's executive vice president for marketing told reporters.
Besides the move from Orly to the more modern and spacious facilities at Charles de Gaulle, the alliances allow the U.S. and French firms to share Frequent Flyer programmes and share revenues on feeder and transatlantic flights.
The main benefit will come when Air France links its schedules with Delta and Continental through a formal code-sharing programme, Barry Simon, Continental's senior vice president international said.
Code-sharing allows one airline to issue a through ticket using a connecting flight on its partner's network. Such deals can significantly increase traffic at low cost.
But Air France cannot sign up a code-sharing pact until the French and U.S. governments agree a bilateral air treaty. The U.S. authorities seek substantial liberalisation, including the right to fly from a domestic city to France and onward to a destination in a third country.
"We took into account what we could do, and we did it," Air France deputy managing director Christian Kozar said. "Thanks to Air France, Charles de Gaulle will be - and already is - the world's entry point for Europe. If the Americans choose Charles de Gaulle, it is for the long term."
Air France Aviation, a staff newspaper, said the airline hopes to agree as many Delta and Continental code-shares as possible by the end of 1997.
Continental's Simon said he was not aware of the details of the intergovernmental talks but said, "I see no reason why it can't be done."
The U.S. partnerships and Air France's new summer schedule are expected to increase Air France's traffic this year by 20 percent, equally split between the two factors, Kozar said. That will follow a 20 percent increase in the first year of hub operations in 1996, he added.
The alliances should add $100 million to Air France's annual revenues, Yves Abbas, Air France hub coordinator said.
Delta is particularly looking to develop business using Air France's network in the Middle East and Africa, said Coggins. Eventually, it hopes to increase the frequency of flights to Paris, he said.
More than three million passengers travel between the United States and France every year.
Both U.S. airlines said they were confident Air France could overcome its labour problems encountered in its merger with Air France Europe, adding that U.S. companies faced disputes when the U.S. system was deregulated in the 1980s.
