France's restructuring of its defence sector and the key role of state-owned Aerospatiale in that process are complicating the change in the European Airbus consortium into a limited liability company, analysts said.
The four national firms in Airbus Industrie are studying the best way to convert the partnership into a faster, more efficient company, better to compete with U.S. rival Boeing Co, which is merging with McDonnell Douglas.
Aerospatiale is not only the French partner in the Airbus passenger plane venture but is also involved in the two deals at the heart of France's defence industry consolidation -- the merger of Aerospatiale and combat plane maker Dassault Aviation and the privatisation of electronics firm Thomson-CSF .
"It is consistent with French strategic thinking that you must first get your house in order, then negotiate from a position of strength," said an industry executive.
"Aerospatiale cannot do this today in the Airbus system. It has to have weight behind it. It will have that weight when the Dassault merger is complete," he added. DASSAULT MERGER WILL BOOST AEROSPATIALE
The Dassault merger, due to be agreed this year, will add 13 billion francs of annual turnover to Aerospatiale, creating a group with combined sales of 64 billion and giving Aerospatiale greater clout at the Airbus negotiating table.
A banker close to the Airbus talks said Aerospatiale is seen as the weakest among the senior Airbus partners -- British Aerospace (BAe) and Daimler-Benz Aerospace (Dasa). Casa of Spain makes up the fourth Airbus partner.
But Aerospatiale will get an injection of aggressive, private-sector management with the Dassault merger.
Aerospatiale executives complain bitterly that the foreign media does not give them due credit for their industrial restructuring. Their efforts turned the company round to post a 1996 net attributable profit of 812 million francs, after years of losses, and racked up sales of 51 billion francs.
Their exasperation is palpable when they say their public sector tag is seen as a weakness when compared to the private sector BAe and Dasa.
But analysts point out that Aerospatiale was slower in attacking its cost structure and still needs to improve.
BAe underwent drastic pruning in the early 1990s, going from an empire with property, cars and military interests to a group focused on defence and aerospace. It posted 1996 pretax profits of 425 million pounds, on sales of 7.44 billion pounds.
Dasa, although loss-making, has the industrial and financial strength of parent Daimler-Benz AG which has set a management target of a 12 percent return on capital. Dasa posted 1996 turnover of 13 billion marks, making it smaller than BAe and Aerospatiale, but it has huge ambitions for Airbus.
A business consultant said Aerospatiale has excellent programmes, but, using benchmarking techniques, its military projects are 30 percent more costly than those of BAe and Dasa. THOMSON-CSF SALE ENHANCES PROSPECTS
Apart from the Dassault merger, Aerospatiale also holds a key hand in the Thomson-CSF sell-off.
The government has said bidders Alcatel Alsthom and Lagardere will have to take into account Aerospatiale's interests when putting together their offers for Thomson-CSF.
Even though Aerospatiale, as a state-controlled company, cannot take part direcly in the privatisation, it will be affected by the outcome and chairman Yves Michot will give his views to the government on the rival bids.
French newspapers have reported that Michot will have to observe strict neutrality in the contest. But it is clear Alcatel's plans would significantly strengthen Aerospatiale, giving it still greater weight against BAe and Dasa.
If Alcatel won Thomson-CSF, it would create a missiles joint venture between Thomson-CSF and Aerospatiale, and a satellite venture between Alcatel Espace, Aerospatiale and Thomson-CSF.
Lagardere has said it wants a dialogue with Aerospatiale to prepare its bid. Relations between the two firms have been strained as they compete in missiles and satellites.
"The perimeter of Aerospatiale is not yet defined," said the industry executive.
The government plans to decide on the Thomson-CSF bids by June 30. AEROSPATIALE NEEDS AIRBUS, WILL MAKE IT WORK
Aerospatiale only stands to gain from the defence moves and is in no hurry to bow to pressures from BAe and Dasa to rush into an Airbus agreement which does not suit its own interests.
Airbus is vitally important for Aerospatiale. Its 38 percent stake in Airbus contributed the biggest slice of 1996 operating profit, 1.175 billion francs, and around 70 percent of sales.
Analysts believe of the big Airbus three, Aerospatiale needs Airbus the most, and BAe and Dasa could, in extremis, walk away if relations broke down irreparably.
BAe has a 20 percent Airbus stake and has bigger military interests, while Dasa's parent Daimler-Benz gets most of its money from the auto business, through Mercedes trucks and cars.
Aerospatiale has, paradoxically, maximalist and minimalist aims for the new Airbus company.
For the near term, Michot takes a cautious approach in the status change, arguing that the present system has proven its worth, winning Airbus a third of the world market, coming out of nowhere in 25 years. A much bigger manufacturing concern would overstretch the management.
In the long term however, Michot would like Airbus to have a military wing, to balance out economic cycles with government contracts. U.S. giant Lockheed Martin has both civil and defence sides, and Boeing will acquire McDonnell's significant military interests in the pending merger.
The Airbus partners said in January they agreed in principle on the change to a single integrated company, in which the new Airbus would own its factories and design offices. Work is going on this year on valuing the assets to be vested in the new firm.
That valuation is complicated as some of the factories mix civil and military programmes, and some plants are efficient while others are uncompetitive. In BAe's case this is made easy as it has a plant for making Airbus wings, and Dasa has a special production line near Hamburg for the Airbus 320 family.
One way of viewing the Airbus negotiations is through the prism of conflicting cultural visions.
"This country (France) has a vision of long-term industrial strategy. It wants to be a world power and be a dominant player in the aircraft industry," said the industry executive. Without that vision, Airbus arguably would never have got funds to launch its first plane in the early 1970s.
Set against that long-term strategic view, is the British insistence on short-term returns for shareholders, summed up as "Let the City decide".
But Aerospatiale would not have signed the agreement on the Airbus change if it had not meant it, the executive said.
