Holding company Cie de Suez  and utilities group Lyonnaise des Eaux SA are expected to announce a merger deal on Friday, effectively ending the independence of the company created in the 19th century to build the Suez Canal.
The boards of the two companies will meet on Friday to approve terms of the link-up, which has already received the backing of the Lyonnaise board.
Lyonnaise chairman Jerome Monod said last Thursday that the merger with Suez was an excellent plan but the terms had not yet been fixed.
However, a source close to the merger talks told Reuters on Thursday that the share parity to be used would be 41 Suez shares for every 20 Lyonnaise shares.
Suez stock was down 0.04 percent at 282.90 francs ($48.79) on volume of 171,495 shares, while Lyonnaise was down 0.37 percent at 540. The market was off 0.63 percent.
Suez would also pay out either 3.6 or 3.8 billion francs for the 1996 dividend, the source added.
The deal would mark the end of autonomy for Suez, which fell victim in the 1990s to a troubled property market.
It was founded in 1858 by Ferdinand de Lesseps to build and operate the property asset which symbolised the glory of the French Empire and engineering, the Suez Canal.
Discontented Suez shareholders forced out the previous chairman, Gerard Worms, after the group reported a four billion franc ($690 million at current rates) loss in 1995 and installed Gerard Mestrallet to turn round the sprawling conglomerate.
Mestrallet quickly sold crown jewels such as investment bank Banque Indosuez and fund manager Gartmore. The ailing real estate portfolio was also disposed of, leaving Suez with more than five billion francs in cash.
But he held on to a 63 percent stake in Belgian holding company Societe Generale de Belgique (SGB) which groups some choice industrial and financial assets.
SGB welcomed Suez as a white knight in the late 1980s when it was being stalked by Italian businessman Carlo de Benedetti, who saw it as ripe for takeover.
Now it looks as if SGB could be the saviour for Suez. Stock market analysts say that if there is any industrial logic in the merger, it lies in Mestrallet's focus on the utilities sector and abandoning financial services.
SGB has a 37 percent stake in Tractebel, which specialises in electricity, gas, water and environmental services. It has operations in cable television, property, infrastructure and industrial installations -- areas which overlap with Lyonnaise.
Lyonnaise, under veteran chairman Monod, has set its sights on international expansion in utilities but lacks the financial muscle to fund that growth.
A link-up would inject fresh capital from Suez's cash hoard -- even after the special dividend to sweeten Suez shareholders on the merger.
Monod said last week that a merged Suez/Lyonnaise would be a multi-service company on a global scale and capable of boosting profits and cashflow.
Monod said earlier this week, he expected Mestrallet to head the executive board of the merged company while Monod himself would head the supervisory board and handle strategy. ($ = 5.797 French Francs)
