France's Lyonnaise des Eaux and holding company Cie de Suez agreed on Friday to merge, creating a new global utilities heavyweight, and announced a series of financial goals.
As part of the deal creating a group with annual sales of more than 200 billion francs ($34.5 billion) and market capitalisation of 75 billion francs, Suez said it would pay its shareholders a dividend sweetener worth three times last year's payout.
The companies said in a joint statement they expected 1997 net profits of at least 3.50 billion francs and aimed to double earnings per share in five years after 1997.
"Beyond this year, the goal is to double net earnings per share in five years," they said. Shareholders of the new group will benefit from an immediate positive effect on net earnings of eight percent on the 1997 results.
The statement came after the Suez and Lyonnaise supervisory boards met to approve merger terms for the group that will be known as Suez Lyonnaise des Eaux.
Suez said shareholders would be asked to approve the merger terms at a meeting on June 11 and authorise a dividend of 24.60 francs a share -- representing a total payout of 3.8 billion francs. It paid a dividend of 8.20 francs for 1995.
Under the agreement, Suez shareholders will get 20 Lyonnaise shares for 41 Suez shares. Trading in the two companies' shares was suspended on the Paris bourse on Friday.
The merger agreement ends the independence of Suez, set up in the 19th century to build the Suez Canal, a glory of French engineering.
Lyonnaise chairman Jerome Monod told Europe 1 radio earlier on Friday that the larger group would absorb Suez, whose activities involve financial services and utilities, through a friendly "merger-takeover."
Lyonnaise's "mission is to conquer the world," said Monod.
The group will focus on four core businesses -- energy, water distribution, waste management and communications -- and would give shareholders "a very big world actor that will be a leader in its activities and enjoy high visibility," Monod said.
It would have the resources to invest around 17 billion francs from its first year of operation, he said. He has promised that the merged group will boost profits and cashflow.
Lyonnaise, whose activities span water distribution, construction and communications, has been pushing the deal as an operation that will give it extra muscle to expand abroad.
Lyonnaise is twice the size of Suez in terms of shareholder funds and one third bigger in share capitalisation.
Suez, once one of France's grandest corporate institutions that grew through acquisitions, fell victim in the early 1990s to a property slump.
Disgruntled Suez shareholders forced out the previous chairman Gerard Worms after the group made a four billion franc loss in 1995 and installed Gerard Mestrallet to turn round the overly diversified colossus.
Mestrallet swiftly sold crown jewels such as investment bank Banque Indosuez and fund manager Gartmore. He also disposed of the ailing real estate portfolio, leaving Suez with more than five billion francs in cash.
But he held on to a 63-percent stake in Belgian holding company, Societe Generale de Belgique, which groups some choice industrial and financial assets. ($ = 5.789 French Francs)
