Holding company Cie de Suez  and utility Lyonnaise des Eaux must tell shareholders how they will benefit from the groups' planned merger, otherwise the deal will look like a defensive move, analysts said on Friday.
The boards of Suez and Lyonnaise are expected to approve later on Friday terms of the merger which will create a group with annual sales of about 200 billion francs ($35 billion) and a market capitalisation of 75 billion.
But size is not necessarily a bonus if the new group cannot bring operating companies together and if Suez is not allowed to sell Belgian financial assets to shed its conglomerate status and focus on utilities.
"If there is no link-up between Lyonnaise and Suez, the merger makes little sense. It looks like a defensive move," a share analyst said.
Lyonnaise chairman Jerome Monod told Europe 1 radio on Friday that the new group would have four core businesses -- energy, water distribution, waste management and communications.
"What do shareholders stand to gain?" a second analyst asked. "There is still uncertainty," he added.
In the short term, Suez shareholders can look forward to  a big cash payout as part of the merger terms, with a dividend estimated at around 24 francs per share, or a total of some 3.8 billion francs.
They are also getting a chance to cut the discount on Suez shares compared with underlying assets -- if the new group buries Suez's holding company image by selling financial assets to concentrate on utilities, as promised.
Suez investors will also gain by getting shares in Lyonnaise, which for all its past weakness, is one of France's biggest companies and harbours big expansion ambitions.
But Suez holders still need to be convinced on big issues related to the merger.
The merger is being structured as a Lyonnaise takeover of Suez, apparently to take advantage of Suez's tax loss carry-forward, which would shelter future profits of the new group. "This needs to be clarified," said an analyst.
For Lyonnaise shareholders, the deal looks more risky.
They do not know if Suez chairman Gerard Mestrallet has made guarantees of management freedom to the Belgian government for the Societe Generale de Belgique holding company, which groups choice industrial and financial assets.
Any commitments may inhibit SGB's disposal of Belgian financial assets, which include stakes in banking giant Generale de Banque and insurer Fortis.
French investment in Belgium has become a sensitive issue since Renault SA's decision to close its Vilvoorde plant near Brussels at heavy cost to jobs.
The Belgian authorities insist on keeping the Tractebel utilities company, 50.3 percent owned by SGB, independent and headquartered in Belgium. This may limit the scope for integrating Tractebel into Lyonnaise's global ambitions.
Howver, Tractebel could benefit from asset transfers from Lyonnaise, such as the Elyo energy subsidiary.
The disposal of Suez's French financial units such as consumer credit house Sofinco, property broker Banque Monod and insurer Henin Vie, pose less of a problem.
Credit Agricole, which last year bought Banque Indosuez, has an option to buy 20 percent of Sofinco next year.
Lyonnaise shareholders stand to gain an injection of fresh capital which the company needs to finance its global aspirations. But if the Suez disposals do not go according to plan, they will be left with a conglomerate on their hands, with the accompanying discount on the shares. ($ = 5.789 French Francs)
