A debt deal to refinance Channel Tunnel operator Eurotunnel SA /Plc may help management and bank lenders but leaves little value for the long-suffering shareholders, debt specialists said on Thursday.
Eurotunnel said on Thursday it would send prospectuses to shareholders next month giving details of a restructuring of its 70 billion francs ($12 billion) of bank debt and hoped to get approvals at a meeting in Paris by July 10.
It earlier announced a 1996 net loss of 6.1 billion francs, one billion francs less than a year ago.
One debt specialist said Eurotunnel technically has no shareholder value as its debts wiped out its "enterprise value."
Eurotunnel currently has issued shareholders capital of some 10 billion pounds, which it plans to halve to take into account its past losses. But the debt stock will remain intact, except for one billion pounds which will be swapped for shares.
A second debt expert said the complex debt deal takes none of the debt away but pushed out payments further into the future, giving time for management to stabilise the company.
"The restructuring works in that it solves the banks' problems by turning current debt into future potential paid debt," he said. "It solves the company's problem as it allows management to continue without defaulting," he added.
But the problem for shareholders is the deal "mops up all the free cashflow for the short, medium and long-term," he said. There is no debt write-off and the loans will be simply restructured, using instruments which extend maturities, allow extra borrowing and rolling up interest payments. However, interest margins will be lowered.
"The restructuring may leave shareholders with 50 percent of the company but 50 percent of nothing is still nothing," he said. "Based on common-sense projections, it is hard to see how the equity holders are going to get anything," he said.
The debt/equity swap will leave equity holders with 55 percent of Eurotunnel's capital.
But first Eurotunnel must get approvals from both its 225-strong bank loan syndicate and shareholders.
Christian Cambier, chairman of the Eurotunnel shareholders association, said he has four conditions for approving the deal and would be seeking shareholder proxies to get a 34 percent blocking vote at the July meeting.
The conditions are: he wants the banks to approve the restructuring deal before the shareholders give their approval, both tunnel bores to be operating by May 15, freight service on the Shuttle to be resumed before June 15 and an extension of the tunnel concession by the French and British governments.
"I am confident we will refuse approval if the conditions are not met," he said. Cambier's association held proxies for 32 percent of the shareholder votes at last year's annual shareholders' meeting.
Eurotunnel is running a reduced service following a major fire on November 18 which forced the shut-down of part of the "south" tunnel bore and halted the freight Shuttle operation.
Another group representing Eurotunnel small shareholders, Adacte, said in a statement it maintained its opposition to the restructuring which it said gives too much to the banks and exclusively hit the shareholders by diluting the capital.
Adacte wants to postpone the shareholders meeting until the company can show a full year of continuous commercial service.
Eurotunnel has not published its cashflow forecasts to show these will cover debt service and capital expenditure needs. Although shareholders get no rights to the cashflow, they are being asked to approve a deal which dilutes their holdings.
"Last year's shareholders meeting was a rehearsal," said Sophie L'Helias, a laywer who helped organise the proxy solicitation for the 1996 shareholders meeting. "This year it is the real thing. Shareholders will have to decide what is in their best interests," she added.
The second of the debt specialists said a rejection of the debt accord would lead to bankruptcy, which was not attractive but could leave it to a commercial court to decide whether some of the debt should be written off. ($ = 5.790 French Francs)
