Talk of a merger between the Airbus European passenger plane venture and U.S. aerospace giant Lockheed Martin was premature but the two groups do have interests which would benefit from a link up, Airbus's French partner said on Saturday.
"It's premature," Aerospatiale vice president for corporate communications Patrice Kreis said when asked about a report in the London Times newspaper which said Airbus Industrie and Lockheed Martin were in merger talks.
"Airbus's interests and Lockheed's interests are to merge (eventually)," he said, in the face of a pending merger by Boeing and McDonnell Douglas. The merged Boeing-McDonnell group "want not only to dominate the market but to take it over completely," he said.
But it was too early to talk about linking up Airbus with Lockheed as European aerospace and defence companies needed to consolidate among themselves, before tackling a transatlantic merger, he said. "There's a lot of work to do," he added.
Among the key steps to be taken are current moves to changing Airbus's partnership into a limited liability company. But that should occur in the context of a rationalisation of European civil and military aviation, space and weapons systems, he said.
"Airbus on its own will not survive. Everything is linked -- civilian aircraft, military aircraft, space and weapons systems," he said. The creation in the United States of titans such as Lockheed Martin and Boeing-McDonnell Douglas, which embrace all these sectors, is forcing Europe to do the same.
The European consolidation would be through changes in capital at the parent-company level rather than cooperation on specific projects favoured in the past.
Important steps are being taken in France in the restructuring, with a merger of state-owned Aerospatiale and combat-plane maker Dassault Aviation, and the privatisation of defence electronics firm Thomson-CSF, both due to be realised this year.
Aerospatiale's chairman Yves Michot has said he was talking to Lockheed to collaborate with Airbus on specific projects.
Lockheed could become a partner in the crucial Airbus project to build a 555-seater plane, the A3XX, to rival Boeing's monopoly of the large capacity segment with its 747 jumbo.
Aerospatiale had no comment on the timing of any Lockheed decision to join the A3XX project, which has already signed up Italy's Alenia, part of the Finmecanicca group, and Saab of Sweden as potential risk-sharing partners.
Lockheed Martin and Aerospatiale both have interests in civil and military aircraft -- Lockheed makes fuselages for Boeing passenger planes, makes large military transports, and is also a prime contractor for the U.S. new-generation F22 fighter.
Aerospatiale makes Airbus cockpit systems and assembles the planes at its plant in Toulouse, southwestern France. It is also a key partner in the planned European Future Large Aircraft (FLA) military transport.
British Aerospace Plc, Daimler-Benz Aerospace AG and Casa of Spain are the other Airbus partners working on changing it to an integrated company by 1999.
