Partners of the Andersen Worldwide professional services business opened a key meeting on Monday to air major differences on how the $11 billion global venture should develop.
The Andersen group covers the Arthur Andersen accounting and audit practice and Andersen Consulting, which specialises in strategic advisory work.
The 2,700 partners are meeting in Paris hoping to resolve problems stemming from the rapid growth of Andersen Consulting and tensions between the two Andersen businesses.
The group posted revenues of $9.5 billion in 1996 and is tracking toward $11 billion by August 1997, an Andersen executive told Reuters recently.
But the rise of the consulting side since it set up as a separate unit in 1989 has fuelled demands for a reorganisation which reflects its wealth and importance within the group.
At stake is how the partnership votes are distributed and fee income is shared out across the Andersen group.
Revenues at the consulting arm have grown between 20-25 percent a year, while the traditional accountancy practice has shown annual growth of 11-13 percent.
The 1996 revenues were split $4.9 billion for consulting and $4.6 billion for accountancy. That was the first time consulting revenues outstripped the accounting side, the executive said. The earnings differential is widening, with consulting expected to bring in $6 billion and accountants $5 billion in 1997.
But there are around 1,650 audit and 1,100 consulting partners, so not only do fewer consulting partners make more money than their accounting colleagues, they have a smaller share of the partners' votes.
Also, under a complex system of worldwide allocation of revenues, the consultants end up effectively transferring wealth to the accountants.
The Paris meeting will air the issues, such as keeping more of the consulting income on that side of the group, the executive said.
"We are not in a crisis," the Andersen executive said. "Revenues and earnings continue to grow year on year." But there is room for a change in governance, he added.
Among the various options which have been studied are a separation of the two businesses but that radical move was not considered likely. "I don't think that's most likely," he said.
A more gradualist approach might be to streamline the decision-making process. Any proposals which require "constitutional change" would require a two-thirds majority of partners in Arthur Andersen and Andersen Consulting.
Andersen Consulting owes its success to demand from blue-chip firms for management advice, computer-related services and the trend in contracting out administrative jobs traditionally done in-house. Its international corporate identity reflects the global nature of its clients' businesses.
Consulting's rivals includes computer specialists International Business Machines , EDS as well as high-powered management consultants such as McKinsey.
The Arthur Andersen accountancy, set up in Chicago in 1913, is one of the so-called Big Six practices. It draws on a customer base of mid-sized firms, and member firms have a strong national identity in the 79 countries in which it has offices.
The Paris meeting, part of an 18-month cycle of partners' gatherings, will be the last with Lawrence Weinbach as managing partner and chief executive, as he is stepping down in August.
