U.S. aero-engine maker Pratt &amp; Whitney marked on Wednesday a revamp of global operations with the opening of a regional office in Paris to anchor a new market strategy aimed at getting closer to civil and military clients.
The office at the La Defense business district on the Paris outskirts will spearhead P&amp;W's efforts to sell the "total thrust management" concept to airlines and air forces in Europe, the Middle East and Africa, Robert Wolfe, president of large commercial engines told reporters.
P&amp;W, a unit of the United Technologies Corp industrial group, aims to "integrate closely with its customers" through the regional offices which serve the Americas, Europe, the Middle East and Africa and the Asia-Pacific region, he said.
P&amp;W makes engines for passenger planes with thrust ranging from 17,000 to 98,000 pounds, as well as combat jets such as the F15 and F16 fighters and the futuristic F22 stealth warplane.
Wolfe said P&amp;W has a 53 percent share of all engines sold on the Airbus Industrie A330 wide-body plane and 41 percent of the Boeing 777 giant twinjet.
The Hartford, Connecticut-based firm wants to expand market share by handling "all aspects of the propulsion system with the airline, to become the thrust manager" for the life of the engines, instead of just selling or leasing power plants.
That package deal would include setting up a special purpose company to buy engines and lease them to the airline. It would take charge of overhaul, repairs and maintenance -- leaving airlines to concentrate on flying passengers, Wolfe said.
The engine overhaul business is forecast to generate $1.0 billion to $1.5 billion by the end of next year, contributing about 30 percent of P&amp;W's total revenues, he said.
It is discussing the thrust management concept with airlines British Airways Plc, Swissair and Singapore Airlines, and wants to be the first to sign contracts in this area, Wolfe said.
It has already signed contracts with Delta for engine inventory management and Airbus for all engine maintenance on aircraft owned or leased by the European consortium.
Major U.S. airlines including Delta and United Airlines are also interested. "We think we have broken the ground for the first step toward full-thrust management," he said.
P&amp;W is looking at acquisitions and joint ventures among smaller firms specialising in overhaul to help boost operations. "I dare say you could see some of those occurring in the coming months," he said.
P&amp;W currently has around 15 percent of the total sales in the overhaul business in both commercial and military engines but expects to increase that "easily" to 30 percent, he said, giving no timetable.
The U.S. military is considering privatising maintenance of its park of F100 engines for the F15 and F16 aircraft, he said. And supply contracts for the F22's F119 engine stipulate the maintenance will come from P&amp;W.
Airlines stood to gain savings of 20-25 percent over the life of the engines, including the acquisition cost, while P&amp;W would be able to predict confidently the costs and margins of its products over the total life cycle.
Wolfe declined to give the margins on current business.
Industry executives have said competition for engine sales forces the leaders, P&amp;W, General Electric and Rolls-Royce Plc to sell their products on razor-thin margins, if any at all, and recoup their money on sales of spares over the 25-or-so year life of the plant.
P&amp;W expects 14,000 commercial jets to be sold in the next 20 years, with the world aviation market growing five percent a year. Europe will grow annually 3.9 percent, and in terms of revenue per passenger mile, ranks as the third largest regional market with 25 percent of the world total.
