Rival bidders Alcatel Alsthom and Lagardere Group are expected to put in final offers on Wednesday to meet the government's timetable in the privatisation of defence electronics firm Thomson-CSF.
A source close to telecommunications giant Alcatel said on Monday the final offer would confirm the terms of its joint bid with privately-held Dassault Industries.
Alcatel has held talks with Daimler-Benz Aerospace (Dasa) over cooperation if it won Thomson-CSF but these were "not binding on the French government," the source said. Dasa has said it is talking to Alcatel and Lagardere.
But the larger issue is what deals the British heavyweight defence firm General Electric Company Plc (GEC) has discussed with the two French contenders, the source said.
Dasa, while ambitious for a bigger role in European defence, is smaller than GEC, which is Britain's largest defence electronics group and a major rival to Alcatel in world markets.
Alcatel has to be more careful in negotiating with GEC, the source said.
Although the French government ruled out GEC as a candidate in the Thomson-CSF sale, saying it went against national security interests to sell more than 50 percent of the firm to a foreign company, it encouraged Lagardere and Alcatel to talk to GEC in preparing their bids.
Analysts believe GEC knew it would not be allowed to make its own bid but used the opportunity to serve notice that it wants a share of the business plan with whoever wins.
The government's sale terms and conditions are centred on creating a strong group around Thomson-CSF with the widest possible industrial participation and with a European dimension.
"The prospects for restructuring the defence industry in a European context will be taken into account by the government. The two candidates know that," Industry Minister Franck Borotra told reporters on Monday.
"Alcatel won't do it at any cost," the source close to Alcatel said. While the Thomson-CSF deal is important to developing Alcatel's business, chairman Serge Tchuruk does not want it so badly as to make "dangerous concessions".
A source close to Lagardere said neither Lagardere nor Alcatel would bid for Thomson-CSF at any price.
Lagardere has close ties with both GEC and British Aerospace Plc (BAe). It has a satellite joint venture with GEC through Matra Marconi Space and a missile venture with BAe in Matra-BAe Dynamics.
Alcatel is partners with GEC in GEC Alsthom, the power engineering joint venture.
The government has said it would hold to the timetable on the Thomson-CSF sale despite a pending parliamentary election which pushed back the partial privatisation of France Telecom by a month. The state expects to choose the buyer of Thomson-CSF by June 30.
Socialist leader Lionel Jospin, campaigning against the RPR/UDF centre-right coalition, said on April 22 he opposed further privatisations, saying "if Thomson is to be sold for one franc, honestly that is not what we want to do."
The government was forced into privatising Thomson-CSF separately from the Thomson SA electronics group when the independent Privatisation Commission threw out last year the government's preferred bid by Lagardere.
Lagardere wanted to buy the whole group for one franc and re-sell the loss-making consumer goods arm Thomson Multimedia for a symbolic one franc to South Korea's Daewoo Electronics.
