French engineering group Alcatel Alsthom and missiles-to-publishing conglomerate Lagardere said on Wednesday they had submitted firm and final offers for Thomson-CSF.
British Aerospace Plc said in London it was putting 300 million pound stg in Lagardere's offer while GEC Plc said it had signed memoranda of understanding with both bidders.
The state is selling its 58 percent stake in defence electronics firm Thomson-CSF and had set a midday deadline for the bidders to make their industrial and financial proposals.
The French government, mindful of a threat from U.S. defence mega-mergers and the need to build a national champion before embarking on European consolidation, set sale terms seeking the biggest possible industrial participation around Thomson-CSF.
The government is not expected to take any decision until after the two-round parliamentary election of May 25 and June 1.
Alcatel and family-owned Dassault Industries said they had submitted a joint bid for Thomson-CSF and hoped aerospace group Aerospatiale would join them afterwards if they won.
Alcatel and Dassault, which holds a majority stake in warplane maker Dassault Aviation, said they were committed to increasing Thomson-CSF's size "by close to 50 percent to create a world leader in defence electronics as well as in the associated civil sectors".
Dassault is offering to put its Dassault Electronique subsidiary into a joint venture with Thomson-CSF, which would bring significant assets in guidance systems, aircraft and missile electronics to Thomson-CSF.
If Aerospatiale does join up with Thomson-CSF through the Alcatel-Dassault bid, that holds out the possibility of further industrial integration as Aerospatiale is merging with Dassault Aviation, another move vital to the French consolidation.
Alcatel and Dassault said they could finance the acquisition from their own resources without compromising the future or using the resources of Thomson-CSF.
If the joint bid succeeded, it would form a 25-billion franc annual pool for research and development, with major benefits in civil and miltary syngeries, the two companies said.
Lagardere said it had the finances needed to fund the acquisition and an eventual offer to buy out minority shareholders in Thomson-CSF. It would issue a special five billion franc bond convertible into Thomson-CSF shares to help fund the deal, along with its own cash and credit lines.
The bond would be a one-year, eurofranc issue  underwritten by Credit Lyonnais and Dresdner Kleinwort Benson. It would be repaid in cash and Thomson-CSF shares depending on terms of a planned merger between Thomson-CSF and Matra High Technologies and the public offer to minorities.
Lagardere had been the government's favoured bidder for the whole Thomson SA group last year but the independent Privatisation Commission rejected its offer, which included selling the loss-making Thomson Multimedia unit for one franc to Daewoo Electronics of South Korea.
Lagardere's Matra space and missiles businesses have British alliances with British Aerospace Plc and GEC Plc.
The Thomson-CSF sale is being closely watched as France is the last of the four major European arms producers to shake up its industry, a step needed to open the way for new cross-border alliances with partners in Britain, Germany and Italy.
In London, Britain's GEC said it had signed a memorandum of understanding with both candidates bidding for Thomson-CSF. It said it would enter talks to combine some of the business of its GEC-Marconi division with those of Thomson-CSF.
Germany's Daimler-Benz Aerospace (Dasa) has also said it has held talks with the French bidders aimed at possible cooperation.
Thomson-CSF makes military radios, radars, sonars, aircraft, naval and missile electronics, and training simulators. It made a 1996 net attributable profit of 745 million francs on sales of 36.3 billion francs.
