A bid by conglomerate Lagardere for military electronics firm Thomson-CSF highlights the cutthroat competition in the secretive world of naval combat systems, a senior defence source said on Monday.
Publishing-to-missiles group Lagardere and engineering company Alcatel Alsthom filed rival offers last Wednesday in the Thomson-CSF privatisation, seen as a big step in the consolidation of the European defence industry.
Lagardere said it had secured 300 million pounds ($500 million) in financing from defence giant British Aerospace Plc and would put BAe's and Thomson-CSF's naval businesses into Matra BAe Dynamics, a joint venture held by Lagardere and BAe.
France and Britain, countries which have strong maritime traditions, have waged a commercial war in naval systems, sometimes in alliance, but more often squared off as rivals.
"I believe we have a real lead in the field of naval combat systems that the British do not have," said the defence official. "It's a crown jewel. I would be amazed if we gave this away."
Thomson-CSF and rivals such as BAe and General Electric Co Plc design and integrate the complex electronic and computer systems controlling weapons and radar for ships and submarines. The submarine sector, based on sonar technology, is considered a "sovereignty issue" for France, the official said.
The Alcatel camp is hoping the French government will not let Thomson's naval assets slip into foreign control by accepting Lagardere's bid and undermining the sovereignty issue.
The Thomson-CSF sale offers a rare opportunity for BAe to grab a market share built up by the French firm since 1990 when it bought Signaal of the Netherlands.
Thomson-CSF said naval systems contributed about six billion francs of 1996 turnover of Thomson-CSF's total 36 billion franc sales. Defence electronics as a whole, including aerospace and land-based systems, made up 65 percent of the group's sales.
Thomson-CSF has allied with state-owned DCN naval shipyard for combat systems for ships but the DCN jealously guards its submarine technology, heavily restricting Thomson-CSF's access to its sonar systems, the defence official said.
Sonar technology is inextricably tied to submarine architecture, the source said, adding "The field of sonar is an area of sovereignty for the French navy."
Two major deals in naval systems highlight their strategic importance, a source following the Thomson-CSF sell-off commented.
BAe is acquiring a 49-percent stake in German defence firm STN Atlas, as part of a consortium with arms company Rheinmetall AG and utilities firm Badenwerk.
The Anglo-German consortium won against stiff competition from U.S. defence giant Lockheed Martin, Daimler-Benz Aerospace and Thomson-CSF, the source said.
BAe's BAeSema joint venture with the Sema computer systems house, is expected to play a key role in the BAe bid, despite a statement last Wednesday by BAeSema to the contrary, a senior industry source said.
A second major move in the area was creation of Thomson Marconi Sonar, a joint venture between GEC and Thomson-CSF -- which some French newspapers viewed as costing then Thomson-CSF chairman Alain Gomez his job as the government thought it brought the British too close to its strategic technology.
GEC is a huge player in the submarine field and secured a two billion pound contract in March to build three nuclear -powered Trafalgar class submarines for the British navy.
Thomson-CSF's share of key programmes include France's La Fayette "stealth" frigate, the Horizon warship being built by Britain, Italy and France, and through Signaal, is working on a frigate being built by Germany and the Netherlands.
($ = 0.615 British Pounds)
