Boeing Co. stock surged Tuesday after the company decided to scrap plans to build a costly stretch version of its 747 jumbo jet.
Boeing shares jumped $5.625 to a record $112.125 on the New York Stock Exchange, accounting for much of the rise in the Dow Jones industrial average. Boeing is one of 30 stocks in the index of blue-chip companies.
Industry analysts estimated the move by the world's largest aircraft manufacturer, announced late on Monday, could reduce Boeing's research and development costs by more than $2 billion over the next five years and boost annual earnings by as much as $1 a share.
NatWest Securities analyst Nick Heymann said the decision not to proceed with the risky project removed a cloud of uncertainty over Boeing as it ramps up production to meet rising demand and prepares to complete its planned $14 billion purchase of McDonnell Douglas Corp.
"It's fantastic news," he said.
While officials at Boeing rival Airbus Industrie said the European consortium would go ahead with plans for an all-new superjumbo jetliner called the A-3XX, Heymann said he thought that project was dead.
"Airbus never really had the resources to go ahead with their aircraft," Heymann said.
He said it was even less likely the European consortium could raise the funds now that Boeing has talked with the same customers and determined market conditions did not justify the investment needed for a new big jet.
Boeing said it would cost more than $7 billion just to develop a new wing and make other changes needed to produce two new versions of the 747 that would add range and capacity.
Airbus has said it can develop and all-new jet for $8 billion, but analysts peg the total costs at closer to a whopping $15 billion.
Citing increasing "route fragmentation," especially across the Pacific Ocean, Boeing said it plans to focus its development efforts on new versions of the medium-sized 767 and 777 twin-engine models.
Boeing already has begun offering an increased-capacity version of the 767 that could be launched with an initial order in the next few months.
Boeing also is considering new versions of the 777 that would add both capacity and range.
Heymann said Boeing also plans minor changes in the 747 including new digital cockpit electronics and computer software. The revamped plane would be the same size with the same range as the current 747-400, Boeing's latest version of the four-engine plane.
Alfred Goldman, a stock market analyst at brokers A.G. Edwards and Sons, said the rise in Boeing stock accounted for nearly half of the Dow's rise of about 34 points, to 6,878, at midday.
