Boeing Co. stock surged Tuesday after the company decided to mothball plans to build a costly stretch version of its 747 jumbo jet.
Boeing shares jumped $6.875 to a record $113.375 on the New York Stock Exchange, accounting for much of the rise in the Dow Jones industrial average. Boeing is one of 30 stocks in the index of blue-chip companies.
Industry analysts estimated the move by the world's largest aircraft manufacturer, announced late on Monday, could reduce Boeing's expenses by more than $2 billion over the next five years and boost annual earnings by as much as $1 a share.
NatWest Securities analyst Nick Heymann said the decision not to proceed with the risky project removed a cloud of uncertainty over Boeing as it boosts production to meet rising demand and prepares to complete its planned $14 billion purchase of McDonnell Douglas Corp.
"It's fantastic news," he said.
While officials at Boeing rival Airbus Industrie said the European consortium would go ahead with plans for an all-new superjumbo jetliner called the A-3XX, Heymann said he thought that project was dead.
"Airbus never really had the resources to go ahead with their aircraft," Heymann said.
He said it was even less likely the consortium could raise the funds now that Boeing had talked with the same potential customers and determined market conditions did not justify the investment needed for a new big jet.
Boeing said it would cost more than $7 billion just to develop a new wing and make other changes needed to produce two new versions of the 747 that would add range and capacity.
Analysts noted that the estimated cost of developing the so-called 747-500X and 747-600X had ballooned over the past two years from as little as $3 billion as prospective customers such as British Airways Plc and Singapore Airlines Ltd. demanded more features.
In the end, only Thai Airways International Ltd. and Malaysian Airline System committed to ordering the proposed new jumbo.
Boeing executives said the projected demand for fewer than 500 very large jets over the next 20 years was not enough to generate a sufficient shareholder return.
"Sufficient market demand has not yet developed to justify committing the significant investment required to develop larger versions of the 747," Ron Woodard, president of the Boeing commercial airplane group, said in a statement.
While most of the 1,000 Boeing employees working on the 747-X project will be shifted to other planned derivatives, Woodard said Boeing would continue studying the possibility of a jet bigger than the current-generation 747-400.
Airbus, which projects a far bigger market for jets that can seat more than 500 passengers, has said it can develop an all-new jet for $8 billion, but analysts peg the total cost at closer to a whopping $15 billion.
Analysts said Airbus could develop an attractive airliner to alleviate congestion at the world's biggest airports and on heavily travelled routes, but they were sceptical about the consortium's ability to keep costs down.
"At the end of the day it's going to come down to the cost of building the airplane," said Byron Callan of Merrill Lynch. "This only increases the pressure on Airbus to restructure and restructure quickly."
He and other analysts said Airbus now might be more willing to take the risk needed to launch a new large jet to break Boeing's monopoly on the lucrative top end of the market.
Citing increasing "route fragmentation," especially across the Pacific Ocean, Boeing said it plans to focus its development efforts on new versions of the medium-sized 767 and 777 twin-engine models.
Boeing already has begun offering an increased-capacity version of the 767 that could be launched with an initial order in the next few months.
Boeing also is considering new versions of the 777 that would add both capacity and range.
