Boeing on Monday scrapped plans to build a new, larger version of its 747 jumbo jet in the near future, saying market conditions do not currently justify the risk and expense, estimated at more than $7 billion.
Instead, the Seattle-based company plans to focus its development efforts at coming up with new versions of its medium-sized 767 and 777 twinjets, executives said.
The decision, announced late in the day, marks an end to more than three years of research that included a joint study by Boeing and partner companies in its European rival, Airbus Industrie into a double-decker jet with room for 600 to 800 passengers.
Boeing's move to sharply scale back its so-called 747-X program leaves Airbus alone in the market with a proposed all-new superjumbo plane that could seat 600 passengers, compared with 416 in a typical three-class configuration for the current-generation 747-400.
But analysts have expressed skepticism that Airbus would be able to raise the funding needed to build such a jet. Airbus executives say their superjumbo, dubbed the A-3XX, could be built for $7 billion, but industry sources put the cost at closer to $15 billion.
"If Airbus is going to launch a big airplane, they're going to have to fund it privately," said Bill Whitlow, an analyst at Pacific Crest Securities in Seattle. "With Boeing throwing in the towel, it's going to make it that much more difficult for them to convince investors that it's worthwhile."
In a news release, Boeing commercial airplane group President Ron Woodard said the manufacturer would leave some employees on the 747-X program to continue to study a possible larger version of the four-engine plane.
"This remains one of the priorities of our product development efforts," he said. "When the market develops for such an airplane, we will be ready."
John Hayhurst, vice president and general manager for the 747-X, said about 1,000 people had been working on the program, more than half of whom will be shifted into new 767 and 777 models.
Hayhurst said the decision to focus on the smaller wide-body jets reflects the company's conclusion that trans-Pacific air traffic increasingly will shift away from larger hub cities and toward more thinly traveled city pairs.
"We think there's going to be increasing fragmentation on long-haul routes, and less dependence on hubs," he said. "That will require airplanes of the 767 and 777 size."
Boeing market projections foresee a demand for no more than 470 jets with 500 seats or more over the next 20 years, which is unlikely to be sufficient to produce an acceptable return to shareholders on the investment needed to design a larger wing and make other changes for the proposed 747 derivatives, Hayhurst said.
Whitlow said Boeing could reduce the market demand for new large jets even further by enhancing its line of medium-sized jets.
For example, Boeing has announced plans for a stretched version of the 777 that would seat 400 people, nearly as many as the 747. Another version being proposed would have a range of 10,000 miles (16,000 km), more than any other commercial jet, allowing an airline to fly between city pairs such as Singapore and Los Angeles or Hong Kong and Chicago.
