Boeing Co. said Tuesday it formed an entrepreneurial organisation that will seek out joint ventures and possibly acquisitions related to its core business of commercial airplanes.
Boeing senior vice president of planning and international development Lawrence Clarkson will serve as president of the new organisation, Boeing Enterprises, which will be part of Boeing's commercial airplane group.
In an interview, Clarkson said the unit was aggressively seeking out "very significant" projects and could grow rapidly in the next year.
Clarkson declined to be specific about ongoing negotiations but indicated they probably would not involve new airplane models.
Instead, he said Boeing would seek out opportunities in "businesses that are very related to what Boeing does, but which up to now we've let other people do."
For example, Boeing executives in the past have discussed taking advantage of the company's massive database of world airline inventories to help carriers maintain service records, a business Clarkson said would fall within the new unit.
Boeing Enterprises also will be responsible for the company's joint venture with General Electric Co. to market the 737 as a business jet.
Clarkson said formation of the unit had been discussed for some time and was unrelated to Boeing's planned acquisition of McDonnell Douglas Corp.
"The idea is to have a basically independent operation so we don't get tied down with the existing bureaucracy," he said.
He said some of the prospective joint ventures could have "significant" international components, particularly focusing on the Asia-Pacific region.
Boeing is continuing to study the possibility of working with Asian manufacturers to build a new small jet that would seat about 100 passengers, but Clarkson said he did not expect any decisions in the near future.
Clarkson said he expected any acquisitions would be profitable immediately.
"The basic objective here is to increase shareholder value and grow the company, so obviously we want it to be as profitable as possible," he said.
A decision on Clarkson's replacement in planning and international development will be made in the near future, the company spokeswoman said.
Clarkson, 58, came to Boeing in 1987 from engine maker Pratt &amp; Whitney, a unit of United Technologies Corp.
After serving as a senior vice president in the commercial airplane group, Clarkson was promoted to his position in Boeing headquarters, which The New York Times descibed as "the closest thing it has to a corporate secretary of state."
"I think I'll still have to use some of those skills, but it's kind of nice to get into more of a line operation and something new," Clarkson said.
Clarkson will retain his title as one of only six Boeing senior vice presidents.
