Struggling computer products retailer Egghead Inc. Friday said it would close 77 of its 156 stores to focus on its most profitable locations and Internet business with a new management team.
Egghead, which just last April sold the corporate sales unit that generated half its revenue, said it would take a $30 million charge against earnings in the current fiscal fourth quarter to pay for the latest restructuring.
Chief Executive Officer Terry Strom and senior vice presidents Kurt Conklin and Ron Smith will leave the company, and Chairman George Orban was appointed to replace Strom, who will continue to work as a consultant, Egghead said.
Egghead, which lost $10.7 million in fiscal 1996 on sales of $403.8 million and lost another $7.6 million in the first three quarters of fiscal 1997, said the reorganization would reduce its losses in fiscal 1998 by cutting almost $20 million from annual operating expenses.
"The actions approved by the board amount to a remaking of Egghead in a way that we believe should give us the opportunity to turn the company around," Orban said in a statement.
Egghead stock, which was at nearly $14 last June, fell 62.5 cents to close at $5.375 in Nasdaq trading.
Egghead, which began in 1984 as a single shop in suburban Seattle, once had more than 200 stores in a nationwide chain. But it has struggled for years as software prices have fallen and "big box" superstores have eaten into its market share.
"It's been one downsize after another now for as long as I can remember," said Scott McAdams, an analyst at Ragen MacKenzie.
He said it was far from clear whether Egghead, now based in Spokane, Wash., would succeed with its new strategy of concentrating on larger stores and hardware sales that would include computers and upgrade kits.
"I truly just don't know whether there's room in the world for this thing at all," McAdams said.
Egghead's announcement comes one month after Tandy Corp. said it would shut all 17 of its Incredible Universe megastores and 19 of its 108 Computer City Stores.
Egghead still faces enormous competitive pressure from giant chains like CompUSA Inc., Office Depot Inc. and even Wal-Mart Stores Inc. ,as well as catalogue dealers and other retail channels.
Egghead itself has begun selling and even delivering software over the Internet, although Orban acknowledged the business is "in its infancy."
CompUSA officials declined to comment on the Egghead news, but Chief Executive Jim Halpin said this week that the chain hopes to increase its market share by targeting as much as $2 billion in sales abandoned by the previously announced industry closures.
With $70 million in cash on its balance sheet, Egghead should be able to capture some of those sales as it opens 15 of its new, larger stores over the next year, McAdams said.
In an interview, Egghead Chief Financial Officer Brian Bender blamed the company's problems in part on an operation that was too dispersed. The store shutdowns over the next two months will reduce Egghead operations to 24 markets from 54.
Among the markets the company is exiting are Atlanta, Las Vegas, Miami, Philadelphia and San Diego. Egghead is closing 12 stores in the Los Angeles area and eight in Chicago.
Bender said more than 300 of the company's 1,800 employees would lose their jobs, including all employees at the Lancaster, Pa., distribution facility, which is being shuttered. The company also will sell its Spokane headquarters facility, which it moved into less than two years ago.
For the third quarter ended Dec. 28, Egghead reported net income of $1.5 million, or 9 cents a share, compared with a loss of $941,000, or 5 cents a share, in the year-ago quarter. Sales fell to $113.2 million from $121.7 million.
Egghead said sales from the 79 stores targeted to remain open accounted for 64 percent of its revenue in the first nine months of the fiscal year.
