Paccar Inc., maker of Kenworth, Peterbilt and Foden heavy-duty trucks, reported fourth-quarter profits well above expectations Tuesday as it benefited from its acquisition of Dutch-based DAF Trucks N.V.
Paccar earnings slid to $62.5 million, or $1.61 per share, in the quarter ended Dec. 31 from $65.1 million, or $1.67 per share, a year earlier. Sales edged up to $1.2 billion from $1.1 billion.
But the earnings were well above average Wall Street expectations of $1.23 a share, according to First Call, and Paccar stock rose $2.25 to $69.75 in afternoon Nasdaq trading.
"It was quite a nice quarter for them," said analyst Paul Latta of brokerage Ragen MacKenzie in Seattle. He credited the better-than-expected results to the acquisition of DAF, completed in November for $543.8 million.
"Everybody knew it would be accretive (help earnings) and was wondering how accretive it would be," he said. "It looks like it's falling into the category of very accretive."
The Bellevue, Wash.-based company did not break out European business, but Latta and others said Paccar's truck-making operations performed substantially better than expected in the quarter.
"Last year was a strong year for heavy-duty truck manufacturing -- much better, in fact, than many in the industry anticipated," said Paccar Chairman Mark Pigott. "Paccar increased its market share (of the largest trucks) as more trucking companies specified our products."
For the year, Paccar net income fell to $201 million, or $5.17 per share, from $252.8 million, or $6.50 per share, in 1995. Sales dropped to $4.3 billion from $4.6 billion.
Pigott said analysts expected 1997 to be a reasonable year for truck manufacturers despite softer markets in both North America and Europe.
Analysts agreed, noting that markets had held up better than expected despite concerns about overcapacity in the U.S. truck fleet.
"I think the one thing that has been surprising to everyone in the industry is that truck demand has not slowed as much as had been forecast," said John Rogers of Jensen Securities.
He noted that U.S. truck sales volume was down about 15 percent last year, compared with estimates of up to a 25 percent decline.
Richard Walles of DRI/McGraw Hill in London estimated total U.S. truck sales would decline less than 10 percent this year while European sales would remain flat.
Truck fleet operators are at the tail end of a replacement cycle, but sales remain at historically high levels, "so we can't complain too much," he said.
Paccar said operating profits surged 28 percent last year in its financial services sector due to a growing portfolio and significantly lower credit loss provisions in Mexico.
