For years Microsoft Corp. Chairman Bill Gates and other executives have watched with mixed feelings as longtime rival Apple Computer Inc. has slowly self-destructed.
While the two companies have had frequent clashes over the years, including a landmark copyright lawsuit that went to the Supreme Court, Microsoft also has become the largest independent producer of software for the Macintosh platform.
But as Apple goes through yet another reorganization aimed at stanching losses and regaining lost market share, Microsoft has long since turned its attention to other, more pressing rivalries.
"I am very interested in continuing to work with Apple as we have done through history," Gates said in Frankfurt, Germany, where he appeared for a product launch. "But I am confused by the Apple operating system strategy ... and have decided not to worry about the future (in this respect)."
Indeed, Microsoft has little need to worry about Apple, which just a few years ago provided the only credible threat to the hegemony of Microsoft's Windows operating system, the software that runs a personal computer.
Now, various versions of Windows are installed on about 80 percent of new desktop copmputers, compared with about 5 percent for the ailing Apple Macintosh operating system.
More importantly, the competitive landscape has been shifting rapidly due to the rise of the Internet and the Java programming language, which is independent of any operating system.
"The Mac operating system vs. the Windows operating system is almost a sideshow nowadays," said Dwight Davis, editor of Windows Watcher, an industry newsletter. "In centre stage is Java, which has huge momentum and a lot of companies supporting it."
Both Microsoft and Apple have been trying to "pigeonhole" Java as simply one of many development languages with little success, Davis said.
"Now that Java's on everybody's lips, there's really a critical mass of vendors out there, many of them driven by an anti-Microsoft agenda, and they're going to use Java as their rallying cry to erode Microsoft's dominance in the industry," Davis said.
As for Microsoft's Macintosh software, at an estimated $250 million a year it would be a huge business for almost any computer software company -- but now represents just 2.5 percent of the Redmond, Wash.-based company's annual revenues.
Nevertheless, last month Microsoft signalled its commitment to the Macintosh platform by forming a product unit with 100 employees dedicated to designing a new version of its Office software bundle for Apple computers, expected out sometime in the fall.
Shortly afterward, Gates visited Apple's Cupertino, Calif., headquarters to meet with Chairman Gilbert Amelio and Apple co-founder Steven Jobs and discuss closer cooperation, according to published reports.
Gates confirmed meeting with Jobs but said he was not devoting a lot of time to Apple.
"People like Apple and would like them to succeed," Gates said. "But that doesn't mean they will succeed."
Dave Meltzer, Microsoft group product manager for Macintosh applications, estimated that 8 million Macintosh users have at least one Microsoft product, creating steady demand for upgrades.
"We continue to sell more units than ever," Meltzer said.
"To the extent they they're experiencing difficulties, that's a sad thing for us," he said. "We're certainly confident they will take the right steps to put the company on an even footing."
