Microsoft Corp.'s 4-month-old Expedia Internet travel service sold more than $1 million in travel tickets this week, its best ever, executives said Friday.
Josh Herst, lead product manager for Expedia, said business has been building but enjoyed a flurry of sales this week when American Airlines launched a fare war after President Clinton blocked a strike by its pilots.
"We had a nice spike," he said. "If they wanted to have more of those, we wouldn't complain."
Herst said Microsoft is investing heavily in the travel arena, seen as a potentially lucrative form of electronic commerce.
Forrester Research analyst Bill Bass said travel generated $126 million in retail sales over the Internet in 1996, second only to computer software and hardware, which generated $140 million.
By 2000, the travel industry will generate $1.6 billion in annual sales over the Internet, Forrester estimates.
"Airline tickets are a great thing to be able to buy online," Bass said. "You don't have to hold it -- it's not like clothes, where it helps to be able to see it and touch it."
Bass also said travel sites on the Internet are able to include related information such as maps and hotel listings that would be impossible to provide over the telephone.
Microsoft is far from the only company seeking a piece of the Internet travel market, but analysts give Expedia high marks so far and say Microsoft is likely to remain one of the major players.
Other online travel agencies include Travelocity, operated by American Airlines' parent company AMR Corp., Preview Travel and Internet Travel Network.
Airlines themselves also operate sites, which have proven to be an excellent way to sell seats that would otherwise go empty, Bass said. American Airlines has sold $10 million in tickets in the past year through a weekly electronic mail bulletin offering discount seats for weekend travel on lightly booked flights, he said.
Herst said Microsoft has about 100 people working on Expedia, including journalists building a database of information about destinations. The service plans to add several "big-name columnists" soon, said Erik Blachford, Expedia product manager.
Microsoft is believed to keep slightly less than the usual 10 percent travel agent's commission, and it has a relationship with Worldspan Travel Partners in Atlanta to print and mail tickets and provide 24-hour telephone support for travelers.
Microsoft also expects to generate substantial advertising revenue, Herst said.
While Expedia is designed for individuals and small businesses, Microsoft also is working with American Express Co. on a related project to develop a corporate travel application.
Expedia can be found at http://expedia.msn.com/.
