An Electronic Arts executive on Wednesday said the company was focusing on personal computers and CD-ROM devices as game platforms despite the success of new cartridge-based machines from Nintendo Co Ltd.
Bing Gordon, executive vice president of marketing for the entertainment software company, said he had been surprised by the success in North America of the Nintendo 64, which was launched last year afer several delays. It became one of the big electronics hits of the holiday season.  
Still, he said Electronic Arts probably would focus on other platforms because of Nintendo's decision to stick with more expensive cartridges rather than switch to CD-ROMs as its rivals Sony Corp and Sega Enterprises Ltd had done.
"We're pretty strongly in the camp that low manufacturing cost in media is important to the overall growth of interactive entertainment," Gordon said. "I doubt we'll ever ship as many products for the Nintendo 64 in any year as we do on the PC or the Sony Playstation."  
He said Electronic Arts planned to launch its first game for the Nintendo 64, a version of its FIFA soccer product, in March or April to coincide with the European launch of the video game device.
Electronic Arts announced Wednesday it had opened a game development studio in the Seattle area, which Gordon said was destined to become "one of the top five worldwide centers of interactive entertainment creativity," along with Japan, Britain, northern California and possibly Los Angeles.  
He noted that two of the company's four "long-term competitors" -- Microsoft Corp and Nintendo -- are located within a few miles of the new Electronic Arts studio, which employs 55 developers. About 40 of them came with last year's acquisition of Manley &amp; Associates Inc in nearby Issaquah, Washington.
Anthony Garcia, a former Microsoft executive who is general manager of the new facility, said he hoped to add about 15 employees during the next year.
Electronic Arts develops software for platforms owned by all its competitors, including Sony and Sega.  
The company also is working to develop online products, including Ultima Online, which will go into a wide-scale beta test in April or May.
Gordon said he hoped the game would be on store shelves in June. He described Ultima Online as a "persistent world" that could be experienced by up to 20,000 Internet players in a single day and 2,000 simultaneously.
He said the company would wait until after a market test before deciding whether it would seek to charge for connect time in addition to the software. And he said there were still many issues to be resolved before multiuser Internet games could take off.
"This is not a boat that's about to leave the dock," he said.
"The most valuable thing we've done in Internet so far is to start replacing print advertising in our communication mix with Web marketing," Gordon said.
He said the company is making money over the Internet by selling its software directly to users.
	  ((-- Reuters Seattle bureau 206-386-4848))
