Starbucks Corp. executives Thursday lashed out at critics of the company's coffee buying practices, saying the retailer has been targeted unfairly because of its high visibility.
At the company's annual shareholders meeting, Chairman Howard Schultz heatedly defended the coffee chain's commitment to improve the lot of the Third World farmers who grow most of the beans it roasts and sells.
Schultz threatened to stop buying Guatemalan coffee entirely if activists continues to pummel Starbucks with what he called "propaganda" about its role in conditions endured by agricultural labourers there.
"We are doing everything possible to be a great corporate citizen, but we are only one company," Schultz said. "We can't change the entire physical, political and agricultural system of an entire country overnight."
Schultz clearly was stung by a coalition of labour, human rights and religious activists who launched a campaign on the eve of the annual meeting to complain Starbucks was not doing enough to change a system that pays workers far less than a reasonable living wage.
"We're the only company that has given back to Guatemala, and we are the ones being hounded," said Schultz.
Schultz pointed out that Starbucks had donated $300,000 to the aid group CARE last year to help workers in Guatemala and three other coffee-growing nations and had established a partnership with Appropriate Technology International to help small-scale producers in Central America.
He said the non-profit groups were the best way for the company to effect change because Starbucks does not itself have any coffee farms and typically buys its beans from exporters rather than producers.
Bruce Herbert, director of the Northwest Coalition for Responsible Investment, said he and other activists recognised Starbucks' positive contributions but wanted the company to live up to the code of conduct it approved two years ago as a framework for helping coffee workers.
"No one has ever put a timeline on it, but two years have passed and they haven't taken the first steps," he said.
At a news conference after the meeting, Schultz said the company was expanding its charitable efforts by establishing the Starbucks Foundation, which will support aid projects in the cities where the coffee chain operates.
The Foundation will get all royalties and a $500,000 advance from a book by Schultz on the Starbucks way of doing business to be published in September.
Schultz also said market coffee prices that have doubled over the past several months were a source of "great concern," but he said he was confident that company would work through the volatiliy and meet Wall Street earnings estimates for the current fiscal year.
He said the company would make an announcement on its strategy regarding the price issue within the next several days, but he declined to say whether Starbucks would raise retail prices.
Dave Olsen, senior vice president for coffee, said market supply and demand were not far out of balance but a decision by large buyers to go short on the commodity had created a huge "bow wave" of buying, compounded by speculative volatility.
