After arriving late to the Internet party, computer software giant Microsoft Corp has crafted a strategy that poses a serious threat to rival Netscape Communications Corp.
The latest version of Microsoft's Internet Explorer software for browsing the vast computer network, launched last week, eliminates the formerly commanding technological lead Netscape's market-leading Navigator, industry analysts said.  
Because Microsoft is giving away its browser, the Redmond, Wash.-based company likely will boost its market share from less than 10 percent to as much as 40 percent by mid-1997, according to one estimate.
The market battle is expected to escalate next year when Microsoft launches a new version of its browser that can be used instead of the Windows interface, allowing users to search for information on their own computer or the Internet with a single stroke.  
"Netscape doesn't own the operating system, so it will be very difficult for them to counter that," said Michael Wallace of UBS Secrurities.
Microsoft also has integrated Internet server software for no additional cost into its high-end Windows NT operating system, taking aim at another key Netscape market.
"It's clearly a strategy to cut off any revenue stream that Netscape might have because Netscape does pose a real threat to Microsoft," said Phil Lemmons, editor in chief of PC World magazine.  
While the Internet browser market itself is not expected to generate significant revenue, it is a crucial battleground because the browser is seen as the next-generation "front end" for the operating system.
"Whoever dominates the browser market will determine the direction of the Internet," Wallace said.
He and others are betting that Microsoft will continue to make inroads as its Chairman Bill Gates tenaciously defends the company's dominance of the personal computer desktop.  
"I don't think Netscape is going to do very well in the long run with Bill Gates waking up every morning thinking, 'How can I get Netscape today?'" said Adam Schoenfeld or research firm Jupiter Communications.
"As other companies have painfully learned, when Gates is out to get you he's serious," Schoenfeld said.
Netscape can count on support from software developers and corporate executives eager for an alternative to Microsoft's Windows platform.  
And Netscape has a chance to beat its much-larger rival in areas not dominated by Microsoft products, such as television set-top boxes, video game devices and stripped-down "network computers" being backed by Oracle Corp and other Microsoft rivals.
But analysts say Netscape faces a tough battle with broad ramifications for the software industry.
"It's very hard to bet against them given the amount of resources that they can and are throwing at it," Lemmons said. "Microsoft is a formidable foe, and there's nothing so deep and mysterious about Netscape's technology that it can't be cloned."  
Lemmons said that despite Microsoft's near-monopoly in key areas of desktop computing software, the strategy of giving away Internet software appears to be legal, and the company has withstood years of antitrust scrutiny.
Software developers and industry executives will be watching closely as the battle between Microsoft and Netscape continues to heat up over the coming year, Schoenfeld said.
"The question for any innovative software company is what can you do that Microsoft can't also do," he said.
"The damning thing is Microsoft doesn't even have to do it as well -- they just have to do it and leverage their desktop control," Schoenfeld said. "That looms over the entire industry."
					-- Seattle bureau 206-386-4848
