As Delta Air Lines Inc. nears a decision on an aircraft order worth at least $2.5 billion, Boeing Co. reportedly is trying to persuade the carrier to lock it in as the long-term supplier for all its jet needs.
The deal being considered, similar to an agreement reached with executives of American Airlines last year, could have broad ramifications for an aviation industry that is becoming increasingly consolidated, industry analysts said.
The Wall Street Journal reported Tuesday that Boeing was negotiating with Delta on a sole-source agreement that could involve up to 100 jets worth about $6 billion.
Delta spokesman Bill Berry declined to comment on the reported Boeing proposal, although he acknowledged the airline was considering a purchase that would go well beyond its stated goal of two dozen wide-bodied jets needed to help retire 49 ageing Lockheed L-1011 airliners from Delta's domestic routes.
Berry said Delta was in final discussions with both Boeing and its European rival Airbus Industrie.
"We are now in very sensitive final discussions with the manufacturers," he said. "We would hope to have a decision in a matter of weeks. But I can't tell you if it's two weeks or six weeks or eight weeks."
Boeing Chairman Phil Condit, in Brussels for a meeting with European regulators, said a sale to Delta was far from certain.
"We are in a very strong competition at Delta," Condit told a meeting organised by the European Aviation Club. "We have not reached any agreement at this point."
Boeing stock rose $2 to $108.125 in New York Stock Exchange trading, and Delta gained $1.125 to $85.75.
Delta's current fleet of 531 jets is two-thirds Boeing, including some older narrow-body planes that need to be replaced or modified to meet upcoming noise requirements.
A Boeing spokeswoman said the manufacturer was offering Delta its wide-body, twin-jet 777, although the airline also is considering the slightly smaller 767-400ERX, which is not yet in production, a fact Airbus is emphasising.
"If they would want something right away they take one of current airplanes Boeing has or the (Airbus) A330, so that's where the battle is," said Paul Nisbet of JSA Research.
Nick Heymann, an analyst at Natwest Securities, said the potential Delta deal could have "huge ramifications for the future of how airlines get their equipment."
"Boeing's strategy here is to be able to have such a complete product line that all their derivatives will be able to meet all their customers' needs even as their customers' markets fragment," he said.
The "one-stop shopping" concept is spreading across the aviation industry as manufacturers seek to increase their share of the lucrative market in services, Heymann said.
Just this week Boeing said it would eliminate its money-losing training organisation and instead offer training for commercial jet pilots and mechanics in a joint venture with Flight Safety International.
General Electric Co. expanded its aircraft engine servicing business by agreeing to acquire Greenwich Air Services Inc. and UNC Inc. for a total of $875 million plus the assumption of debt.
A deal with Delta would be similar to the agreement struck with American, a unit of AMR Corp., last year worth at least $6.5 billion over the next five years and up to $25 billion or more over 20 years.
But Wolfgang Demisch, analyst at BT Securities, pointed out that while the American deal has been described as a firm long-term commitment for the airline to buy all its jets from the Seattle-based manufacturer, it does not legally bind the carrier to accept prices that are not competitive.
"I view it as more of a statement of intent than anything else," he said. Given recent strong airline traffic, rising profits and expectations of growth, he said Delta would be tempted to accept Boeing's offer, which presumably guarantees competitive prices.
Analyst Bill Whitlow of Pacific Crest Securities disagreed, saying Delta management has been historically conservative, particularly compared with American's, and would be less likely to go with a single source.
"If you do that you lose the ability to pit each manufacturer off each other every time an order comes up," he said.
