A new osteoporosis drug reduces the risk of broken hips by 51 percent among women who already have suffered fractures caused by the debilitating bone disease, researchers said on Tuesday.
In research presented at a medical meeting, Dennis Black of the University of California at San Francisco said results were so promising that the first part of the study was ended early so all the participants could get the drug.
Black said 2,027 women aged 55 to 80 who previously had suffered spinal fractures due to the disease were enrolled in the study, with half of them getting the drug alendronate and half getting a placebo.
Women taking the drug were 51 percent less likely to suffer hip fractures over a three-year period and 55 percent less likely to suffer painful new spinal fractures.
Researchers ended the first phase of the study in October because they felt it would be unethical to continue giving patients the placebo, Black told the American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.
The second part of the research, studying the effect of the drug on 4,400 post-menopausal women with osteoporosis who had not suffered previous spinal fractures, will be completed early next year, Black said.
Alendronate, sold under the trade name Fosamax by Merck and Co., was approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration in October 1995 based on a smaller study that showed it increased bone mass density.
As of July 30 the company had generated $100 million in sales from the drug, a company spokeswoman said.
Merck has its eye on the even more lucrative market for prevention of osteoporosis, which affects an estimated 25 million Americans, the vast majority of them post-menopausal women who suffer bone loss when their bodies stop producing estrogen.
Currently only estrogen-based drugs are approved for prevention of osteoporosis, but Merck filed an application with the FDA in April seeking similar approval for Fosamax, a non-hormonal drug.
Researchers at the meeting were to present evidence on Wednesday that Fosamax stops bone loss and restores bone mass at the spine and hip.
Black noted that hip fractures are among the most debilitating symptoms of osteoporosis, leading to permanent disability in 50 percent of the cases and costing the U.S. economy $5.4 billion annually.
He said the research showed that "even women with advanced osteoporosis can benefit from treatment."
Another researcher at the conference presented a study showing that a class of drugs known as cytokine inhibitors prevents bone loss in laboratory rats, indicating a possible new treatment for osteoporosis.
