Edmark Corp, a U.S. maker of educational computer software for children, said on Monday that chairman and chief executive Sally Narodick had resigned for stress-related health reasons.
The company said Donna Stanger, vice-president for product development, would temporarily assume the duties of chief executive while the board of directors searched for a permanent successor.
Frances Conley, a director of the company and principal of Roanoke Capital Ltd, will serve as chairman of the board.
"As you can well imagine, it's an extremely difficult thing for me to acknowledge that I'm not a rock and I'm not invincible, and I'm having a tough time with that," Narodick told a news conference.
She said she first began experiencing symptoms including fatigue in June and took a two-week holiday. After returning to work, she again suffered symptoms including fatigue, insomnia and weight loss.
Late last month her doctors recommended that she take steps to lower her stress level.  
"I don't have energy... It's pretty clear that I need to take quite a bit of time off to rest and heal myself, and in this kind of environment the company needs somebody who's going to be fully in charge." Narodick said.
Her resignation comes at a time when the market for educational software is increasingly crowded, forcing Edmark and its rivals to drive down prices and compete fiercely for precious shelf space.
Edmark officials declined to comment on persistent speculation within the industry that the company might become a takeover candidate but said the change in top management would not alter their options.
Stanger said the company could continue to be a "very strong niche player" or could elect to merge "if the need for scale becomes important enough".
Conley said Edmark would survive the current turmoil within the company and the industry, noting the company's talent pool of more than 200 employees and strong balance sheet including more than $25 million in cash as of June 30.
Narodick, who said she had "great confidence" in Stanger, will remain on Edmark's board.
