Boeing Co.'s engineers union said Wednesday it has filed a charge of unfair labour practices over the aerospace giant's decision to merge its training unit into a new venture with FlightSafety International.
The Seattle Professional Engineering Employees Assocation, which represents more than 23,000 mostly white-collar workers at Boeing, said it filed a complaint asking the National Labour Relations Board to prevent Boeing from completing its deal until the legal issues are resolved.
Charles Bofferding, executive director of SPEEA, said the union had begun negotiations with Boeing after being surprised by the March 10 announcement of the deal with FlightSafety, which affects more than 600 Boeing employees, including about 240 union members.
Under the deal, Boeing and FlightSafety, a unit of Warren Buffett's Berkshire Hathaway Inc., each would contribute $100 million in assets to create an international training company for commercial jet pilots and ground crews.
Bofferding said Boeing already has agreed to guarantee that employees will be offered other jobs at Boeing if they do not get similar positions in the new venture, known as FlightSafety Boeing Training International.
But he was not optimistic Boeing would agree to union demands that engineers who switch to the new venture will be allowed to keep their Boeing wages and benefits as well as union membership.
"Those two issues frankly we don't think we're going to clear up in negotiations," Bofferding said. "It's very clear the company wants to give these people FlightSafety International benefits and strip away these people's union representation."
A Boeing official said in a statement the company was "disappointed" the union felt a need to file the charge with the NLRB.
"We recognise our obligation to engage in these discussions with the union and welcome the opportunity to do so," said the official, Sants Contreras.  "We have worked very hard over the last three years to build a strong, cooperative relationship with SPEEA, and we hoped to have more time to meet with the union on their concerns before they took this type of action."
The two sides will meet again Friday to continue their negotiations.
