Nike Inc. said Thursday that earnings jumped 77 percent in the latest quarter as worldwide sales of its athletic footwear and clothing surged.
The Beaverton, Ore.-based company said net income rose to $237.1 million or 80 cents a share, in its fiscal third quarter ended on Feb. 28, from $133.9 million, or 45 cents a share, a year earlier. Revenue rose 53 percent to $2.42 billion from $1.58 billion.
The earnings exceeded expectations of Wall Street analysts who had estimated Nike would earn 72 cents a share on average, according to First Call, which tracks profit forecasts.
Nike said worldwide orders for footwear and apparel to be delivered from March through July rose 34 percent from the year-earlier period to $4.3 billion.
"All of us out here at Nike are delighted with the quarter," Chairman Phil Knight said in a conference call with analysts and reporters.
In a statement, Knight said said revenues for the latest quarter rose more than 50 percent in each of the company's four geographic regions -- the United States, Europe, Asia-Pacific and the Americas.
"This is remarkably balanced growth for a company with trailing 12-month revenues approaching $9 billion," Knight said.
Nike said it U.S. sales of footwear and athletic apparel rose 51 percent to $1.34 billion, while international sales jumped 67 percent to $983 million. International sales would have been up 78 percent if currency changes were ignored.
"Obviously these are great numbers," said analyst John Rogers of Jensen Securities in Portland, Ore. "The surprising thing was not only the overall sales growth and margin growth but particularly the international component."
Nike officials said in the conference call the company's international sales were on track to surpass U.S. sales somewhere around the year 2000.
Rogers said the future orders figure, marking the 10th straight quarter of increases over 30 percent, was in line with estmimates.
"I think it's more than likely that order rates will slow from here as comparisons get tougher," he said.
