Amazon.com Inc., an online bookseller, is one of the best-known retailers on the Internet but faces a harsh investment climate and tough competition as it plunges into the stock market, industry analysts said Tuesday.
The rapidly growing Seattle-based company filed documents on Monday to sell about 10 percent of the company in an offering projected to raise up to $33 million.
That gives the company a market value of about $300 million despite a reported net loss of $5.8 million last year on sales of only $15.7 million.
While Amazon.com long has been considered a likely candidate for a public offering, some analysts were surprised by the timing, noting that technology stocks in general and Internet startups in particular have been hammered in recent months.
Some analysts speculated that Amazon.com decided to jump in now because of rising competition from bookselling giants Borders Group Inc. and Barnes &amp; Noble Inc., among others.
"I certainly think it's possible it came sooner rather than later because of the entry of those other players into that market," said Scott Smith, director of the digital commerce group at Jupiter Communications.
The competition already has sparked a price war, forcing Amazon.com to offer its 500 top titles at a 40 percent discount to list price, slashing its slim profit margins.
Smith and other analysts give Amazon.com high marks for identifying and exploiting a niche that seems particularly appropriate for online commerce.
"They can definitely make money at this," said Bill Bass, an analyst with Forrester Research. "The interesting thing will be to see how much of the market they'll be able to capture."
Amazon.com advertises itself as "Earth's Largest Bookstore" with an "inventory" of virtually all 1.5 million English-language books in print plus about 1 million out-of-print books, compared with about 200,000 titles at a typical superstore.
In fact Amazon.com keeps no more than a few thousand books on hand at its Seattle warehouse at any time, relying on its relationships with major distributors and publishers to order titles as needed and keep overhead low.
Jeff Bezos, the 33-year-old founder and chief executive of Amazon.com, said the secret to the company's success was its ability to develop strong relationships with customers.
"We are incredibly customer-obsessed," Bezos said Tuesday at PC Forum, a high-level industry conference in Tucson, Ariz.
"The Web is really primitive at this point," he said. "You have to make every customer an evangelist."
The company's filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission said repeat customers account for more than 40 percent of its business.
"I think it's absolutely possible to make money on the Web," Bezos said, while declining to comment specifically on the company's financial results. "You can sell products at lower prices and have higher margins with much lower overhead."
But Manesh Shah, publisher of IPO Maven, said the market has not been kind to Internet stocks since last summer, when momentum began shifting to large-capitalization issues.
"The market has been very negative on small-cap IPOs," he said. "I think they are hoping sometime between now and the end of the summer they get a window to get in."
Well-known Internet startups such as CNET Inc. and Yahoo Inc. have swung wildly, while Wired Ventures was forced to withdraw its planned offering due to a lack of interest.
Yahoo, which has never matched its peak of $43 a share attained on its first day of trading last year, currently trades around $28. CNET has fallen from as high as $35.75 this year to $24.50 Tuesday.
Even mighty Microsoft Corp. has seen its stock price slip 12 percent in recent weeks.
"Overall the sentiment is quite negative," Shah said.
