Itron Inc shares fell more than 25 percent after the company warned for the second quarter in a row that its results would fall short of expectations.
Itron was off 8-1/2 at 20-1/2 after the company said it expected to post a loss in the current quarter rather than $0.18 a share profit that analysts had expected on average.
The company blamed a utility industry slowdown in the pace of adopting its automated meter reading systems.  
"We believe the market slowdown is temporary as market forces will increasingly compel utilities to become more efficient providers," President and Chief Executive Officer Johnny Humphreys said in a statement.
Itron stock peaked at a record 60 in late April but then plummeted after the company warned that second- and third-quarter earnings would fall short of expectations due to aggressive price competition.  
In a conference call with analysts Wednesday, monitored on a tape-delayed basis, company executives said Itron could lose $0.10 to $0.20 a share in the current quarter, resulting in net income for the year in the $0.40 a share range, compared expectations of about $0.83.
And executives said net income next year likely would rise only to about last year's level of $0.78 a share, rather than the $1.29 a share analysts had expected on average, according to IBES.  
"The utilities that I've talked to all tell me it's a very good system," said John Rogers of Jensen Securities. "The question is when do they want to invest in it, and they have yet to make a complete commitment to it."
Humphreys said in the conference call that the company had been investing heavily in its "fixed network" line of products, which is not expected to become profitable until 1998.
Itron's current line of products allow utility workers to read meters simply by walking or driving down the streets where the devices are installed and collecting the information sent out by radio signal.
The network systems being tested include automated collection devices mounted on utility poles that would sned the information to a central point, virtually eliminating meter readers.
While Spokane, Wash.-based Itron is the leader in the industry, the company faces competition from  CellNet Data Systems Inc, which has filed for an initial public offering of stock and has just begin the process of meeting with potential investors, analysts said.
"It's definitely a short-term setback, and it probably means that next year's numbers are going to have to come down, but I think its a compelling long-term story," said analyst Rick Owens of Pacific Crest Securities, which downgraded its rating on the stock to "hold" from "buy."
He and other analysts said Itron had been expecting major utility orders for its meter-reading systems that repeatedly had been pushed into the future. 					-- Seattle bureau 206-386-4848
