Microsoft Corp. plunges into its latest online venture Thursday as it enters the hotly competitive market to supply local news and information over the Internet.
Microsoft's Sidewalk will be launched in the software giant's hometown of Seattle and add 10 to 15 cities by the end of the year, including New York, Washington, San Francisco and Sydney, Australia, executives said.
While Microsoft enters a field crowded with Internet startups, local niche players and established media powers, the software heavyweight, with its $10 billion cash hoard, brings nearly unmatched ability to sustain short-term losses, and few doubt its staying power.
"I think they will be a major presence," said Larry Gerbrandt, an analyst with Paul Kagan Associates. "They have the size to jump-start businesses. The question is whether a national infrastructure can be more efficient than a whole bunch of local entrepreneurs."
The field is crowded with both types of players, all aiming to get a slice of the highly fragmented $72 billion market in local advertising.
Microsoft's strategy is to focus on listings for entertainment and leisure activities led by restaurants, movies and music.
"The core thing we identified in our research was the fact that consumers are working more and more and have less free time," said Gayle Troberman, consumer marketing manager for Sidewalk. "So the choices they make become increasingly important."
The Seattle Sidewalk site offers users the ability to personalize content based on preferences and activate "agents" that will remind them about specific performers and events.
Articles written by an editorial staff of about 14 full-time journalists will highlight major events and trends, but the core of the site is a series of searchable databases of rated movies, restaurants, outdoor activities and events.
Microsoft is aiming to capture part of the revenue that traditionally goes to local newspapers, and at least in Seattle the dominant newspaper has acted quickly to protect its turf.
"If we don't respond, somebody will eat our lunch," said Michael Fancher, executive editor of The Seattle Times.
The newspaper speeded its planned Internet site to beat Seattle Sidewalk and on Wednesday announced an alliance with Digital City, the local news component of America Online Inc.
Fancher cited the newspaper's long-term commitment to providing regional news "regardless of the financial model."
"I don't think that this is a natural fit for Microsoft, and I think once they've stimulated the competition they'll move on," Fancher said.
Others are not so sure.
Charles Conn, chief executive officer of two-year-old CitySearch, which already operates in 12 U.S. cities, said Microsoft is one of its few rivals to build a journalistic presence in each city rather than simply provide a "hodgepodge of hypertext links."
"I'm glad to have another serious player in the business," Conn said. "I think we're going to see sites like CitySearch and Sidewalk really break through the clutter."
In contrast to Sidewalk's narrow entertainment focus, CitySearch provides a broad platform for community news and information, generally in partnership with a local news organisation.
CitySearch's financial model is also much different, based largely on creating and operating Internet sites for thousands of small and medium-sized businesses, which pay $49 to $99 a month.
Sidewalk's revenue at first will come exclusively from advertising, and Troberman said executives have been "excited" by their success in attracting local advertisers in Seattle and New York.
Local advertising will be sold in each city by agents from CUC International Inc. Sidewalk also has attracted support from national advertisers, including Barnes &amp; Noble, Citibank, Visa U.S.A. and United Airlines.
