Unionized workers said Thursday they have filed a class-action lawsuit against Albertson's Inc., charging the rapidly growing grocery store chain pressures them to work overtime without pay.
The United Food and Commercial Workers Union, which represents 31,000 of the company's 85,000 employees, said seven of its members filed the lawsuit in King County Superior Court in Seattle, seeking back wages that could total millions of dollars.
A union official said employees were preparing a similar action in California, where the Boise, Idaho-based chain has about 165 of its nearly 800 stores.
Joe Peterson, a special assistant to UFCW international President Douglas Dority, was not certain how many employees were covered by the Washington state suit but said back pay sought easily would run into the "millions."
He said the union, which also filed a complaint with the National Labor Relations Board, has sworn statements from more than 1,500 Albertson's employees contending they have been forced to miss breaks and pressured to work off the clock.
"The company has created conditions in its stores that foster off-the-clock work," Peterson said. "We think the off-the-clock practices have helped them in their expansion plans and have given them a competitive edge over retailers who have obeyed the law."
A spokesman for Alberston's denied the charges, noting that the retailer had filed a federal lawsuit in Boise this week seeking to force the union to go through a contractual grievance process.
"We are always very concerned any time an allegation is made that any of our employees may have worked off the clock for any reason," said Michael Read, the company's director of public and governmental affairs.
"It's a top priority for us to be sure that every employee is treated fairly and is paid in full for every minute worked," he said.
He contended the lawsuit was part of a union campaign aimed at damaging the company's reputation and boosting efforts to organize non-union stores.
Read said 40 percent to 50 percent of the company's workers are unionized, with the UFCW by far the biggest union.
With about $13 billion in annual sales, Albertson's is one of the nation's biggest grocery chains and has an ambitious plan to open more than 350 new stores in the next five years.
