Walt Disney Co.'s agreement to buy into billionaire Paul Allen's Starwave Corp. will mean little change for the online company's 300 employees, Chief Executive Officer Mike Slade said Thursday.
In an interview, Slade said Starwave would continue producing its nine Internet sites including the hugely popular ESPNet SportZone as well as a new ABC News site that will go online this month.
He said the long-expected announcement by Disney represented a natural evolution for Starwave, which has become one of the Internet's early success stories by focusing on sports and entertainment and teaming with well-known "brand names."
"What's really important is the big traditional media company and the Internet company get their strategic and economic interests completely aligned, and they are," Slade said. "These relationships are always complicated, but everyone's working for the exact same goal."
Disney and Starwave did not provide financial details, but Slade said the deal reduces Allen, co-founder of Microsoft Corp., to a minority shareholder with a single representative on Starwave's new board, which will be controlled by Disney.
Analysts said Disney paid about $100 million for a one-third stake, with a series of options to buy the rest over the next five years. Starwave employees also own shares.
Starwave was founded by Allen and Slade in 1993, before the Internet emerged as a commercial publishing platform. The company explored interactive television before developing content for proprietary online services and CD-ROMs.
"Then the Web came along," said Slade, who credited the company's chief technology officer Patrick Naughton and Progressive Networks founder Rob Glaser with persuading him to adopt an Internet business plan.
Starwave launched its sports product in late 1994 and signed the deal with ESPN -- now mostly owned by Disney -- the following spring.
The ESPNet site is considered one of the Web's most popular and one of the few mainstream areas that charge for access.
While basic sports results and information are free of charge, Slade said about 100,000 people pay to play in fantasy leagues or gain access to premium information at $4.95 a month.
Starwave also operates Mr. Showbiz, a well-regarded entertainment site, as well as a site for parents and children and official sites for professional football, basketball and auto racing.
Slade said Starwave's experience producing ESPNet would help in creating innovative features for the ABC News site.
Despite competition with virtually every major news organization including CNN, USA Today and NBC's joint venture with Microsoft, Slade was optimistic Disney could make money in news.
"One of the things about Disney that makes them the ideal partner is they never do things in a lackadaisical way," Slade said. "They marshal all the corporate resources and really make it happen."
