A huge cheer erupted in the newsroom of the Seattle Times shortly after 12 noon Monday when Washington state's largest newspaper learned it had won its sixth Pulitzer prize.
A few minutes later another cheer went up when the newspaper won its seventh.
"It was wild pandemonium," said business editor Rob Weisman.
For any but the nation's largest newspapers it is virtually unheard of to win more than one Pulitzer in a year, but the Seattle Times this year won in two prestigious categories  -- investigative reporting and beat reporting.
"We had two very competitive candidates, but the odds against winning two in a single year are so astronomical there's simply no way you can get your hopes up for something like that," said executive editor Mike Fancher.
With a daily circulation of 235,000, the Seattle Times barely ranks among the nation's 50 biggest newspapers.
The Pulitzer judges cited the Times for its series exploring corruption in a federally subsidised housing programme for native Americans and for beat reporter Byron Acohido's investigation of rudder control problems on the Boeing 737, the world's most widely used airplane.
Shortly after the series was published the Federal Aviation Administration called for inspection of all U.S.-based models for any possible jamming of rudder parts, and Boeing announced it was working on a modification.
Throughout his investigation, Acohido encountered what Fancher called a "very hostile reaction" from Boeing, the region's dominant employer.
At one point the company issued a statement saying it refused to cooperate with Acohido because "we have lost all confidence that he is capable of objective reporting when it comes to Boeing."
"In terms of access to Boeing they've treated me consistently, which means minimum access," Acohido said. "There are other ways of getting information."
The Pulitzer was the second for Times reporter Eric Nalder, who was part of the investigative team that also included Deborah Nelson and Alex Tizon.
Their report on inequities in subsidised Indian housing led to congressional hearings and proposals to change the law governing the programme.
"In both stories the immediate aftermath was that things changed, and that's what good journalism is about," Fancher said.
Nalder also was part of the team that won the newspaper's last Pulitzer in 1990 for its coverage of the Exxon Valdez oil spill in Alaska.
