Boeing Co. plans to enter the airline maintenance business within the next several months as part of a drive by the jet manufacturer to develop new business opportunities, a top executive said Friday.
"It's one of the things we're looking at, and I'm quite sure we're going to do it," said Larry Clarkson, president of Boeing Enterprises, a new division of the company's commercial airplane group.
Clarkson said in an interview the company is negotiating with several potential partners, which he declined to identify, and might begin by forming a joint venture to provide maintenance for airlines that want to use outside contractors for the business.
The Wall Street Journal reported Friday that Boeing was pushing to take over the heavy-maintenance operations of several major carriers, possibly including British Airways Plc, but Clarkson said any such transaction would be a long way off.
"When it comes to, say, taking over the total maintenance of a major airline, it's going to take us a while," Clarkson said. "It's a very complicated thing to do."
A spokeswoman for British Airways declined comment.
Industry analysts said a move by Boeing into maintenance would make sense as a way to diversify the company's business beyond highly cyclical airplane manufacturing and weapons systems.
"If you can get into that business without stepping on your customer's toes I think it's a great idea," said Bill Whitlow of Pacific Crest Securities.
He and other analysts said the move was a reflection of Chief Executive Officer Phil Condit's efforts to diversify Boeing while the manufacturer is enjoying a record wave of new orders.
"This is a reflection of Phil Condit and his more aggressive nature than his predecessor and a reflection of the internal thinking that's going on as to where best could they deploy the huge amount of cash they're going to have on hand," said Paul Nisbet of JSA Research.
Boeing had $4.4 billion in cash at the end of last year, and Nisbet estimated that with the company's expected acquisition of McDonnell Douglas Corp. this year it will generate at least $1.5 billion in excess cash annually over the next several years.
Last month Boeing Enterprises announced a $200 million joint venture with FlightSafety International to offer pilot and ground crew training. FlightSafety is a unit of Berkshire Hathaway Inc.
The Boeing unit, formed in January, also has been exploring ways to profitably use the company's massive database of world airline inventories to help carriers maintain service records.
Boeing fell $1.75 to $100.375 on the New York Stock Exchange amid a drop of 148 points, or more than 2 percent, in the Dow Jones industrial average.
