Microsoft Corp Chief Financial Officer Mike Brown reiterated Thursday that he expects results in the current fourth quarter to be similar to the just-ended third quarter, which he called "sizzling."
But in an interview, Brown also said he expects Microsoft's growth to slow over the next five quarters based on difficult comparisons and a lack of planned major new upgrades.  
While the current fourth quarter is expected to show results similar to the $1.04 billion in net income and $3.21 billion in revenues posted for the period that ended March 31, Brown said the first quarter of fiscal 1998 could show a sequential downturn.
Brown said he expected results to rise sequentially after that.  
Brown also said that while the company's high-end Windows NT Workstation operating system is being pre-loaded on some new personal computers, the mix shift was not yet material to Microsoft's so-called OEM (original equipment manufacturer) revenues.
"It's just going to be more of a (fiscal) '99 phenomenon, not a '98 phenomenon," he said.
Brown said he expected a spike in revenues from the Office 97 upgrade would begin to tail off in the current quarter, although deferred revenues from product shipped earlier would prevent a sequential downturn.  
The next upgrade of Office will not be out until fiscal 1999, Brown said.
"So fiscal '98 is in the product cycle valley from a comparison standpoint, and that makes the comparison tough, even if business fundamentals are very good," Brown said.
And he said he expected the revenue surge from the higher-priced Windows 95 operating system to begin to tail off soon now that the product has been out 20 months.
Brown said he was "very excited" about the long-term future but said the earnings bar had been raised to an "all-time Olympic record."
"We haven't had very many quarters in which EPS went up 80 percent," he said. "That's not a quarter-in, quarter-out type of thing. This is just an incredible quarter."
((-- Reuters Seattle bureau 206-386-4848))
