Microsoft Corp.'s fiscal third-quarter profit jumped 85 percent to $1.04 billion, well beyond analysts' expectations, on strength in its core business, including sales of its Office 97 upgrade, the world's largest software company reported Thursday.
Microsoft Chief Financial Officer Mike Brown reiterated that he expects results in the current fourth quarter to be similar to the quarter ended March 31, which he termed "sizzling."
But in an interview Brown also said he expects Microsoft's growth to slow over the next five quarters based on difficult comparisons with year-earlier quarters and a lack of planned major new upgrades.
Net income, equal to 79 cents a share, rose from earnings of $562 million a year ago, or 44 cents a share, in the third quarter. The number easily topped Wall Street's consensus analyst forecast of 64 cents a share, according to First Call.
Revenues totalled $3.21 billion, a 45 percent increase over the $2.21 billion racked up in the same quarter a year ago. Analysts on average had predicted revenues of about $2.9 billion.
Microsoft released its latest results after financial markets closed. In after-hours trading, the Redmond, Wash.-based company's stock jumped $4.625 to $102.75 from its Nasdaq closing price, dealers said.
"Worldwide acceptance of Microsoft Office 97 ignited these outstanding results," Brown said in a statement.
Office 97, the latest upgrade of the company's best-selling software package, was launched in January. It combines "productivity applications" such as word processing and spreadsheets that accounted for an estimated $2 billion of the company's $8.7 billion in the prior fiscal year.
Brown said Microsoft also realised "solid gains" from sales of operating systems.
Microsoft makes the bulk of its money from "platforms," including the operating systems preloaded onto new personal computers, which generate about one-third of the company's revenues.
"However," Brown cautioned, "incredible results like these are seldom duplicated, and we are mindful of the very tough comparisons we will have in fiscal 1998."
Brown said in the interview that the first quarter of fiscal 1998 could show a downturn from the fourth fiscal quarter of 1997. He said he expected results to rise sequentially after that.
Brown said he expected a spike in revenues from the Office 97 upgrade would begin to tail off in the current quarter, although deferred revenues from product shipped earlier would prevent a sequential downturn.
The next upgrade of Office will not be out until fiscal 1999, Brown said.
"So, fiscal '98 is in the product cycle valley from a comparison standpoint, and that makes the comparison tough, even if business fundamentals are very good," he said.
Brown said he expected the revenue surge from the Windows 95 operating system to begin to tail off soon now that the product has been out 20 months.
Brown said he was "very excited" about the long-term future but said the earnings bar had been raised to an "all-time Olympic record."
"We haven't had very many quarters in which EPS (earnings pr share) went up 80 percent," he said. "That's not a quarter-in, quarter-out type of thing. This is just an incredible quarter."
