Microsoft Corp. said its third-quarter profit jumped 85 percent to $1.04 billion, well beyond analysts' expectations, on strength in its core Windows business and the new Office 97 upgrade.
The software giant's net income of 79 cents a share compared with earnings of $562 million, or 44 cents a share, in last year's fiscal third quarter. Revenues rose to a record $3.21 billion, a 45 percent increase over the $2.21 billion racked up in the year-ago quarter.
Analysts on average had forecast earnings of 64 cents a share and revenues of about $2.9 billion.
While Microsoft Chief Financial Officer Mike Brown reiterated that he expects growth to slow over the next year, analysts said they were impressed by the software giant's continuing ability to rack up huge gains.
"I was floored," said analyst Scott McAdams of Ragen MacKenzie, who predicted the stock would rise sharply Friday as analysts jack up their earnings estimates. "This was a 16-cylinder engine, and all cylinders were working."
Microsoft released the results after financial markets closed. In Nasdaq trading Thursday Microsoft fell 12.5 cents to $98.125, but the stock rose as high as $102.75 in after-hours trading, dealers said.
Microsoft credited strong revenues from the Office 97 bundle, released in January, which helped drive application and content revenues to $1.53 billion, up 24 percent from the year-earlier period.
But revenues from Microsoft's platform products, including the various Windows operating systems, rose 73 percent to $1.68 billion.
Sales of software preloaded on new computers to the so-called OEM (original equipment manufacturer) channel, rose 51 percent, faster than the PC growth rate, reflecting a continued shift to the higher-priced Windows 95 operating system from the older Windows 3.x.
In an interview, Brown said he expected growth to slow over the next five quarters based on difficult comparisons with year-earlier quarters and a lack of planned major new upgrades.
Brown said he was "very excited" about the long-term future but said the earnings bar had been raised to an "all-time Olympic record."
"We haven't had very many quarters in which EPS (earnings per share) went up 80 percent," he said. "That's not a quarter-in, quarter-out type of thing. This is just an incredible quarter."
In fact, he said results from the current fourth quarter would be roughly equivalent to the period that just ended, and he predicted a modest sequential decline in revenues and earnings in the seasonally slow September quarter. But after that sequential growth should resume, Brown said.
Because Microsoft exceeded third-quarter expectations by 15 cents per share, analysts likely will have to raise fiscal 1997 estimates to about $2.65 per share from the previous $2.35, McAdams said. Fiscal 1998 estimates also are likely to be raised, he said.
McAdams also pointed out that the company's "unearned" revenues of $1.29 billion included an additional 13 cents per share that was taken in but not recognized as earnings in the quarter. Microsoft defers some revenues to account for costs over the life cycle of products such as Windows and Office.
While Microsoft routinely beats earnings estimates, analysts said they had not even heard a "whisper" of the blowout number, and Microsoft's stock has traded in a relatively narrow range over the past two months.
"It's just an extraordinarily well-managed company to deliver that kind of earnings upside on this size of a revenue base," said analyst David Readerman of Montgomery Securities.
