Microsoft Corp. stock surged almost 10 percent Friday after the software giant reported an 85 percent increase in quarterly earnings, smashing Wall Street estimates.
Microsoft was up $9 at $107.125 in afternoon trading on Nasdaq and was by far the most active issue with 23 million shares changing hands.
While Microsoft keeps expectations low and then routinely surpasses them, analysts were stunned by the results reported late Thursday from the latest quarter, which included earnings that were 23 percent higher than estimates.
"I think it's the best quarter I've ever seen," said Scott McAdams, who has watched the company for years as an analayst at Ragen MacKenzie in Seattle. "I was floored."
As they always do, Microsoft executives warned they could not sustain the current pace, and analysts agreed growth will slow over the next five quarters, particularly when the company faces comparisons with the period that just ended.
But coupled with better-than-expected earnings from its hardware ally Intel Corp., Microsoft's results reflect fundamental strength in the personal computer industry, analysts said.
"The combination of very strong returns from Microsoft and very strong returns from Intel certainly indicates we're still in an upswing, and I dont believe we've hit the maximum level," said Rob Enderle, senior analyst with Giga Information Group.
He and other analysts said the strong sales were being driven by a shift to 32-bit operating systems and applications led by Microsoft's Windows 95 operating system and its Office 97 desktop programmes.
While Windows 95 has been on the market for 20 months, "the original uptake was not that dramatic," particularly among corporate users, said Drew Brosseau of Cowen &amp; Co.
He said only 20 percent of large organisations had moved to a 32-bit desktop from the older 16-bit DOS and Windows operating systems by the end of 1996.
But last year's release of Microsoft's Windows NT version 4.0 cleared a "logjam" and triggered the current sales surge by allowing corporate managers to make an informed choice between Microsoft's two main operating systems, Brosseau said.
"It's pretty clear that momentum is going to continue through the end of the year," Brosseau said.
Meanwhile Microsoft has another ace up its sleeve in its line of server software for corporate networks, led by the Windows NT Server operating system and the BackOffice group of applications.
Analyst Rick Sherlund of Goldman Sachs estimated sales of Microsoft's business systems would rise to $1.5 billion this year from $750 million last year.
Sherlund was among many analysts who raised Microsoft earnings estimates for the current quarter and the fiscal year that begins July 1.
For its fiscal third quarter ending March 31, Microsoft reported earnings of $1.04 billion or 79 cents a share, compared with $562 million or 44 cents a share a year earlier. Analysts on average expected earnings of 64 cents a share.
Revenue for the quarter rose to $3.21 billion from $2.21 billion, smashing estimates the company would bring in $2.9 billion in revenues.
