Microsoft Corp. Monday plans to announce a version of its Windows 95 operating system for hand-held consumer devices that will be available this year, according to sources familiar with the company's plans.
The Windows CE system for consumer electronics comes two years after Microsoft scuttled a similar project known as Winpad because its intensive memory requirements would have made the hardware too costly.
Since then the explosive growth of the Internet has expanded the market possibilities for small wireless devices, while Microsoft rival Oracle Corp. has popularised the concept of a $500 consumer device for accessing the Internet.
Microsoft officials declined to comment, but the company said it would have an announcement early Monday on "a significant addition in the area of Microsoft Windows platform software."
Microsoft executives previously had disclosed plans to supply a system for hand-held devices in time for the holiday season.
The devices, ranging from a "smart" wireless telephone to personal organisers with communcations capabilities, will be marketed by eight computer and consumer electronics companies including Hewlett-Packard Co., Casio Computer Co. Ltd., and Philips Electronics NV, industry analysts said.
The operating system will include stripped-down versions of Microsoft's Word and Excel applications and are likely to have some ability to get information off the Internet's World Wide Web.
But with their tiny, monochrome screens, analysts believe they will be used at first largely for accessing electronic mail and personal information such as telephone numbers and appointments.
"The Web doesn't look good on a 4-inch screen," said analyst Mike McGuire of Dataquest. "What this is about is Internet transactions and communications."
While hand-held "personal digital assistants" such as Apple Computer Inc.'s Newton have been available for several years the products have failed to grow beyond a niche category in part because of the difficulty of swapping information between them and desktop computers, analysts say.
Microsoft aims to break that logjam with its new system, built for RISC microprocessors from Hitachi and others rather than the Intel Corp. processors used for most Windows-based computers.
But at $500 -- or close to $1,000 for a machine fully loaded with communications accessories -- price will continue to be an obstacle, said analyst Rob Enderle of Giga Information Group, who said the "sweet spot" for small devices was about $300.
"I don't really think the market is going to really jump off in big number until next year," he said.
McGuire of Dataquest estimated worldwide shipments of hand-held devices would rise to at least 5 million units a year by the end of the decade from the current 1 million.
While that's still relatively small compared with a personal computer market of about 60 million units annually, Microsoft needs to protect its Windows franchise from any potential incursion, said analyst Scott McAdams of Ragen MacKenzie.
"If you let someone else get that operating system, over time someone could start working that system upmarket," he said. "Microsoft needs to be a player here."
Microsoft move into hand-held systems could pose a threat to U.S. Robotics Corp. and Britain's Psion Software Plc, two of the most successful marketers of proprietary hand-held products.
The Windows CE system also could be licensed for use with a rival to Oracle's  Network Computer, analysts said.
