Boeing Co. said Monday first-quarter profit more than doubled and sales rose 70 percent as it ramped up airplane production, but the results disappointed Wall Street and the company's stock tumbled.
Boeing said it earned $313 million, or 87 cents a share, in the quarter, excluding an accounting credit, compared with $119 million, or 35 cents a share, a year earlier. Revenue soared to $7.32 billion from $4.29 billion.
But Boeing's net income was 13 percent below the Wall Street consensus of $1 a share, according to First Call, and its stock fell $6.625 to close at $95.375 on the New York Stock Exchange, where it was the most active issue.
"The stock is down because earnings came in quite a bit below the consensus. That's it in a nutshell," said Peter Jacobs, an analyst at Ragen MacKenzie in Seattle.
Analysts said Boeing's earnings were hurt by higher-than-expected expenses for new airplane models and other projects including a commercial space venture.
The company also said it was incurring significant overtime costs as it increases production to meet rising demand and warned that profit margins would be under pressure for the rest of the year.
"It's sort of a wake-up call to some analysts who I think have been a little too optimistic about their margins," said analyst Bob Toomey of Piper Jaffray.
Boeing said profit margins would be lower for the rest of the year because of a shift toward deliveries of the new 777 and next-generation 737 models. New models carry lower profit margins until the company has written down the costs of production equipment.
At the annual shareholders meeting, Chairman Phil Condit said the two new models would account for half of Boeing's production next year, but he said the industry's fundamentals remained strong.
"I'm very optimistic about the upturn in our commercial airplane business as well as our prospects in defence and space," Condit said. "We're excited about the future of this company."
Boeing delivered 68 commercial aircraft in the quarter, up from 40 in the year-earlier period when production was still hampered by the effects of a 10-week strike.
For this year, Boeing reiterated that it expects to deliver 340 jets and generate revenue of $33 billion, compared with 218 jets and revenues of $22.7 billion last year.
That includes former defence and space operations of Rockwell International Corp., absorbed in December, but not the planned acquisition of McDonnell Douglas Corp., which Boeing executives say will be completed in August, adding about $15 billion of annual revenue.
Analysts expect Boeing production to continue rising in 1998 to about 450 jets as the world's biggest commercial planemaker works to meet surging industry demand.
"You expect that if you're ramping up rates there would be some costs incurred, and that's clearly what's happening," said Wolfgang Demisch of BT Securities.
But he said he was encouraged that Boeing still expects to meet its production target for the year.
"There always is a significant risk of running into some sort of shortfall, and all of a sudden you wind up with airplanes that ... are most of the way done and missing some critical parts," he said.
That happened to Boeing in the late 1960s, when the company nearly went bankrupt, he said.
This time around there is no such danger, as the company said it had $5.5 billion in cash at the end of the quarter, up slightly from three months early. Boeing's backlog rose to $89.2 billion from $87.7 billion three months earlier, chiefly because of new defence contracts.
Boeing also recorded a $64 million accounting credit related to an employee-benefit trust fund.
Boeing shares were also pressured by other factors, including a report in the London Times that Boeing rivals Lockheed Martin Corp. and Airbus Industrie were discussing a possible merger.
An Airbus spokeswoman denied the report Monday but said the European consortium was in discussions with many aerospace companies, particularly about joining its proposed A3XX jumbo jet project.
At the shareholders meeting, Condit reiterated that he was optimistic Boeing would complete its planned merger with McDonnell Douglas despite concerns raised by European Union authorities. A special meeting of Boeing shareholders to approve the merger has been set for July 25.
