Nike Inc., the world's largest maker of athletic footwear, reported a 24 percent jump in first-quarter profits Monday, reflecting strong demand for its shoes and apparel around the world.
The Beaverton, Ore.-based company also announced a two-for-one stock split, its second in two years.
For the three months ended Aug. 31, Nike earned $226.1 million, or $1.53 a share, up from $182.1 million or $1.25 a share a year ago. Revenues jumped 34 percent to $2.28 billion from $1.70 billion last year.
The earnings were slightly better than the $1.51 a share industry analysts had expected on average.
But the company's stock jumped sharply on news that Nike had taken orders for $3.5 billion in footwear and apparel through January, a 66 percent increase over the year-earlier period, analysts said.
"The futures were up beyond anybody's expectations," said Shelly Hale Young of Hambrecht &amp; Quist, who said few expected Nike to top the 55 percent increase in advance orders reported three months ago.
As a result, she and other analysts raised their Nike earnings estimates for the rest of the year, and Nike stock rose $2.375 to a record close of $121.625 on the New York Stock Exchange.
"Management is very pleased with these results," Nike Chairman Phil Knight said in a conference call with analysts and reporters.
In a statement, he said Nike's "brand strength, which many thought was nearing its peak last year, continues to grow unabated in fiscal 1997."
Indeed U.S. sales of Nike footwear surged 27 percent to over $1 billion in the quarter, while the overall market is growing at only about an 8 percent rate.
Young of Hambrecht &amp; Quist said she expected Nike to raise its share of the U.S. footwear market to 43 percent by the end of the fiscal year from 37 percent, with most of the increase coming at the expense of rival Reebok International Ltd.
The increase is coming even as Nike imposes a 7 percent rise in the price of its shoes, which can top $100 a pair.
Young said Nike's aggressive marketing and focus on footwear technology have given it the edge.
"They have the better shoes and they have the brand that consumers want to buy, and therefore they can increase prices," she said.
Overseas, where Nike is not as well established in all markets, Nike sales rose 35 percent from last year's first quarter to $781 million, a figure that was hurt by fluctuations in the U.S. dollar.
The company also continued its strong performance in ahtletic apparel, where sales surged to $584 million, a 75 percent increase.
At the company's annual shareholders meeting in Beaverton, Ore., Knight and others strongly defended the company against rising criticism of its overseas manufacturing practices.
Shareholders overwhelmingly defeated a proposal for independent monitoring of the factories introduced by the United Methodist Church.
Knight blamed media reports for distorting Nike's record and said the company generally pays twice the minimum wage in countries where it operates.
He said the company recently had discovered "horrible conditions" among Pakistani workers -- including children -- sewing soccer balls at home under contract for Nike and had worked to establish centralized sewing centers that would eliminate the abuses.
Nike outside directors Jill Conway and John Thompson said they had traveled recently to Indonesia and Vietnam and were generally satisfied by factory conditions.
