Czech President Vaclav Havel on Wednesday told the nation that he had a near-death experience after radical surgery which removed a cancerous tumour in his lungs over four weeks ago.
Speaking publicly for the first time since the December 2 operation, Havel, looking thinner and grasping for breath but speaking clearly, reflected on his illness and the loss of his wife Olga to cancer last January.
"In the year we have just dismissed, I have faced death twice. First, when it came for my closest being, and second when it swirled around my hospital bed," he said in the videotaped nationally televised New Year's greeting.
Havel, in a reflective mood even more profound than usual for the former playwright, said both events caused great suffering and made him feel that the world was unjust.
"But on the other hand, both of these experiences, to my own surprise, I have perceived as great challenges for a new and far deeper consideration of the world in which we live."
Havel said that he pondered "about myself, about the mysterious order of human existence, and about the volume of signs or hidden messages which are speaking to us from within this order, which we are mostly ignoring."
Havel, the chain-smoking leader of Prague's bloodless 1989 revolution over communism, entered a clinic on November 25 with what his office called a case of pneumonia.
A week later Doctors performed exploratory surgery and found a small malignant tumour in the right lobe of his lungs.
Surgeons decided immediately to remove half of the lobe, and said later that it appeared that the cancer was caught in an early stage and had not spread to other tissue.
But Havel, aged 60, developed pneumonia in the left lobe soon after the surgery and fought off a high fever, the seriousness of which is only now coming to light.
For weeks he was on a respirator connected through his throat but was released from hospital on the day after Christmas after the pneumonia and fever subsided.
Doctors have said that Havel's condition has been steadily improving and his prospects for a full recovery are good.
The less than eight-minute address, which he taped in a business suit sitting at a desk in his private west Prague villa, replaced his traditional New Year's speech which is normally much longer.
Havel concentrated his prepared remarks on creating a deeper understanding of common goals in Czech society.
He recalled that 1996 brough many "important, beautiful, and painful" things to the Czech public.
He said the year was tainted by the failure of several banks, political spats, and various corruption which had emerged from the country's massive post-Communist privatisation programme and economic reforms.
"I implore you... to try to understand all of these ugly things as warning signs calling us all to a newer and deeper consideration of the sense of our common affairs," he said.
The greatly popular Havel also thanked all who have supported him through his illness, and said he hoped that Czechs still could rely on him.
The Czech agency CTK reported on Wednesday that Havel's staff at Prague Castle had agreed to stop smoking in the office in a show of solidarity with the president who was advised by doctors to give up his several-packs-a-day habit.
He made no mention however of his smoking in the speech.
Havel is expected in February to finalise a long-awaited declaration of reconciliation with Germany, which has been a focus of his presidency, aiming to put an end to anxiety of the neighbouring countries over World War Two and its aftermath.
