Czech President Vaclav Havel said on Wednesday he felt more deeply about the world after facing the possibility of death when he underwent major surgery to remove a cancerous lung tumour a month ago.
"In the year we have just dismissed, I have faced death twice. First when it came for my closest being and second when it swirled around my hospital bed," he said in a New Year address on national television.
Speaking publicly for the first time since the December 2 operation, Havel reflected on his illness and the loss of his wife Olga to cancer last January.
The former playwright, looking thinner, said both events had caused great suffering and made him feel the world was unjust.
"But on the other hand both of these experiences, to my own surprise, I have perceived as great challenges for a new and far deeper consideration of the world in which we live," said Havel.
He said he had thought "about myself, about the mysterious order of human existence, and about the volume of signs or hidden messages which are speaking to us from within this order, which we are mostly ignoring."
Havel, the chain-smoking leader of Prague's bloodless 1989 overthrow of Communist rule, entered a clinic on November 25 with what his office called a case of pneumonia.
A week later doctors performed exploratory surgery and found a small malignant tumour in his lungs.
Surgeons decided to operate immediately and said later it appeared the cancer had been caught at an early stage and had not spread.
But Havel, 60, developed pneumonia in his lungs soon afterwards and fought off a high fever, the seriousness of which is only now coming to light.
For a while he was on a respirator connected through his throat but was released from hospital the day after Christmas.
Doctors have said Havel's condition has been steadily improving and that his prospects for a full recovery were good.
The just under eight-minute address, which he made in a business suit sitting at a desk in his private west Prague villa, replaced his traditional and normally much longer New Year's speech.
Havel called for a deeper understanding of common goals in Czech society.
He said 1996 had brought many "important, beautiful, and painful" things to the Czech public.
The year was tainted by the failure of several banks, political spats and corruption cases which had emerged from the country's massive post-Communist privatisation programme and economic reforms.
"I implore you...to try to understand all of these ugly things as warning signs calling us all to a newer and deeper consideration of the sense of our common affairs," he said.
Havel thanked all who had supported him through his illness and said he hoped Czechs could still rely on him.
The Czech news agency CTK reported on Wednesday that Havel's staff at Prague Castle had agreed to stop smoking in the office in a show of solidarity with the president, who has been advised by doctors to give up his several packs a day habit.
