Pop singer Michael Jackson came to Prague on Tuesday to launch his first tour in two years as promoters erected a huge statue of the star on a hill over the city where a monument to Soviet boss Josef Stalin once stood.
Jackson's three-month "HIStory" tour through Europe, Africa and Asia kicks off on Saturday with a concert on Prague's Letna Plain where 130,000 are expected, but he arrived four days early to do some sightseeing in and around the Czech capital.
After his jet sat for half an hour on the tarmac of Prague airport's VIP terminal, the flamboyant but reclusive Jackson emerged in a gold lame and red outfit under a white parasol blocking the bright sun.
Several hundred fans handpicked by promoters greeted the star, and he hugged several fans who presented gifts on the tarmac before Jackson's motorcade left.
After waving at others lining the 15 km (10 mile) route into the city from a gleaming Rolls Royce, Jackson and his police-escorted phalynx of luxury cars carrying his entourage drove through a screaming hotel welcoming party.
Thousands of fans amassed at the hotel on the river Vltava (Moldau), climbing over each other for a glimpse of the star on his first tour since he was cleared of child molestation charges by a U.S. court because of lack of evidence.
Pavel Klika, in his late teens from the southern Czech city of Tabor, played a human "K" in a seven-member group spelling out J-A-C-K-S-O-N for his arrival.
"I had to come here to see him to really beleive he was in the Czech Republic, even though I have a ticket to see him on Saturday -- I just couldn't wait," Klika said.
The singer's penthouse suite Prague faces the hill where a 10-metre (33 foot) water-filled statue of Jackson takes up the rock pedastal where Communists built a massive monument to Stalin which they later blew up up after his death in 1953.
Despite complaints about the Jackson statue in some quarters, Prague City Hall finally approved its placement until the concert is completed on Saturday.
Two huge torches on either side of Jackson's statue were lit recalling the days when Stalin's Cult of Personality kept two Olympic-style flames burning.
The Prague stop, Jackson's first visit to the Czech capital in a long series of rock concerts since the fall of Communism here in 1989, has so far avoided the controversy at other planned dates on his tour.
In South Korea, civic and religious groups reacted bitterly to a decision to let Jackson play two concerts in Seoul in October, saying it was unbelievable that the government agreed to to make an "amoral singer" the teenagers' idol.
A planned stop in Casablanca was cancelled by Moroccan authorities, without explanation. A concert organiser said the government did not want 100,000 youths all in the same place.
