Burmese democracy leader Aung San Suu Kyi received on Friday an honorary doctorate in absentia from Prague's Charles University in a show of Czech solidarity with Burma's democrats.
The Nobel laureate's husband, British professor Michael Aris, accepted the honour for Suu Kyi who has been largely confined to her house and told by military rulers that if she left Burma she would not be permitted to return.
The six-centuries-old Czech university awarded the Doctor of Law degree on the 20th anniversary of Prague's Charter 77 human rights declaration, for Suu Kyi's "active participation in the fight for democracy, freedom and human rights".
In a speech read by Aris, Suu Kyi said that the fight of her National League for Democracy (NLD) was "a struggle that knows little respite."
She said that Prague's 1989 bloodless "gentle revolution" over communism, which was in large part inspired by the Charter, formed a special bond with Burma's democracy campaigners and "provided hope and practical lessons".
"An idea whose time has come cannot be crushed," she said.
Suu Kyi's NLD won a landslide victory in a 1990 election, but has never taken power because the military government rejected the results of the poll.
In commemorating Burma's 49th anniversary of independence from Britain last week, Suu Kyi vowed to step up her efforts to bring democracy to Burma despite restrictions on her and her supporters.
In December, troops and riot police used water cannon and batons to force thousands of student demonstrators off the streets in the biggest anti-government demonstrations seen since national protests in 1988.
Czech President Vaclav Havel, a former dissident against communism who helped forge the Charter and led the 1989 democratic revolution, promised "support and solidarity" to Burma's democrats, in a statement read at the ceremony.
In the speech read by Aris, Suu Kyi said that like the Czech democrats, who were ignored by the top communist rulers until the revolution, Burma's democracy campaign was mired in "a one-sided dialogue with police and security forces".
Aris said that Suu Kyi's speech was delivered to him from Burma with great difficulty.
