Seven years after the "Velvet Revolution" over communism, journalists still do not have to check their political views at the gate to Prague Castle, but they now better hide their Rolling Stones t-shirts under more serious attire.
On Monday, the spokesmen for the Czech president, prime minister, and both houses of parliament issued a joint statement asking media to respect "the normal protocolled parts of life of the historical areas of our institutions."
In other words: "Please...devote attention... to the society dress of your reporters."
If enforced, it marks the end of an era for one of the most ecclectically-clad European press corps, although it came without a formal dress code. Many journalists said the statement left much to subjective interpretation.
"Society dress? Whose society? This IS the dress of our society," said one normally casual Czech reporter.
Liberated by the bloodless 1989 coup led by the sweatered dissident playwright Vaclav Havel and other crumpled intellectuals, much of Prague's free press has carried on the no-holds-barred approach to many high-brow functions.
Government and presidential news conferences are often festooned with jeans, rock concert t-shirts and pullovers, but an increasing number of business suits have recently snuck in.
When Havel made the unlikely ascent from prisoner to president in 1989, an emergency tailor was dispatched to complete his first suit so he could take the oath of office.
But as the years roll on, Havel, who once rode a child's scooter through Prague Castle's Baroque halls, has developed a taste for finer suits and the trappings of protocol.
"These rules are respected by all workers and guests; there's nothing preventing journalists also from coming to actions organised by our offices in society dress," Monday's statement said.
But the times are not changing so quickly.
Despite having a dapper prime minister, Vaclav Klaus, who routinely wins opinion polls as best dressed in Bohemia, many of Prague's most well-respected democrats do not associate a free market and a free society with a rigid dress code.
At a reception on the 20th anniversary of the Charter 77 human rights declaration earlier this month, dissidents, reporters, and ministers mixed in Prague Castle's gilded Spanish Hall, the most formal of the country's salons.
Amid the mirrors, porcelain, and stucco of the magnificent room, guests rocked the night away in everything from waistcoats to the best picks of garage sale bins.
And while actors dressed in former communist police uniforms symbolically kept an eye on the event, the real interior minister's rat tail hairdo belied his new establishment suit.
