Standard &amp; Poor's (S&amp;P) on Tuesday gave investment grade ratings to three of the four largest Czech banks, but said the high marks were partly due to an implied safety net for the banks provided by the state.
In its first quality debt ratings for commercial banks in former communist Europe, S&amp;P gave long-term ratings of BBB-minus to Komercni Banka a.s. , Ceska Sporitelna a.s. , and Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka a.s..
It also issued all three banks short-term ratings of A3 for counterparty risk in trade with other banks.
The ratings fell short of the Czech Republic's sovereign rating of A, but were similar to the marks issued to the Slovak, Polish, and Greek central banks, and one grade above Hungarian sovereign debt.
But in explaining the ratings, S&amp;P said the three banks' size and position in the market made it "highly likely that the Czech government would provide support" if needed.
Thus, the ratings were higher than they would have been if based solely on each bank's financial situation.
S&amp;P did not give a rating for the third largest Czech bank, IPB a.s. , which is waiting for a roughly one-third stake to be privatised in a tender later this spring.
S&amp;P said Komercni had 25 percent of Czech deposits, 26 percent of the credit market and conducted 10 percent of total trading on the Prague Stock Exchange last year.
"Given the bank's size, its importance to the country's financial system, and position in the market, S&amp;P believes state support would be forthcoming if required in the future, although no formal guarantee exists," it said of Komercni, the country's largest commercial bank.
It said that Komercni's classified loans totalled 35.4 percent at the end of September and its outlook was stable.
Komercni's deputy general director Borivoj Prazak told reporters after the announcement that the bank was "very glad" to receive the ratings. "We held our ground," despite slower than expected Czech macroeconomic growth, he said.
As with the other two banks, the Czech government has a major stake in Komcerni, 48.7 percent.
The government has said it plans to privatise all state-held banks, so getting the ratings based on the tacit state safety net adds more intrigue to the debate over the speed and extent of Czech banking privatisation.
S&amp;P noted that Sporitelna, the former Communist savings bank where virtually all deposits were kept, was still "the most important player in Czech retail banking" but said it "remains vulnerable to further problems within the sector".
"(Sporitelna's) asset quality problems remain a concern with customer loans classified as non-standard amounting to 43.6 billion crowns, representing 31.8 percent of gross customer loans at year-end 1995," S&amp;P said.
It said that CSOB's ratings reflected the bank's strong position in foreign trade financing and its joint ownership by the Czech and Slovak governments.
The S&amp;P report said CSOB's non-standard loan level had dropped to 41 percent of gross customer loans by the end of 1995 from 51 percent at the end of the previous year.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
