Czech National Bank (CNB) Governor Josef Tosovsky said on Thursday he could see no sense in the crown's recent sharp rise amid a wave of Eurobond issues in the currency.
Tosovsky also told a news conference on 1997 monetary policy that a marked reduction in money supply growth had created good conditions for lowering inflation and interest rates.
But the central bank would remain cautious, and lowering the M2 growth rate would still be the main goal, he added.
The crown has surged since the New Year despite a steadily worsening trade balance, with an unprecedented 24 billion crowns ($862 million) in new Eurobonds issued in the currency.
"I don't see any rational reason for the strengthening of the crown in the past few days," Tosovsky said.
But he indicated that the central bank was still comfortable with the crown's rise even though it has climbed to nearly five percent above parity with its mark/dollar basket, which the CNB uses for fixing the currency daily.
Almost a year ago the CNB widened the band in which the crown is fixed to 7.5 percent either side of the midpoint of basket from 0.5 percent either side.
"We widened the band so the crown could move freely within it...," said Tosovsky. "A strong crown is the long-term policy of the central bank."
The crown slipped on Thursday morning due to Tosovsky's comments, dropping to 4.32 percent above the midpoint from around +4.50 percent before he spoke.
But it recovered to 27.770 crowns to the dollar and 16.925 to the mark, or 4.67 percent above parity, after the German bank Suedwest LB ignored Tosovsky's comments and issued another one billion crowns in Eurobonds.
"Obviously there was a large issue of Eurobonds in recent days but we do not see any macro-economic reasons for such an issue," Tosovsky said. Asked if there was a herd mentality in issuing these bonds, he said: "Yes."
Analysts said issuers of one to two-year crown Eurobonds were taking advantage of relatively wide interest rate differentials with major currencies and an inverted yield curve.
Tosovsky also said the CNB aimed to lower the M2 growth rate even further within its target range of eight to 12 percent.
M2 growth slowed in November to 9.7 percent year-on-year from 9.8 percent in October, and 22.1 percent in November 1995.
The slow down began after the CNB raised its discount rate one percentage point to 10.5 percent in June and raised minimum reserve requirements for banks to 11.5 percent from 8.5 percent.
Tosovsky said the inflation target of 7.9 percent for 1997 depended on growth of government regulated prices -- heating costs and housing rents -- not exceeding 15.2 percent.
The CNB's target implied core inflation of about five percent, and a rise in food prices of about seven percent.
But the cabinet is debating fiercely how much to deregulate the politically sensitive cost of energy and housing.
Tosovsky said that a slowing in real wage growth would also be a condition for meeting the targets.
The other major concern, he said, was the continually worsening trade deficit, and thus the current account deficit, which some analysts have said may surpass eight percent of gross domestic product this year.
Tosovsky said it was important to keep demand for imports under control, and implied that interest rates could not be quickly lowered as a result.
"We are trying to hold back aggregate demand. These restrictions should be also reflected in imports," he said.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003 ($1=27.84 Czech Crown)
