Czech Industry and Trade Minister Vladimir Dlouhy said if the rapid expansion in the country's current account deficit does not subside by the end of next year, a devaluation of the crown might be needed.
Speaking on Czech Television late on Wednesday, Dlouhy repeated government policy that a devaluation is currently not necessary to boost exports and stem the current account defict forecast at 5 to 6 percent of gross domestic product this year.
In a panel discussion, Dlouhy was asked whether he could see the need for a devaluation of the crown in the future, if the deficit kept growing.
"If (growth in the deficit) doesn't stop, then I think at the turn of 1997-98 it will be the time when you will correctly push me into more emphatic measures of the types that I would not like to take, like a devaluation," he said.
Some independent economists have suggested that a nominal devaluation in the currency might be needed if the record trade deficit does not subside.
But the government and other economists have said that net capital inflow, plus tourism and services revenue should comfortably pay for a merchandise trade deficit which grew to 85.3 billion crowns in the first seven months of 1996.
That compares with a 49.5 billion crown trade deficit for the same period last year.
"I would like to see a stabilisation of the increase of the deficit during the first half of next year," Dlouhy said.
"If it ranges around five percent of GDP, this economy, with its revenue from tourism and services, is capable of financing it."
Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus and central bank governor Josef Tosovsky have both recently ruled out a devaluation. Tosovsky said a strong crown would force companies to be more efficient.
The comments sent the crown to its all-time high last Friday against the mark/dollar basket to which it is pegged each day, but profit taking has eased the currency a bit in recent days.
Dlouhy added that he is strongly against protectionist measures, but would seek to use other tools to help the trade balance.
"I will never agree with (an) import surcharge or higher protectionism, but I will agree with using the relevant legislative tools like the anti-dumping law, stricter (quality) controls, and more money for pro-export policy," Dlouhy said.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
