Czech politicians are struggling to overcome scepticism about the merits of NATO membership, with opinion polls consistently showing Czechs the coolest of the central European frontrunners towards joining the bloc.
While surveys show a majority of Hungarians and Poles in favour of joining the alliance, they say less than 40 percent of Czech citizens back NATO membership.
"Many consider NATO to be just military manoeuvres around Europe, and maybe it is our fault that we haven't been able to explain the importance in the solidarity of values," Czech Senate Chairman Petr Pithart told Reuters in an interview.
But Pithart, elected to chair the new upper house of parliament in December, also believes there is a lingering lack of respect for the army which would make a referendum on NATO membership, sought by the political opposition, irrelevant.
"The relationship to NATO, the less strong will here compared with Poland or Hungary or wherever, is evidently for me more a result of the scepticism against the army of the Czech republic than against NATO," Pithart said on Thursday.
The Czechs, along with Poland and Hungary, are widely expected to be invited to join NATO (North Atlantic Treaty Organisation) at a summit of member states in July.
NATO membership has been the top foreign policy aspiration of the Czech government, along with joining the European Union.
Disdain for the Czech army built up after World War Two and during 40 years of communism, when many Czechs saw the military as subservient to Moscow.
Opinion polls also show that many people are simply tired of being tied to a military bloc.
Pithart, who was the Czech Republic's first post-Communist prime minister and is now affiliated to the centre-right Christian Democrats, is joined in his opposition to a referendum on NATO by the conservative current Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus.
But the chairman of the lower house, Social Democrat leader Milos Zeman, has joined ultra-right and Communist members of parliament in calling for a referendum, although he says he and his opposition party are in favour of joining NATO.
"Certainly to be against holding a referendum is dangerous because it indicates you feel a majority of people are against (NATO membership)," said Pithart, a political scientist and leading dissident under Communism.
"But to use (a referendum), which we've never used in the political tradition of this country, is absurd."
Pithart said Czech politicians must start rebuilding the prestige of the military by pointing out the army's solid performance with NATO in the IFOR and SFOR missions in Bosnia.
"Because in our modern history one of the major casualties is that the army has somewhat lost prestige and...respect," Pithart said.
Echoing a favourite theme of his friend, President Vaclav Havel, Pithart said it was necessary to also stress the non-military underpinnings of NATO representing a family of democratic nations in Europe.
