Czech railway unions said on Monday they would begin a nationwide strike at midnight demanding a complete overhaul of the decrepit rail system, and adding to growing unrest among public sector workers.
The planned 48-hour strike, seeking a long-term plan to revive the failing state railways, is expected to completely shut passenger and freight traffic on domestic and international lines throughout the Czech Republic.
"We certainly will strike from midnight," the executive secretary of the Association of Unions of Rail Workers (OSZ), Zdenek Jilek, told Reuters.
In a statement, the OSZ said that if it did not get sufficient guarantees to repair what it says are massive problems in the quality and development of the state railways Ceske Drahy, it would prolong the strike.
"It will be repeated every 24 hours," the OSZ said.
Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus was quoted by the CTK news agency as saying on Monday that a new development plan for the railways had already been negotiated with union leaders, and the unions were simply impatient for a result.
"If they could not hold on until when we meet again, and they call a strike, then they are taking a great risk in front of 10 million people of this country," he was quoted as saying.
The action comes on top of an alternating "chain" strike started last week by teachers and school workers who are forcing the closure each day of selected primary and secondary schools throughout the country.
The school strikes, for pay increases and more state expenditure on teaching resources, are alternating each day among various districts.
There have also been persistent threats of industrial action by doctors and health-care workers, especially at large state clinics and hospitals which have fallen into insolvency.
The centre-right coalition government has resisted giving into public sector demands which might threaten its fiscally-hawkish reputation.
The country posted its first state budget deficit in 1996, at just over a billion crowns, after three straight years with a budget surplus.
The rail union leaders said that their action carries no demands for pay increases, but is rather to clean up what it says are "massive problems" in the leadership of Ceske Drahy and the transport policy of the Czech government.
They said that the condition of the rail system was "critical" and problems were deepening, and that the government had not fulfilled its own decisions to improve and consolidate the railways.
The OSZ represents all Czech rail workers, which total more than 100,000 employess, excluding train drivers who have yet to say whether they will support the action.
It is not expected that the railways would function even if the drivers do not strike.
Losses of Ceske Drahy, one of the few companies not yet privatised by the post-Communist government, have been mounting.
CTK quoted Ceske Drahy officials as saying the company expected losses of about seven billion crowns in 1997 after a six billion crown loss last year, and four billion in 1995.
In June 1995, the rail unions were hours away from a strike over the planned privatisation of Ceske Drahy, when the government agreed not to execute its plan at the time to restructure the loss-making railways.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
