President Vaclav Havel on Tuesday paid a personal tribute to the grand old man of Czech literature, Bohumil Hrabal, calling him one of the great contemporary writers of prose, and a friend for life.
The author of "Closely Observed Trains" and over 50 folksy works, fell to his death from the fifth floor of a Prague hospital on Monday where he was being treated for arthritis.
Doctors said he fell while apparently trying to trying to feed pigeons. He was 82.
"He wrote ruggedly beautiful texts," the former playwright Havel said in a statement released by the president's office.
Havel recalled writing a student essay on Hrabal, and joining him at the favourite literary hangout, Cafe Slavia. "A beautiful friendship connected us throughout life," Havel said.
On Tuesday, the normal afternoon murmur filled the U Zlateho Tygra (at the Golden Tiger) bar, where Hrabal was a fixture, and where U.S. President Bill Clinton joined the venerable author for a beer during a 1994 state visit.
Many of Hrabal's old friends quietly toasted him in the room where a black sash over a picture was the only indication that a Golden Tiger regular would never return.
"He used to sit here, but now he sits everywhere," said one regular under a collection of Hrabal memorabilia.
Hrabal's subtle political works were suppressed under the Czechoslovak communist authorities but were widely circulated in samizdat photocopies in dissident circles.
"I consider Bohumil Hrabal as one of the greatest prose writers of contemporary time," Havel said.
The Jiri Menzel film "Larks on a Thread" was a biting commentary based on Hrabal's personal stories of a worker's tedious 1950s life after the Communist takeover.
A Hrabal revival began soon after the 1989 revolution when "Larks", banned by the Communists, was reintroduced, and many of the author's works were finally published legally.
Menzel also made Hrabal's quirky "Closely Observed Trains", about life at a provincial railway station during World War Two, into an Oscar winner in 1966.
Another film, based on Hrabal's "I Served the King of England", is set to be released later this year.
Havel, the dissident turned president, said he was happy to have been able to award Hrabal the state honour for artists, the Medal for Merit, in 1996.
