Czech railway workers on Wednesday voted to extend a national railway strike, scheduled to end at midnight, for another 24 hours after the government supported a tough approach against the strikers.
Jaromir Dusek, chairman of the Association of Unions of Czech Railway Workers (OSZ), was quoted by the CTK news agency as saying that OSZ's strike committee had agreed to continue the action for at least another day.
Dusek was quoted by the private television channel Prima after the decision to extend the strike that the OSZ would keep extending the strike until it gets an acceptable compromise.
The OSZ had originally scheduled the action as a 48-hour strike, but said it would consider extending it for 24 hours at a time if its demands were not met.
The government on Wednesday backed Transport Minister Martin Riman's hard line against the OSZ, which has shut the country's entire rail network over potential job cuts.
Government spokesman Ivo Strejcek told reporters after a cabinet meeting that "the government expressed its support" for Riman, who has refused union demands for a long-term railway plan that guarantees jobs while sacking the current management.
The spokesman declined any further comment.
CTK quoted Riman later on Wednesday as saying a Prague court had ruled that the strike was illegal, but the OSZ then said that a different court had ruled that the strike was lawful.
The strike, the first major nationwide post-Communist industrial action, has had little major impact on daily life, but businesses fear the shutdown in freight service will start to bite into earnings if the strike lasts longer.
Cities have added buses to relieve commmuter pressure, but international trains have been stranded at borders with Germany, Poland, Austria, and Slovakia.
Two rounds of talks between Riman and union officials on Tuesday failed to break the impasse, and the minister acknowledged the strike may go on longer. Fresh talks on Wednesday have apparently not yet led to a solution.
The OSZ wants the government to implement a long-term plan to revive the decrepit railway system, saying that waste and inefficiency should be cleaned up before jobs are threatened.
The state railway company, Ceske Drahy, lost six billion crowns ($216.4 million) in 1996, and expects to lose seven billion crowns this year, but the government has been unable to put together a viable plan for reversing the losses.
Leaders of the OSZ reported that 75 to 80 percent of the more than 100,000 railway workers had joined the strike, but management of the railway company said over 60 percent showed up for work and signed a petition against the strike.
An attempt to use workers who ignored the strike resulted in the operation of a just five trains on Wednesday, but the system was mostly idle.
An effort to reconstruct Ceske Drahy ended in 1994 when the conservative government backed off privatisation plans to halt a threatened strike just hours before it was to begin.
This time, Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus has given ominous warnings that the unions "may go too far" with the strike.
Most major Czech firms have said a short-term strike will have little effect on their operations, though the coal mining company Mostecka Uhelna Spolecnost a.s. said it was losing between 15-20 million crowns a day due to the action.
($ = 27.73 Czech Crowns)
