The Czech government on Wednesday backed Transport Minister Martin Riman's hard line against striking railway workers who have shut the country's entire rail network over potential job cuts.
Government spokesman Ivo Strejcek told reporters after a cabinet meeting that "the government expressed its support" for Riman who has refused union demands for a long-term railway plan that guarantees jobs while sacking the current management.
The spokesman declined any further comment.
The rail strike, which began at midnight on Tuesday and was originally planned for 48 hours, is the Czech Republic's first major nationwide post-Communist industrial action, but it looks increasingly likely to be prolonged.
The strike has had little major impact on daily life, but many businesses fear the shutdown in freight service will start to bite into earnings if the strike lasts longer.
Cities have added buses to relieve commmuter pressure, but international trains have been stranded at borders with Germany, Poland, Austria, and Slovakia.
Two rounds of talks between Riman and union officials on Tuesday failed to break the impasse, and the minister acknowledged the strike may go on longer. Fresh talks on Wednesday have yet to lead to a solution.
The OSZ has said it will make its decision on prolonging the strike by 6 p.m. on Wednesday (1700 GMT).
The Association of Unions of Rail Workers (OSZ) wants the government to implement a long-term plan to revive the decrepit railway system saying that waste and inefficiency in the system should be cleaned up before jobs are threatened.
Leaders of the OSZ reported that 75 to 80 percent of the more than 100,000 railway workers had joined the strike, but management of the railway company said over 60 percent showed up for work and signed a petition against the strike.
The Czech news agency CTK reported that an attempt to use workers who ignored the strike resulted in the operation of a just five trains on Wednesday, but the system was mostly idle.
The state railway company, Ceske Drahy, lost six billion crowns ($216.4 million) in 1996, and expects to lose seven billion crowns this year, but the government has been unable to put together a viable plan for reversing the losses.
The Czech daily Mlada Fronta on Wednesday reported that the last unpublished government plan, which infuriated the unions and led to the strike, called for layoffs of up to 40 percent of Ceske Drahy's more than 100,000 workers.
The plan also called for the sale of 20 percent of the rail system, and a decommissioning of another 20 percent, it said.
An effort to reconstruct Ceske Drahy ended in 1994 when the conservative government backed off privatisation plans to halt a threatened strike just hours before it was to begin.
This time, Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus has given ominous warnings that the unions "may go too far" with the strike.
Most major Czech firms have said a short-term strike will have little effect on their operations, though the coal mining company Mostecka Uhelna Spolecnost a.s. said it was losing between 15-20 million crowns a day due to the action.
e($ = 27.73 Czech Crowns)
