The Anglo-Swedish consortium which makes the Gripen supersonic fighter aircraft said on Thursday that it could provide the Czech Republic with new planes for 40 percent less than any offered by its American competitors.
British Aerospace Plc and Sweden's Saab said their package offered to the Czechs, who are looking to upgrade a fleet of ageing Soviet-made aircraft, includes guaranteed financing, low-cost leasing, and possible equity participation in Czech aircraft makers.
Alan Garwood, British Aerospace's director for North America and Europe told a news conference the package would allow the Czechs to buy new Gripens for much less than any new or used aircraft offered by American makers.
"We believe the life-cycle cost of the Gripen is incredibly competitive, and the Americans cannot compete," he said, adding that there would be hidden costs inherent in the upkeep of used U.S. aircraft.
Officials declined to specify the cost-per-piece the Gripen joint venture would actually offer to the Czechs.
In cooperation with McDonnell Douglas Corp, the U.S. Navy last month offered the Czechs seven used surplus F/A-18 "Hornet" fighters in a no-cost, five-year agreement as a sweetener for a long-term deal.
The offer also includes supplying, at cost, replacement parts, pilot and ground personnel, training and equipment.
U.S. Lockheed Martin Corp has said it would have its own lower-cost offer to the Czechs for its flagship F-16.
New advanced fighters are typically $20 million and higher, depending on communications, avionics and weapons systems.
Czech defence officials have said they have the will but not the wallet to buy brand new Western-made advanced fighters, but are keeping their options open as a battle over the long-term military budget goes on.
They have said they would need about 24 fighters to replace their ageing Soviet made MiG-21s to be more compatible with NATO, but they have said new western planes are too pricey.
But Garwood said that the Gripen's basic lower price, a low-cost lease, and a guaranteed financial package backed by the Swedish and British government's with low interest rates, would ensure tremendous savings for the Czechs.
"Every day (the Czechs) delay, the American aircraft are getting older," Garwood said.
The Gripen consortium has been considering participating in a tender for a 34-percent stake in the debt-ridden Czech light jet maker Aero Vodochody a.s.. Officials said a decision would be made in the next 7-10 days on whether to enter the bidding.
Garwood said that although the Czech government did not explicitly create a direct link between equity participation in Aero and the selection of new fighter aircraft, Garwood said the government has made it clear that there would be a "strategic" link with Aero's new owners.
Gripen officials said that development of Aero's L-159 trainer aircraft would fit well with the consortium's strategy, but did not rule out remaining in the race to supply the aircraft if they decided not too seek the Aero stake.
Garwood said that the consortium was also in talks over offset agreements which would create production of some of the components domestically for Gripens provided to the Czech army.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
