The Czech National Bank (CNB) said on Wednesday that it was not satisfied with the continued firming of the Czech crown, and cautioned that it has the option of intervening on the market when necessary.
"Intervention (on the market) is our normal instrument, and we can use it whenever we are not satisfied (with the crown's exchange rate)," CNB spokesman Martin Svehla told Reuters.
The crown was still well above its mark/dollar basket on Wednesday, as the CNB matched the market, fixing it at 27.947/dollar 16.664/mark, or 5.42 percent over parity with the basket, and just below Tuesday's record fixing at +5.51.
"The other question is whether we are satisfied? You heard (CNB) governor (Josef Tosovsky) saying there is 'no reason' for the crown to be like this," Svehla added.
"It signals that the central bank is not fully satisfied with this development." He declined to elaborate, and said these were just "general" comments.
The crown's surge has been fuelled by more than 30 billion crowns in recent issues of mostly medium-term Eurobonds.
Tosovsky said at the peak of the wave in late January that there was "no rational" macroeconomic reason for the crown's rise, and the Eurobond wave.
The firming currency is compounding a troublesome trade deficit which grew to a record 160 billion crowns in 1996.
Some crown dealers have said the central bank that had been putting out feelers in the market recently, but others said that it did not appear that intervention was imminent.
"I don't expect any direct intervention soon," said Citibank dealer Emil Stava. "I don't think their main goal is to help exporters by a depreciation of the currency."
He said the CNB was still mainly concerned with controlling the money supply and inflation.
The market has not bought the CNB's comments, as dealers keep buying crowns.
Crown Eurobonds keep coming -- another billion crowns was issued on Wednesday -- taking advantage of interest rate spreads against major currencies and an inverted yield curve.
The CNB has not intervened since last February when it propped up the crown after widening the fixing corridor to plus/minus 7.5 percent against the basket from 0.5 percent.
Svehla repeated that the CNB had no immediate plans to lower its key interest rates, despite a rapid decline in the money supply in recent months.
The CNB's repo rate remains solidly at 12.4 percent, while its discount rate has been at 10.5 percent since it was raised a full percentage point last June.
Meanwhile inflation in January slowed to 7.4 percent, year-on-year, from 8.6 percent in December.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
