Pop star Michael Jackson launched his first concert tour in three years on Saturday with a high-tech spectacle in Prague aimed at restoring the gleem to a career tarnished by allegations of child molestation.
Jackson exploded through the floor of his futuristic stage in something best described as a missile on a monorail, and emerged decked out in gold-plated astronaut's armour to open the concert with one of his latest hits, "Scream".
On a stage melding a classical Greek temple with the furnishings of a space station, Jackson matched the high tech wizardry with his still-formidable dancing skills, singing many of the hits throughout his 20-year career.
The three-month "HIStory World Tour" actually will take hundreds of tonnes of equipment to stops in Europe, Africa, Asia, but with no dates scheduled for the Americas.
Many of the estimated 120,000 spectators on Prague's sprawling Letna Plain -- where Communist leaders once reviewed military parades -- stood awestruck as massive "Jumbotron" video screens dominated Jackson's virtual-reality show.
"It's more of a video game than a concert," said one Prague student as she stood dwarfed in the crowd mid-way from where the real Jackson looked like a blip on a radar screen.
Fans hailing from Malta to Moscow made the trip to Prague, but the biggest of the 40,000-strong foreign contingent came from neighbouring Germany where Jackson had cancelled planned stops because of high taxes charged to visiting entertainers.
Some 130,000 were expected for the two-hour concert in Prague, but ticket touts outside the gates were offering $30 tickets for less than $10.
Czech President Vaclav Havel -- dubbed "Rock'n Roll President" as a fan of the Rolling Stones, Velvet Undergound and Frank Zappa, who have all played Prauge -- showed up for the gig although he said Jackson's music "isn't close" to him.
The first part of the tour has a heavy Eastern European flavour with stops planned for Hungary, Romania, Poland, and Russia, matching a theme running through his latest album "HIStory" which includes the song "Stranger in Moscow".
The first tour of the self-proclaimed "King of Pop" since 1993's "Dangerous" tour is to back Jackson's "HIStory" album which has lagged well behind his 1982 album "Thriller", the all-time top seller with 44 million copies sold worldwide.
But the tour marks his biggest effort yet to get Jackson's career back on track after a long-running scandal over child-sex abuse allegations.
The charges first came to light in August 1993, when a 13-year-old boy accused Jackson of molesting him.
Jackson denied wrongdoing but reached a multimillion-dollar settlement with the boy, and prosecutors dropped their investigation in 1994 after the child refused to testify.
The concert marks the climax of five of the most bizarre days in the history of the ancient Czech capital, as the star's game of hide-and-seek kept a horde of fans and media guessing outside his hotel, and clogged streets in the city's centre.
Reports that Jackson was furious with a local tabloid's rehash of the child molestation story led local media to speculate that he might cancel Saturday's concert as he remained holed-up in his hotel suite for much of the week.
On Friday, Jackson sparked a near riot when he ventured out to visit St. Vitus Cathedral in Prague Castle, and fans climbed over pews in the holy Bohemian shrine to get close.
Meanwhile, concert organisers erected a giant water-filled statue of Jackson on the same hill over Prague where a massive monument to Soviet-leader Josef Stalin once stood.
President Havel, the playwright whose dissident writings helped inspire Czechoslovakia's bloodless 1989 revolution over Communism, penned a 1984 essay "Thriller" using "Jackson-mania" as his metaphor to mourn the soulless modern world.
