A Czech appeals court rejected on Tuesday a move by a group of minority shareholders to invalidate a $1.32 billion 1995 tender which gave a 27 percent stake in fixed-line monopoly SPT Telecom a.s. to a Dutch-Swiss consortium, SPT said.
The decision, which overturns a lower court ruling, means the Telsource consortium, combining PTT Netherlands and Swiss Telecom, will remain SPT's largest shareholder after the Czech government, which still holds a majority stake.
The lawsuit concerned the validity of a decision at an SPT general meeting held in February 1995, setting up the tender which at the time was the largest privatisation in post-Communist Europe.
The action was brought by a group of Czech investors who contended former Economics Minister Karel Dyba did not have authority to represent the state in voting at a general meeting which approved the plan for SPT to take on a strategic partner.
A second suit over another general meeting in August 1995 is still under review, but the decision on Tuesday is a setback for the group which has been agressively challenging the tender.
The Dutch-Swiss consortium bid $1.32 billion in cash, and another $131 million in services, to win the tender over four other international telecom groups, promising to double the country's network to more than four million lines by the end of the century.
SPT said after the decision that the ruling on Tuesday would help its creditibility with investors, after large finance programmes were held up because of the lawsuits. "The decision only confirms the integrity of the current view of our company and thus all resolutions of the SPT general meeting are valid," SPT's chairman Lubos Rezabek said in a statement.
A second lawsuit, brought by the same group led by Czech businessman Martin Mosinger, concerns the conduct of a general meeting in August 1995 where the transaction won final approval.
"I believe that the second suit... will soon be concluded to our benefit and it will put an end to questions regarding the SPT privatisation," Rezabek said.
SPT last April mandated U.S.-based banks Chase Manhattan and Citibank to arrange a $500 million, five-year syndicated loan to part finance the firm's long-term development programme.
The syndicated loan was delayed pending decisions on the lawsuits.
SPT shares closed 13 crowns lower on the Prague Stock Exchange on Tuesday at 4,040 ahead of the news.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
