Czech politicians and pundits spent Monday panning the self-proclaimed "King of Pop" Michael Jackson for the first concert of his world tour on Saturday and his behavior in Prague in the week leading up.
Columnists in almost every Czech daily blasted Jackson for his high-tech two-hour show, which some in the crowd of over 120,000 said was more video game than concert.
"The... spiceless performance with Jackson's appallingly bad vocals -- which were not even saved by his famous dance routines -- were complemented by an even worse sound system," said Stanislav Pechacek in the right-wing daily Denni Telegraf.
Prague, known more as a former bastion for classical music than a pop mecca, has hosted a handful of huge festival-style concerts -- including two visits by the Rolling Stones -- since the revolution over Communism in 1989.
But the city had never seen anything like the hype and hysteria surrounding Jackson's visit, which included erecting a giant statue of the star on the same rock pedastal where a monument to Soviet-leader Josef Stalin once stood.
Jackson opened by exploding through the floor of a futuristic stage and emerged in gold-plated astronaut's armour.
The next two-hours were choreographed with the aid of three huge "Jumbotron" screens flanking a stage blending a classical Greek temple with a space station.
But columnists -- in a country embracing the kitschiest of American culture since the revolution -- took issue with Jackson's singing and the Cult of Personality around him, which clogged the streets in the city centre for five days.
"Jackson is the most bizarre product of American pop culture," Jan Lacina said in Lidove Noviny, describing the performance as surprisingly sober.
"A big nothing took place," said Vladimir Vlasak in the largest Czech daily Mlada Fronta Dnes, while complaining of Jackson's "megalomania".
"The music sounded as artificial as the singer himself," said Svobodne Slovo's Jaroslav Riedel.
The three-month "HIStory World Tour" will take the multi-media spectacle to stops in Europe, Africa, Asia, but with no dates scheduled for the Americas.
The harshest criticism -- in the minds of protocol-minded Czechs -- came from the Christian Democratic party, who peppered Jackson for not removing his trademark black fedora when meeting President Vaclav Havel at Prague Castle.
The local agency CTK quoted Jan Kasal, who serves as deputy chairman of parliament for the centre right party, as saying Jackson had no manners and that he could not imagine any other visitors behaving in such a way.
Jackson's next concert is scheduled for Tuesday night in Budapest.
