When the former Czechoslovak diplomat Josef Korbel died in 1977, he may have carried the secret tragedies of his Jewish heritage to the grave, but his passion for democracy lives on through his powerful daughter.
As Madeleine Korbel Albright tours the globe and shards of her tumultuous family history surprise the world, it is her father's life and legacy which may quietly foreshadow things to come from the new U.S. Secretary of State.
Revelations this month that three grandparents died in concentration camps surprised Albright -- born in Prague in 1937 as Marie Jana Koerbelova. She fled with her family after the 1948 Communist coup, and was raised as a Catholic.
But while much of the recent focus has been on her family's Holocaust tragedies, it was her father's democratic heritage which again put the family at risk after World War Two, and apparently had the most influence on his daughter.
At her swearing-in last month, Albright first thanked her mother and father "who taught me to love freedom", then praised Vaclav Havel, the Czech dissident-turned-president, "who helped me to understand the responsibilities of freedom".
"A great deal of what I did I did because I wanted to be like my father," Albright recently told Time magazine.
As U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, Albright crusaded against anti-democrats, often condemning the behaviour of Cuban president Fidel Castro, Iraq's Saddam Hussein, and Serbian aggression in Bosnia.
HOW POWERFUL WILL HER FATHER'S INFLUENCE BE
Now the world wonders whether she will moderate her often sharp tongue as she tackles U.S. diplomatic problems from Havana to Beijing, or if she will lambast the leaders and political systems her father loathed.
"Cuba is an embarrassment to the Western Hemisphere and I think we need to keep making clear that there needs to be a change there," she said soon after becoming secretary of state.
Josef Korbel had a direct impact on the fragile -- and eventually crushed -- inter-war experiment of Czechoslovak democracy. Friends and former colleagues said leaving his cherished homeland behind in tatters crushed him.
"Joe was, you might say, a Czech nationalist, but more importantly he was a Czech democrat and he deeply abhorred the collapse of his country," Professor Arthur Gilbert, who taught with Korbel at the University of Denver, told Reuters.
"His anti-communism, and his distate for the Soviet Union came from a man who really had seen both systems."
Korbel was most influenced by the father of Czechoslovak democracy, President Tomas Garrigue Masaryk, a humanist philosopher whom Korbel called "the most profound writer and thinker of the late 19th and early 20th centuries".
In "Twentieth Century Czechoslovakia" published in 1977, Korbel cites Masaryk as taking the progressive step in 1918 of backing women in the national assembly, and saying that "women should devote themselves to public activity just as men."
Korbel frequently cited Masaryk in his work after becoming a professor and eventually dean of the Graduate School of International Studies at the University of Denver, when he settled with his family in Colorado in 1949.
Born to a Jewish wood merchant in a northeastern Czech village in 1909, Korbel studied at the Sorbonne in Paris and then earned his law doctorate in Prague in 1933. He joined the Czechoslovak foreign service assigned as a press attache at the embassy in Belgrade.
With the Nazi onslaught imminent Korbel took his family to London as the Germans occupied the Czech lands in 1939.
Korbel's friendship with Masaryk's son Jan began during the war, when Korbel was information officer for the government in exile in London, and Jan Masaryk was foreign minister. Amid the Blitz, Madeleine learned to speak English and live under siege.
After returning from London, and serving as ambassador to Belgrade, Korbel was stunned by the 1948 Communist takeover. He wrote that the last democratic president Edvard Benes told him in vain, days before the coup that "I shall defend our democracy till my last breath."
Jan Masaryk died soon after the coup when he fell, jumped or pushed from a high foreign ministry window. His death is still controversial in Prague, but Korbel wrote in 1977 that Masaryk simply "was murdered by Soviet agents".
Masaryk's death devastated him, and his return for the funeral was the last time Korbel would see his home.
Before the Communists could get to him, Korbel spirited his family out of Czechoslovakia, taking asylum in the United States, and eventually a teaching post in Denver.
"Sooner or later he would have been imprisoned," said Antonin Sum, a former colleague of Korbel's who served in the last democratic pre-Communist foreign ministry and was imprisoned for 13 years.
"The question at that time was (Korbel) a democrat or not. He was very dangerous to the Communists." Nearly 200 of the democrats arrested were executed by the Communists.
KORBEL AN ARDENT COLD WARRIOR
Korbel quickly became a fixture at the university, leading its first doctoral programme in international relations. He is remembered by his colleagues for his visceral defence of U.S. foreign policy, even in the dark days of the Vietnam War.
"He was an ardent Cold Warrior," said Professor Gilbert whom Korbel hired in 1961. "The three things he cared about was what was happening in the Soviet Union, what was going on at school, and fly fishing."
Albright's often-quoted concept of "assertive multilateralism" in foreign policy appears to have its roots in Korbel's strong defence of U.S. involvement abroad.
But Gilbert said Korbel "was very late in the game to understand the problems about Vietnam -- well into the 60s before he started to have doubts about American involvement."
Gilbert said Korbel's house in Denver became a meeting place for informal academic policy discussions, a practice Albright carried on as a professor in Washington.
Albright married newspaper heir Joseph Albright, raised three daughters while earning her doctorate, and divorced.
But the Albright name is still seen alongside Korbel, not just as a maiden name kept as her middle name, but because father and daughter would quote each other in research.
In 1977, the father predicted Prague's "Velvet Revolution" in the final words of his last book:
"The spark is still there. One cannot doubt that it will flicker one day again into flame, and freedom will return to this land that is so essentially humane...The nation will take up again its active role in mankind's never-ending struggle for freedom and social justice."
As a professor at Georgetown, Albright advised Havel after Prague's 1989 revolution which ended four decades of Communism.
