Czech President Vaclav Havel called on the new Senate on Wednesday to give final approval to a post-World War Two reconciliation pact with Germany to ensure good relations with its large and influential neighbour.
In his first speech to the upper house, which was elected last November, Havel asked Senators to rise above the lower house's often ugly debate on the pact, in which Communist and ultra-right Republican opposition deputies filibustered before the measure was approved by a large majority last month.
"The debate on (the declaration) in the Chamber of Deputies did not give us much glory," Havel told the Senate.
The declaration, in which Bonn expresses its regret for the 1938-45 occupation of the Czech lands and Prague its sorrow for excessive brutality in the expulsion of ethnic Germans after the war, was signed by both governments in January.
It was quickly approved by a large marjority in the German parliament but faced virulent attacks by Czech Communist and Republican deputies who said the measure was a sellout to Bonn.
The agreement seeks to tie up political loose ends from World War Two and its aftermath, and is Germany's last reconciliation agreement with a neighbouring country which the Nazis occupied.
Havel told the Senate, in which the centre-right coalition government has a strong majority, to consider the historical significance not just of the declaration itself, but of building strong relations with the Czechs' powerful neighbour.
"I am guaranteeing you, that historians and politicians will devote time to the question of what we did for good relations with our large and influential neighbour, and through that for good relations in the whole of Europe," Havel said.
The speech, which mostly focused on the constitutional role of the Senate, was Havel's first live public appearence since he had half of his right lung removed along with a small malignant tumour in December.
A former chain-smoking dissident playwright, Havel was to return to his full presidential duties this week, but has been hampered by the flu.
Havel, 60, led a three-year fight to have the Czech constitution fulfiled by forming a Senate, which he considers as a necessary guarantor of Czech democracy.
