The Czech National Bank (CNB) said on Thursday that non-performing loans written off in the first 11 months of 1996 by commercial banks totalled 20 billion crowns, up from about two billion in the same period of 1995.
But CNB spokesman Martin Svehla said the main reason for the rise was a change in taxation rules allowing banks to pull more into reserves so that the credits could be written off.
"It has been allowed by the taxation rules thanks to the reserves created by these banks," Svehla told Reuters.
Most large banks have released their profit and loss figures for 1996, but have yet to detail reserves and provisions.
Svehla said the total amount of credit classified as risky in Czech commercial banks was about 220 billion crowns.
That was split between non-performing credit lingering from the Communist era, which has been consolidated in the state-run Konsolidacni Banka, and credit granted after the 1989 revolution, much of it connected with privatisations.
"We tightened up rules on how to assess risk and potential risk from credit. These rules have been effective since 1995, and they have gained more and more confidence," Svehla said.
"On one hand the figure (of classified credit) became bigger, but reserves and provisions were created, in what I would say is a sufficient amount. Speaking about the whole banking sector, all these potential losses are covered by all created reserves."
He said that six of 13 small private banks which have been offered participation in a state-supported debt relief programme were certain to enter the scheme.
Pragobanka, Banka Hana, and Moravia Banka have been accepted in the potential 13.7 billion crown debt buy-back programme, Svehla said, declining to name the others.
Banking sources have said that Forestbank, Zemska Banka, and Universal Banka had applied to join the programme and were nearing approval.
"This is good news for the banks and their clients. It means they will be better accepted on the (interbank) market," Svehla said.
Under the plan, participating banks must follow strict conditions and allow the central bank to make management changes where needed.
The state-run Konsolidacni Banka would buy the banks' doubtful assets at face value.
The banks will be required to buy back the assets after around five to seven years, again priced at their nominal value, minus credits recovered by Konsolidacni from the debtors in the meantime.
Banks seeking to participate will be held to strict requirements which include sticking to a three-year stabilisation plan and an agreement to attain an eight percent capital adequacy ratio. -- Prague Newsroom, 420-2-2423-0003
