President Emil Constantinescu said on Tuesday that military modernisation costs were Romania's only obstacle to full NATO membership, but the country should still be named in the first wave of new members.
Speaking during a visit to Radio Free Europe headquarters in Prague, Constantinescu said that Romania had already met all of NATO's criteria for membership except one -- upgrading its military equipment to western standards.
"That is why we speak of Romania's nomination in the first wave followed by the effective integration when all the conditions would be fulfilled," he said.
"We still have to fulfil one of them... the capacity to support the costs of the modernisation of military equipment."
Romania -- with the backing of France, Spain and Italy -- has intensified diplomatic efforts aiming to be among the first group of ex-communist states expected to receive an invitation to join the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation at a July summit in Madrid.
Poland, Hungary, and the Czech Republic are widely expected to be named, but Constantinescu said Romania saw "no alternative" to its NATO integration, and should be part of the first group.
Romania is trying to link its bid to join NATO to that of Hungary. The two countries have signed an agreement to form a joint military battalion and new Romanian Prime Minister Victor Ciorbea is to make his first official trip abroad to Budapest this week. Constantinescu said Romania, after a slow start in post-Communist reforms, now met NATO's membership criteria on democracy and human rights.
"There is no argument against Romania's integration into NATO. Anything regarding democratic steps, stability, minority relations, relations with neighbouring countries and regional stability, Romania has fulfilled," Constantinescu said.
But the president said that "radical" economic reforms were still necessary, and his country could not rely on large NATO members to pay the bill for modernising Romania's army.
"It's clear that the United States... are not willing to support the costs of modernisation of military equipment for any large group of countries, because that would be impossible for the American taxpayer," he said.
The U.S. government estimated last month that the total cost to bring in former Warsaw Pact members would be between $27 billion and $35 billion up to the year 2009.
Of this, the United States is expected to bear costs of between $1.5 billion and $2 billion, the Clinton administration said in a report to Congress.
The frontrunners are all struggling to find the finances for modernising their military to the alliance's standards in the midst of massive economic reforms.
Constantinescu, at the end of a two day visit to Prague, did not say how Romania might eventually meet the cost of military modernisation.
But the Bucharest government launched a programme last year to seek credits for up to $400 million to pay for military modernisation.
Romanian military planners have said the government expects to spend about three percent of gross domestic product in total military spending this year, or roughly $900 million.
