Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus said on Tuesday that the Czech National Bank may have gone too far in its attempts to slow inflation quickly and the result may have been a slowing in economic growth.
Speaking at Prague's Zofin Forum of business leaders Klaus said there was no way to slow inflation quickly, and that central bank steps last year to rein in consumer prices were more than the government wanted.
"At this moment I see in the Czech economy the existence of an array of short-term irremovable inflation factors which we cannot simply get rid of, and I also do not see any easy way to a faster slowing of inflation," said Klaus, a monetarist professor of economics.
Klaus took issue with restrictive monetary measures of the Czech National Bank last year which helped cut inflation to 7.3 percent year-on-year in February from levels above nine percent in the previous year.
He said that the government differed with the central bank on whether monetary tightening measures to slow inflation would slow the economy.
"I believe that in our context and in our structural parameters disinflation bought at the high price of a marked loss in the pace of economic growth was more than we would have wished," he added.
Still, Klaus told his audience that February's inflation rate was "satisfactory".
He said that 1996 full-year gross domestic product growth ended one percent lower than the government originally expected. He did not give a specific result. The government's original forecast was growth of 4.8 percent.
Full-year official GDP results are expected later this month.
Klaus said factors in this slowing of growth were weak demand for exports because of weak growth and protected markets in western Europe. Another reason was the "unfavourable structure of our domestic demand -- consumer as well as investment."
Klaus however stressed the "restrictive measures of the central bank" and its role on demand as a factor and said the CNB "used" the chaos after inconclusive June elections to raise interest rates and tighten minimum reserve requirements.
He said the main problem facing the country's economy was a widening trade deficit, but he ruled out a devaluation of the crown to help the situation.
"I am only reminding you that the cure for our trade deficit cannot be any devaluation of the crown and fortunately the government, the central bank and the majority of analysts agree with this," Klaus said.
The Czech trade deficit, spurred by imports of raw materials and machinery needed for industrial restructuring, widened to a record 160.3 billion crowns for the whole of 1996, up from 95.7 billion the previous year.
The deficit is forecast to grow even further in 1997, to around 210-220 billion crowns.
-- Prague Newsroom, 420-2-2423-0003
