The outgoing vice-chairman of Czech Skoda Auto a.s., a unit of Volkswagen AG , rejected as "nonsense" on Wednesday a German magazine report connecting him to a VW bribery affair under investigation.
Volkhard Koehler was unexpectedly replaced on Skoda's board last week, and a subsequent story in the weekly Der Spiegel said it was because he had prevented an investigation into a bribery affair linked to VW employees and was involved in dubious real estate transactions.
A Skoda spokesman, Milan Smutny, said in a statement on Wednesday that Koehler had spoken to economic corruption investigators in the German city of Braunschweig who confirmed that he was not the subject of any investigation.
"The state prosecution office confirmed that (Koehler) is not the target of any investigation," Smutny said. He quoted Koehler as saying Der Spiegel's claims were "absolutely nonsense".
VW chairman Ferdinand Piech said last week that corruption allegations, which centred on a plant expansion contract for Skoda awarded to Swiss-Swedish engineering group ABB , involved "a nearly double-digit sum in the millions of marks".
He said a probe into allegations that VW employees have demanded and received bribes in return for contracts, had so far turned up only one employee who has since been suspended.
The employee was not named.
Piech said the figures involved are well below German media reports that have said the contract was worth some 400 million marks and included bribes of about 20 million marks.
VW said its purchasing division in the summer of 1994 approved a 74 million mark contract for a Skoda paint factory and a second contract worth 38 million marks to expand the facility.
Smutny said that all decisions on purchases over 100,000 marks at Skoda had to be approved by officials at Volkswagen headquarters in Germany.
German prosecutors in Braunschweig have said they were investigating two suspects as part of their probe at VW, brought about by the carmaker in a formal legal request.
Smutny said Koehler was expecting another assignment from VW headquarters in Wolfsburg after his stint with Skoda ends on April 15. He said that the non-renewal of his contract conformed to standard Volkswagen practice.
The functions of Skoda board members named last week will be announced in a news conference on April 3, Smutny said.
