Czech Foreign Minister Josef Zieleniec said on Monday his country viewed as frivolous and "absolutely unacceptable" Russian threats of economic reprisals for Prague's entry into NATO.
"We consider it frivolous to connect the expansion of the North Atlantic alliance with bilateral (Czech-Russian) relations and threaten economic sanctions in this context," the Czech news agency CTK quoted Zieleniec as saying.
On Sunday, Moscow's ambassador to Prague Nikolai Ryabov warned the Czech Republic that key bilateral agreements with Russia might be jeopardised if it joined NATO.
Ryabov told Russia's NTV commercial television that the former Warsaw Pact member's entry into the western defence alliance could mean a damaging loss of arms markets for Moscow.
"It would be a real blow for the Russian economy," he said.
The ambassador went on to hint that Moscow could reconsider economic deals with Prague if it went ahead.
"Agreements fundamental to the Czech Republic, such as gas deliveries and nuclear energy, create a basis for future problems that our countries would face (if Prague joined NATO)," said Ryabov, former head of Russia's central electoral commission.
Zieleniec told CTK that Ryabov's statement made it clear why the Czechs wanted to join western organisations.
"This type of demand is one of the reasons why it is important, at the earliest, to become a member of the key western political, economic, and security organisations," it quoted Zieleniec as saying.
He said he thought the ambassador's interview on Russian television was mostly for media consumption.
The Czechs, Poland and Hungary are expected to be named among the first former-Soviet Bloc countries to be invited to join NATO at a July summit of the alliance in Madrid.
Russian officials have intensified their rhetoric against NATO expansion plans, which they say threaten Russia's security, in the run-up to a summit in Helsinki this week between President Boris Yeltsin and U.S. Bill Clinton.
Moscow hopes to use the issue as a lever with which to win concessions from the U.S.-led alliance on arms control agreements and other security and economic issues.
After the collapse of former communist trade arrangements in the early part of the decade, total Czech trade turnover with Russia grew 9.8 percent in 1996 to $2.8 billion.
But 1996 trade was heavily weighted in Russia's favour with Czech exports to Russia at $694 million and while imports from Russia were $2.1 billion.
Czechs are still dependent on Russia for natural gas and most of its crude oil, but Prague is in the final stages of negotiations of a long-term contract for some of its gas supplies to come from Norway.
Last year, the Czechs opened the Ingolstadt spur in the Transalpine crude pipeline from the Adriatic Sea, providing direct access to crude from the Middle East.
The Czech power company CEZ a.s. is also dependent on Russian nuclear fuel for its lone atomic power station at Dukovany, but the company is expected to take U.S.-supplied nuclear fuel when it opens a new plant at Temelin by the end of the century.
The Czech army is also considering several offers to modernise its mostly Soviet-era equipment with Western-made, NATO compatible goods.
