The head of Credit Suisse First Boston in Europe, David Mulford, said on Thursday that while economies were gaining speed throughout Eastern Europe, CSFB would concentrate its activity where it was already based.
"I don't think we will see any major shift" of CSFB's business in Eastern Europe, Mulford, who was appointed CSFB Europe chairman last month, told journalists.
He said that beyond CSFB's established investment banking business in Poland, Hungary, Russia and the Czech Republic, few new beachheads were planned.
"The only change...is that we have opened an operation recently in Kiev, because we think Ukraine is a very promising market, but I don't anticipate any further office operations elsewhere," he said while visiting CSFB's Prague office.
Mulford, a former U.S. assistant treasury secretary in the Bush administration, took over a restructured CSFB last month saying "Europe, Russia and the emerging economies of central Europe are key to our long-term success in world finance."
A recent CSFB research report showed that overall gross domestic product in the former East Bloc was picking up, and the entire region would show average positive growth by the end of the century, after massive post-Communist recessions.
But CSFB said there would be a convergence of average growth rates below five percent in the region by 2000 as robust Czech, Polish, and Hungarian economies slowed and countries further east pick up strength.
Mulford said each country had to balance the quest for lower inflation with a need to maintain economic growth.
"It's important to have reasonable positive growth. If you have a seven or eight percent growth level and it goes down to a five percent growth level, I don't think people should talk about that as a recession or a major setback," he said.
"But I do think that growth down around the one or two percent levels for extended periods...are not particularly helpful, although I would also say that inflation is a major enemy of long-term stability."
He said that while it was still necessary to price growth out of the system, each government had its own level of political tolerance for inflation.
"People have to have a sense of progress, but if you have high inflation you don't necessarily have a feeling of progress...You've got to strike the right balance."
In Prague, Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus recently criticised the Czech National Bank for going to far in efforts to slow inflation below eight percent annually last year, saying that an excessively tight monetary policy had slowed growth.
Analysts said Czech 1996 real GDP -- once forecast at well above five percent growth -- would fall well short of four percent growth in data due to be released on Friday.
"I think when you mention the slowing of growth here, which has been more noticable than Poland for example -- although you've seen the same thing a couple of years ago in Hungary -- I mean that's normal," Mulford said.
"It's not easy keeping everything going at the same pace, and some of the adjustments are quite difficult and quite painful and take time, and are politically hard to accomplish.
He said despite a ballooning Czech current account deficit, which topped eight percent of GDP in 1996, and rising wage-labour costs, the slowing in Czech growth should not last.
"I think this is temporary. Problems are being addressed. The government recognises that there are issues which have to be dealt with, and I think we will see that happen," he said.
"In other words, I don't think we're heading toward a period of negative development."
-- Prague Newsroom, 420-2-2423-0003
