The Czechs, a small nation with an impressive history of Oscar success, on Tuesday showered praise on Jan and Zdenek Sverak for bringing home a coveted Academy Award for their film "Kolya".
The story of an ageing bachelor's reawakening when he takes an abandoned Russian boy under his wing on the eve of Prague's bloodless 1989 Velvet Revolution won the Oscar for Best Foreign Language Film in the ceremony late on Monday.
President Vaclav Havel, a former dissident playwright under communism who acted in films himself, sent a victory telegram to the Sveraks in Los Angeles.
"I am pleased with the great success of your film. I am happy that after many years a Czech film has again received the Oscar," Havel's press office quoted the telegram as saying.
Czech media also applauded for the win for the director Jan, 31, and his scriptwriter father Zdenek, who played the bachelor in Kolya.
"The Oscar Goes to Prague" shouted the capital's daily Vecernik Praha.
It was the first Czech foreign language film Oscar since Jiri Menzel's won in 1968 with "Closely Observed Trains" one of a spate of admired movies known worldwide as the "Czech New Wave".
Elmar Klos from Slovakia -- now independent, but then part of Czechoslovakia -- won the best foreign film Oscar in 1966 for "The Shop On Main Street".
The Czech Republic, with a population of 10 million, also lays claim to director Milos Forman, a Prague native who made the Oscar-winning "Amadeus" in 1985 and "One Flew Over The Cuckoo's Nest" in 1976 after emigrating to the United States.
Forman failed to pick up best director honours on Monday after his nomination for "The People Versus Larry Flint", after winning a Golden Globe and the Berlin's Golden Bear for the film.
The Sverak team made their first international splash in 1992, when the post-war drama-comedy "Elementary School" earned a first Oscar nomination but lost. Zdenek is currently working on the team's first original English-language script.
Critics say Kolya, a politically-charged comedy-drama which draws heavily on the decades of animosity -- and jokes -- Czechs had for occupying Russian forces, may be one of the region's best offerings since the Czech New Wave.
"The film is about how the understanding between nations is much more important than the power," Sverak told reporters backstage after winning the Oscar.
Earlier this month Kolya won the Czech version of the Oscar, the Czech Lev (Lion), for best picture, but Zdenek Sverak was edged out for the best Czech actor award by Bolek Polivka, a popular cabaret comedian.
Kolya was favoured to take home the Oscar after winning Hollywood's Golden Globe for best foreign language film in January.
