The right-wing Czech coalition government ended nine uneasy months of ruling with a parliamentary minority on Tuesday when a former opposition deputy crossed the aisle to bring it a key seat.
Tomas Teplik, recently expelled from the opposition Social Democratic Party (CSSD), joined Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus's Civic Democratic Party (ODS), an official in the ODS's parliament office told Reuters.
The switch gives the ruling coalition 100 seats in the 200-seat lower house of parliament, after having a minority since general elections last June.
"I can confirm that the (ODS parliamentary) caucus voted to accept Teplik," said Vlasta Kloncarova of the ODS.
Financial analysts welcomed the news which they said would increase confidence in the Czech economy. "I would call it a higher level of comfort," said Jan Pudil, director of the Prague-based investment house WoodCommerz.
"This is going to take away the political questions... and keep investors focusing on the fundamentals in the macro-economy, which is the way it should be," he added.
Klaus's coalition, which has held power longer than any conservative government in post-Communist Europe, lost its large majority in parliament last June after a surprisingly strong second place showing by the centre-left Social Democrats.
Though divided on some issues, the coalition has remained united in all key votes.
Another former CSSD member, budget committee chairman Josef Wagner, declared himself an independent last weekend after the Social Democrats expelled him for voting with the ruling coalition last December on the 1997 budget.
The CSSD expelled Teplik -- who also voted with the government on the budget -- along with Wagner late last year, but unlike Wagner, Teplik did not try to rejoin the CSSD.
Wagner's membership was officially terminated by the CSSD's national congress earlier this month, and he has said he will remain "an independent Social Democrat."
He has said he will not necessarily vote with the government to give the coalition an absolute majority.
Marie Noveska, who was elected as a CSSD deputy last June but resigned from the party after it was revealed that she had falsely used a "Doctor of Law" title, has remained in parliament as an independent.
