Congressional approval to expand NATO to former communist Europe is not assured as top aspirants must still prove they can pay their way, a key supporter of expansion in the U.S. Senate said on Wednesday.
"I think many of my Czech friends and my Polish friends think this is a foregone conclusion in the United States Senate," Joseph Biden, ranking Democrat on the Senate foreign relations committee, told reporters.
"It is not... a 'done deal'."
Biden, on a tour of regional capitals, said he must fight a "growing neo-isolationism in the United States".
But to do that, he said he must prove top candidates for expansion -- which he listed as Poland, Hungary, the Czech Republic, and Slovenia -- were ready to fulfill all criteria for joining the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation.
"When I stand... as the spokesperson for my party on these issues and I say 'Expand NATO', they're going to say 'Okay, are they (applicants) ready to pay'? And to be very blunt with you I don't think those questions -- that question -- has been addressed in Poland or here in the Czech Republic," Biden said.
NATO is expected to invite a number of countries to join the alliance at a July summit of member states in Madrid, but Biden said that achieving the two-thirds vote required in the Senate to approve the change in the NATO charter may be tough.
Czech diplomats last autumn said then-U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher and then-United Nations ambassador Madeleine Albright both expressed concern about what they regarded as the low level of Czech defence spending.
The worries were expressed in meetings with Czech Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus and Foreign Minister Josef Zieleniec.
Klaus denied that Christopher had said this when they met in September, but later the Foreign Ministry confirmed that the subject had been raised by the Americans.
All NATO aspirants are struggling to find financing to modernise their forces to be compatible with NATO at the same time their economies are undergoing massive reforms.
Still, NATO membership remains a top foreign policy priority of former communist countries in central Europe.
Biden said he was "confident" the questions on committments to meet NATO requirements -- expected to costs billions of dollars -- would eventually be answered by aspirants.
"If they are not, I think we lose the day, if they are, I think my position prevails."
The Clinton administration last month said the cost for expanding NATO eastward was expected to be between $27 billion and $35 billion up to the year 2009, with the U.S. expected to bear costs of between $1.5 billion and $2 billion.
Biden said he would have preferred a slower approach to NATO expansion, but since the Clinton administration had made the committment to expand quickly, there was no turning back.
"What happens in Europe is significantly impacted upon by whether or not we are here with both feet planted on the ground as a player in Europe. To the extent we are not, our security diminishes long term," he said.
He said the opposition to expansion in Congress was "real" and it was growing.
Democratic Representative David Obey of Wisconsin earlier this month called NATO's quick eastward expansion an "historically arrogant decision which we will come to regret."
"I believe (turning back from NATO expansion) would raise serious doubts about America's long-term commitment in Europe," Biden said. "I think that arrogance would be if we did not do all in our power to pull (NATO aspirants) closer to the west."
