The Czech central bank should not prop up the crown even if it fell to the low end of its fluctuation band, a leading Czech economist said on Thursday.
Without central bank intervention the market could force the crown as low as 20 percent below parity with its mark/dollar basket, Jan Svejnar, director of the Economics Institute at the Czech Academy of Sciences, said in an interview.
This would give natural support to troubled Czech exports, he added.
Svejnar said he was not advising an official devaluation of the currency, but calling for the central bank to allow a market-driven depreciation in line with the existing macroeconomic situation.
"I'm not saying that the central bank should go and devalue (but)...should be ready to let the currency depreciate," said Svejnar, who is also a professor at the University of Michigan.
The central bank and Czech government have repeatedly ruled out a devaluation to boost exports, and the Czech National Bank agreed in its meeting on Thursday not to change its current policies.
The central bank fixes the crown daily against a mark/dollar basket but allows it to fluctuate on the market within a corridor of plus or minus 7.5 percent of its basket parity.
The CNB widened the band in February 1996 from plus/minus 0.5 percent and since then has virtually matched the market rate each day. The crown was fixed at the equivalent of 1.39 percent on Thursday.
With the country's current account deficit exceeding eight percent of gross domestic product, the crown fell last week to a nine-month low after hitting record levels of 5.51 percent above basket parity in early February.
Investors have moved into crown paper to take advantage of real interest rate differentials with major currencies.
"What I am more worried about is... sooner or later (the trade balance) will become untenable," said Svejnar, adding that foreign capital would then flee the country.
He said that with the central bank foreign exchange reserves covering just about five months of average imports, central bank intervention to prop up the crown would be futile.
Czechs "should take a lesson" from the 1992 crash of the British pound when the Bank of England made a fruitless attempt to defend its currency against speculators, who ultimately forced the pound from the European exchange rate mechanism, he said.
"Essentially, (the Bank of England) lost a significant part of its reserves and had to devalue the pound or let the pound devalue anyway," Svejnar said.
