Volkswagen AG's Czech unit Skoda Automobilova a.s. said on Thursday that it should nearly double its worldwide production capacity, making half a million cars yearly by the end of the century.
At a news conference detailing last year's results -- which showed a swing to a small profit after a 1995 loss -- Chief Financial Officer Volkhard Kohler said the former communist car maker had laid the foundation for strong global expansion.
"The half million (cars produced yearly) volume is no Utopia for us, we are sure we can achieve that," he said.
"We have to globalise," said Kohler, who is to be re-assigned soon after helping lead Skoda's transformation.
Skoda posted 1996 net profit of 163 million crowns after a loss of 1.62 billion crowns in 1995, when it ploughed much of its cash flow into building a new mid-sized platform for its Octavia line which premiered last autumn.
"In the next and future years we don't count on any losses, only profits," said Kohler, declining a more specific forecast.
Skoda's total turnover comprised roughly 3.4 percent of Volkswagen Group's worldwide take in 1996. VW built up a 70 percent stake in the Czech company in 1995 since joining in on its privatisation earlier in the decade.
Officials said potential domestic production capacity would be filled when it reaches an expected 340,000 cars this year.
Expansion is to come from opening new production elsewhere, such as its assembly line in Poznan, Poland -- which has a capacity for 15,000 to 20,000 cars.
Total sales rose 34 percent last year to 58.9 billion crowns, while unit sales were up 24 percent to 279,363 cars, almost entirely comprised of Skoda's compact Felicia line.
Production is forecast to increase 30 percent this year, as the Octavia range comes fully on stream.
The century-old Skoda, based north of Prague, posted robust sales growth of 47 percent in developed countries of western Europe, which accounted for nearly a third of total turnover.
Meanwhile, sales to central and eastern Europe, excluding Skoda's home market, rose 78 percent, and domestic turnover was up 24 percent and comprised 45 percent of sales.
Sales and marketing director Detlef Wittig said that the company hoped to hold on to its 50 percent domestic market share while continuing to focus on Poland and Russia for growth and making gains in new western European markets.
"In highly developed Western markets we have broken through with the Felicia range," Wittig said, stressing that Skoda's marketing had concentrated on the new quality of the brand which was once the butt of many western jokes.
Unit sales in two of its largest western European export markets Germany and Britain showed growth of just two percent, but sales to France, Italy, and Denmark showed double-digit growth, and sales to nearby Austria doubled to 9,457 units.
Meanwhile it had a lower turnover in Asia and South America of 10 percent as it directed exports toward stronger demand in Europe. The company has yet to attack North America.
Despite average double-digit wage increases and Czech average annual inflation last year of 8.8 percent, personnel costs grew only 6.8 percent, as the workforce grew 6.9 percent to 17,992 employees.
Skoda exports account for roughly five percent of total Czech exports. Kohler said that further increases in productivity and efficiency would counter the strong Czech crown and increase Skoda's share to seven or eight percent.
"We can say that the ground floor (at Skoda) has already been finished, but it now depends on our colleagues to make a nice skyscraper," the outgoing Kohler said.
-- Prague Newsroom, 420-2-2423-0003
