Czech Deputy Finance Minister Vladimir Rudlovcak, under heavy criticism for his management of capital markets, resigned on Thursday, his ministry said.
It said Finance Minister Ivan Kocarnik had accepted Rudlovcak's resignation and named Jiri Spicka, director of the ministry's section on finance and banking, as his replacement.
Rudlovcak and the ministry have been criticised by investors and in the media for their performance in regulating funds and equities markets, which are frequently accused of being opaque and rife with insider trading.
In leaving, Rudlovcak was quoted by the ministry in a statement as saying that "in the situation when there is a long-term strong media campaign against the Finance Ministry and himself especially... his continuation in the function of deputy minister would not be profitable".
It said that the situation had been problematic "especially for the activity of the (capital market) oversight, in which (Rudlovcak's) authority is continually eroded through the systematic attacks."
Criticism of Rudlovcak intensified in recent weeks after several cases where Czech investment fund managers and major shareholders were found to have been stripping assets of the funds under the noses of regulators.
One case involved the investment fund Trend, in which a group of shareholders was arrested and charged with transferring major holdings out of the fund, including a major stake in the Prague department store Kotva a.s.
The arrests too place long after shares had been transferred and a group of minority shareholders is still fighting to get them back.
On Thursday, a representative of the Czech Value Fund, one of Trend's large minority shareholders which has put much of the blame for ignorance of the fund's stripped assets on the Finance Ministry, welcomed Rudlovcak's resignation.
"It's a positive sign of course. It shows that what we are working on here is having some effect," said John Moffitt of the Czech Value Fund, who leads a group of investors pushing for tighter regulation of the capital markets.
Another case involved the fund CS Fond in which managers were found to have drained more than a billion crowns ($34 million) of assets into personal accounts.
The ministry statement cited the CS Fond case specifically, saying that Rudlovcak and his staff did what it could within the framework of the law but it was up to other criminal justice bodies to resolve the case which had "an unambiguous criminal character".
Much of the frustration on Prague's share markets, which have consistently underperformed other post-communist markets in the region, has been aimed at the Finance Ministry.
Prague Stock Exchange Chairman Tomas Jezek, one of the most outspoken critics of Rudlovcak, is pushing for legislation to give power to a new independent watchdog fashioned on the lines of the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission.
Jezek was not immediately available for comment after the ministry's announcement.
Jan Sykora, a broker at the Prague investment house Wood &amp; Co, commented : "I think it's good news, because clearly there are a lot of things not going well in the capital markets and Rudlovcak was responsible for that (the capital markets)."
-- Prague Newsroom, 420-2-2423-0003 ($ = 29.67 Czech Crowns)
