Tremours rumbled through Czech markets on Monday, as crown, debt, and equity traders were anxious about the contents of a government pro-growth package due out mid-week.
The extent of budget cuts and measures affecting interest and exchange rates in the still-secret package -- aimed at stemming growing budget and trade deficits and reviving economic growth -- kept everybody in the markets guessing.
The Czech crown fell to a 10-month low, losing 1.5 percent of its value trading late on Monday at 30.283/dollar 17.568/mark or about 0.75 percent below parity with the peg, from 29.290 and 17.439, or +0.80 on Friday.
"I think we'll see much nervousness on the markets (until the cabinet's announcement) -- forex, equity, and fixed income," said Vladimir Kreidl at Prague's Patria Finance.
In thin activity on the Prague Stock Exchange, the blue-chip PX50 index dropped about 0.5 percent to 548.5.
"Probably now, the nervousness around the government measures is a little bit distracting," said Lubomir Vystavel of ING Barings. The heaviest decliner among top shares was Komercni Banka, which fell 65 crowns, 2.8 percent, to 2,247.
Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus and other senior ministers have suggested a series of budget cuts along with a loosening in monetary policy, but specific details have not been revealed.
The central bank responded last Thursday by easing minimum reserve requirements, but kept key interest rates unchanged.
The Czech National Bank fixed the crown on Monday at 30.045 and 17.439 or +0.04 percent above parity, as rates fluctuated wildly ahead of the daily fixing at 11.30 am (0930 gmt).
The sharp fall in the crown did not give a reason for the CNB to intervene to prop up its value, the CTK news agency quoted CNB spokesman Martin Svehla as saying late on Monday. Central bank officials were not available for further comment.
Traders are debating whether the central bank, as a complicit part of the plan to be announced on Wednesday, would let the crown depreciate to help a worsening trade situation.
The crown, which hit its high in February against the central bank's mark/dollar peg, has been especially sensitive as government pressure for an easing of monetary policy grows.
"Traders see the authorities as not opposing a weaker Czech crown, and the authorities are seeing the revaluation (side of the central bank's fixing) band, as overvalued," said Petr Korous, a trader at Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka.
Korous said comments by Prime Minister Klaus over the weekend, hinting he was not happy with the crown's higher exchange rate levels, added more uncertainty.
The government and the central bank have repeatedly ruled out a direct administrative devaluation of the crown in order to boost exports, although the country's current account deficit now is over eight percent of gross domestic product.
"I haven't seen the market this agitated since last September. When you see volatility like that, and it's across the board not just a few major players, that can be a bit of a problem," said one London-based analyst.
