A long-awaited early 1997 measure of Czech M2 money supply showed no signs of surfacing on Monday, causing traders and analysts who use the numbers for investment strategy to vent their frustrations.
"It's incredibly frustrating, because the Czech National Bank keeps referring to M2 as one of its most important statistics and it's consistently released very late," said Matt Starr, a fixed-income analyst at Creditanstalt in Prague.
While central banks of most major economies and many post-communist neighbours have already released key money supply figures for well into 1997, the Czech National Bank (CNB) has yet to publish any for the year.
The CNB said on Monday it still had no definite release date for January's M2 data, although the figures may come soon.
"Definitely not today. Maybe tomorrow or after tomorrow," Pavel Palivec, a CNB spokesman, told Reuters.
"No legal norms" require a release of M2 data, he said, adding that slow reporting of commercial banks was partly to blame for the tardier-than-usual release.
Tension has grown ahead of the government's economic stimulus package on Wednesday, where some analysts believe that a rapid decline in M2 may enable the cabinet to succeed in pushing the central bank into lowering key interest rates.
"They (the CNB) may be waiting for political reasons, but it's putting a lot of people off," said one trader at the Prague office of a foreign bank.
Analysts are hoping to see end-February figures, although January data is more likely.
They say it is difficult to forecast privately and that much of the data included in the M2 calculation has long been at the central bank's disposal.
The CNB has never had a set release date for its key M2 figure, but in 1996 the lag time was usually around one-and-a- half to two-and-a-half months after the period being measured.
The last M2 release was on March 13, when the CNB said M2 at end-December was 7.8 percent higher than the same 1995 month. That was a slowing from November which showed a rise of 9.7 percent year-on-year.
November's results were released on January 23.
Analysts are watching M2 closely since growth in the money supply slowed from a double-digit rate last year ahead of central bank tightening measures in June.
The government has said a drop in March's 12-month inflation rate to 6.8 percent from nine percent for much of 1996 came at the cost of a slowdown in economic growth.
The criticism has kept many watching for a possible lowering of interest rates, monetary conditions permitting.
Creditanstalt's Starr said he expects the figures -- after an inflow of more than 30 billion crowns in crown Eurobonds in January -- might give the central bank less room to manoeuvre, helping its argument to keep rates higher.
"I actually think the M2 figure for January is going to be bad with all those Eurobonds they haven't been able to sterilise (pull out of circulation)," Starr said.
Compared with other central banks, the CNB-published figures lag well behind:
* Germany's Bundesbank has a roughly three-day window around the 20th of each month to release its key M3 data for the preceding month.
* The U.S. Federal Reserve measures M2 weekly and releases the results within three to five days, adding up roughly $4 trillion circulating and saved in the U.S. economy.
* The neighbouring Polish central bank releases its broad money data for each month within 10 days after the end of the period measured. End-March data was released on April 9.
-- Prague Newsroom, 420-2-2423-0003
