The Czech cabinet will adopt a carrot-and-stick package mixing investment incentives with budget and import cuts in an attempt to spur economic growth, a Reuters poll of analysts showed on Tuesday.
With the cabinet due to announce a stimulus package on Wednesday, share market reforms and savings promotion steps to reduce demand were most frequently mentioned as likely to be included by the nine analysts surveyed.
The government has said it aims to reduce growing budget and trade deficits, while spurring growth, dampening demand for imports and adding confidence to beleaguered capital markets.
None of the analysts expected a direct manipulation of the exchange rate to help exports, although several suggested allowing the crown to ease below its corridor of plus/minus 7.5 percent from the mid-point of a mark/dollar basket.
Josef Poeschl at the Vienna Institute for Comparative Economic Studies said lower interest rates were needed, but Merrill Lynch's Andrew Kenningham expected lower rates would be put off until more data on slowing growth was available.
There was a consensus among the analysts that the cabinet should take steps to beef up market regulation, with most saying a U.S.-style Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) would help revive lagging foreign investment.
The analysts agreed sharp budget cuts were on the cards, as economic growth, and thus tax revenue, has come up short.
Expectations ranged from 20 billion crowns ($654 million) in cuts seen as "very likely" by Boris Gomez and Susanne Hallergard at ING Barings to 40-50 billion forecast by Kenningham.
"At least 25 billion crowns of cuts are needed to give good chance of a balanced budget," said Kennigham. "Anything short of a balanced budget lacks credibility."
There was a broad consensus that state sector wages would be capped at 10 percent nominal growth -- Kenningham said that should save about 30 billion crowns this year -- and several expected pressure on the private sector to follow suit.
Kamil Janacek, chief economist at Komercni Banka, said the government should seek a budget surplus of two to three percent of gross domestic product (GDP), but more likely would move toward just a balance.
Janacek, who works at the largest state-controlled bank, said the government must finish privatising big banks and industrial corporations.
He said he expected the issuing of longer-term government bonds to increase the propensity to save in the household sector and for changes in the legal and institutional framework to enable better functioning of the legal infrastructure.
Several said they expected longer-term state bonds to be issued to attract individual Czech retail investors to park their money for awhile, reducing demand.
The group was mixed on the need to impose surcharges or quotas to reduce demand for imports, which have thrown the current account deficit to more than 8.5 percent of GDP.
Gomez and Hallergard said they expected seasonal import duties on selected foodstuffs and more stringent non-tariff trade barriers on imports, particularly from the European Union, in the package.
Poeschl said he expected some non-tariff barriers would be introduced on selected items, adding they should be for a defined period of time with plans for a gradual removal.
Other key comments included:
* Martin Kupka at Prague's Patria Finance said he expected "considerable" budget cuts, anti-import administrative measures and a rise in consumption taxes to dampen demand.
* Matt Starr, bond trader at Creditanstalt Prague, said he expected a cap on wages, budget cuts, a move to separate investment funds from banks -- an often-cited problem in the capital markets -- and more support for the Export Guarantee and Insurance agency (EGAP) and state export bank.
($ = 30.58 Czech Crowns)
