The Czech government, central Europe's perennial budget hawk, says it will consider a plan next week to cut all ministries' spending in order to balance the 1996 budget by year's end.
The Finance Ministry is proposing cuts of roughly more than one percent from the 1996 budgets of every ministry, because of a projected 6.6 billion crown ($248 million) revenue shortfall and a 2.7 billion over-expenditure from the originally approved balanced budget.
"The total we need to cut is roughly 9.3 billion crowns," Deputy Finance Minister Miroslav Havel told Reuters.
Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus's government has been widely praised by financial analysts for passing four consecutive balanced budgets, earning him the reputation as post-Communist Europe's tightest fiscal manager.
Earlier, Klaus told a news conference after a cabinet meeting that the finance ministry plan would be on the agenda of next week's government session.
Deputy minister Havel said the cuts, would not affect pensions or civil service wages, but would be broad, not deep.
"(The cuts) will touch every ministry and in the same level -- the same percentage of reduction of several non-investment outlays. Certainly we're not cutting pensions or wages," said Havel, who directs budget planning for the ministry.
"But we are reducing such expenditures on materials and other things," he added.
Analysts said the Czech capital markets would welcome the move as it would keep billions of crown out of the bloated money supply which has already been fueling inflationary domestic demand.
"I would consider this to be a very positive move," said Jan Vlachy, vice-chariman at Prague's Patria Finance. "This is basically the only way I could have imagined the government could have had an (immediate) impact on inflation."
Domestic bond prices have been depressed of late after central bank moves to tighten the money supply in late June signalled inflation worries were strong.
Annual inflation has remained stubbornly around nine percent this year, above the eight percent the government projected by the year's end.
The budget cuts, if passed, would reduce the entire 1996 state budget to 291 billion crowns from the plan passed by parliament last December.
Havel said the revenue gap was mostly due to Russia's failure to pay about five billion crowns on loans owed to the Czech Republic.
The largest component of the over-expenditure was subsidies for heating because of the longer than expected cold weather and other social aid payments, he said.
"You know (the ministers) don't like cutting their budgets. But we're doing it because of the total macroeconomic situation," Havel said. ($1=26.63 Czech Crown)
