The Czech National Bank (CNB) on Tuesday put the largest fully-private bank, Agrobanka a.s., under forced administration due to liquidity problems arising from the failure of another bank, Kreditni Banka a.s..
The central bank, in its 12th intervention into a commercial bank in the post-Communist period, said it would guarantee all of Agrobanka's obligations during a "temporary" forced administration period of an unspecified duration.
Analysts said the move was another badly-needed step in reforming the banking sector and should speed up overall market reforms.
CNB Governor Josef Tosovsky on Tuesday said that the central bank instructed the "big banks" to prepare up to six billion crowns ($159 million) to help liqidity at Agrobanka, which has four billion crowns in basic capital.
Tosovsky did not elaborate on what form the liquidity help might take or from which source.
The "Big Four" banks are Ceska Sporitelna, Komercni Banka, Investicni a Postovni Banka and Ceskoslovensko Obchodni Banka a.s. (CSOB) -- all in which the state holds a significant stake. All but CSOB, have privately-held shares.
Tosovsky, who called Agrobanka's situation a problem with "liquidity not solvency" said the central bank would jump in with its own funds if necessary to help the central bank's "precautionary measures".
In a statement issued after an overnight meeting of the Czech cabinet, the CNB said that problems of Agrobanka, the country's fifth largest overall, had arisen as a consequence of the failure of the medium-sized Kreditni Banka a.s.
It also said the move stemmed from the investigation of people in the Kreditni case -- in which five people connected to Kreditni have been indicted on fraud charges -- who are also connected to Agrobanka.
"The investigation of the fall of Kreditni Banka...and its politicisation, and charges against people connected to Agrobanka, negatively influences the liquidity position of this bank (Agrobanka)," the CNB said in its statement.
Over 70 percent of banking activity in the country is done within the four largest banks.
In order to support Agrobanka, the CNB said it would guarantee all deposits at the bank, and that it would ensure, in cooperation with other commercial banks, sufficient "financial sources" for Agrobanka, should it need them.
Czech Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus said the central bank's move was a preventative step aimed at keeping the banking sector sound. "There isn't even the slightest reason for any sort of banking panic," Klaus told journalists on Tuesday.
($1=26.51 Czech Crown)
