The Czech National Bank (CNB) on Tuesday put the largest fully-private bank, Agrobanka a.s., under forced administration due to liquidity problems arising from the failure of another bank, Kreditni Banka a.s..
The central bank, in its 12th intervention into a commercial bank in the post-Communist period, said it would guarantee all of Agrobanka's deposits during a "temporary" forced administration period of an unspecified duration.
In a statement issued after an overnight meeting of the Czech cabinet, the CNB said that problems of Agrobanka, the country's fifth largest overall, had arisen as a consequence of the failure of Kreditni Banka a.s..
It also said the move stemmed from the investigation of people in the Kreditni case -- in which five people connected to Kreditni have been indicted on fraud charges -- who are also connected to Agrobanka.
"The investigation of the fall of Kreditni Banka...and its politicization, and charges against people connected to Agrobanka, negatively influences the liquidity position of this bank (Agrobanka)," the CNB said in its statement.
While over 70 percent of banking activity in the country is down within the four largest banks -- each with the state as a major shareholder -- Agrobanka has grown to be the largest fully-private bank with four billion crowns ($151 million) in basic capital.
In order to support Agrobanka, the CNB said it would guarantee all deposits at the bank, and that it would ensure, in cooperation with other commercial banks, sufficient "financial sources" for Agrobanka, should it need them.
Czech Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus said the central bank's move was a preventative step aimed at keeping the banking sector sound. "There isn't even the slightest reason for any sort of banking panic," Klaus told journalists on Tuesday.
He said the move by the central bank is a way to stop problems in the banking sector escalating.
The fall in August of Kreditni, based in the western city of Plzen, caused a political furore and led local media to question the effectiveness of bank supervision.
Kreditni and Agrobanka were linked to each other through the secretive Czech investment group Motoinvest which used both banks to finance its securities operations.
An official from Motoinvest was indicted last weeekend for a debt swap scheme which police said led, in-part, to the failure of Kreditni Banka.
But Motoinvest has denied any responsibility for the failure of Kreditni which caused losses of about 12 billion crowns.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003 ($1=26.51 Czech Crown)
