The Czech cabinet appeared headed for a shakeup on Tuesday as Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus's senior Civic Democratic Party (ODS) agreed to discuss changes with its two partners in the centre-right ruling coalition.
The leadership of ODS, after suffering weeks of harsh criticism and falling approval ratings amid Klaus's insistence that immediate personnel changes were not necessary, agreed to discuss a shuffling of the cabinet.
"(The leadership) expressed its agreement with the opening of debate on the reconstruction of the government also with our coalition partners," Klaus said in an interview on Czech Radio.
The Czech news agency CTK quoted ODS deputy chairman Miroslav Macek as saying that the cabinet changes should be completed by the end of June.
Later a government spokesman, Ivo Strejcek, told Reuters that leaders of the coalition parties might meet Tuesday afternoon or evening, but he said he could not say what would be discussed.
Klaus's government has come under fire in recent weeks for a slowdown in the country's economic performance and for highly publicised cases of financial crime, and problems in the health care sector and schools.
The macroeconomic problems -- mainly a current account deficit topping nine percent of gross domestic product and recent contractions in industrial output -- have prompted a sell-off of the country's currency, the crown.
Political instability has also added to the downward pressure on the currency. The central bank intervened on several occasions last week to stem the fall of the crown.
Opinion polls have shown that support for Klaus's centre-right ODS is at a record low while support for the opposition Social Democrats has grown well above that of the three parties in the ruling coalition.
Just 35 percent of respondents in a poll released on Monday said they trusted the government, down from 38 percent in April. A year ago 47 percent trusted the government.
Klaus last month announced a package of measures aimed at giving fresh impetus to economic growth, curbing trade and current account deficits and clamping down on economic crime. It included cuts in public spending and limits on wage growth.
"The ODS's declining popularity  probably also means that the public has not embraced the package of measures that the government recently announced in an effort to 'correct' negative economic developments," independent political analyst Jiri Pehe said.
"As the package was not accompanied by radical personal changes in the government is now backfiring--and, once again, affecting adversely mainly the ODS," he added.
Deputy Prime Minister and Finance Minister Ivan Kocarnik was chiefly blamed for the country's problems in the poll on Monday, with 28 percent saying he should resign.
He was followed in the unpopularity stakes by Industry and Trade Minister Vladimir Dlouhy, with 22 percent saying he should quit. Eighteen percent said Klaus should go.
