An influential Internet organisation has backed away from a proposal to dramatically expand the number of addresses available on the global computer network.
The Internet Society, which helps develop and coordinate Internet standards, announced this week that instead of moving ahead with the proposal it would form a nine-member committee to study the issue.
Unveiled in August, the proposal was an attempt to quell the growing number of disputes over desirable address names.
"There has been considerable international debate on various aspects of the proposal with no consensus," Don Heath, president of the society, said in a statement. "It is in the best interest of the continued beneficial evolution of the Internet that these issues be aired and resolved."
Disputes over Internet names are occuring with increasing frequency as more companies seek to publicise and market their products over the Net.
For example, Viacom Inc.'s MTV cable music channel fought with one of its employees who had registered "mtv.com," eventually regaining control of the name in an out-of-court settlement.
Every site on the World Wide Web must have a unique address name. Most addresses end with one of a few three letter designations, known as top-level domains, including "com" for private sites, "gov for government sites and "edu" for sites run by schools.
In August, Internet Assigned Numbers Authority said it would oversee the creation of up to 150 new top level domains, easing the squeeze, especially for names in the private sector category.
The authority, operating under charter from the society and the Federal Network Council, is the central coordinator of Internet addresses and other standards.
The society's board of trustees voted in June to accept a preliminary version of the numbers authority proposal, with the proviso that the business aspects of proposal be fleshed out.
But with the ensuing controversy, the society decided a committee was needed to reexamine the proposal, Heath said.
The committee will include two members appointed by the society, two by the numbers authority and two by the Internet Architecure Board.
The International Telecommunication Union, the World Intellectual Property Organisation and the International Trademark Association will each appoint one member.
