When a company in California sells a book to a consumer in Canada from a Web site hosted on a computer in England, what laws govern the transaction?
As sales of all kinds of goods over the Internet continue to grow, questions are multiplying about basic regulations covering consumer protection, taxation and other issues.
"Most commercial law has built in a hidden assumption of geographical boundaries within which certain kinds of actions will occur," said Jerry Kaplan, who runs an Internet site called OnSale that auctions electronic merchandise. "Now the legal system is facing a medium which is inherently boundary-less."
For example, some states tax transactions that originate within their borders while others hope to collect so-called use taxes when their residents buy from out-of-state merchants. "Sin" laws on obscenity, gambling and sales of alcohol also differ from state to state and apply to some Web merchants.
With the potential for so much confusion, some online mavens argue the federal government should step in and set clear policies.
"The role of the federal government is to set national standards or national policy," said Gary Arlen, president of Arlen Communications and a leading analyst of online companies. "A lot of what we're talking about online transcends state borders and even national borders."
A top priority is protecting consumers' private information.
"More regulation is really needed on the privacy issues compared to other areas," said Jonathan Rosenoer, an attorney and author of the online "Cyberlaw" column. Existing laws protect some kinds of records, like medical data, but not other information, Rosenoer said.
Both real and imagined privacy violations are feeding public sentiment in favour of reform. Lexis-Nexis was deluged with protests last month after word spread that the database company was selling personal information such as social security numbers and maiden names over the Internet.
The company responded that its P-TRAK product no longer provided social security numbers and never contained maiden names. But it withdrew the names of thousands of individuals that asked to be deleted.
Following the controversey, the Federal Trade Commission asked Congress to amend the Fair Credit Reporting Act, a law governing personal financial information held by credit agencies. The commission suggested the law be extended to cover nonfinancial information like social security numbers.
In many cases, however, the federal government is still deciding what steps to take.
The Treasury Department, which has a hand in tax policy, banking regulation and international trade, has several groups studying online commerce issues but has not reached any conclusions yet.
Top Treasury officials and banking regulators have expressed a desire not to intrude on the nascent market for electronic money. Some banks would like federal rules barring non-banks from issuing electronic money.
"Heavyhanded, pre-emptive attempts to regulate these products before any social risks have been demonstrated would handicap innovation," Federal Reserve Gov. Edward Kelley said earlier this month.
There is little confusion about criminal scheming online, however. The Federal Trade Commission, Commodity Futures Trading Commission and the Securities and Exchange Commission are all prosecuting online crooks and collecting complaints at their Web sites.
"It's not an area where we need new laws or new authority," John Stark, special counsel of Internet projects at the SEC said. "It's the same swindles, just in a different medium."
