Supreme Court justices Wednesday sharply questioned rules governing so-called derivative investments and foreign currency trading in a case that could have wide repercussions for both markets.
The Commodity Futures Trading Commission has traditionally prosecuted crooks who ripped off the public with fraudulent investments. But sophisticated investors such as big banks have been allowed to trade similiar financial instruments with little direct regulation, market participants said.
That distinction has been blurred in recent years, as defendants accused of fraud by the CFTC have sought to rely on an exemption from regulation, relied on by the bigger players, in a 1974 amendment to the Commodity Exchange Act.
The amendment was added at the request of the Treasury Department to ensure that sophisticated investors trading in foreign currency and a few other markets would not be subject to uneccessary regulation by the CFTC.
Lower courts have made conflicting rulings about the 1974 amendment and the Supreme Court decided last year to hear the case of William Dunn, a foreign currency investment advisor charged with fraud by the CFTC after losing $95 million of his clients' money.
Jeffrey Minear, assistant to the Solicitor General -- the federal government's representative before the Supreme Court -- defended the CFTC's prosecution of Dunn before the court Wednesday. Minear argued that the 1974 exemption for "transactions in foreign currency" did not cover Dunn's trading in foreign currency options, one type of derivative. A derivative is an investment whose value is derived from a stock, bond, currency, commodity or other instrument.
But justices questioned Minear's distinction, which relied heavily on the particular meaning of the word "in."
Congress was "not using consistent language" in the commodity laws passed in 1974 and since then, Justice Antonin Scalia said. "They use in, they use on, they use involving."
Minear drew a sharp rebuke from Chief Justice William Rehnquist when he later argued that Congress expressed greater concern about fraudulent use of options than other types of investments under a 1922 commodity trading law.
"Perhaps it was true in 1922 but that doesn't prove it's true now," the chief justice interjected.
Gary Stumpp, Dunn's lawyer, argued that other federal agencies such as the Securities and Exchange Commission might have jurisdiction over fraudulent foreign exchange trading but not the CFTC.
Several Wall Street trade groups and big banks filed friend-of-the-court briefs in support of Dunn's position. They warned that if the court upheld the CFTC's position, the burden of additional regulation might drive the gigantic $40 billion a day foreign exchange market in the United States might overseas.
On the other side, Chicago futures exchanges said they could be put out of business by unregulated competitors if the court throws out the CFTC's case against Dunn.
Brooksley Born, chairwoman of the CFTC, attended the argument but declined to comment afterwards.
A decision is not expected for at least a few months. Several members of Congress have said they may introduce legislation early next year to change the 1974 amendment, possibly rendering the verdict in the Dunn case moot.
