The Internet continued to grow in leaps and bounds this year while online services found it much harder to add new customers, a new survey says.
An estimated 35 million adults in the United States had used the Internet, according to the poll by Louis Harris and Associates conducted in late September, up from 27 million at the beginning of the year.
"Although the number of people who use computers has fluctuated around just over half of the adult population, the number of adult Americans using computers for cyber-activities is growing," said Humphrey Taylor, chairman of the polling organisation.
While online services like America Online Inc. and Compuserve Corp. could lay claim to almost 41 million subscribers, that was the same level Harris found back in January.
Online services, which provide private online content in addition to Internet access, have faced greater competition this year from companies like AT&amp;T Corp., which provide cheaper Internet-only access.
Businesses, which are looking to the Internet as a potential source of new revenue, are intensely interested in figures on its usage. Differing surveys have come up with widely varying numbers.
The Harris poll found that, although more people are getting wired, they are on average spending less time in cyberspace.
Home users said they were online 2.8 hours a week, down from three hours a week in an April survey. Business and other users said they were online for 1.8 hours, down from two hours in April.
The poll also reinforced findings of earlier studies showing that more educated people were more likely to use computers and access the Internet.
People with college and graduate degrees were twice as likely to use computers and four times more likely to access the Internet as people who only graduated from high school, the poll found.
The poll's results were based on a telephone survey of 1,032 adults at the end of September and have a margin of error of plus or minus 3 percentage points, according to Harris.
