The growing business of doing business on the Internet poses a major challenge to tax collectors, but no special taxes should be imposed in cyberspace, the government said in report released Thursday.
"Treasury believes that these new technologies should not be used to justify new taxes," the Treasury Department draft report said. "Accordingly, Treasury is not considering any type of value added tax, 'bit tax,' or other new excise tax on electronic commerce."
Instead, the current system should evolve to tax income from all sources in a consistent manner, the department said.
"Our overall tax policy goal in this area should emulate policy in other areas -- maintain neutrality, fairness and simplicity -- a policy which serves to encourage all desirable economic activity new and old," the report said.
Businesses are already struggling with tax proposals from state and local governments, according to Kent Johnson, head of sales and transaction tax practice at KPMG Peat Marwick.
"State governments don't feel the same way as the federal government, but this report may be a good starting point for discussing all the issues," Johnson said.
This year, about $1 billion of goods and services will be sold online, growing to over $7 billion by the year 2000, according to market researchers at Jupiter Communications.
But the myriad tax laws and regulations affecting businesses may not keep pace with the fast-paced, often chaotic growth of the worldwide computer network.
Buyers and sellers on the Internet can be in different states or even different countries, complicating the task of collecting tax at the "source" of a transaction.
The department also said it was worried that tax evaders could use the anonymity provided by the Internet as a mask to avoid reporting income or to transfer money to offshore bank accounts.
But the report made no recommendations about how the government should deal with tax evasion issues. "Treasury intends to study, and requests comments on these issues," the report said.
The report is available on the Treasury's web site, http://www.ustreas.gov.
The report on taxation is likely to be followed by reports on other aspects of online commerce that the department is studying, including consumer protection, electronic money, bank regulation and law enforcement, officials said.
