A U.S. District Court judge Wednesday barred new federal regulations that allow credit unions to expand their membership beyond workers at one company, saying this would exceed the legal limits of the institutions.
The rules have raised the ire of banks who, fearing the loss of customers, have been battling in court since 1990 to keep credit unions to their traditional role of serving members of just "one" community or occupation.
The new rules, which the National Credit Union Administration adopted last month after an unfavorable court ruling, redefined "a single common bond" that is the basis of credit union membership.
On Wednesday, Judge Thomas Jackson issued an injunction blocking the new rules, saying they were merely an attempt to circumvent earlier court rulings.
Earlier court rulings limited members of a credit union to a single company or organization. The court actions struck down a 1982 NCUA decision allowing credit unions to draw members from multiple companies.
Under the latest NCUA rules, credit unions could include members of a single trade, industry or profession even if the members worked for different companies.
Jackson chastised the NCUA and said the federal credit union regulator was acting more like a trade association.
Jackson also said the agency must rescind 31 applications that it had already approved for credit union charters under the new rules.
The judge said he might refer the matter to the attorney general for further investigation of what he termed collusive behavior among the agency and credit unions.
"Why did you go about it in such a surreptitious, collusive, underhanded way?" Jackson asked lawyers for the agency at a hearing Wednesday.
Eric Goulian, a lawyer for the Justice Department, denied the agency had acted improperly and said the new rules were a response to emergency conditions.
The fireworks were the latest development in a six-year-old case before Jackson pitting the American Bankers Association against the agency and the credit union industry.
In 1990, the ABA and five North Carolina banks filed suit againt AT&amp;T Family Federal Credit Union, which had grown to encompass members from more than 150 different occupational groups.
In July, a U.S. Court of Appeals handed the banks a major victory in the case, ruling that the NCUA had exceeded its statutory authority in allowing single credit unions each to serve members of more than one employer.
Jackson issued injunctions in October implementing the ruling. The injunctions limited more than 3,500 non-profit credit unions nationwide to members who share a "single common bond."
The credit union industry has said the injunctions will result in millions of people being expelled from credit unions, with some unable to afford similiar but more expensive services from banks.
Two weeks after Jackson issued the injunctions, the credit union agency adopted new rules, now set aside, to dramatically expand the definition of a single common bond.
The new rules also allowed credit unions to have as many as 1 million members, up from 25,000 under the old rules.
After the hearing, Brenda Furlow, general counsel for the Credit Union National Association, said the industry was considering an appeal.
"Clearly, we're disappointed with the ruling," she said. "Basically, banks are trying to aggressively protect their competitive interests and the American consumer loses."
Paul Schosberg, president of the trade association America's Community Bankers, praised Jackson's ruling. "The NCUA has clearly stretched the law's common bond requirement beyond all recognition," he said.
