If the Board of Governors of the U.S. Federal Reserve System does as expected early Friday and votes to expand banks' non-banking activities, it will only heighten the drive in Congress to overhaul U.S. banking regulations completely, analysts and industry officials said.
The Fed is expected to vote to allow banks' section 20 subsidiaries to derive 25 percent of their revenue from non-banking activities such as securities underwriting, up from the current 10 percent ceiling.  
The section 20 proposal was released for comment in July, but since then another bank regulator has stolen some of the Fed's thunder. Comptroller of the Currency Eugene Ludwig said his office will begin approving bank affiliates moving into an assortment of non-banking businesses.
Both the Fed's proposal and the Comptroller's actions will raise the pressure on Congress to scrap the Glass-Steagall Act, according to Robert Litan, director of economic studies at the Brookings Institute.  
In the past, banks led the charge to change the law because they wanted to get into other businesses, like selling insurance or underwriting stock deals. Insurance companies and securities firms generally opposed the banks creating legislative gridlock.
"Now the tables have been turned," Litan said. "But it's not a two-way street. Other industries will want to level the playing field."  
Both moves also reflect current market realities. The financial services industry, from banks to insurance companies to mutual funds, is converging. Mutual funds already offer checking account-like money market funds and some of the leading stock and bond underwriters are commercial banks.
In the words of one top regulator, the Fed's move from 10 to 25 percent, "is not material." The Fed has required banks to take certain steps to prevent problems in the subsidiaries from affecting the bank itself, and its government-insured deposits.
Competitors in other fields fret that the banks insured deposits are a form of government subsidy giving the banks an unfair advantage when they venture into other fields.
Comptroller Ludwig disagreed. Speaking to reporters after delivering a speech here Thursday, Ludwig said that walling off the subsidiary "basically eliminates any subsidization."
He opposes efforts by some in Congress to keep banks out of certain fields, such as real estate or merchant banking, entirely. "It's a mistake to set product limits, particularly in this day and age when we have such a dynamic marketplace," he said.
((--Aaron Pressman, 202-898-8312))
