U.S. banks will be able to significantly increase their securities underwriting activities under a rule adopted Friday by the Federal Reserve, but that will only add pressure on Congress to overhaul the entire regulatory system, market participants said.
The Fed voted unanimously to allow so-called section 20 subsidiaries of banks to derive as much as 25 percent of their revenues from underwriting and dealing in securities such as stocks, corporate bonds and commercial paper.
The new rule takes effect in 60 days, the Fed said.  
At the meeting, Fed governors called for Congressional action to reform the 1933 Glass-Steagall Act and other laws separating banks from non-bank financial services industries.
"We hope that the next move will be up to the Congress in this whole area," Fed vice chair Alice Rivlin said.
"Legislation is needed but I think this is a constructive step and it is appropriate for us to interpret the existing legislation," Governor Susan Phillips said.
While the Glass-Steagall Act prohibits banks from engaging in non-bank activity, under section 20 of the Act banks may affiliate with firms not "engaged principally" in such areas.  
The Fed said it currently authorizes 41 bank subsidiaries to deal and underwrite securities, ranging from stocks and bonds to commercial paper and mortgage-backed securities.
Banks were already allowed to handle other sorts of financial instruments, including Treasury securities and over-the-counter derivatives.
Both the Fed's action and an even broader move last month by the Comptroller of the Currency will raise the pressure on Congress to scrap the Glass-Steagall Act, according to Robert Litan, director of economic studies at the Brookings Institute.  
In the past, banks led the charge to change the law because they wanted to get into other businesses, like selling insurance and underwriting. Insurance companies and securities firms generally opposed the banks, creating legislative gridlock.
Now, all industries will press for change, Litan said. "The tables have been turned," he said. "But it's not a two-way street. Other industries will want to level the playing field."
Banking industry representatives said they were elated by the Fed vote.  
"This is a tremendous boost for banks that already underwrite securities and an incentive for banks considering this business," American Bankers Association managing director Larry LaRocca said.
"By lifting the 10 percent revenue cap to 25 percent for Section 20 ineligible securities, the Fed has begun chipping away at the antiquated barriers handicapping banks for years," LaRocca added.
Securities industry groups had written to the Fed strongly opposing the proposal and restated their position after the vote.  
"It's as if Santa Clause delivered all the gifts to only one house in the neighborhood," Steve Judge, senior vice president for the Securities Industry Association, said.
Judge also called for Congress to act. "Nothing could benefit consumers and our economy more than a modernization of federal laws governing the financial services industry," he said.
((202-898-8312))
