The Federal Communications Commission proposed Tuesday to trim the $23 billion a year that long-distance telephone companies pay to local service providers in access fees.
But the commission ducked the contentious issue of whether such charges should be imposed on Internet service providers, asking for comment on the issue without offering any proposals.
In a notice of proposed rule-making, the commission said it could cut the access fees in either of two ways: it could impose a schedule of long-distance access charge reductions or wait to allow market forces to drive fees lower.
The access charges, which make up a substantial portion of local phone company revenues, were adopted after the break-up of AT&amp;T Corp. in 1984 that led to the creation of the regional "Baby Bell" local service companies.
New telecommunications rules signed into law in February are supposted to foster more competition for local and long-distance service and drive prices lower.
Long-distance companies, which say the access fees are excessive, favour deep, government-mandated cuts.
"We recommend the FCC to move as quickly as possible to squeeze the $10 billion in excess access fees out of the local exchange industry and put it back in the pockets of consumers," AT&amp;T said in a statement.
Local phone companies concede that the fees exceed their actual costs for carrying long-distance calls but would prefer a gradual reduction based on competition and market forces.
The FCC "must not allow the long-distance companies to continue to benefit at the expense of consumers," said Roy Neel, president of the U.S. Telephone Association, which represents local service providers.
While local providers have already cut access fees by $9 billion, "the long-distance oligopoly has raised rates in lockstep more than six times," he said.
Under the FCC's market-based approach, new entrants in the local market would compete with the Baby Bells to connect long-distance calls. The FCC would gradually relax and ultimately remove price caps and access fee schedules while relying on competition to drive the fees down.
The alternate approach would specify the nature and timing of changes in existing rate levels. Ultimately, the FCC said it could adopt parts of both approaches.
Local phone companies also connect Internet users to Internet service providers over local phone lines, but they receive no access charges for those calls.
Recently, several Baby Bells complained that Internet users were getting a free ride, tying up local lines with often lengthy calls.
The FCC did not take a position on whether Internet service providers should be required to pay access fees. In a less formal "notice of inquiry," the agency asked for comment on possible reform "relating to interstate information services and the Internet."
Comments are due by Jan. 27 on the long-distance access fee proposals and by Feb. 21 on the Internet issue.
