House Banking Committee chairman Jim Leach introduced a bill on Tuesday aimed at remaking the regulatory landscape for banking and other financial services in the United States.
A similiar bill Leach introduced in the previous Congress foundered last June amid opposition from the insurance industry and House Democrats.  
Analysts have said this year's bill might have a better chance of passage, but that was before Leach decided to oppose Newt Gingrich's reelection as Speaker of the House, a move that could turn the leadership against his bill.
"This bill provides expanded powers for the banking, securities and insurance industries," Leach said in a statement. "The ultimate beneficiaries of this legislation, however, are consumers."  
"Not only will there be more products available to banking customers who are looking to maximize their savings, but efficiencies should lower industry costs and therefore costs to consumers," Leach said.
If passed, the bill would break down the legal barriers enacted after the Great Depression between banks, securities firms and insurance companies.
Bank regulators have already begun eroding the barriers for banks, putting pressure on Congress to level the playing field, analysts said.  
The Federal Reserve voted Dec 20 to allow bank subsidiaries to garner a greater share of revenue from underwriting activity. And a month earlier, the Comptroller of the Currency's office said it would allow banks to enter an array of non-bank markets.
Leach said his bill would repeal Section 20 of the Glass-Steagall Act and amend Section 32 to allow for the merger of commercial and investment banks.  
Bank subsidiaries would be allowed to engage directly in securities dealing and other activities considered "part of and incidental to" banking. Affiliates of bank holding companies, would be allowed to engage in insurance activities as principal, agent or broker.
The bill would also abolish the federal charter for thrifts while grandfathering existing thrift holding companies. National thrifts would have the option of transferring to a national or state bank charter or a state savings and loan charter.
The Iowa Republican's bill would continue to prohibit commercial companies outside the finance sector from owning banks.
The bill was also sponsored by three other Republican members of the Banking Committee: Rep Marge Roukema of New Jersey, Mike Castle of Delaware and Rick Lazio of New York.
The full committee will hold hearings on the bill and any related legislation in early March, Leach said.
The text of Leach's bill is available under the "daily update" section of the Banking Committee's World Wide Web site, http://www.house.gov/banking/.
((202-898-8312))
