Fast running out of options, federal credit unions are hoping the Supreme Court will decide Friday to wade into the midst of their six-year legal battle with the banking industry.
The Supreme Court's nine justices are expected to decide whether or not to hear the credit union case, lawyers involved in the case said.
The banks, who filed suit to challenge a 1982 policy adopted by the National Credit Union Administration (NCUA) relaxing previous membership limits, have urged the court not to take the case.
Lower courts have agreed with banks that membership should be sharply limited at thousands of credit unions, cooperative non-profits that offer bank-like services.
If the court decides not to hear the case, membership limits could force many credit unions to be dissolved or broken up into smaller, less-efficient institutions, according to Tim Pryor, federal regulatory counsel to the National Association of Federal Credit Unions.
"It would be kind of like a court-ordered savings and loan crisis," Pryor said. "This case is extremely important to the safety and soundness of the industry."
If at least four justices favour taking the case, the credit unions would have a final chance to erase the limits.
Oral arguments could be scheduled for later this term, with a decision likely by the summer.
"This is about settled law," said Michael Crotty, counsel for the American Bankers Association. If credit unions want to change the membership limits, they should go to Congress and ask for legislation, he said.
"The policy of who gets to be a member of a credit union is not a judicial issue but a legislative one," added Crotty.
Until 1982, credit unions were limited to having members with a single common bond, people who worked for the same employer or lived in the same neighbourhood. But that year, the NCUA began allowing credit unions to include members from multiple, distinct groups.
That angered banks, which contended that some of the larger tax-exempt credit unions posed unfair competition. In 1990, the banks sued a North Carolina credit union that had grown to encompass more than a hundred groups.
The case wound its way through the system, reaching the federal appeals court for the District of Columbia last year. The court ruled the NCUA had exceeded its authority and that members of each credit union must share a single common bond.
A lower court then ordered credit unions to stop accepting members from more than one group, although the order was partially suspended until the Supreme Court makes a decision or declines to hear the case.
The case, First National Bank and Trust Co. v NCUA et al, is on a list of cases the Supreme Court justices are scheduled to discuss Friday.
It is possible that the justices might not get to the case Friday, and then it would likely be discussed at a conference next month, lawyers said.
