The growing mass of Internet users have paid their fair share to local telephone companies and pose little threat to the phone system, according to a study released on Wednesday by a coalition of Internet and computer companies.
The coalition presented the report to counter studies by local phone companies released last year seeking to justify new access fees on Internet usage. The phone company studies found that Internet usage threatened to overwhelm the system.  
"The Internet is not crashing the telephone network," Information Technology Association of America President Harris Miller said at a news conference here.
"We are bringing the real facts to bear on a 'problem' that the phone companies have anecdotally created to protect their own interests," said Miller, whose group is a member of the Internet Access Coalition.
On December 24, the Federal Communications Commission said it had tentatively decided not to impose access fees on Internet providers similiar to those paid by long distance companies to local phone companies.  
But the commission also asked for comments about the effect of the Internet on the phone system.
"Our findings clearly show that claims of phone network 'congestion' resulting from Internet traffic and predictions of a 'meltdown' are greatly exaggerated," said Lee Selwyn, one of the study's authors.
Further, ordinary consumers using the Internet already pay the phone companies more than enough to cover the cost of increased use, said Selwyn, who is an expert on telecommunications regulation.  
The study found, for example, that in 1995 consumers paid more than $1.4 billion for installation and use of six million second phone lines devoted to accessing the Internet or other online services. The study said another eight million second lines were not primarily used for Internet access.
Local phone companies, some of which had not yet seen the new study, disputed Selwyn's conclusions."To suggest that there is no real problem here is mind-boggling," Bell Atlantic spokesman Harry Mitchell said. As Internet companies add huge numbers of phone lines to meet growing demand, "it does impact the capacity of the public telephone network."  
America Online, for example, said recently it would double the number of modems it has to connect with subscribers from 200,000 to 400,000 by June.
But phone company studies considered only a few pieces of the phone system, focusing on switches between Internet service providers and the rest of the network, Selwyn said. While those few switches might be congested, capacity could be added inexpensively, he said.
The study also cited speeches by some phone company executives who have bragged about the additional revenues generated by increased Internet usage.  
"Sales of secondary lines at Bell Atlantic increased more than 50 percent, fueled by surging demand for Internet and telecommuting applications," company CEO Raymond Smith told Wall Street analysts last March. The revenue generated substantial profit because "we were able to provision new lines and services from idle capacity in an existing plant."
Company spokesman Mitchell said charges from second lines "were not designed to subsidize Internet service providers."
However, all sides agree that a technological solution could eliminate most congestion problems by separating calls carrying voice and data.
SBC Communications, parent of Southwestern Bell, announced last week it would introduce such splitting technology at a cost of less than $100 million.
"Technological solutions are readily available," Paul Misener, chairman of the Internet coalition's steering committee said.
((--202-898-8312))
