The various sectors of the U.S. financial services industry will spar over bank reform proposals at a hearing on Tuesday before the House Banking Committee's subcommittee on financial institutions.
With most in Congress and industry ready to scrap the Depression-era laws separating banking from other financial services, one of the hottest topics is likely to be whether even broader reform is required.
Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin is considering a proposal to allow combinations between commercial and financial firms.  
While savings institutions and insurance companies can already own or be owned by non-financial companies, banks operate under much tighter restrictions.
A Treasury Department task force recommended that the administration's bank reform proposal, expected in about a month, allow mixing of commerce and banking, permitting Ford Motor Co or Microsoft to own Citicorp or BankAmerica.
Rubin told a group of bankers at a private meeting last week that the administration has not yet made a decision on the contentious issue, people familiar with the meeting said.  
The high-level private-sector group, known as the Federal Reserve's Federal Advisory Council, also met with House Banking Committee chairman Jim Leach last week.
Leach, who strongly opposes mixing commerce and banking, told the group of CEOs that their banks could be taken over by larger capitalized companies.
"They'll be at the working end of the food chain," Leach reportedly told the bankers according to one person familiar with the meeting. Spokesman for Leach and Rubin declined to comment on the meetings.  
At Tuesday's hearing, insurance and savings groups will oppose restrictions on commercial and financial combinations. The mutual fund industry also opposes restrictions.
Small banks, represented by the Independent Bankers Association of America, will take the opposite position, in favor of imposing legal barriers.
Federal Reserve officials, along with some consumer, agricultural and union groups favor restrictions but will not be heard from on Tuesday. The Fed will testify on Thursday along with other government agencies, while consumer gropups will testify at a Feb 25 hearing.  
The AFL-CIO recently sent a letter to the Clinton administration charging that allowing unlimited mergers would drag the U.S. economy back into the 19th century with a "reinstatement of trusts and monopolies," a person who read the letter said.
Leading Democrats, including ranking minority members of House and Senate banking panels Rep Henry Gonzalez and Sen Paul Sarbanes, also favor restrictions.
Not all Republicans agree with Leach and the Democrats. Rep. Marge Roukema, chairwoman of the financial institutions subcommittee, has introduced a bill that would allow financial companies to do 25 percent of their business in non-financial markets.
And in the Senate, Banking Committee chairman Alfonse D'Amato has opposed restrictions and plans to introduce his own bank reform measure soon.
Rep Gonzalez is likely to raise questions about the possible risks to federal deposit insurance funds, some lobbyists said. Gonzalez has said conglomerate combinations should have limited access to deposit insurance.
((--202-898-8312))
