The debate over reforming America's financial services sector, a top priority for Congress and the Clinton administration, began in earnest Tuesday.
As major industry representatives sat down at a House Banking subcommitee hearing on two pending reform bills, word came that Senate Banking Committee Chairman Alfonse D'Amato, R.-N.Y., had introduced his own version of comprehensive reform.
The bills introduced so far, as well as an administration proposal expected late next month, begin with the same premise: the time is right to scrap the Glass-Steagall Act enacted during the Depression to separate banking from other financial activities like securities underwriting and insurance.
Most in Congress agree. And, for the first time, most financial service company seem to agree as well.
At the hearing of the Subcommittee on Financial Institutions, representatives of banking, insurance, securities and mutual funds all agreed Congress should allow a single entity to span all financial services businesses.
But, as subcommittee Chairwoman Marge Roukema, a New Jersey Republican, observed, "The devil is in the details."
Those who had opposed tearing down Glass-Steagall, mainly insurance and securities companies, have seen federal courts and regulators slowly roll back the law -- but only for banks.
Last March, the Supreme Court freed banks from many state insurance restrictions.
The Federal Reserve also decided to allow banks to derive up to 25 percent of a subsidiary's revenue from securities activity, an increase from the previous limit of 10 percent. In November, the comptroller of the currency said he would start allowing national banks to enter a host of non-banking businesses.
Banks got substantial new authority, but others got nothing.
"For too long, important policy issues have been addressed by regulatory agencies or the courts rather than by Congress," Metropolitan Life Insurance Co. Vice President Roy Albertalli testified at the hearing. Albertalli spoke on behalf of the American Council of Life Insurance, which had opposed mixing banks and insurance.
All the proposals before Congress would level the playing field to some degree and recognise the changes that have shaken modern finance.
"This banking reform legislation will reform the current patchwork of laws and allow the market to operate freely within the financial services industry," D'Amato said as he introduced his bill.
While a broad consensus has been achieved, several important issues remain to be addressed. Perhaps the most controversial is the extent to which non-financial companies should be allowed to own or be owned by financial companies.
Under existing law, mutual funds, insurance companies and savings and loans can combine with so-called commercial firms while banks cannot.
Smaller banks and consumer groups staunchly oppose mixing the two, which would be permitted under the D'Amato bill, limited under the Roukema bill and forbidden under a bill introduced by House Banking Chairman Jim Leach, R.-Iowa.
Joseph Bracewell of the Indepedent Bankers Association of America laid out the opposition. Citing former Federal Reserve Chairman Paul Volcker, Bracewell said such mergers could "distort lending decisions, be anticompetitive and threaten the safety and soundness of the banking system.
Banks said they could live with Roukema's compromise approach, but were undecided about the D'Amato plan. Others heartily endorsed the unlimited approach.
Mutual funds have been "knee-deep in affiliations" and "they've never proved a problem in 57 years," said Matt Fink, president of the Investment Company Institute.
Differences also remain regarding regulation of new, diversified financial services companies, although most favoured an approach having various, specialised agencies regulate the relevent portion of each firm's activities.
