Several U.S. legislators are planning to introduce measures soon to relax export restrictions on encryption technology, an increasingly essential part of global communications and online commerce.
Last year, the Clinton administration relaxed some of the Cold War era export limits on the technology, specialized computer programs that scramble data and render it unreadable without a password or software "key."
But computer companies said the administration did not go far enough, locking them out of the growing global market.  
Rep. Bob Goodlatte, Republican of Virginia, plans to reintroduce a bill on Wednesday that would go well beyond the Clinton administration's approach, staff people in his office said.
Goodlatte's bill would allow computer companies like Netscape Communications Corp or Microsoft Corp to export products with powerful encryption features if foreign competitors were selling similiar technology.
In the Senate, Montana Republican Sen Conrad Burns is also planning to reintroduce his encryption bill from last year.  
At an informal gathering of the Congressional Internet Caucus Tuesday night, Burns said he expected to put forth the bill, known by the acronym PRO-CODE, in late February.
At one time, the Senator had said the 1997 bill would be identical to last year's bill which did not get a vote in the Commerce Committee.  But staffers said the Senator is still tweaking the bill to draw more supporters.
"It's about ready to go," Burns said Tuesday night.
Goodlatte's bill, under the jurisdiction of the House Judiciary Committee, had already garnered 54 co-sponsors by Tuesday night.  
Staff said the bill almost had the backing of a majority of the members of the Judiciary Committee.
Others are also considering introducing bills, some seeking a middle approach between the administration and the Burns and Goodlatte bills, which would remove nearly all export restrictions.
Sen. Patrick Leahy, the Vermont Democrat and co-chair of the Internet Caucus, may have a bill and Rep Rick White, Pennsylvania Republican and also co-chair, is considering weighing in, staff people said.
Some lobbyists involved in the debate said that the administration was considering introducing its own legislation.  But they were unsure about the contents of the legislation, since the administration implemented its new policy by a Presidential executive order in November.
Administration officials were not immediately available for comment.
((--202-898-8312))
