A scuffle breaking out between a top U.S. bank regulator and the state of Rhode Island could foreshadow an increasing number of disputes as more national banks begin selling insurance products, market participants said.
The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency said last month it is considering overriding a new Rhode Island insurance law that imposes different requirements on banks selling insurance than those imposed on on insurance agents.  
While national banks have long had the legal right to sell insurance in small towns, state insurance regulators often imposed onerous rules on the banks.
But last year, the Supreme Court rejected discriminatory state insurance laws and ruled that states cannot "significantly interfere" with national banks conducting permissible activities.
Banks said that states are now trying to evade the court's ruling. They charged that an insurance agents trade group is pushing states to adopt laws like the Rhode Island measure.  
"The Rhode Island statute is their first successful effort to pass such restrictive legislation," James McIntyre, counsel to Association of Banks-in-Insurance, said in a letter this week to the OCC.
"Many other states are considering similiar legislation or regulations at this time. Guidance from the OCC is urgently needed if we are to avoid wasteful legislation and avoid pointless litigation," McIntyre added.
Major states such as Texas, Pennsylvania and Illinois are expected to consider similiar legislation, bankers said.  
The Independent Insurance Agents of America fired back in their own letter to the Comptroller's office. Preempting the Rhode Island law would be "wholly inappropriate" because the law does not significantly interfere with a national bank's ability to sell insurance, the group said.
The agents added that an override would be premature. Although the law was enacted in August, the state has not finished writing the implementing regulations.
Banks said the law on its face is more burdensome to banks than to others selling insurance.  
For example, bank personnel involved in teller activities or making loans would be restricted from selling insurance, forcing banks to have two different sales forces, McIntyre said.
The Comptroller's Office is reviewing the comments it received and will issue an opinion, but has not set a deadline for making a decision, a spokesman said.
