Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan on Friday urged Congress to modernise U.S. financial laws but warned that some government oversight must be maintained to avert financial catastrophes.
A top priority of regulators, Greenspan said after a speech at a Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta conference here, is to prevent "systemic risk," where a problem in one firm or market spreads through the financial system and ultimately undermines the entire economy.
If a bankruptcy or market crash cannot be contained, it could behave like a chain reaction spreading through all markets, he warned.
The failure of Drexel Burnham Lambert in the 1980s, for example, raised fears that its collapse would cause a cascade of failures among large Wall Street firms and commercial banks that had lent funds to Drexel. But the firm was liquidated in an orderly fashion and losses did not spread.
Using its existing authority to oversee banks and provide loans, the Federal Reserve has been able to contain previous crises, Greenspan said. "There have been occasions when we have been on the edge of a significant breakout," he said, but declined to name the institutions involved.
The Fed's actions and other rules governing financial firms "turned out to be adequate to stem the atomic erosion," he said, returning to the nuclear analogy.
"Regulation, by its very nature, becomes increasingly obsolete," Greenspan said. "Regulation imposed in an earlier period would be wholly or partly inappropriate for something that evolves at a later date."
Congress is currently considering several bills to reform laws governing banks, which would affect the Fed, which is one of the nation's primary bank regulators. Legislators have also introduced a measure to modernise rules on derivatives, financial instruments whose value is based on the value of something else such as a commodity, stock or currency price.
"It is important for Congress to periodically review" such laws, Greenspan said. "Regulators are required to do that."
For example, in a recent review of Regulation Y, governing non-bank interests of bank holding companies, the Fed found that "some of that stuff is just unbelievable because the markets have changed so much," the Fed chairman said, without elaborating.
If Congress alters the Fed's responsibilities, it should not strip the central bank of its ability to contain systemic risk, Greenspan argued. "Having seen the inner workings of these things, a lot of the things we do actually are quite effective," he said.
"I would be very chagrined to see some of these powers disappear ... I say that from someone who believes the less you interfere in the market, the better."
Under one proposal before Congress, the Federal Reserve would remain a primary regulator of financial institutions such as banks. But under other proposals, that authority could be divided among many regulators or entrusted to a new committee of federal regulators.
The Fed offered to provide loans following the stock market crash of 1987, for example, preventing a liquidity crisis that could have caused wider problems for the economy.
Greenspan also appeared to side with the Treasury Department in its long-running dispute with the Commodity Futures Trading Commission over the appropriate scope of U.S. laws governing futures trading.
Under a 1974 amendment to the Commodity Exchange Act, trading of foreign currency and certain other instruments is exempt from CFTC oversight. But federal courts have made contradictory rulings about the scope of the amendment, especially as it relates to derivatives, and the Supreme Court is expected to deliver a ruling on the issue soon.
Greenspan said Congress did not need to impose new regulations on trading of derivatives over-the-counter by sophisticated institutional investors. "There appears to be no need," he said. Regulation under the commodity act "seems an inappropriate framework," he added.
Even trading by less-sophisticated retail investors "is more appropriately regulated" by bank regulators and the Securities and Exchange Commission, not the CFTC, he said.
Greenspan's comments were significant and could affect lawmakers' decisions when they consider related legislation, an Association executive said.
"If you're going to vote on these issues and you've been kind of on the fence with respect to pro-market or expansion of CFTC (Commodity Futures Trading Commission) power, etcetera, I have to believe that his comments influence that person who's on the fence," said John Frawley, chairman of the Managed Futures Association.
"So if you're looking for a Good Housekeeping seal of approval, he just sort of stamped it on those who are looking for such a thing," Frawley told reporters at a briefing.
