The Supreme Court said Monday it would decide whether a federal regulator had properly allowed credit unions to expand their membership over the past 15 years, settling a long-running legal dispute between the cooperative non-profits and banks.
Credit unions praised the court's action to reconsider an Appellate court decision last July in favour of the banks. But bank representatives said the court was only delaying the inevitable.
The 1934 Federal Credit Union Act creating credit unions "was not meant to delineate and protect bank markets at the expense of the consumer," said Marc Schaefer, president of AT&amp;T Family Federal Credit Union, the credit union being sued by banks in the case.
"Consumers everywhere will be the winners when banks compete in the marketplace instead of the courts and on Capitol Hill," Schaeffer added.
American Bankers Association executive vice president Donald Ogilvie countered that "the facts and law weigh overwhelmingly in our favour."
"We are disappointed at the prospect of delay in the enfocement of a law we believe is quite clear," he said.
The Supreme Court will hear arguments in the case in its upcoming term, which begins in October. A decision is likely early next year.
The case affects about 3,600 federal credit unions serving 32 million customers, Justice Department lawyer Walter Dellinger said.
The appeals court ruling in favour of the banks "threatens nationwide instability and losses in the credit union industry affecting millions of persons," Dellinger said.
Until 1982, credit unions were limited to having members with a single common bond, such as people who worked for the same employer or lived in the same neighbourhood. Owned by their members, non-profit credit unions paid no federal taxes and were able to offer bank-like services often at lower prices than banks.
But in 1982, concerned about a lack of diversification, the National Credit Union Administration decided to allow credit unions to accept members from multiple distinct groups.
As many previously tiny credit unions diversified and grew substantially larger, banks complained of unfair competition. In 1990, they sued AT&amp;T Family Federal, a North Carolina union that had grown to encompass over 150 different groups.
After the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia struck down the 1982 policy change last July, a lower court imposed strict membership limits on multi-group credit unions.
Those limits have since been put on hold until the Supreme Court makes a decision. But if the banks win, their next move could be to ask the courts to force multi-group credit unions to throw out members from all but one group.
Credit unions said they will ask Congress to amend the law if they lose in the Supreme Court.
"Congress never intended the 1934 Federal Credit Union Act to limit credit union growth or to protect banks from competition," said Daniel Mica, president of Credit Union National Association, a leading trade group. "If the court does not see it this way, we think Congress will recognise consumers' need for credit unions."
((202-898-8312))
