The Commodity Futures Trading Commission, one of the nation's primary regulators of derivatives, has no authority over most foreign currency transactions, the Supreme Court said Tuesday.
In a unanimous decision, the court ruled that a 1974 law exempting some transactions in foreign currency from CFTC oversight also exempted some foreign exchange derivatives, financial instruments whose value is based on the value of currencies like the dollar or Japanese yen.
The CFTC regulates trading of derivatives such as futures and options on everything from wheat and corn to interest rates and electricity. By law, such trading must occur on a recogized exchange, such as the Chicago Board of Trade or the New York Mercantile Exchange.
But when Congress created the commission in 1974, it added an amendment permitting off-exchange trading in foreign currency and a few other items without CFTC regulation. The amendment was requested by the Treasury Department, which believed that the developing market in foreign currency among large banks and securities firms would be overregulated by CFTC oversight.
The CFTC stayed away from the inter-bank foreign exchange market, which has grown to $40 billion a day in total trading. The commission did, however, prosecute small-scale fraudulent foreign exchange investment peddlers, often called "bucket shops."
But when the CFTC pursued William Dunn, whose $180 million foreign currency fund lost $95 million in 1993, Dunn argued that the 1974 Treasury amendment should also apply to his trading of foreign exchange options.
On Tuesday, the Supreme Court agreed with the bulk of Dunn's argument.
"We think it plain that foreign currency options are 'transactions in foreign currency' within the plain meaning of the statute," Justice John Paul Stevens wrote. "We are not persuaded by any of the arguments advanced by the CFTC in support of a narrower reading."
That pleased banks and Wall Street trade groups, which had sided with Dunn. They argued that subjecting their off-exchange foreign exchange trading to CFTC oversight would be too costly, forcing them to shut down U.S. operations and move overseas.
"We're obviously delighted at the result," said Ken Raisler, an attorney for several of the trade groups.
"It supports our view that the amendment should be read broadly," Raisler, a former general counsel of the CFTC added.
Dunn's lawyer and the banks suggested that any wrongdoing in the foreign exchange area could be dealt with under existing law by other federal agencies, but the Supreme Court did not address the issue. Most off-exchange derivatives trading is not directly regulated, although most participants in such markets are overseen by bank, securities and insurance regulators.
The CFTC still has jurisdiction over foreign currency derivatives traded on an exchange, which include futures contracts. But that market is dwarfed by the over-the-counter market among banks and similiar institutions.
In a lower court case last year, the CFTC argued unsuccessfully that a fraudulent "bucket shop" constituted an exchange.
On Tuesday, the commission maintained that the Supreme Court had decided only the narrow issue of whether the Treasury amendment covered options trading.
"While we are disappointed in the outcome of the case, we note that the Supreme Court's opinion was limited to the narrow issue of whether the Treasury amendment treats futures and options the same," CFTC general counsel Dan Waldman said. "The court's decision does not affect the commission's ongoing efforts to police fraud against the public in foreign currency trading."
Congress is already discussing amending the 1974 Treasury amendment. The Supreme Court's decision "underlines the need for Congress to make decisions about what financial products should or should not be subject to the CFTC's jurisdiction," said Andy Fisher, spokesman for the Senate Agriculture Committee.
Sens. Dick Lugar, R-Ind., Pat Leahy, D-Vt., and Tom Harkin, D-Iowa, introduced a Senate bill to overhaul futures regulation. "It makes the case to proceed with that bill as quickly as we can," Fisher said.
The court invited congressional action. Recognising an "important public policy dispute" underlying the case, the court suggested "these arguments are addressed to the Congress, not the courts."
