The French government on Wednesday called off a controversial sale of the state electronics group Thomson SA to Lagardere Groupe but President Jacques Chirac vowed to bring the sell-off to fruition.
The government, which had doggedly defended its choice amid a storm of employee protest and political opposition, made the U-turn after the independent Privatisation Commission challenged the terms of a South Korean firm's involvement in the sale.
"The French defence electronics industry can lay claim to being world class," Chirac's spokeswoman Catherine Colonna said. "The privatisation of Thomson is key to creating the necessary 'poles of excellence' needed to achieve this ambition."
"The government will carry (the sale) out in accordance with the terms set on February 22," she said, referring to Chirac's televised speech on restructuring the army and defence industry.
Finance Minister Jean Arthuis told reporters the process would be delayed by several weeks, but other politicians said it could stall things for months.
"Unfortunately, the decision to suspend the privatisation process to which the government has had to resort will delay this process by serveral months, possibly even a year," said, Francois-Michel Gonnot, a parliamentary committee chairman and member of the ruling coalition.
Lagardere planned to merge Thomson's 58-percent owned defence electronics unit Thomson-CSF with its Matra Defense Espace unit and sell television set and video recorder maker Thomson Multimedia to Korea's Daewoo Electronics.
The Privatisation Commission, France's highest authority on the sale of state assets, said in a confidential report obtained by Reuters that the Daewoo deal did not fully reflect the value of Thomson's technology in digital decoders and flat screens.
The decision to suspend the sale of loss-making Thomson SA was the second embarassing U-turn on a privatisation in two weeks after a decision to suspend the sale of state-owned bank CIC following staff protests and political opposition.
Several thousand workers of Thomson Multimedia marched in Paris and other cities on November 20 to protest against a sale to a booming Asian competitor, fearing for their jobs and working conditions.
The government said in mid-October it had picked Lagardere over rival bidder Alcatel Alsthom because it was best for French defence interests and that it would sell the heavily indebted company for a symbolic one franc after a 10.8 billion franc ($2 billion) state capital injection.
Lagardere shares closed 6.4 percent down at 146.00 francs in Paris after having been suspended in the morning, because investors believed the Thomson deal was good for the company.
Alcatel Alsthom dropped three percent to 460.70 francs because it is now back in the race.
Opposition parties said on Wednesday that they hoped the delay would lead to the total scrapping of the sale plan.
"Today is a first success...but we should not stop there," Socialist Party spokesman Francois Hollande said.
"We are now calling for the privatisation to be abandoned totally," he said. Communist Party members said they now wanted a national debate on the future of Thomson.
The ruling RPR party said in a statement Hollande was behaving like a "shipwrecked man who blames his rescuers for his problems in getting afloat."
