The French government on Wednesday halted the sale of electronics group Thomson SA to Lagardere Groupe but said it still wanted to privatise the group to build a large French defence company.
French defence firms including Thomson's 58-percent owned Thomson-CSF, Matra, combat plane maker Dassault Aviation, tank builder GIAT, and aerospace group Aerospatiale face shrinking defence budgets and a restructuring of the industry in Europe.
President Jacques Chirac when he announced in February that he wanted Aerospatiale to merge with Dassault Aviation -- maker of the Mirage and Rafale planes -- and the privatisation of Thomson made it clear he wanted strong French groups to play a powerful role in Europe, rather than see smaller French companies swallowed up by large European rivals.
Most of Germany's defence activities are in the hands of Daimler-Benz AG while Britain has two big defence champions in British Aerospace Plc and General Electric Co Plc.
Thomson-CSF is a big player in its defence electronics niches but is small compared with the British and German groups.
The government on October 16 decided it preferred the offer of Lagardere for the Thomson group over one from Alcatel Alsthom because of defence issues.
Lagardere wanted to merge Thomson-CSF with its Matra Defence Espace unit, making a large group with international ties.
Alcatel wanted to merge Thomson-CSF with its much smaller defence electronics activities and then planned to hoist Thomson-CSF to the number two spot in the world defence industry, overtaking GM Hughes Electronics Corp but staying behind Lockeed Martin, through an alliance with another big group -- either GEC or Daimler-Benz or both.
But the government was not taken with Alcatel's effort to create a conglomerate active in many kinds of electronics, from televisions in Thomson Multimedia to telecommunications and Thomson-CSF's defence activities, but preferred the pure defence play of Lagardere.
Industry sources said the government feared that French interests would not be able to retain control in a large alliance under the Alcatel banner.
There was even a newspaper report, never confirmed, that President Jacques Chirac's decision to go with Jean-Luc Lagardere was influenced by a report that General Electric Co Plc honorary chairman Lord Weinstock and executive chairman George Simpson had discussed how they could take the upper hand in such an alliance.
Although Chirac brought French forces back into the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO), he is very keen on safeguarding France's own defence capabilities, as shown by his decision to finalise a series of nuclear tests.
An independent self-sufficent defence force needs to have unhindered access to arms supplies.
At first, industry observers believed Alcatel was only interested in the multimedia business and financial analysts were slightly surprised when Alcatel chairman Serge Tchuruk unveiled big defence plans.
Lagardere has never hidden his intention to keep only Thomson-CSF and went to great lengths to make its South Korean partner Daewoo Electronics acceptable to the French government.
The government did come around to accept Daewoo but on Monday France's highest authority on the sale of state assets -- the independent seven-member Privatisation Commission -- told the government that it could not approve certain elements of the planned sale, for one franc, of Thomson Multimedia to Daewoo.
