The French government on Wednesday called off the controversial sale of electronics group Thomson SA in a major policy U-turn after weeks of staunchly defending its choice of buyer.
It was the second privatisation to be halted in less than a month after a decision to suspend the sale of state-owned bank CIC.
It comes at a time when Prime Minister Alain Juppe, at a record low in opinion polls, is anxious to avoid another labour revolt following last month's truckers stoppage.
The Finance Ministry said in a statement the suspension of the proposed Thomson sell-off to Lagardere Groupe was due to objections to the planned sale of the company's consumer electronics unit to South Korea's Daewoo Electronics.
But the office of Prime Minister Alain Juppe said renewed talks about the sale could start soon.
"The government will launch consultations as rapidly as possible allowing the privatisation to take place on a basis that will be defined very quickly," Juppe was quoted as saying.
"The aim of privatising Thomson addresses the necessity for France to have an electronics and defence industry of global standing," he said.
Industry Minister Franck Borotra said in a statement the privatisation of Thomson remained essential
"The goal of privatisation of Thomson, and in particular TMM (Thomson Multimedia), remains essential for the future of the company," Borotra said.
"TMM needs to cuts its debt, enter new markets and improve its competitiveness in order to better exploit its technological and human resources," he added.
Several thousand workers of Thomson Multimedia marched in Paris and other cities on November 20 to protest against a sale to a booming Asian competitor, fearing for their jobs and working conditions.
Staff were also enraged by Juppe telling parliament in October their hi-tech company was worthless. The prime minister said the company was "worth not even a franc, it is worth 14 billion francs of debt."
The government said in October it had picked Lagardere because it was best for French defence interests and would sell the heavily indebted company for a symbolic one franc after a 10.8 billion franc ($2 billion) state capital injection.
Lagardere planned to merge Thomson's 58-percent owned defence electronics unit Thomson-CSF with its own Matra Defense Espace.
The Finance Ministry's surprise suspension announcement came on the day the European Commission had been expected to give the green light to the deal.
The ministry said the Privatisation Commission "declared itself incapable of giving a favourable opinion to the Lagardere Groupe offer, because of the terms of Daewoo Electronics' purchase of Thomson Multimedia."
It added the companies could continue their discussions with the Privatisation Commission and the state would pursue talks with the European Commission about conditions for a capital increase, on which Brussels had expressed reservations.
Shares in Lagardere and Thomson-CSF were suspended, while those of Alcatel fell three percent with investors expecting the group to make a new bid that could create uncertainties about the financing and its own profit recovery.
Lagardere said in a statement it was still interested in taking over Thomson, which it said was of strategic importance. A spokesman for Alcatel Alsthom said only that the company "took note" of the decision.
"The chances (for Alcatel) have got to be increased by this, if they can come up with a different offer," said a Paris share broker, adding the decision was a blow to the government's standing. "It doesn't look good for the French government."
Alcatel chairman Serge Tchuruk recently said he was ready to make a new offer for Thomson, breaking weeks of silence after French newspapers suggested Chirac might have been influenced by a disputed report of British plans to take over the company.
Britain's GEC has said it is willing to talk about a cooperation deal with whoever wins Thomson.
($1=5.271 French Franc)
