The French government called off the controversial sale of electronics group Thomson SA Wednesday in a major policy reversal after weeks of staunchly defending its controversial choice of a buyer.
It was the second privatisation to be halted in less than a month after the government decided to suspend the sale of a state-owned bank.
It comes at a time when Prime Minister Alain Juppe, at a record low in opinion polls, is anxious to avoid another labour revolt following last month's truckers strike.
The Finance Ministry said in a statement the suspension of the proposed Thomson sell-off to Lagardere Groupe was due to objections to the planned sale of the company's consumer electronics unit to South Korea's Daewoo Electronics.
Lagardere said in a statement it was still interested in taking over Thomson, which it said was of strategic importance.
The office of Prime Minister Alain Juppe said renewed talks about the sale could start soon.
"The government will launch consultations as rapidly as possible allowing the privatisation to take place on a basis that will be defined very quickly," Juppe was quoted as saying.
"The aim of privatising Thomson addresses the necessity for France to have an electronics and defence industry of global standing," he said.
Industry Minister Franck Borotra said in a statement the privatisation of Thomson remained essential.
The government said in October it had selected Lagardere Groupe because it was best for French defence interests and would sell the heavily indebted company for a symbolic one franc after a 10.8 billion franc ($2 billion) state capital injection.
Lagardere planned to merge Thomson's 58 percent owned defence electronics unit Thomson-CSF with its own Matra Defence Espace.
The Finance Ministry's surprise suspension announcement came on the day the European Commission had been expected to give the green light to the deal.
The ministry said the Privatisation Commission "declared itself incapable of giving a favourable opinion to the Lagardere Groupe offer, because of the terms of Daewoo Electronics' purchase of Thomson Multimedia."
