Britain's software and technology consultancy group Logica Plc on Thursday said it had bought Axime Ingenierie SA for 161 million francs and said it saw no need to make a pause in its expansion programme.
"Of course we will need some time to digest this acquisition but I see no need why we should stop our expansion. We have the resources and we want to develop further in continental Europe," Logica board member Duncan Craig told Reuters, saying Germany, Italy and Scandinavia were among the countries that interested the group.
Axime Ingenierie, with 1,000 staff and 360 million francs in sales, was a loss-making and non-core part of Axime SA which is in the process of merging with Sligos.
"We see good synergies between the two companies. We are active in the same fields and Axime Ingenierie is bringing in a solid client list," Craig said.
"It's is our biggest acquisition for ten years," he added.
The French unit will be named Logica SA and its chief executive Christian Chevallier keeps his post.
"The team remains in place, the clients will have the same contacts they had before," he added.
Craig declined to comment what the French acquisition would do to the earnings per share development.
The company said in a statement that it expected a small positive effect on earnings for the current financial year ending June 30. Last year, Logica had a pre-tax profit of 24.7 million sterling on sales of 284.8 million sterling and with 4,800 staff.
Its main rival in France is Cap Gemini while in Britain it is facing Arthur Andersen Consulting and EDS.
"We compete on specialist fields, in area's where we can bring our project management expertise and win business," Craig said.
Among Logica's specialisations are the financial sector, telecommunications and the energy/utility sector.
"With the ongoing deregulation of telecommunications and the utilities sector in continental Europe we believe that these areas will be key growth sectors," Craig said.
Logica is also acquiring Axime Ingenierie's Belgium and Luxembourg operations and will merge these with Logica Belgium.
"That's a nice fit. We had mainly international clients and a predominant English/Flemish organisation. Axime has domestic Belgian clients in the French language areas," Craig said.
-- Paris newsroom +33 1 4221 5452
