Shareholders of electronics group Thomson SA rubber-stamped an 11 billion franc ($2.12 billion) state capital injection of Friday as the government  reviewed how to relaunch the privatisation process.
"I believe we need a few days to think things over. We've been accused of amateurism and blundering, we're not going to rush into any statements now," a government official told Reuters.
Industry Minister Franck Borotra received a delegation of Thomson worker representatives who wanted the government to drop the privatisation plans entirely, after the state on Wednesday announced it was suspending the sale.
State-owned Thomson SA comprises 58 percent of defence electronics group Thomson-CSF and all of televison and video recorder maker Thomson Multimedia (TMM).
Some 200 Thomson workers marched through the streets of Paris, welcoming a group of 15 employees that had walked for a week from the Thomson Multmedia plant in Angers in west France.
"Franck Borotra has expressed the government's intention to pursue the (Thomson) privatisation according to terms which will be detailed in the coming days," the industry ministry said.
"He has taken note of comments that TMM should be fully valued and reconfirmed the recapitalisation of this company."
The government on Wednesday suspended the sale, for a symbolic franc, of Thomson SA to Lagardere Groupe because the independent Privatisation Commission could not agree with the terms of Lagardere's planned sale of Thomson Multimedia to Daewoo Electronics of South Korea.
The French Foreign Ministry on Friday, asked by an irritated South Korea to explain itself, issued a statement aimed at easing the strain on its ties with an important trade partner.
The ministry said France and South Korea enjoyed relations of "respect, partnership and confidence".
Inside Thomson's Paris headquarters, state shareholders voted to back a capital increase needed to bolster the company's balance sheet ahead of an eventual sale.
The shareholders are a handful of representatives for the state, telecom operator France Telecom and a pool of banks represented by the state-owned Caisse des Depots et de Consignations (CDC).
Thomson said afterwards that the state would pay the bill, but the aid still needs EU approval.
At the end of 1995, Thomson SA had debts of 25.3 billion francs of which 13.8 billion were at TMM and 2.3 billion at Thomson-CSF.
Finance Minister Jean Arthuis said on Thursday he was not ruling out any options, including whether Thomson-CSF and TMM should be sold seperately rather than in one go.
In February, President Jacques Chirac made the privatisation conditional on the group remaining intact.
The Les Echos business newspaper said that if the government insisted on a package sale, Alcatel stood the best chances of winning.
Alcatel Alsthom chairman Serge Tchuruk, whose rival offer had been sidelined by the government in October, recently suggested the state should sell Thomson SA intact but in stages.
If the government accepted a split, Lagardere could still obtain control of Thomson-CSF and finalise the planned merger with its Matra Defence unit, Les Echos said. ($1=5.186 French Franc)
