French state agencies met on Friday to rubber stamp an 11 billion franc ($2.09 billion) capital injection of state aid in electronics group Thomson SA, as the government reviewed options for reviving its sale.
Thomson labour unions, with the support of many other labour groups, were planning a big demonstration in Paris later to demand the total cancellation of the group's privatisation after its controversial sale was suspended earlier this week.
Finance Minister Jean Arthuis, under political pressure to come up quickly with ways to restore France's reputation on international markets, was working on how to relaunch the sale process.
He must also find ways to mollify South Korea, which was outraged by the decision to suspend the privatisation because the independent Privatisation Commission did not agree with the terms of the planned sale of Thomson's consumer electronics subsidiary Thomson Multimedia to Daewoo Electronics.
Inside Thomson's Paris headquarters state shareholders were holding an extraordinary meeting to vote on the capital increase that is needed to bolster the company's balance sheet ahead of a sale.
Representatives of France Telecom and the CDR state holding company, which owns former Credit Lyonnais assets, met to agree the aid package, which has also to win approval from the European Commission in Brussels.
A spokesman for Dutch-based  Philips Electronics denied a rumour the company had lodged an official complaint.
One issue that Arthuis has to settle is whether to restart the sale from the beginning and invite new tenders, or to limit negotiations to the two finalists in the orginal process -- the winner Lagardere Groupe and Alcatel Alsthom.
He must also decide whether to abandon France's preference for the defence and electronics group to be sold as a whole rather than in parts. Arthuis has said he his willing to consider a split before a sale.
The influential Les Echos financial newspaper said on Friday that if the government insisted on a package sale, Alcatel Alsthom stood the best chances of winning. Alcatel chairman Serge Tchuruk recently suggested the state should sell Thomson SA as a whole, but in tranches.
If the government accepted a split, Lagardere Groupe could still obtain control of 58-percent defence unit Thomson-CSF, Les Echos said.
Whatever the solution, Arthuis faces a series of problems.
South Korea's Deputy Prime Minister Han Seung-son told French ambassador Dominique Perreau in Seoul on Friday that the Thomson decision had "caused worries to many people" in South Korea.
French companies have recently won huge orders from Korea, including a TGV high-speed train deal, and are vying for a multi-billion combat aircraft order.
Another problem is the risk of a spillover into other privatisations. International investors are expressing their dislike of the French decision and trades unions see the climbdown at Thomson as a sign they can win elsewhere.
The Communist-led CGT union said on Friday the government should also suspend the planned sale of France Telecom. Billed as  France's biggest stock market flotation, it is set for next spring. ($1=5.270 French Franc)
