State-owned Gaz de France plans to spend billions of francs upgrading its infrastructure to meet demand growing at an estimated three percent a year.
Chairman Pierre Gadonneix said on Wednesday he was against European rules aimed at liberalising the gas industry because that would focus minds on the short term whereas long term commitments were needed.
"It's extremely difficult to make people understand that while we have for a few more years an abundance of gas, we need long term deals to ensure our medium term needs," Gadonneix told reporters at a visit to the "Artere du Midi" gas pipeline under construction.
He said European liberalisation could not do for gas what it had done for electricity, noting there were big differences between the two energy sectors.
While all European countries produce electricity, only Britain and the Netherlands export gas in the European Union and the other member states are almost completely dependent on imports from Norway, Russia and north Africa.
"I am not against a spot market," Gadonneix said, "As long as it does not hurt the long term (20-25 years) commitments."
It takes many years to build a gas infrastructure and in France's case it is far from completed. Gaz de France will have spent 4.5 billion francs on transport and distribution in 1996 and will spend five billion in 1997 with a 10 percent growth rate for many more years to come.
To amortise these investments takes many years. On top of that there is the question of the national security of assuring supply, now arranged by so-called "take or pay" contracts.
"The producer takes a risk on the price, we take a risk on the volume," Gadonneix said.
He is not in favour of allowing big clients to order natural gas directly from the producer, but he does support the existing European gas transit system. "The Europe of gas distribution has been working for 30 years, long before people wanted to invent rules for it," he said.
Gas firms have agreed deals for the transit of gas, based on a "normal" reward for the investment on one side while on the other the advantages of scale are being passed on to the user.
France, due to its geographic position, transits gas from Norway to Spain -- some two billion cubic metres this year, rising to 2.6 billion in 1997.
Gadonneix does not believe that Gaz de France should remain for ever in the hands of the state.
"It does not make a difference. For me there are well-run companies and badly-run companies. We have to serve our clients, take account of our staff and our shareholder whether it is the state or the private sector," he said.
The "Artere du Midi" pipeline, a one billion franc investment for Gaz de France, links Marseille to Toulouse for the transport of gas from Algeria to the southwest of France. The link will also help to transport gas to Spain.
Gadonneix said that in France gas has a 13 percent share in the market for energy products, against fuel and electricity, while the average for Europe is 20 percent.
"Almost every day of the year we connect a new village," he said. This, with the new cogeneration of electricity from gas as well as oil or coal, means that demand will grow by three percent per year, or one billion cubic metres.
For this, the company has two other infrastructure projects, one to land gas from Norway and another for Dutch gas.
Gadonneix is also enthusiastic about new uses of gas and the company will in 1997 start an experiment with an undisclosed town for buses and municipality vehicles to run on natural gas to help cut pollution.
