France Telecom on Thursday announced it was cutting its call tariffs to boost telephone use ahead of its flotation in 1997 and full liberalisation of the market in 1998.
"Now that we are a few months away from our flotation, I would like to unveil our plans," chairman Michel Bon told a news conference, reiterating that the first sale of shares in the state operator could be from the second half of April.
He said the exact timing of the sale and details of the capital to be sold depended on market conditions and Finance Minister Jean Arthuis' decisions.
"What is clear is that the government will not sell more than 49.9 percent," Bon said. The government has said it will sell about 20 percent in the spring. "We want to make our market introduction as much a popular success as the Deutsche Telekom sale," he said.
From March 4, France Telecom will slash a number of call rates and in October and in 1998 there will be further cuts. The monthly standing charges, however, will increase.
Bon said the reductions were aimed at boosting telecommunications use. "If the traffic rises by six percent in 1997 the cuts will be good for France Telecom's business model," he said, declining to be more specific ahead of the flotation prospectus.
He added that he aimed to increase foreign sales, such as the company's mobile telecommunications subsidiary in Belgium started this year, by 50 percent.
"Our aim is to grow the market. If we grow the market everybody will benefit, we and our competitors," he said.
Bon said that recent price cuts had already boosted telephone use and he added that the Itineris mobile telecommunications unit would have 1.3 million subscribers at the end of 1996, against 700,000 in 1995.
Bon said France Telecom's 1996 accounts would not be comparable to previous accounts because they would use U.S. standards. But this would not diminish the value of the company.
France Telecom said it would cut national call rates by 17.5 percent on March 4 and a further 21 percent in October 1997.
This will bring standard call rates to 1.20 francs (22 cents) per minute by end-1997 from 2.30 francs in 1994.
International rates will be slashed by 20 percent in March, putting all European countries at less than 2.50 francs per minute and North America at less than three francs.
France Telecom said it would raise its monthly standing charge by 15.20 francs to 68 francs, but added this was still one of the lowest rates in Europe.
