French oil groups Total SA and Elf Aquitaine said on Monday that they had signed contracts with Iraq to buy crude oil under a United Nations oil-for-food deal with Baghdad.
Total said it had signed a contract to take 30,000 barrels of oil per day (bpd), conditional on United Nations approval.
"We reached an agreement with the Iraqis at the end of last week to take 30,000 barrels per day. We now await approval of the United Nations," a spokesman for Total said.
At Elf Aquitaine a spokesman said the company had signed a three-month deal but declined to say how much oil it would take.
"I do not know whether we have permission from the UN overseers. We signed on Friday and have submitted it for approval," an Elf spokesman said.
Under the U.N. programme, Iraq may sell $2 billion of crude oil to finance purchases of food and medicine to ease the plight of Iraqi civilians bearing the consequences of international economic sanctions.
The plan was agreed in principle in May after months of negotiations but the U.N. delayed signing the deal after an Iraqi assault on Kurdish rebels until early this month.
Under the plan, oil companies will reimburse Iraq for the oil through payments into an Iraqi account in New York to finance purchases of food and medicine.
The strain on daily life is fuelling opposition to President Saddam Hussein. Two opposition groups in exile have claimed responsibility for an attack last week on Hussein's son Uday.
Mitsubishi Corp of Japan was the first company on Monday to say it had signed a deal. It signed an accord on Friday to take 40,000 bpd.
The United Nations has so far approved five contracts. U.S. firms Coastal Corp and Bay Oil on Sunday began lifting crude oil from the southern export outlet of Mina al-Bakr.
Other companies granted U.N. approval include Turkish state oil company TUPRAS and Italy's Oil Energy.
TUPRAS was the first to get U.N. permission. Much of the oil will be exported through a pipeline to Ceyhan in Turkey which opened last week.
On Monday the first tanker with Iraqi oil left Ceyhan while tow tankers are loading at Mina al-Bakr.
The French oil companies resumed contacts with Iraq shortly after the Gulf war and Elf is in talks to extract oil from the Majnoon field in southern Iraq -- with an estimated capacity of 300,000 bpd -- while Total wants to develop the giant Nahr Umar field which could have a capacity of 500,000 bpd.
Elf and Total have been in talks with Iraq since 1992 and always worked within the framework of the 1990 United Nations sanctions imposed after the invasion of Kuwait.
French firms are also lining up deals to sell wheat to Bagdad for the first time in six years.
Traders will have to submit their offers on Tuesday for an auction to sell 100,000 tonnes in French wheat to Iraq for delivery in January and February.
Iraq also tendered for between four and six cargoes of lower quality white sugar for delivery between mid-February and early March, sugar traders said.
