French state-owned electronics group Thomson SA said on Tuesday that it had no comment on a report in the Le Monde newspaper that its management preferred a market float for Thomson-CSF over a private placement.
The French government plans to privatise Thomson SA through the early sale of the latter's 58-percent stake in profitable defence electronics group Thomson-CSF and a later sale of Thomson SA's wholly-owned but loss-making Thomson Multimedia (TMM).
The government earlier this month suspended the planned sale of Thomson SA to Lagardere Groupe after the independent Privatisation Commission objected to the terms of the planned resale of TMM to Daewoo Electronics.
Le Monde said that during the December 16 supervisory board meeting of Thomson SA and Thomson-CSF, the management let it be known that it prefered a market sale over a private placement.
"Although the management representatives have not openly said that they prefer a market sale, they have said that such a float would allow a quicker sale and also added that it was necessary to go quickly," an unnamed supervisory board member was quoted as saying in Le Monde.
"We have no comment. What is being said during a board meeting is part of the private life of the company," a Thomson spokesman told Reuters.
"(Chairman) Marcel Roulet's official position is that it is up to the seller, the Finance Ministry, to decide how to go about the sale," he added.
The Lettre d'Expansion, a confidential newsletter, said on Monday that Roulet had sent a four-page letter to the government and the chairman of the Conseil d'Etat, the constitutional council, to argue for a market sale, an Offre Publique de Vente (OPV) in French.
The Thomson-CSF sale is scheduled to take place in early 1997 while the Thomson Multimedia sale could take until 1998.
Originally, the French state wanted to sell Thomson SA as a block and after an initial round of offers only two companies remained as likely buyer, Lagardere and Alcatel Alsthom.
In October, the government said it prefered the Lagardere offer because of its plans to merger its Matra Defense Espace arm with Thomson-CSF to create a French defence giant.
Industry sources said that a market float of Thomson-CSF, already a world player in defence electronics and radars, would allow the company's management to negotiate on its own terms any alliances in a French or European defence restructuring.
If it were sold in a private placement, either to Lagardere, Alcatel or any other suitors, the new owner would decide policy.
Meanwhile the La Tribune newspaper said that European Union Commissioner Karel van Miert might start a probe into the price at which France plans to buy-back shares in state-controlled Credit Lyonnais from Thomson SA/Thomson-CSF.
Thomson-CSF shares were down 0.29 percent at 169.70 francs at midday in a lower Paris Bourse.
Investors expect any buyer of the state's 58-percent in Thomson-CSF to make a buy-out offer for minorities. In the case of a market sale, however, there will be no such bid.
