A French parliamentary commission said on Wednesday that it approved a planned merger between Anglo-French industrial power group GEC Alsthom and state-controlled nuclear engineering group Framatome.
But it attached a number of conditions to its approval that go beyond the terms set by Industry Minister Franck Borotra.
The Socialist members of the commission, however, said they opposed the privatisation of Framatome and they feared four to five thousand of the company's 19,000 jobs could be lost.
GEC Alsthom is a joint venture between France's Alcatel Alsthom and Britain's General Electric Co Plc.
The French government in August gave the go-ahead for a merger study between GEC Alsthom and Framatome, the world's biggest maker of nuclear power stations.
Framatome competes against Swiss-Swedish ABB, Germany's Siemens, Mitsubishi of Japan, and U.S. firms General Electric and Westinghouse.
Alcatel has a 44 percent stake in Framatome, with the rest in the hands of French state groups CEA, EDF and CDR.
The commission said in a statement that after six weeks of study and talks, it had concluded that a merger had undeniable advantages and even found that it would be "suicidal" for Framatome to try and survive the next 10 to 15 years on its own because few nuclear stations are expected to be ordered.
The commission put down nine conditions to the merger.
It said the group had to be French, which means that Framatome has to absorb GEC Alsthom, which is a joint-venture under Dutch law, and not the reverse.
It also wants French shareholders to have control for as long the group is unlisted and a blocking minority when it is listed.
It said the nuclear activities of Framatome had to be put in a special subsidiary of the new group and public authorities should have a right of veto on strategic decisions.
It said the cash reserves of this unit should be at least equal to a provision for nuclear risks, or the cost of decommissioning plants, estimated at 6.5 billion francs ($1.24 billion).
The commission said cooperation with Siemens on the development of a new European nuclear reactor should continue and the parliamentarians suggested a share swap between the nuclear subsidiary and Siemens's KWU unit.
The commission also called for a new cooperation deal between Framatome, CEA and electricity utility EDF as well as for an extension to 2011 of an agreement between Framatome and nuclear material group Cogema on fuel rods.
Finally, the commission said parliament should have control over the nuclear activities.
It said all nine conditions were "non-negotiable".
Borotra's conditions include French identity, the Siemens link, a French majority stake and provisions for nuclear risks.
GEC has let it be known that it wants a stake equal to that of Alcatel in the new group and that it does not want to end up a minority shareholder.
Framatome had net attributable profit of 663 million francs in 1995 on sales of 17.9 billion.
GEC Alsthom had operating income of 2.6 billion francs in 1995 on sales of 29.3 billion francs.
($1=5.224 French Franc)
