French chemical group Rhone-Poulenc SA and Merck &amp; Co Inc of the U.S. announced on Thursday they were merging their animal health activities to create the world leader in the sector.
The new 50/50 joint venture company Merial, with estimated 1996 sales of $1.750 billion, will be the market leader in biology products, veterinary drugs and poultry drugs, they said.
In the animal health sector Merial will overtake Pfizer-Smithkline Beecham, Bayer and Novartis -- the recent merger between Ciba-Geigy AG and Sandoz AG of Switzerland.
Igor Landau, managing director of Rhone-Poulenc, told a news conference the merger would cut costs and have an effect on jobs, although it was too early to give details.
"It will not be in France that the impact will be most pronounced," he said, adding that the merger would have a positive effect on Rhone's results.
Merck will make an unspecified payment to Rhone for the 50/50 parity.
"Taking everything into account, the valuation of our business was higher than that of Merck," Landou said, because Rhone's growth potential was higher.
The joint-venture will merge the animal health activities of Rhone Merieux and Merck AgVet. It will be headed in the first few years by Merck's John Preston, while Rhone's Louis Champel will become chief executive of Merial and will succeed Preston.
Landau said discussions had lasted several months and a letter of intent had been signed on Thursday morning. J.P. Morgan and Bear Sterns were advisor banks.
Merck was the number two in animal health in 1995 but has been overtaken in 1996 by Novartis. Its leading product, Ivermectine, loses some of its patent protection next year but has still some eight years of sales ahead of it. 1996 sales for this product alone have been some $750 million.
Rhone Merieux's main product is the recently launched Frontline, which has had sales this year of $85 million and expects them to doublein 1997.
Merial will benefit from the launch of a number of new Merck products in the coming years while a new jointly-developed product will be ready in three years.
"The real creation of added value is in innovation," Landau said, stressing the possible synergies of the joint research and development.
Shares in Rhone-Poulenc were up 0.48 percent at 166.80 francs on the Paris stock exchange at 1200 GMT.
Landau said that Merial would not be listed seperately. He said that Rhone's animal health activities had a profitabilty of 13.5 percent in operating income as a percentage of sales and of some 18 percent in operating income as a percentage of working capital. Merck's profitability is "largely higher" than that.
The Merial merger is the latest of a series of big corporate moves in animal health.
In 1994, American Cyanamid was bought by American Home Products Corp (AHP). In 1995 by Pfizer bought the animal health business of Smithkline Beecham Plc and Rhone Merieux acquired the veterinary business of Sanofi, part of Elf Aquitaine.
1996 saw the creation of Novartis and Belgium's Solvay sold its animal health business to AHP.
Landau said that Mallinckrodt, number nine in world animal health, was for sale but Rhone was not interested.
Asked to comment on rumours of a merger between Rhone's Rhone-Poulenc Rorer and Sanofi, following a Thursday statement by Elf that a merger was desirable for Sanofi, Landau said Rhone was not interested in a pharmaceutical alliance.
