Merck &amp; Co. Inc. and French chemical group Rhone-Poulenc SA Thursday announced the merger of their animal health businesses to create a new company that will be the world leader in the sector.
Merial Animal Health, their 50/50 joint venture with estimated 1996 sales of $1.750 billion, will be the market leader in biology products, veterinary drugs and poultry drugs, they said.
Merial will overtake Pfizer-Smithkline Beecham, Bayer and Novartis -- the recent merger between Ciba-Geigy AG and Sandoz AG of Switzerland.
Igor Landau, managing director of Rhone-Poulenc, told a news conference in Paris that the merger would cut costs and have an effect on jobs, although it was too early to give details.
"It will not be in France that the impact will be most pronounced," he said, adding that the merger would have a positive effect on Rhone's results.
Merck will make an unspecified payment to Rhone for the 50/50 parity.
"Taking everything into account, the valuation of our business was higher than that of Merck," Landou said.
The joint-venture will merge the animal health activities of Rhone Merieux and Merck AgVet. It will be headed in the first few years by Merck's John Preston, while Rhone's Louis Champel will become chief executive of Merial and will succeed Preston.
Merck was No. 2 in animal health in 1995 but has been overtaken in 1996 by Novartis. Its leading product, Ivermectine, loses some of its patent protection next year but still has about eight years of sales ahead of it. Sales for this product alone in 1996 have been $750 million.
Rhone Merieux's main product is the recently launched Frontline, which has had sales this year of $85 million and are expected to double in 1997.
Merial will benefit from the launch of a number of new Merck products in the coming years while a new jointly developed product will be ready in three years.
"The real creation of added value is in innovation," Landau said, stressing the possible synergies of the joint research and development.
The Merial venture is the latest of a series of big corporate moves in animal health.
In 1994, American Cyanamid was bought by American Home Products Corp. In 1995 Pfizer bought the animal health business of Smithkline Beecham Plc and Rhone Merieux acquired the veterinary business of Sanofi, part of Elf Aquitaine.
In 1996 Belgium's Solvay sold its animal health business to AHP.
Landau said that Mallinckrodt, No. 9 in world animal health, was for sale but that Rhone was not interested.
Asked to comment on rumours of a merger between Rhone's Rhone-Poulenc Rorerand Sanofi, following a statement Thursday by Elf that a merger was desirable for Sanofi, Landau said Rhone was not interested in a pharmaceutical alliance.
