AOL France hopes to reach the level of 100,000 subscribers in 1997 from some 30,000 now at the end of its first calendar year since launch in April, managing director Bertrand le Ficher said in an interview.
"We passed the 30,000 mark this weekend and there is a big acceleration in recent months which I expect to continue in 1997. I think 100,000 should be possible," he said.
He said that while the French market had developed slower than expected, with a low penetration of personal computers, the AOL subscriber numbers were ahead of planning.
The company, a joint-venture between America Online Inc and Bertelsmann of Germany, is sticking to its plan of breaking-even within three years after launch.
Le Ficher said that during 1997, AOL would add a number of services, such as train reservations, currently available on France's online Minitel database. He said he expected to have an agreement soon with French banks for financial services such as the consultation of accounts and making money transfers.
Electronic commerce, however, was unlikely to really hit France in 1997 because there are as yet insufficient numbers of subscribers.
Le Ficher said that at 130,000 subscribers it would become economically viable. Pending that level, AOL France will present a number of French companies, such as the wine and fashion industries, on electronic shopping malls for the Canadian and Japanese versions of the world's biggest service provider.
Advertising was also not really taking off. He said that he saw mainly a future in sponsored events -- like AOL's Tour de France coverage which was sponsored by insurer GAN -- than in simple spots.
Le Ficher said that he did not fear the arrival of more Internet access providers, who offer a pure access to the worldwide web of computer connections.
"We're addressing the general public, we have a subscription at 49 francs with three hours free use. We are not addressing those people that spend 20 hours on the net," he said.
Havas and Lagardere's Grolier are extending their internet services as is France Telecom's Wanadoo and Infonie.
CompuServe, which opened its services in France in 1993, is currently market leader. Le Ficher said he had not yet noted an impact of the relaunched MSM by Microsoft.
Further market entrants are expected in 1997.
Le Ficher said that AOL offered "easily, packaged, aided and thematic" access to the web and many people needed some support while surfing the net. He said that in France, 40 percent of the time AOL users were connected they were surfing the Internet.
"That means they are also doing other things," he said noting that discussion groups were "massively" used.
He said AOL was having preliminary talks with broadcasters who are starting digital satellite television services.
In France, Canal Plus has already launched its Canalsatellite service while the TPS venture and AB Sat will start soon.
TPS groups private broadcasters TF1, M6 and Luxembourg's CLT as well as state-owned France Television and France Telecom and cable operator Lyonnaise des Eaux .
"We are starting discussions with the digital television groups. For the moment, television is static, there is no interactivity. But there is a certain need there and we are starting talks about how to combine that," he said.
Le Ficher said that with digital television, which will lead to a multitude of new channels, the programmes will become more specialised which will increase the need for interactivity.
"The day that we can link televisions to the internet, that will be a winning combination, with higher (modem) speeds etcetera. But for the moment the market is with personal computers and telephone lines," he said.
-- Paris newsroom +33 1 4221 5452
