Philippe Jaffre, chairman of French oil group Elf Aquitaine, is entering the last lap of an ambitious restructuring drive to cut the formerly state-owned conglomerate back to its core oil and chemicals activities.
After a three-year programme to sell assets from a treasury trove lovingly amassed by state-appointed predecessors such as Loik Le Floch Prigent -- now in jail pending trial on fraud charges -- Jaffre this week said he was ready to give up control of the health and beauty products unit Sanofi.
Sanofi, in which Elf holds 53 percent, has a promising product pipeline but needs money to get them to market quickly.
Its chief executive Jean-Francois Dehecq also has ambitions to play a part in the global pharmaceutical industry's restructuring and needs more financial support.
At a board meeting on Wednesday at Elf's imposing glass office tower in Paris's La Defense business district, Jaffre told Dehecq Elf would not commit money to a Sanofi expansion but freed the unit to engage in talks toward an alliance.
"Jaffre wanted to send a signal to other pharmaceutical companies that Sanofi is in play," a company source said.
Jaffre had previously said Elf would not invest a lot of money in Sanofi because it was trying to reduce its own debt and improve its profitability.
Elf is among the weakest performers in the oil industry. In 1995, its return on equity was 6.5 percent, compared with 12.1 percent at Shell/Royal Dutch and 16.7 percent at Exxon, according to data on Reuters Securities 3000.
Elf said on Thursday its consolidated income for 1996 was up 40 percent at 7.3 billion francs ($1.4 billion) and the board said it was pleased with the recovery stemming from stringent controls.
In June 1994, when Sanofi wanted to buy the Sterling Winthrop business from Eastman Kodak, Jaffre agreed with the $1.68 billion acquisition on condition that Sanofi sold assets for the same amount. Dehecq was forced to part with Sanofi's bio-activities and some lacklustre perfume brands.
Jaffre was appointed chairman and chief executive of Elf in 1993 when it was still under state control and he oversaw the privatisation of the group in 1994. The sale of a 64 percent stake in Elf for 385 francs per share generated 14.9 billion francs, representing the biggest privatisation to date.
But Elf reported its first ever loss that year, of 5.4 billion francs, after Jaffre took an 8.7 billion charge to clean up the balance sheet and write off overvalued oil reserves and the Texas Gulf phosphate business.
He said he aimed to sell 15 billion francs of industrial assets and six billion of financial assets to cut the debt which stood at 46 percent of equity. Most of this programme has been carried out, company sources said.
Jaffre cut investment in the ambitious Leuna refinery project in former East Germany, sold stakes in Entreprise Oil in Britain and Petrofina in Belgium and most recently a stake in Compagnie de Suez.
Elf returned to profit in 1995, reporting income of 5.04 billion francs, and Jaffre stated his goal to place the company in the Top 10 oil firms worldwide in all its activities by 2005.
While it ranks eighth overall, its chemicals are in 13th place, pharmaceuticals in 20th, and the refining and marketing activities are also lagging.
Chemical unit Elf Atochem rode an industry upswing to boost 1995 operating income to 5.0 billion francs from 1.8 billion.
The core refining and marketing business remains weak. In November 1996, Elf merged its British refining and retail operations with Chevron Corp unit Gulf Oil and Murco Petroleum of Murco Oil Corp. ($1=5.260 French Franc)
