French State-owned aerospace group Aerospatiale said on Saturday it could make a bid for defence electronics group Thomson-CSF with Dassault Aviation if it obtained government permission.
The Le Monde newspaper said Alcatel Alsthom could also join the project to form a big French defence group in response to last week's merger announcement of Boeing Co and McDonnell Douglas Corp.
Aerospatiale spokesman Patrice Kreis told Reuters on Saturday that Aerospatiale and fighter plane maker Dassault, in merger talks themselves, were not at the moment actively preparing an offer to acquire Thomson-CSF.
"At the moment, and I say that after having talked to the boss -- chairman Yves Michot -- a few minutes ago, at the moment we are not working on an offer." But he confirmed that the chairmen had expressed an interest in acquiring Thomson-CSF.
Kreis said the companies had to await the terms of the new procedure for the sale of Thomson-CSF, expected in January, and for the green light from the state as shareholder.
"We will see in January whether we will work on one or not. If we are authorised to do so, we will, but only after we now the terms of the (sale) procedure," he said.
A Ministry of Defence official told Reuters: "It is certain that Yves Michot and (Dassault Aviation chairman) Serge Dassault are working on an offer."
"If Aerospatiale and Dassault wanted to make an offer for Thomson-CSF, the government ... would allow them to," Le Monde quoted a Ministry of Defence source as saying.
At Alcatel Alsthom there was no immediate comment.
In February President Jacques Chirac launched the sale of Thomson SA and urged the merger between Aerospatiale and Dassault as a first step in an industry shake-up.
Thomson SA has a 58 percent stake in Thomson-CSF, the remainder being listed on the Paris Bourse. It also has 100 percent of consumer electronics group Thomson Multimedia (TMM).
In October, the government said it preferred a bid by Lagardere Groupe over one by Alcatel Alsthom.
Lagardere would buy Thomson SA for one franc after a 14 billion franc capital increase and would sell TMM to Daewoo Electronics of South Korea. Lagardere planned a a bid on the other 42 percent of Thomson-CSF and would merge the company with its Matra Defense Espace unit.
The independent Privatisation Commission objected to the TMM sale and the government suspended the procedure early December.
The government has since decided to sell Thomson-CSF seperately in early in 1997 and wait with the TMM until 1998.
On Friday, the government said it would announce the terms of the Thomson-CSF sale in early January. One of the issues it has to resolve is whether to decide on a public float or a new tender for an industry sale.
Thomson chairman Marcel Roulet is campaigning for a float.
The Aerospatiale spokesman said on Saturday that a link with Lagardere was not logical but one with Alcatel was. "It is true that Aerospatiale and Dassault are competitors of Matra, but we are complementary to Alcatel and Thomson-CSF."
Aerospatiale is the French partner in the Airbus Industrie consortium with British Aerospace Plc, Germany's Daimler Aerospace and Spain's CASA.
"When the Boeing-McDonnell merger was announced people said that it was a threat to Airbus and that it had to speed up its integration. But that is not true, the merger is mainly a Pentagon project," an industry source said.
"Boeing-McDonnell also have Rockwell -- the American Thomson-CSF -- (and) their merger is mainly a defence industry challenge," the source added.
