French Caisse Nationale de Credit Agricole said on Saturday it would take full control of merchant bank Banque Indosuez from financial holding company Compagnie de Suez on December 23.
The two companies said in a joint statement that the total price would be 11.9 billion francs.
Credit Agricole bought a 51 percent stake in the merchant bank in July for 6.3 billion francs and will on Monday pay the outstanding 5.6 billion francs.
Compagnie de Suez said its 1996 annual result, expected to be published on April 2, would show a 300 million franc capital gain on the transaction.
Under the original sale terms, Credit Agricole would have bought an additional 29 percent in July 1997 and the remaining 20 percent on January 1, 2000.
"It has been a joint decision to speed up the transaction," Compagnie de Suez spokeswoman Michele Meyzie told Reuters.
"Credit Agricole has engaged a restructuring of its activities and this is easier to pursue when it has full control of Indosuez. At the same time, for us it is welcome to have the capital gain and the 5.6 billion francs in cash," she added.
The companies said than an audit ended at June 30 this year showed that the value of Indosuez was 11.790 billion francs to which was added some interest.
In May, when the orginal deal between the two companies was announced, the vale of the bank was put at 11.85 billion francs.
Credit Agricole is setting up an international investment bank under the Banque Indosuez name -- combining French brokers Cheuvreux de Virieu, Dynabourse and Hayaux de Tilly.
In asset management, there is the combination of Indosuez and Segespar which have a combined 650 billion francs under management.
On Friday, Dutch savings bank SNS said it was buying Banque Indosuez Nederland NV.
Gerard Mestrallet, the former head of Societe Generale de Belgique who was appointed chairman of parent Suez in July 1995 after a messy board room battle, is restructuring the holding company which suffers from heavy property losses.
In June, Mestrallet said he expected a return to profit in 1996 after a pre-tax loss of 3.9 billion francs in 1995.
Credit Agricole has a five percent stake in Suez.
