The French government said on Tuesday it planned to sell the loss-making SFP film studios, maker of much of the country's cinema and television film heritage, to Generale des Eaux and Havas.
The sale, which still needs approval from the independent Privatisation Commission, will be preceded by a state capital injection of up to 1.2 billion francs ($229 million).
The Societe Francaise de Production et de Creation Audiovisuelle (SFP) will get 350 million francs of this amount before the end of 1996.
In a joint statement, the Culture Ministry and the Ministry of Economy and Finance said Culture Minister Philippe Douste-Blazy had met European Commissioner Karel van Miert in Brussels on Monday to discuss the planned capital injection.
"He (Van Miert) accepted the principle of a very quick opening of the examination procedure which would allow the European Commission to approve, in principle before the spring, the state's financial effort in the privatisation framework."
It said that the cash injection was needed because of the financial and economic situation of the SFP and would allow the future shareholders to run the normal operating risks and contribute 40 percent to the costs of a job reduction plan.
There had been four offers for SFP on the table. One was by Global Studios run by French businessman Walter Butler, another by Little Big One (LBO) run by Swiss investor Frabrice Giger and a third by former SFP director Jean Cressant.
The fourth was made by Havas' Images Television International and Generale des Eaux's Generale des Images.
All the bids were demanding a state capital injection in exchange for maintaining jobs.
The Havas/Generale des Eaux plan contained 480 job cuts out of the 1,010 SFP staff. LBO promised to keep as many as 700 jobs while Walter Butler would have kept 580.
Generale des Eaux, which also owns the Babelsberg studios in Germany, had previously backed the Butler bid.
The European Commission had previously objected to the 1.1 billion franc in aid given to SFP between 1993 and 1996.
The SFP studios were created on the grounds of the Buttes Chaumont villa of French film pioneer Leon Gaumont in north Paris and its later facilities in Boulogne-Billancourt and modern site at Bry-sur-Marne are the backdrop of many French films and television series.
The group ran into difficulties adjusting to competition by smaller independent production companies and by changed buying behaviour by the French television companies following the arrival of competitors TF1, owned by Bouygues, M6 and Canal Plus.
Last year SFP signed a deal to sell its Buttes Chaumont studios to Bouygues and demolished the buildings to make place for an office and housing complex. But a change in the political scene in Paris held up the procedure for the building licence.
Banks Paribas and Credit National had granted SFP a 250 million franc loan with as collateral the future receipts of the sale. These banks wanted SFP to pay the final 200 million of the loan back before the end of the year.
Where the studios once stood, there is now a large hole in the ground.
($1=5.245 French Franc)
