French oil group Elf Aquitaine on Monday signed a landmark oil exploration deal with Azerbaijan, the former Soviet republic which France has described as the next oil Eldorado.
The contract is the latest in a string of Western oil deals in the Caspian Sea region, whose waters contain some of the most sought-after oil reserves in the world despite ethnic conflicts and disputes over pipeline rights.
Following months of negotiations, Elf signed a production sharing contract for the offshore Lenkoran-Talysh Deniz permit with Azeri national oil firm Socar
Symbolising the Baku government's drive to attract Western capital and technology, the contract was signed in the presence of Azeri President Haydar Aliyev, who is on a three-day state visit to France, and French President Jacques Chirac.
Aliyev said the pact was worth $1.5 billion and said that it raised total planned investments in Azeri petroleum since a first international contract was signed in 1994 to $15 billion. He added the field should produce 350 million barrels of oil.
"There can be no doubt that Azerbaijan is an open country ready to cooperate with the world," he said in a speech to the French Institute of International Affairs (IFRI).
Elf, which gave no details of price or production, will take an initial 65 percent stake as operator in the field, while Socar will have 25 percent. Elf's smaller French oil rival Total SA has 10 percent and there are talks for other firms to join.
"The signature of the Lenkoran-Talysh Deniz contract is a major step for the group in its establishment in Azerbaijan," Elf chairman and chief executive officer Philippe Jaffre said.
The 30-year Lenkoran-Talysh Deniz project allows Elf to seek and produce oil in an area of 420 square kilometres (162.2 sq miles) in waters up to 100 metres (328 ft) deep, located south of Baku in the Caspian Sea.
In June 1996, Elf also signed a production sharing contract for a 10 percent interest in a consortium led by British Petroleum Plc on the Shah Deniz permit in the Caspian Sea.
French Foreign Minister Herve De Charette said when he visited the area in October that he had obtained "very precise" pledges about the role Elf could play on the Azeri oil fields.
De Charette called Azerbaijan, which won independence from Moscow in 1991, a new oil Eldorado.
But Azerbaijan, which played a dominant role in early oil exploration in the nineteenth century, must deal with a morass of ethnic conflicts and disputes among its neighbours over pipeline routes before it can deliver its latest oil finds to the West.
Azerbaijan's largest oil project, a trio of giant Caspian oil fields operated by a consortium led by BP and Norway's Den Norske Stats Oljeselskap A/S (Statoil), plans to use two pipeline routes for its own output, starting this year.
One will send production through strife-torn Chechnya to the Russian Black Sea, the other passing close to Georgia's breakaway region of Abkhazia to the Mediterranean via Turkey.
Aliyev gave strong backing for the new pipelines. "Oil production from this region is going to keep on rising. These oil pipelines must be built. They are necessary," he told IFRI.
Elf has not said which route any oil to be discovered in the Lenkoran-Talysh Deniz fields might take.
