French oil group Elf Aquitaine on Monday signed a landmark oil exploration deal with Azerbaijan, the former Soviet republic which France has described as the next oil Eldorado.
The contract is the latest in a string of Western oil deals in the Caspian Sea region, whose waters contain some of the most sought-after oil reserves in the world despite ethnic conflicts and a web of disputes over pipeline rights.
Following months of negotiations, Elf said in a statement it had signed a production sharing contract for the offshore Lenkoran-Talysh Deniz permit with Azeri national oil firm Socar.
Symbolising the Baku government's drive to attract Western capital and technology, the contract was signed in the presence of Azeri President Haydar Aliyev, who is on a three-day state visit to France, and French President Jacques Chirac.
Elf will take an initial 65 percent stake as operator in the field, while Socar will have 25 percent. Elf's smaller French oil rival Total SA has 10 percent and there are negotiations for other companies to join the consortium.
"The signature of the Lenkoran-Talysh Deniz contract is a major step for the group in its establishment in Azerbaijan," Elf chairman and chief executive officer Philippe Jaffre said.
A spokesman for Elf declined to detail the estimated reserves or the investment needed. He would not comment on reports that Mobil Corp and Germany's Deminex could join the consortium.
Azeri news reports have said the oil exploration deal is worth around $2 billion, although Western oil industry sources cautioned the exact value of the deal was still hard to assess.
The 30-year Lenkoran-Talysh Deniz project allows Elf to seek and produce oil in an area of 420 square kilometres (162.2 sq miles) in waters up to 100 metres (328 ft) deep, located south of Baku in the Caspian Sea .
Russia's Interfax news agency said the contract could tap into oil reserves of 80 to 100 million tonnes.
In June 1996, Elf also signed a production sharing contract for a 10 percent interest in a consortium led by British Petroleum Plc on the Shah Deniz permit in the Caspian Sea.
French Foreign Minister Herve De Charette said when he visited the area in October that he had obtained "very precise" pledges about the role Elf could play on the Azeri oil fields, which have attracted more than $12 billion of Western investment since Baku won independence from Moscow in 1991.
De Charette called Azerbaijan a new oil Eldorado.
But Azerbaijan, which played a dominant role in early oil exploration in the nineteenth century, must deal with a morass of ethnic conflicts and disputes among its neighbours over pipeline routes before it can deliver its latest oil finds to the West.
Azerbaijan's largest oil project, a trio of giant Caspian oil fields operated by a consortium led by BP and Norway's Den Norske Stats Oljeselskap A/S (Statoil), plans to use two pipeline routes for its own output, starting this year.
One will send production through strife-torn Chechnya to the Russian Black Sea, the other passing close to Georgia's breakaway region of Abkhazia to the Mediterranean Sea via Turkey.
Elf has not said which route any oil to be discovered in the Lenkoran-Talysh Deniz fields might take.
In a reminder of Azerbaijan's own regional conflict with Armenia over the enclave of Nagorno-Karabakh, Aliyev arrived in France on Mnday pledging not to back down on sovereignty.
"Everybody has to know that we will never tolerate that this territory remains occupied," Aliyev told the French newspaper Le Figaro in an interview.
Azerbaijan has said it is willing to grant autonomy to the enclave populated mainly by Armenians, but will not give in to Armenia's demands that it also hands over independence.
About 10,000 people were killed in fighting in the region from 1988 until a shaky ceasefire was called in 1994.
Aliyev said he would encourage France, which has strong links with Armenia, to use its influence in finding a solution.
