French food group Saint Louis on Tuesday tightened its grip on the Spanish sugar sector by acquiring a 15 percent stake in Spain's biggest sugar company and second-largest food group Ebro Agricolas.
Analysts welcomed the move and Saint Louis shares rose two percent to 1,355 francs in an otherwise flat stock market.
"I think they want to have a controlling stake in Spanish sugar-making but I do not believe that the political powers there will allow them to do so quickly. They have to go slow," said a Paris-based food sector analyst.
The company's Generale Sucriere unit bought the 15 percent stake from Banco Santander. Spanish newspapers said the deal was for 17.14 billion pesetas ($129.4 million).
A Saint Louis spokesman declined to comment on the price but said Ebro had a market value of 110 billion pesetas, annual sales of 154 billion pesetas and a market share of 54 percent.
Saint Louis already has a stake of about 21 percent in Sociedad General de Azucarera de Espana (Azucarera), Spain's second-largest sugar group.
The two Spanish groups said in December they were working on a merger which would create the European Union's fifth-largest sugar group. Ebro bought a 21.8 percent stake in Azucarera from bank Banco Central Hispano (BCH) in November.
Saint Louis chairman Daniel Melin has said he wants to have a stake of 20 to 25 percent in the merged group, which would produce 80 percent of Spain's European Union sugar quota.
"We would now have a 17 percent stake in a merged group which is in line with our policy. We do not want to rise above 25 percent because we would have to make a bid for the rest. We want to be a shareholder, not an operator," Saint Louis spokesman Olivier Labesse said.
Spain's Ministry of Agriculture has in the past blocked attempts by the French group to increase its stake in Azucarera as part of a general policy of stopping foreign companies taking control of the Spanish sugar market.
"I believe Saint Louis will try to get a majority and restructure the new company where there is a lot of scope for cost savings. The Spanish ministry may be against it and they can huff and puff but I do not really see how they can block it," a London-based analyst said.
"There will be a lot of political opposition to a majority stake," said Dominique Bastien of brokerage Pinatton Wargny.
BCH has sold another 24 percent in Ebro to a savings bank, Caja de Salamanca. The Kuwait Investment Office (KIO) is Ebro's largest shareholder with a 35 percent stake, while state-owned food group Mercase is expected to increase its 4.7 percent holding by buying BCH's remaining 4.1 percent stake.
Dresdner Kleinwort Benson financial analyst Charles Manso welcomed the Ebro deal and said he was reviewing his Saint Louis recommendation and might raise it from "hold".
"This is the second bit of good news in two days. We have to factor that in. I think today's deal is slightly earnings enhancing," Manso said.
On Monday, Saint Louis said it was closing its sugar plant at Bresles in France as part of a rationalisation of its production structure.
"The new management has been in place for 18 months now and they are doing the right things," Manso said.
In November, it sold its Royal Champignon mushroom unit to Champi-Jandou and it has made provisions for restructuring at its 40 percent-owned paper unit Arjo Wiggins Appleton.
Melin, a former head of construction group Spie Batignolles, was named chairman and chief executive at Saint Louis in May 1995 after Bernard Dumon died in a plane crash in January.
The group is controlled by Bank Worms et Cie, which has a 27.8 percent stake and Italy's IFIL SpA, an Agnelli family finance company, with a 25.9 percent stake.
"I like what they are doing with sugar and with paper, but I do not see what they are going to do to create their so-called third pole," said a Paris analyst.
Saint Louis is the fourth-largest sugar group in Europe behind Germany's Suedzucker, Britain's Tate and Lyle Plc and France's Eridania Beghin-Say.
($1=132.5 Peseta)
