French Industry Minister Franck Borotra said on Wednesday that state consumer electronics group Thomson Multimedia (TMM) would get a capital injection in the next few weeks.
He declined to comment on the size of the injection or whether it was in line with a prior plan for an 11 billion franc ($2 billion) payment into TMM's parent Thomson SA. Some 10 billion of that would have gone to TMM as part of a plan to privatise the company.
Borotra said he also expected a decision on the sale terms of the state's 58-percent stake in defence electronics company Thomson-CSF to be taken before the end of January.
Thomson-CSF is the Thomson group's other subsidiary and will be sold first under a new plan to sell the branches separately.
"It is necessary to recapitalise Thomson Multimedia in the next few weeks," Borotra told reporters at his traditional New Year's reception for the news media.
The European Commission is conducting a formal probe into the planned state aid to TMM.
In early December, the French government suspended an earlier privatisation plan for Thomson under which missiles to books conglomerate Lagardere Groupe would have bought the firm after a recapitalisation for one symbolic franc.
Lagardere would have merged Thomson-CSF with its Matra Defence Espace unit and sold TMM to Daewoo Electronics of South Korea.
Daewoo, which was angered by the government's decision not to go through with the sale, is probably still keen on TMM, Borotra said.
French presidential envoy Jean-Claude Paye, former head of the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, is currently in Seoul on a mission to repair the diplomatic damage. He said on Wednesday he had urged Daewoo to bid again.
"Since Daewoo has already made a near-successful bid once, we are sure that it would be looked upon with sympathy, but of course without preference, because the process must be transparent and without prejudice," he said.
Alcatel Alsthom is also interested in Thomson-CSF and Compagnie des Signaux has said it wants to associate itself with the new owner of Thomson-CSF, which it expects will be Lagardere.
"We have to find a solution as soon as possible. The government will announce a decision before the end of the month," Borotra said.
"Separating the sales of Thomson-CSF and Thomson Multimedia was a good thing. Thomson-CSF has to become the heart and the engine of the restructuring of the defence electronics and professional electronics sector," he added.
He did not state his preference, or whether he thought Daewoo's chances were good. An independent Privatisation Commission objected to the sale of TMM to Daewoo on the grounds that there were insufficient job guarantees and because the one-franc price did not fully reflect the value of TMM's expertise in flat-screen technology and digital decoders.
He indicated he would look with favour on a solution in which TMM had a few partners, with an Asian company among them.
"With the help of partners it will master its production processes and penetrate markets where it is not at present, in particular the Asian markets," Borotra said.
He held up the example of the privatisation of computer group Compagnie des Machines Bull, which returned to the private sector in December after a two-stage privatisation to three main shareholders, France Telecom, Motorola of the United States and NEC of Japan.
"These privatisations (of Thomson-CSF and TMM) have to become successes, just as the privatisation of Bull was a success," Borotra said.
