France's new telecommunications supervisor, ART, said on Thursday that it had ordered France Telecom to review a proposal for prices it will charge future competitors for using parts of its infrastructure.
"We have had a meeting with all the operators yesterday. We are waiting for a new proposal by France Telecom," ART president Jean-Michel Hubert told the body's first news conference.
The list of so-called interconnection charges will be key to both the economic viability of future entrants into the French market and to the value of France Telecom, slated for partial privatisation this spring in the biggest French market float.
Prospective rivals to France Telecom must apply for licences in the first three months of this year to be ready for competition in the telecommunications market in 1998.
"We have been asked to submit a new proposal before the end of January," a France Telecom spokesman said.
Hubert said he hoped ART (Autorite de Regulation des Telecommunications) would issue its opinion on a general draft decree on interconnection at the start of February.
Telecommunications Minister Francois Fillon aims to publish the final decree before the end of that month.
On the actual price list, Hubert said he hoped the five-member ART could take a decision "as soon as possible" and added it should be before the partial sale of France Telecom.
He declined to be specific about what kind of changes ART wanted from France Telecom. Other operators are demanding drastic price cuts from its original proposal.
Hubert noted that there was "only a small window" between a price structure at which competition was impossible and another at which competition would be "ridiculous".
ART would take account of international comparisons, Hubert said, because he believed there would be a move to harmonise these costs internationally. But he added that such a comparison should not be the norm for a decision.
ART started its legal life on January 6, taking over the regulatory and licensing powers which the Ministry of Telecommunications previously held.
ART is independent and will also act as an arbitrator in case of disputes between operators. Its five members -- appointed by the presidents of the republic, senate and parliament -- cannot be sacked nor can they seek a new term.
Hubert said that a difference with Britain's OFTEL regulator was that ART would take collective decisions while at OFTEL the director-general had decision-making powers.
Asked whether ART would make life as difficult for France Telecom as OFTEL had made for British Telecom Plc, Hubert said he expected "hard and difficult talks with all operators".
