France Telecom has been ordered by France's new telecommunications supervisor to review a proposal for a list of prices it will charge its future competitors for the use of parts of its infrastructure.
"We have had a meeting will all the operators yesterday. We are waiting for a new proposal by France Telecom," Jean-Michel Hubert, president of the new ART regulator, said during the body's first news conference on Thursday.
The catalogue of so-called interconnection charges is going to be a key element both for the economic viability of future entrants into the French market as well as for the value of France Telecom, slated for partial privatisation this spring in the biggest French market float ever.
Hubert said that he hoped to be able to render opinion of the Autorite de Regulation des Telecommunications (ART) on the draft decree on interconnection at the start of February.
Telecommunications Minister Francois Fillon aims to publish the final decree before the end of that month.
As far as the actual price list is concerned he hoped the five-strong body could take a decision "as soon as possible" and added it should be before the partial sale of France Telecom.
He declined to be specific about what kind of changes ART was asking from France Telecom -- the other operators are demanding drastic price cuts from an original proposal -- only saying that he wanted to be "equitable".
Hubert noted that there was "only a small window" between a price structure at which competition was impossible and another at which competition would be "ridiculous".
He added that while ART would take account of international comparisons, because he believed there would be a move to harmonise these costs internationally, he said such a comparison should not be the norm for a decision.
ART started its legal life on January 6, taking over the regulatory and licencing authorities that were previously the prerogative of the Ministry of Telecommunications.
ART is indepedent and will also have to act as an arbitrator in case of disputes between various operators.
Its five members -- appointed by the presidents of the republic, senate and parliament -- cannot be sacked nor can they seek a new term. Apart from Hubert, the members are Dominique Roux, Yvon Le Bars, Roger Chinaud and Bernard Zuber.
Hubert said that a difference with Britain's OFTEL was that ART will take decisions as a college while at OFTEL the director-general has the decision-making power.
Asked whether ART would make life as difficult for France Telecom as OFTEL has made that of British Telecom Plc, Hubert said only that he expected "hard and difficult talks with all operators."
Hubert said he wanted to promote growth of the market, which would boost economic growth and jobs. He said he had the interests of the consumer in mind and noted the existence of ART alone as an unbiased regulator was an incentive to competition.
But he made it clear that ART would also come to the aid of France Telecom, or other French operators, as far as international matters were concerned. ART still needs to appoint a director of international affairs but Hubert said the matter was very important and had to be based on reciprocity -- if French operators find obstacles abroad, ART could be engaged in the negotiations.
Hubert is travelling to London on Monday to meet OFTEL's Don Cruickshank and other international counterparts. He said much of the international negotiations would need to be done on a European level while the EU member states would want to harmonise their regulation in a single telecoms market.
Hubert said that ART was following closely discussions between France Telecom, Generale des Eaux unit SFR and Bougues Telecom about the cost of interconnecting mobile telecommunications but said ART had not been asked to arbitrate in the matter.
"I hope the operators come to an agreement," he said.
