France Telecom said on Monday it had taken full control of Keystone Communications, a major U.S. television uplink company, to strengthen its position in the North American television market.
Michel Combes, director general of France Telecom's audiovisual transmisson activities, said the acquisition for less than $100 million gave the company a prestigious client list of the U.S. majors as well as an enhanced position in Asia.
"The acquisition boosts our position on the North American market where our main rival is VIVX Global Access," Combes said by telephone from Cannes where he is attending the MIDEM audiovisual market fair.
France Telecom, through its Telediffusion De France (TDF) unit, is already leader in the European market with a 20 percent stake, ahead of British Telecommunications Plc and has an estimated 15 percent in the world market. Keystone has a 20 percent share of the North American market.
The market for audiovisual transmission -- the service of carrying television pictures from an event or studio to the broadcasting centre -- is estimated at eight billion francs ($1.5 billion) and seen growing by eight percent per year.
The market of broadcasting pictures to the homes, both direct to home as well as to cable company receivers, is also seen at some eight billion francs.
Total sales of the unit are two billion francs.
This market stands to grow rapidly with the take-off of digital satellite television companies.
France Telecom is partner and service provider to the Television Par Satellite (TPS) digital satellite television venture with TF1, France Television, Lyonnaise des Eaux and Luxembourg's Compagnie Luxembourgeoise de Television (CLT).
Combes said that while the world market was seen growing by eight percent, this growth was less pronounced in Europe while Asia would increase at a quicker pace.
TDF has a pact with Japan's KDD as well as NHK and is service provider to Hong Kong's television company.
He said France Telecom wanted "to have a foothold in Asia" which he called an "interesting market with good growth potential" but he declined to comment on whether to company would make an acquisition soon in the area.
"It is increasingly important that you can provide services for your television clients from whatever place in the world, be it for news or sport," Combes said.
France Telecom already had a 40 percent stake in Keystone and bought the remainder from Simmons Group. Together with its Maxat British unit, the three companies are now offering international services under the name "Global Skylink".
France Telecom, official operator for the 1998 World Soccer Championships, also has a 20 percent stake in TBA in Argentina.
-- Paris newsroom +33 1 4221 5452 ($ = 5.481 French Francs)
