Franco-Italian semiconductor group SGS-Thomson Microelectronics NV said on Wednesday 1996 earnings rose 19 percent to $625.5 million, but issued a warning on the first quarter of 1997 after a weak end to last year.
A 15.5 percent fourth quarter drop to $142 million contrasted with a near-doubling of Intel Corp's profit in the same period. The U.S. company's report on January 14 had boosted SGS-Thomson shares on bullish expectations.
SGS-Thomson's president and chief executive Pasquale Pistorio said he was pleased with the 1996 performance. But he was cautious about the first quarter of 1997, although he said the company would still outperform the industry average.
"With lead times shrinking throughout the industry, we are entering the first quarter of 1997 with less order visibility than we have historically enjoyed," he said in a statement.
"From what we know today, we expect 1997 first quarter revenues to be close to third quarter 1996 levels. We also anticipate that overall pricing pressures will continue, and therefore, in spite of productivity improvements, gross margins could be slightly below fourth quarter 1996 levels," he added.
In the third quarter of 1996, net revenues were $988.4 million.
"While first quarter conditions continue to be uncertain, we believe that subsequent quarters of 1997 will show progressive improvement compared to the 1997 first quarter as the company continues to emphasise differentiated products and high growth applications," Pistorio added.
"Recent contracts with key customers and new design wins in such high growth areas as hard disk drives, set-top boxes and digital cellular phones give us confidence that SGS-Thomson will continue to outperform the industry average in 1997," he said.
SGS-Thomson, whose shares are listed in Paris and New York, is 70 percent-owned by two consortia, one French and one Italian, reflecting its formation in a merger of a French and Italian microchip company.
Pistorio said the 1996 results were achieved in difficult market conditions.
Prices of Dynamic Random Access Memory (DRAM) have plunged and caused losses at many chipmakers. SGS-Thomson, however, does not make DRAMs but dedicated chips which shielded it somewhat from price erosion.
"Our concentration on differentiated products provided consistency to our financial results throughout a period that was characterised by industry-wide volatility," Pistorio said.
Full year revenues rose to $4.12 billion from $3.55 billion. Capital expenditure rose to $1.12 billion from $1.0 billion and research and development spending was up by 21 percent to $532.30 million, or 12.9 percent of sales.
The Le Monde newspaper recently said that French Industry Minister Franck Borotra wanted to reduce the French stake in the company, which is held by France Telecom, CEA-Industrie and Thomson-CSF.
The Industry Ministry has no official comment.
