The French telecommunications market, which opens to full competition in 1998, seems be hotting up despite denials that Nippon Telecom and Telegraph Co (NTT) will enter the fray, analysts said on Thursday.
Whether the NTT story was correct or not, 1997 would be full of alliances and deals, they said. "If you want to be in France after liberalisation, you have to make your move now," a Paris-based analyst said.
The Financial Times newspaper reported that NTT was planning to spend $500 million to take a 10 percent stake in Cegetel alongside British Telecom Plc.
But a spokesman for Cegetel, the company aiming to rival France Telecom as a national operator in 1998, said no changes were planned in its shareholding capital.
"The capital make-up of Cegetel will be the one we announced in September with British Telecom, Mannesmann and SBC Communications Inc," said a spokesman of the joint venture controlled by Generale des Eaux.
BT will have around 25 percent, SBC 15 percent and Mannesmann 10 percent.
In Tokyo, NTT said it was not considering investing in the French telecoms market. "We're not in a situation to positively consider any such action. Everything is up in the air," a spokesman told Reuters.
Cegetel had previously said there might be marginal changes in the shareholdings. But in Paris the spokesman said: "They are about to be fixed and it's roughly like we have announced them."
From January 1, 1998, when the European telecommunications market is liberalised, France Telecom will lose the last vestiges of its monopoly.
It will still be majority state-owned, after a partial flotation this year, and will be responsible for the so-called "public service" of telecommunications, but other companies will be able to apply for operating licences.
An independent regulator, l'Autorite de Regulation des Telecommunications (ART), will oversee the market.
Cegetel is so far the only big grouping to have announced its intention to set up against France Telecom as a national operator. The company already runs France's second biggest mobile telecommunications network, SFR.
Bouygues Telecom has teamed up with VEBA of Germany and STET of Italy for telecoms ventures but it has not yet detailed how far its ambitions stretch beyond mobile telecommunications and business services.
Waiting in the wings are Unisource and AT &amp; T.
Unisource, a joint venture of Dutch PTT, Telia of Sweden, Swiss Telecom PTT and Spain's Telefonica, was previously a Generale des Eaux partner but they broke up after the Cegetel deal with BT.
U.S. giant AT &amp; T, which has not hidden its ambition to be a big player in all the main European telecommunications markets, is concluding the Uniworld alliance with Unisource.
On Thursday AT &amp; T and Unisource teamed up with Mannesmann for the German telecommunications market.
France Telecom itself is allied to Deutsche Telekom and Sprint Corp of the United States.
Smaller rivals, operating on target markets in France, are MFS Communications and Colt Telecom Plc of Britain as well as a telecoms subsidiary of Eurotunnel SA/Plc.
MFS's new owner WorldCom Inc has recently stated its intention to obtain a licence as national operator.
-- Paris newsroom +33 1 4221 5452
