French books-to-missiles conglomerate Lagardere Groupe said on Tuesday it does not expect to make a profit on its ambitious multimedia activities until 1998, despite leading market positions in the U.S. and France.
Arnaud Lagardere, the son of founder Jean-Luc Lagardere and the New York-based head of the multimedia (Grolier) activities, told a news conference that while the results were improving, there would still be a loss for 1996 and 1997.
"We will hit the break-even point during 1997 and 1998 will be the first full year that we will be above break-even," Lagardere said. "In 1996 our contribution to the group will be slightly negative but it will be an improvement over the previous year," he added.
Grolier, the number two interactive encyclopaedia publisher in the U.S. behind Microsoft and owner of Hachette and Filipacchi and titels such as Elle, is the largest content contributor to America Online in the U.S.
It has annual sales of some 2.5 billion french francs ($448 million).
Lagardere is also the owner of the Club Internet access provider which is number three in France behind CompuServe and AOL and has big ambitions for the Intranet market of closed web services for companies.
"1997 will be the year of the Intranet in Europe," Lagardere said, pointing out that while Europe was lagging behind the U.S. with only 22 percent of companies having such a service, the majority of companies was planning to start such a service.
That is where the hardware people of Lagardere come in.
Noel Forgeard, chairman of the Matra Defence Espace unit which is vying for state-owned Thomson-CSF, said the company would try to find investors and industrial partners for a multimedia satellite project targeted for 2005.
Lagardere is already partner in the Orion satellite project and its MCNSAT service can provide high-capacity internet and multimedia transport for companies.
The company is currently working on two projects, called "TurboPC" and "West", which would turn digital television sets into stand-alone internet computers.
The TurboPC project envisages that computers can receive information from a satellite through a small dish -- like the ones to be used for digital satellite television.
In the first instance, the so-called return line remains "terrestial" via a telephone line.
With "West", a series of at least three satellites would allow computers to use the satellite for the return as well.
Forgeard declined to speculate on the investments needed, saying these K-band satellites were not comparable to mobile telecommunication satellite projects such as IRIDIUM which plans to launch 66 low-orbit satellites and has raised $2.65 billion.
Forgeard said Lagardere would need to find investors and telecommunications operators to participate in the project.
"It is far too premature to speculate about the investments needed," he said.
Arnaud Lagardere added that while the project was ambitious the company would not engage in investments or take on risks that would "put the group into danger".
($1=5.577 French Franc)
