French conglomerate Generale des Eaux looks set to extend its power in the media after revealing on Monday it was in talks with Havas primarily about pay-television firm Canal Plus.
"Havas and Compagnie Generale des Eaux confirm discussions are now in progress concerning their respective interests in audiovisual activities, primarily Canal Plus," said a joint statement from Generale des Eaux and Havas.
The announcement, rushed out before the stock exchange opened, followed press reports that the companies were preparing a deal which would make Generale des Eaux the key shareholder in Havas. That, in turn, would make the Havas media group the biggest shareholder in Canal Plus.
The companies added that they would not comment further pending board meetings scheduled for February 6.
The prospect of a major transformation of the French media landscape gained weight when a corporate source confirmed that Alcatel Alsthom was in talks about a possible sale of part of its 21.2 percent stake in Havas to Generale des Eaux.
Generale des Eaux, already a powerful force in the water and telecommmunications industry, owns almost 20 percent of Canal Plus. The satellite broadcaster is itself merging with fellow-pay-TV group Nethold to create Europe's largest subscription television company.
"The big winner is (Generale des Eaux chairman) Jean-marie Messier who will find himself at the top of a pyramid in the French audiovisual sector," said an analyst at Paribas.
According to French newspapers, Generale des Eaux would transfer its Canal Plus stake to Havas, almost doubling Havas's current 21.6 percent stake in the broadcaster. Havas would then increase its own capital to allow Generale des Eaux a bigger stake.
Other major shareholders in Canal Plus are the bank Societe Generale with 4.5 percent, and the state-owned bank Caisse des Depots et Consignations with 6.9 percent.
Generale des Eaux would also become indirectly the biggest shareholder in the merged Canal Plus company. Havas would establish its direct dominance within Canal Plus, well ahead of Nethold's owners, Richemont and MIH, which have 15 and 4.9 percent repectively.
Alcatel has owned 21.2 percent of Havas since selling its media business to Havas in 1995 in return for shares in Havas, which it was obliged to hold on to for at least two years.
The initial market reaction was broadly positive. Havas shares soared and those of Generale jumped too. "It's a good deal for all parties involved," one share dealer said.
Alcatel stands to make a capital gain on the sale, as well as receiving cash, because the Havas share price has risen strongly over the past year in line with a French stock market which is at record highs.
Alcatel needs money to finance its planned acquisition, if the state permits it, of the government's 58 percent stake in defence electronics group Thomson-CSF.
The government is due to announce its Thomson-CSF sale plans shortly, after scrapping its original privatisation plan in December.
Newspapers have for months speculated about the Havas share structure, although Generale des Eaux has in the past denied plans to raise its stake.
On the share market, Havas shares opened eight percent higher but then gave up some of the gains to close 4.56 percent up at 424 francs.
Generale des Eaux was 1.55 percent up at 719, but Canal Plus was 0.42 percent lower at 1,177 and Alcatel slipped 1.09 percent to 542 francs.
-- Paris Newsroom +331 4221 5454
