Nobody expected Serge Tchuruk, chairman of electronics and telecommunications group Alcatel Alsthom, to sit and wait while the state made up its mind what to do with defence group Thomson-CSF.
But his audacious move to try and line-up state-owned aerospace group Aerospatiale and Rafale fighter plane builder Dassault came as a surprise to many.
Alcatel on Monday confirmed newspaper reports it was talking to the two plane makers about a Thomson offer.
The link, if successful, would group most of France's defence electronics industry players in one camp, with Lagardere Groupe's Matra Defense Espace in the other.
Other players, Sagem and Cie des Signaux, could join either camp at a later stage.
For Tchuruk's gamble to win, however, the government has to decide to sell its 58 percent stake in Thomson-CSF in a private placement, and not through a market float.
Alcatel Alsthom has defence businesses with some 10 billion francs in sales which would be transferred to Thomson-CSF, already a global player in defence electronics.
Aerospatiale and Dassault, themselves in advanced merger talks, would transfer their missiles and electronics business to Thomson-CSF in exchange for a stake in the group under the Alcatel scheme being discussed, industry sources said.
It would turn the remaining Aerospatiale-Dassault group into a pure aerospace "platform" company, with ties to one of the world's third biggest defence electronics groups.
The enlarged Thomson-CSF would have annual sales of 60 billion francs, against some 35 billion francs currently.
The government, as biggest shareholder in the future Aerospatiale-Dassault, has to allow this company to participate in a bid for another company majority-owned by the state.
The merger of Aerospatiale with Dassault is expected to be concluded before the spring, after which the new group will be privatised itself.
While the government has not publicly expressed its opinion on whether it would allow Aerospatiale to join a Thomson-CSF bid, it has had ample chances to express any opposition.
In December, when the first news reports appeared about a possible Aerospatiale/Dassault interest in Thomson-CSF, the Defence and Finance Ministries said such reports were "without foundation" and "premature".
Industry sources said that Tchuruk had informed all ministers involved about the possible link with the plane builders and they added that the fact Alcatel confirmed its discussions with the plane makers on Monday was a sign that Tchuruk had not been told to drop his plans.
Tchuruk, a 59-year old Marseille-born weapons engineer, had already impressed the independent Privatisation Commission with the industrial logic behind his group's Thomson-CSF bid.
But the government had in October selected Lagardere as preferred bidder because the Matra merger was the best solution for French defence interests.
Meanwhile, Alcatel has confirmed its return to profits in 1996 after heavy losses due to one-off charges in 1995.
It has sold its interests in mobile telecoms operator SFR and it is in talks to reduce its stake in Havas.
Whether that will help convince the government to change its mind remains the question.
On the Paris Bourse, Alcatel shares closed 1.09 percent lower -- after big gains late last week -- at 542 francs, while Lagardere fell 1.59 percent to 154.70 with traders citing concern it may not win Thomson.
