Alcatel Alsthom said on Monday it was in talks with Aerospatiale and Dassault about a joint offer for the government's 58-percent stake in defence electronics group Thomson-CSF .
Prime Minister Alain Juppe said a decision about the procedure for the privatisation of Thomson-CSF would be made before the end of February.
"There are discussions with the companies mentioned in the press," an Alcatel spokesman said when asked to react to newspaper reports about a joint bid.
Industry sources said that Alcatel chairman Serge Tchuruk had kept the government informed about his plans to form an alliance with Aerospatiale and Dassault in order to win the Thomson-CSF stake.
An industry analyst, who prefered not to be named, said the new plan improved the credibility of Alcatel's offer.
Alcatel in October lost out to the Lagardere Groupe in bidding for state-controlled Thomson SA, which has a stake in Thomson-CSF as well as 100 percent of consumer electronics group Thomson Multimedia (TMM).
But the government had to suspend the sale on December 4 after the independent Privatisation Commission rejected terms for the sale by Lagardere of TMM to Daewoo Electronics of South Korea.
A decision about the procedure for the relaunch of the sale, either by a private placement or a public sale, was originally expected at the end of January.
"I think that in the days to come, between now and the end of February, we will be in a position to announce very clearly the procedure, which I want to be as clear and as transparent as possible," Juppe said in an interview on French radio.
"All candidacies will obviously be examined in the context of the procedures we decide on," he said.
Dassault and Aerospatiale, which are currently in talks about a merger of their aircraft activities, had no comment.
President Jacques Chirac said a year ago that he wanted to restructure the French defence industry around a merger of Aerospatiale/Dassault and Thomson-CSF.
A joint bid by the aerospace group and Alcatel would speed up this restructuring. But the situation could be difficult because Aerospatiale is state-owned and the state would be the main shareholder of the merged group with Dassault.
"It is complicated but not impossible," an industry source said.
According to French newspapers, Aerospatiale would transfer its missiles and satellites business to Thomson-CSF and Dassault its electronics activties, now part of Dassault Electronique.
Alcatel would merge its own defence activities into Thomson-CSF. It would become the main shareholder of the enlarged group which would be Europe's biggest defence company and the world's third biggest after Lockheed Martin and Boeing-McDonnell Douglas Corp.
At Lagardere Groupe there was no immediate comment.
Lagardere shares closed 1.59 percent lower at 154.70 francs on the news of the strengthened Alcatel bid. Alcatel, which rose strongly last week, closed 1.09 percent lower at 542 francs.
