Alcatel Alsthom said on Monday it was in talks with Aerospatiale and Dassault about a joint offer for the government's 58-percent stake in defence electronics group Thomson-CSF.
Prime Minister Alain Juppe said a decision about the procedure for the privatisation of Thomson-CSF would be made before the end of February.
"There are discussions with the companies mentioned in the press," an Alcatel spokesman said when asked to react to newspaper reports about a joint bid.
Industry sources said that Alcatel chairman Serge Tchuruk had kept the government informed about his plans to form an alliance with Aerospatiale and Dassault in order to win the Thomson-CSF stake.
Alcatel in October lost out to Lagardere Groupe in bidding for state-controlled Thomson SA, which has the stake in Thomson-CSF as well as 100 percent of consumer electronics group Thomson Multimedia (TMM).
But the government had to suspend the sale on December 4 after the independent Privatisation Commission balked against the terms of the sale by Lagardere of TMM to Daewoo Electronics of South Korea.
A decision about the procedure for the relaunch of the sale, either by a private placement or a public sale, was expected at the end of January. Juppe said it would now be in February.
"I think that in the days to come, between now and the end of February, we will be in a position to announce very clearly the procedure, which I want to be as clear and as transparent as possible," he said in an interview on French radio.
"All candidacies will obviously be examined in the context of the procedures we decide on," he said.
At Dassault and Aerospatiale there was no comment.
The two companies are currently in talks about a merger of the aeroplane activities.
President Jacques Chirac said a year ago that he wanted to restructure the French defence industry around a merger of Aerospatiale/Dassault and Thomson-CSF.
A joint bid by the aerospace group and Alcatel would speed up this restructuring. But the situation could be difficult because Aerospatiale is state-owned and the state will be the main shareholder of the merged group with Dassault.
"It is complicated but not impossible," an industry source said.
According to French newspapers, Aerospatiale would transfer its missiles and satellites business to Thomson-CSF and Dassault its electronics activties, now in Dassault Electronique.
Alcatel would merge its own defence activities into Thomson-CSF and become the main shareholder of the enlarged group which would be Europe's biggest and the world's third biggest such group after Lockheed Martin  LK.N and Boeing-McDonnel Douglas.
At Lagardere Groupe there was no immediate comment.
Lagardere shares fell 1.40 percent to 155 francs on the news of the stengthened Alcatel bid.
Aerospatiale has a minority stake in Thomson-CSF's Sextant Avionique and is a rival to Lagardere's Matra in missiles.
