Britain's largest retail financial services group, Lloyds TSB, on Friday reported a 52 pct jump in 1996 profits, but analysts said the figure was somewhat flattering and included lower than expected bad debt provisions.
Pretax profits in the first full year following the merger between Lloyds Bank and TSB Group rose to 2.505 billion pounds ($4.1 billion), and the bank, which has recently been the star performer in a booming British banking sector, said it still has "unique opportunities for future profitable growth."
The profit figure followed 1.650 billion the previous year. Lloyds TSB raised its dividend by 20 percent to 13.2p per share from 11p, while earnings per share soared by 63 percent to 31.2p from 21.3.
Banking analysts said the headline data flattered the bank's underlying performance, however, and expressed some concern for future income growth. Lloyds shares eased 7p to 485 but later improved to stand unchanged by 1045 GMT at 502p.
"There's nothing really wrong with the results," said John Leonard, banking analyst at Salomon Brothers. "But they are not as glorious as they look on the surface."
Analysts pointed out that the large drop in bad debt provisions -- 44 percent down to 327 million pounds -- was a surprise, even though some improvement was expected given that the bank has increased higher quality assets such as mortgages.
"Bad debts were much lower than expected," said Nick Collier, banking analyst at Morgan Stanley, "and there was a bigger return from problem country debt."
Specific provisons for bad and doubtful debts were down to 357 million stg from 459 million in 1995 while profit from its problem country debt portfolio, mainly in Latin America, jumped to 127 million stg from 50 million.
Lloyds said "problem country debt" had improved so much that it is renaming the portfolio "emerging markets debt".
Leonard and Panmure Gordon analyst David Poutney both said they would likely not be increasing their profit forcasts for 1997 which stand at 2.825 billion pounds and 2.94 billion pounds respectively.
But Poutney, who has been advising clients to hold the shares but take profits, said he was now a seller.
"Overall, they are good figures but then it comes down to the valuation of the shares," Poutney said, "and they are looking a bit expensive. I can't see them making much headway from here."
Lloyds said it made a restructuring provision of 75 million pounds following its purchase of the minority interest in Lloyds Abbey Life and expects to make cost savings of 50 million pounds per year from the acquisition to add to the 350 million pounds its expects to save from the TSB merger.
It also said it was raising its provision against possible redress from the mis-selling of pensions by 29 million pounds to 200 million, a move welcomed as prudent by analysts.
In a joint statement, Lloyds TSB chairman and its new chief executive Peter Ellwood said the high quality of the bank's earnings should enable it to produce consistently higher returns than the industry average.
Lloyds TSB's total revenue rose seven percent to 6.75 billion pounds and net interest margin was maintained at end-1995 levels despite erosion in some areas.
Other concerns in the figures included a rise in general insurance claims to 107 million stg from 70 million in 1995 and a sharp fall in currency dealing profits which dropped to 96 million stg compared to 175 million in 1995.
Despite these concerns analysts were generally positive, although, given the shares' outperformance last year, they said this would be more difficult to maintain in 1996. ($1=.6128 Pound)
