Britain's largest retail financial services group, Lloyds TSB, on Friday reported a 52 percent surge in 1996 profits, but analysts said the figure was somewhat flattering and included lower than expected bad debt provisions.
Pretax profits in the first full year following the merger between Lloyds Bank and TSB rose to 2.505 billion pounds ($4.1 billion), and the bank, which has been the star performer in a booming British banking sector, said "the best is yet to come."
"We had a good year in 1996 but the combination of Lloyds, TSB and Cheltenham &amp; Gloucester is not fully into its swing," Lloyds TSB chairman Sir Brian Pitman told reporters at a news conference."
Pitman expects cost savings of 400 million pounds every year from the merger and from the purchase of the 38 percent minority interest in Lloyds Abbey Life completed last year.
The 1996 profit figure followed 1.650 billion pounds the previous year. Lloyds TSB raised its dividend by 20 percent to 13.2 pence per share from 11p, while earnings per share soared by 63 percent to 31.2p from 21.3.
But banking analysts said the headline data flattered the bank's underlying performance somewhat and expressed some concern for future income growth. Lloyds shares eased 7p to 485 but later improved to stand a net 2p higher by 1600 GMT at 504p.
"There's nothing really wrong with the results," said John Leonard, banking analyst at Salomon Brothers. "But they are not as glorious as they look on the surface."
Analysts pointed out that the large drop in bad debt provisions -- 44 percent down to 327 million pounds -- was a surprise, even though some improvement was expected given that the bank has increased higher quality assets such as mortgages.
"Bad debts were much lower than expected," said Nick Collier, banking analyst at Morgan Stanley, "and there was a bigger return from problem country debt."
Specific provisons for bad and doubtful debts were down to 357 million from 459 million pounds in 1995 while profit from its problem country debt portfolio, mainly in Latin America, jumped to 127 million from 50 million.
Leonard and Panmure Gordon analyst David Poutney both said they would likely not be increasing their profit forcasts for 1997 which stand at 2.825 billion pounds and 2.94 billion respectively.
But Poutney, who has been advising clients to hold the shares but take profits, said he was now a seller.
"Overall, they are good figures but then it comes down to the valuation of the shares," Poutney said, "and they are looking a bit expensive. I can't see them making much headway from here."
Lloyds said it made a restructuring provision of 75 million pounds following its purchase of insurer Lloyds Abbey Life and said it was raising its provision against possible redress from the mis-selling of pensions by 29 million pounds to 200 million, a move welcomed as prudent by analysts.
Pitman said Lloyds was comparing itself with the "best U.S. companies" such as Coca Cola and GE and like them has adopted the "economic profit" measure as the best guide to its performance as it reflects growth in investment and return.
Broadly speaking, economic profit represents the difference between earnings on a company's equity and the equity cost.
Lloyds TSB said that, after excluding restructuring provisions, economic profit for 1996 was 69 percent higher at 1.055 million pounds compared with 623 million in 1995.
Pitman said the bank is likely to spend surplus capital on growth, both organic and by aquisition, or increasing dividends rather than on buying back shares like some of its competitors.
Pitman said shareholders had urged the bank not to buy back shares but to continue to provide them with high returns.
"Our capital ratios are greatly restored," Pitman said, "and if we can, we would like to continue to grow (both) organically and by acquisition and increase dividends." ($1=.6128 Pound)
