Lloyds TSB Group, Britain's largest retail bank, has started an in-depth review of business opportunities overseas, its chief executive Peter Ellwood said on Tuesday.
"(Overseas expansion) has been a bit of a disaster area for British banks, so I think one approaches it with extreme caution," Ellwood said, "but if you look at our potential for growth in the coming years, it does behove us to look very carefully at different parts of the world and ask to what extent we can invest."
Which part of the world Lloyds would invest in would depend on which products and services the bank thought it could sell and the kind of distribution channels that would be available.
Ellwood said Lloyds was thinking about which markets and whether to enter organically or by acquisition.
"We're asking ourselves, what are the risks of expanding in Australia or Latin America, North America or Europe?," Ellwood said. "We want to be in a strong position, a proactive position."
Lloyds has historic connections with Latin America and is known to want to expand into consumer finance products in Brazil.
It has also been linked with an expansion into Australia to add to its interests in New Zealand.
But Ellwood refused to be drawn on any specific area of interest.
Lloyds TSB has been seen as a candidate to enter Australia where restraints on overseas entrants are expected to be eased shortly.
He said the bank had not reached a stage of specific interest, adding that the review of international opportunities was something that he had begun relatively recently.
"I want a very comprehensive analysis of where we might expand but that doesn't mean we're going to rush out and buy something," Ellwood added. "But it will mean that we can say we are definitely ruling these countries out or say these could be areas of opportunity."
Ellwood said some countries in Latin America, for example, have made phenomenal progress with economic reform, naming Brazil and Argentina in particular.
"The challenge for any European bank is to decide whether this is sustainable. If you decide it is, and go on the heavy acquisition trail then your risk will be higher but your rewards will also be higher if you're right."
Ellwood said Lloyds TSB would never rule anything out in an area where it has skills and experience.
Lloyds took big hits on sovereign lending in Latin America as a result of the 1980s debt crisis and consequently cut down its involvement there.
But in its 1996 results, Lloyds reported a pretax profit of 127 million stg from its Emerging Markets Debt portfolio including 86 million stg of releases from provisions set earlier. -- London Newsroom +44 171 542 8864
