Barclays Plc shares dived on Tuesday as the bank reported 1996 pretax profits at the lower end of expectations and a slump in its investment banking unit BZW.
Barclays shares were down 55-1/2 pence at 1144p in afternoon trade, having hit a low of 1131p, after the news that pretax profits at the bank rose by 13 percent to 2.36 billion pounds ($3.8 billion), including an exceptional 70 million pounds gain on disposals.
The shares took a further tumble as analysts returning from meeting the company moved to downgrade the stock. Analysts at SBC Warburg cut the stock to "hold" from "buy", market sources said, and others were cautious on the outlook for the share.
The profits were at the lower end of forecasts and included a 29 percent fall in operating profits at BZW to 204 million pounds.
The company, which has repurchased over one billion pounds of shares in the last 18 months, said it would return 500 million pounds to shareholders in the next twelve months, and raised its dividend by 21 percent to 31.5 pence, in line with forecasts.
But even the buy-back news failed to cheer the market.
"The basic message is that there was disappointment about the headline profits and dividend, the mix of profits and the potential size of any buyback," said Michael Lever, analyst at HSBC James Capel.
"The figures were disappointing relative to expectations and everyone will be pulling their numbers back. I don't think they will make much more in 1997 than they did in 1996."
Market sources said estimates for Barclays pre-tax profit in 1997 were being trimmed by about 200 million pounds.
Barclays chief executive Martin Taylor mounted a spirited defence of the results and his strategy at BZW, saying that the UK banking figures were "cracking" and that Barclays was investing for the future at BZW.
"You have to be careful not to be frightened by your own shadow," Taylor told Reuters in an interview. "The reason that the returns are depressed (at BZW) this year is that we're spending so much."
BZW chief executive Bill Harrison said he plans to improve links between BZW's key areas to build profitable business. He added that the bank's markets division had needed a "significant upgrade", but had now been "re-tooled...and is strongly placed to make a significant earnings contribution."
In a statement earlier, Barclays admitted underperformance by BZW in the fixed income market, with the exception of sterling, and foreign exchange area.
Taylor said BZW would continue to incur quite high costs in the first half of the current year and would then face the disruption of moving its offices to Canary Wharf in London's Docklands.
"I would hope that the second half would be a lot better," he added.
BZW has had had a turbulent time in the past year which started with the death of its chief executive David Band and has included high-level management shake-ups.
On top of this, BZW has also been involved in what have been perceived as some high-profile disasters with its clients. The biggest of these was its takeover defence for Northern Electric against U.S. energy group CE Electric which is being investigated by Britain's Takeover Panel. The late disclosure by BZW of a 250,000 sterling discretionary fee clause meant that CE's offer was extended and it captured Northern by the slimmest of margins.
But Taylor said that well-publicised events last year such as the Northern Electric defence had not done BZW damage.
"I think Northern Electric showed BZW behaving very energetically to try and prevent a client being taken over and almost succeeding," Taylor said. "We very nearly saved it."
But the head of quity sales at another investment house said, "The trials and tribulations at the investment banking arm look as if they will probably be continuing into the next year."
Taylor said Barclays was looking for the best way to return the bank's excess capital to shareholders but rejected the idea of a special dividend, saying that share repurchases help non-sellers to concentrate their position.
He noted that earnings per share had risen by 25 percent to 104.2p per share.
Taylor also rejected the notion that Barclays was devoid of ideas because it wanted to return capital.
He said the bank would make acquisitions if they added to shareholder value but could see none on the horizon at the moment.
