Barclays Plc shares slid lower on Tuesday after the bank announced 1996 pretax profits at the lower end of market expectations, including a slump in its investment banking unit BZW.
The shares were quoted 25p lower at 1174.5p at 1150 GMT, having hit a low of 1131p, after news that pretax profits rose by 13 percent to 2.36 billion pounds ($3.82 billion), including an exceptional 70 million pounds gain on disposals.
This was at the low end of analysts' forecasts and included a 29 percent fall in operating profits at BZW to 204 million pounds.
The group, which has already performed more than one billion pounds of share repurchases in the last 18 months, said it would return 500 million pounds to shareholders in the next 12 months and raised its dividend by 21 percent to 31.5 pence, in line with forecasts.
Chief executive Martin Taylor mounted a spirited defence of the results and his strategy at BZW, saying that the British banking figures were "cracking" and that Barclays was investing for the future at the investment bank.
"You have to be careful not to be frightened by your own shadow," Taylor told Reuters in an interview. "The reason that the returns are depressed (at BZW) this year is that we're spending so much."
Taylor said that if Barclays had invested less in BZW, the unit's profits would have been higher, but that without the investment, BZW would be a weaker firm.
In a statement earlier, Barclays reported underperformance by BZW in the fixed income market, with the exception of sterling, and in foreign exchange, in which said it had performed poorly in an increasingly competitive market.
Taylor said BZW would continue to incur quite high costs in the first half of the current year and would then face the disruption of moving its offices to Canary Wharf in London's Docklands.
"I would hope that the second half would be a lot better," he added.
BZW has had a turbulent time in the past year, which started with the death of its chief executive, David Band, and has included high-level management shake-ups.
It has also been involved in what have been perceived as some high-profile problems with clients. The biggest of these was its takeover defence for Northern Electric against U.S. energy group CE Electric, which is being investigated by Britain's Takeover Panel.
The late disclosure by BZW of a 250,000 stg discretionary fee clause meant that CE's offer was extended and it captured Northern by the slimmest of margins.
But Taylor said that well-publicised events last year, such as the Northern Electric defence, had not done BZW damage.
"I think Northern Electric showed BZW behaving very energetically to try and prevent a client being taken over and almost succeeding," Taylor said. "We very nearly saved it."
On the share price reaction, one broker's head of equity sales said, "The results were very disappointing and there will be some downgrades as a result.
"The trials and tribulations at the investment banking arm look as if they will probably be continuing into the next year," he said.
Taylor said Barclays was looking for the best way to return the bank's excess capital to shareholders but rejected the idea of a special dividend, saying that share repurchases help non-sellers to concentrate their position.
He noted that earnings per share had risen by 25 percent to 104.2p.
Taylor also rejected the notion that Barclays was devoid of ideas because it wanted to return capital.
He said the bank would make acquisitions if they added to shareholder value but could see none on the horizon at present.
"We're already growing very quickly right across our personal sector business," Taylor said. "Both the personal bank and the business bank have had a cracking year."
