A leasing unit of HSBC Holdings Plc said on Wednesday it would buy recently-privatised British train rolling stock leasing company Eversholt in a politically controversial deal worth 726.5 million pounds ($1.2 billion).
HSBC said its Forward Trust Group financing unit, part of retail banking group Midland Bank plc, would buy Eversholt's shares from their venture capital-backed management owners for 453.4 million pounds and repay debt of 273.1 million pounds.
The widely-leaked Eversholt deal has been heavily criticised by opposition politicians. Labour Party leader Tony Blair on Tuesday said the profits likely to flow to some members of its management was "entirely unjustified".
Blair, who is preparing to fight a general election due in the next three months, said in Parliament that the level of gains anticipated for managers after just 14 months as owners of the company could be seen as "profiteering".
However, Blair's allegations were based on claims that the deal would be done for 900 million pounds rather than the 726.5 million disclosed today. Eversholt was bought from the government for 580 million pounds.
The Labour party said it would publish a dossier showing how "fat cats have hit the rail privatisation jackpot" at a news conference later on Wednesday.
Graham Picken, chief executive of Forward Trust, said it had paid a fair market price for Eversholt and refused to comment on how much money Eversholt's directors might have made on the deal.
"As far as we are concerned, we were presented with the opportunity late last year," Picken said in an interview, "and, after due diligence, we are paying a fair market price."
Venture capital backer Candover Investments plc said in a separate statement that its 17.7 million pound investment in Eversholt had increased in value to 100.4 million pounds as a result of the sale.
Blair attacked the large sums that Eversholt directors would make on the, saying that its managing director Andrew Jukes was set to make 20 million pounds on an investment of 110,000 pounds.
Picken said the purchase of Eversholt was a natural expansion and excellent fit for Forward Trust which has been providing finance to the automotive and rail industries since 1928.
He said there were substantial opportunities for growth in the business, especially in the area of new rolling stock which the train operating companies will require.
"We believe that the combination of our financial skills and the railway and engineering expertise of Eversholt will make this work," Picken added.
Picken foresaw healthy competition in the sector and said new entrants could emerge, although Forward Trust was not planning any further acquisitions.
"We are not opportunistic, leasing is a core area and we are making a long-term commitment," Picken said.
