Britain's Woolwich Building Society, which will float on the stock exchange this summer, said on Wednesday its pretax profit rose by 18 percent to a record 392 million pounds ($629.5 million) in 1996.
Woolwich chief executive John Stewart said he wanted to see growth in all the company's businesses following its conversion into a listed company.
While its net mortgage lending jumped 50 percent to 1.4 billion pounds, the society said its administrative expenses rose by less than one percent and its cost-to-income ratio edged down to 45.8 percent from 48.9 percent.
Stewart said that if draft building societies legislation were passed in its current form, the Woolwich would have to consider expansion by acquisition very carefully.
This is because in its current form the law would take away a building society's five-year immunity from takeover if it takes over another financial sector company.
"If the bill is passed in its present form, it would make us think twice about acquisitions," Stewart said. "We would have to weigh the strategic importance of the acquisition against the loss of protection."
But Stewart added that, whatever the legislation, the Woolwich would be "out there doing business".
The Woolwich had an excellent record not only in organic growth but also in joint ventures and cold starts. "We have a lot more clubs in our bag, there are a lot more ways to develop the business if we have to think twice about making an acquisition," he said.
The Woolwich, which will be quoted in the FTSE 100 index after flotation and is Britain's third largest building society, sees itself as a low-cost provider.
Stewart said he wanted costs to get even lower. "We think we're efficient, we've got a track record of reducing our cost-to-income ratio and we're not finished, by no means," he said.
The Woolwich wanted to increase its business in areas such as unit trusts, life and general insurance and in the core mortgage business and personal loans.
He said he especially wanted to see growth in its French and Italian companies -- Banque Woolwich and Banca Woolwich -- which he said were already doing well.
Asked if Woolwich would grow organically in Europe, Stewart said, "Oh no, it may well be by acquisition, if the right one comes along."
