Members of the Halifax Building Society, Britain's largest mortgage lender, on Monday voted overwhelmingly to convert the mutually-owned financial giant into a public company and float it on the stock exchange.
Of the eight million Halifax members eligible to vote, more than 97 percent of both borrowers and investors voted in favour of the conversion.
For the investors' resolution to be carried, 50 percent of those eligible to vote needed to do so and of these, 75 percent were needed to vote in favour.
The flotation, expected to value the society at some 12 billion pounds ($19.5 billion), is now expected to go ahead in June.
Little more than 1,000 of the Halifax's members actually attended Monday's meeting since most mailed in their votes, but many expressed dismay that the society was losing its mutual status.
However, they were assured by Halifax chairman Jon Foulds that the conversion to a bank would be in the customers' best interest.
"If we convert to a public limited company (Plc) we will be best placed to fulfil your needs," Foulds told the meeting, adding that bank status would give the Halifax better access to the equity and debt capital markets and to wholesale funding from the money markets.
But Peter Judge, co-founder of the Halifax Action Group, which has campaigned against the conversion, called on the board to resign over its proposals and had a fierce exchange with Foulds from the floor of the meeting, accusing the board of engaging in a privatisation exercise.
Halifax members will get a basic 200 shares which on early estimates would be worth around 1,000 pounds but which, by the time of the flotation is likely to be worth near an average of 1,500 pounds.
The conversion proposal has not been without controversy with many Halifax members wanting the society to retain its mutual roots and others complaining about the treatment of some disabled members.
Foulds said the board had sympathy for the case of the disabled and other groups whose accounts are held in trust but said the whole flotation could not be put at risk in order to meet their needs.
Other groups to have their case put before the meeting included the blind, children, and members living in some countries, like Canada, the United States and Australia, who have been excluded from the share pay-out for technical reasons.
The action group vowed to continue its struggle against the conversion, saying that the Halifax transfer document was biased and did not give the arguments against conversion.
Halifax vice chairman John Wood denied that its directors would become "fat cats". He noted that the directors had waived the right to free shares and that the Halifax had no executive share scheme. Wood said that any future share scheme for directors would have to gain the approval of shareholders.
The action group says Halifax members will get less interest on their deposits and pay more for their mortgages than account holders at societies that remain mutual.
"If it were not for the fact that people are being bribed with their own money we believe no one would vote for conversion," said the group's co-founder Serge Lourie.
Lourie said the action group plans fight its case with the Building Societies Commission, the industry regulator, which will meet in April to approve the conversion before it goes ahead.
($ = 0.614 British Pounds)
