Members of the Halifax Building Society, Britain's largest mortgage lender, met on Monday to decide whether to convert the mutually-owned financial giant into a public company and float it on the stock exchange.
Thousands of the Halifax's members attended the meeting, which is expected to support the 12 billion pound ($19.5 billion) conversion proposal by an overwhelming majority, probably already present through postal votes from the society's eight million account holders.
Halifax members will get a basic 200 shares which on early estimates would be worth around 1,000 pounds ($1,620) but which, by the time of the flotation is likely to be worth near an average of 1,500 pounds.
The conversion proposal has not been without controversy with many Halifax members wanting the society to retain its mutual roots and others complaining about the treatment of some disabled members.
The Halifax Action Group last week vowed to continue its struggle against the conversion, saying that the Halifax transfer document was biased and did not present arguments against conversion.
The action group says that Halifax members will get less interest on their deposits and pay more for their mortgages than account holders at societies that remain mutual.
"If it were not for the fact that people are being bribed with their own money we believe no one would vote for conversion," said action group co-founder Serge Lourie.
Lourie said the action group plans to lodge its case with the Building Societies Commission, the industry regulator, which must approve the conversion before it goes ahead.
But members arriving at the meeting were almost unanimous in their support for the conversion process.
"The reason for coming was to cast my vote in support of the float and I think there will be very little said against it," said one Halifax member who declined to be named.
The result of the vote is expected at around 1830 GMT when votes in the hall and the proxy votes will have been counted. Half of the Halifax's savers must vote with three-quarters in favour of the scheme to be approved.
The only other building society to float on the U.K. stock exchange has been the Abbey National. Since it came to market in 1989, it has become a successful bank and has diversified away from its core mortgage lending business.
The Halifax is one of four building societies to float this year, the others being the Woolwich, the Alliance and Leicester and the Northern Rock.
($ = 0.614 British Pounds)
