Britain's securities market watchdog said on Tuesday it had disciplined former Barings executive James Bax -- completing the cases of managers blamed for the bank's collapse.
Barings went bust in February 1995 under the weight of some 800 million pounds ($1.3 billion) of losses racked up in unauthorised derivatives trades by trader Nick Leeson, currently languishing in a Singapore jail.
The SFA started proceedings against nine former senior executives of Barings but did not proceed against Peter Baring and Andrew Tuckey, chairman and deputy chairman respectively of Barings group.
The nine were former chief executive Peter Norris, Ron Baker, Bax, Geoff Broadhust, Tony Gamby, Tony Hawes, Ian Hopkins, George Maclean and Mary Walz.
Of these nine, only Hopkins and Baker have any outstanding business with the SFA.
After its spectacular collapse, Barings was taken over by Dutch financial services group Internationale Nederlanden Groep NV and now operates as ING Barings.
The spotlight now turns to Britain's Department of Trade which this week confirmed it has started legal proceedings which could ban the Barings nine plus Tuckey from being directors of any British company for up to 15 years.
The DTI said it would hold preliminary hearings and then would set a timetable for a final hearing of the cases.
And as if that wasn't enough, Norris, Tuckey, Baker, Walz, Hopkins, Gamby, Broadhurst and Bax also face writs from accountancy firm Cooper's &amp; Lybrand in third party proceedings after it was sued by Barings administrator Ernst &amp; Young for what is thought to be around 1.0 billion pounds.
Hopkins was recently banned for three years from being a director in the City and required to pay 10,000 pounds of costs. Though technically he is still able to appeal against his sentence, he is thought unlikely to do so.
Meanwhile, Baker, who as head of financial products played a central role in the Barings affair, is appealing against a reprimand handed out to him in November even though more serious charges had not been proved.
Baring and Tuckey left Barings after giving assurances that they would never seek top management jobs in the financial markets.
Penalties handed out to the others have ranged from reprimands to three year bans with costs of up to 10,000 pounds.
Bax was suspended from being a City director for 21 months and will also pay costs of 10,000 pounds after the SFA found some mitigating circumstances for his conduct.
The SFA said it had taken into account, among other matters, that Bax had no product responsibility for the trading activities of Leeson nor any knowledge of futures and options trading.
Bax's suspension will run from March 1996, the date when the SFA started proceedings against him.
($ = 0.611 British Pounds)
