Shares in Standard Chartered, the London-based bank which specialises in the Asia-Pacific region, rose sharply on Wednesday after it raised 1996 profits by 32 percent and said it would give a major boost to business investment.
StanChart's pretax profit rose to 870 million pounds ($1.43 billion) including exceptional items of 45 million pounds, from 661 million in 1995.
By 1030 GMT, StanChart shares were 21.5p higher at 791.5p, having touched a high earlier of 797p.
It also raised its dividend by 32 percent to 14.5 pence per share from 11 pence in 1995 and said trading profit rose to 818 million pounds from 654 million.
"We're giving a signal that we do expect over the next year to increase costs because we're investing more in the business to really get it into good shape for the next millennium," chief executive Malcolm Williamson told Reuters in an interview.
Williamson said he expects Standard Chartered's cost base to rise by seven percent in 1997 after a two percent rise to 1.09 billion pounds in 1996.
He added that the investment was likely to continue after 1997. "It will go on for a period of years," he said.
"We need to step up that investment to give more power to our elbow."
Williamson said that since quitting the businesses which Standard Chartered felt were not favourable in the long term, such as private banking which it sold last year, the investment will be used to boost its core areas of operation.
He said these are retail banking, which provides around one third of the bank's profits, consumer banking, where credit cards are a burgeoning area, and corporate and institutional banking.
The bank said it sees positive economic signs in the region.
"The Asia Pacific region remains key to our future. There was a slight slowdown in Singapore and other economies during 1996 but indications are positive for 1997," Chairman Patrick Gillam said in a statement.
The profits figure hit the top end of analysts' forecasts that were mostly in a tight 860 to 870 million pounds range.
At the half-way stage, StanChart tried to temper market exuberance by warning that it expected to see slower growth in mortgage lending and analysts had expected profits to be hit by the firm pound and dull foreign exchange markets in 1996.
Stanchart said the lower foreign exchange profits were compensated for by better returns from asset and liability management.
Williamson said the increased investment would not jeopardise the bank's progressive dividend policy, adding that the Standard Chartered strategy does not include major acquisitions but added that in-fill buys could be a possibility.
He said major banking acquisitions in Asia were difficult for practical reasons such as legal constraints on foreign ownership. "So, we're probably stuck with in-fill," he said.
Williamson said Standard Chartered did not expect the death of Deng Xiaoping or the handover of Hong Kong to China to disrupt the bank's business.
He also pointed out that while some growth rates in Asia were not as strong as they have been, they were still stronger than anything seen in OECD countries.
