Asia-Pacific specialist bank Standard Chartered Plc will boost investment in 1997 and beyond to take advantage of business opportunities, its chief executive Malcolm Williamson said on Wednesday.
"We're giving a signal that we do expect over the next year to increase costs because we're investing more in the business to really get it into good shape for the next millennium," Williamson told Reuters in an interview.
Williamson said he expects Standard Chartered's cost base to rise by seven percent in 1997 after a two percent rise in 1996.  
And Williamson added that the investment was likely to continue after 1997. "It will go on for a period of years," he added.
"We need to step up that investment to give more power to our elbow."
Williamson said that since quitting the businesses which Standard Chartered felt were not favourable in the long-term, the investment will be used to boost its core areas of operation.
He said these are retail banking, which provides around one third of the bank's profits, consumer banking, where credit cards are a burgeoning area and corporate and institutional banking.  
Earlier, Standard Chartered announced a 32 percent rise in pre-tax profits in 1996 to 870 million stg and raised its dividend the same amount to 14.5p per share for the year.
Williamson said the increased investment would not jeopardise the bank's progressive dividend policy.
Williamson said the Standard Chartered strategy does not include major acquisitions but added that in-fill buys could be a possibility.
He said major banking acquisitions in Asia were difficult for practical reasons such as legal constraints on foreign ownership. "So, we're probably stuck with in-fill," he said.  
Williamson said economic prospects in the Asia-Pacific region were fairly bright, adding that both the Hong Kong and Chinese economies were doing well as the handover approaches.
He said that Standard Chartered did not expect the death of Deng Xiaoping or the handover of Hong Kong to China to disrupt the bank's business.
Williamson also pointed out that while some growth rates in Asia were not as strong as they have been, they were still stronger than anything seen in OECD countries.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 8864
