British bank Abbey National plc on Thursday posted a 20 percent rise in 1996 pretax profit and said it would make a formal bid on Friday for mutually-owned life assurance firm Scottish Amicable.
The profits of 1.228 billion pounds ($2 billion) were at the top end of analysts' expectations and up from 1.026 billion in 1995.
Abbey National, Britain's fifth largest bank, also announced a dividend payout of 26.1 pence per share compared to 21.75p in 1995.
Its shares were initially boosted to a session high of 781p, up 17.5p on the day. But by 1145 GMT, the share had fallen back to 767p.
The bid for Scottish Amicable is part of its plans to tap the potential of the British life assurance and pensions unit market, chief executive Peter Birch said.
"We are very confident that our proposition will be attractive to the ScotAm board and its policyholders," Birch said, declining to comment further on the details of the revised bid.
Abbey sparked a bidding war for ScotAm in January when it made a preliminary offer of up to 1.4 billion pounds and was followed by a larger bid by insurance giant Prudential Corp.
ScotAm, which had been planning to shed its mutual status and eventually float on the stock exchange, then started a formal bidding process and offers have to be in on Friday.
Abbey is known to be keen to diversify further away from its traditional mortgage lending and savings activities and profits from these other sources now amount to 40 percent of the total.
Birch noted that Abbey's life assurance units raised profit 44 percent in 1996 from a standing start after the purchase of Scottish Mutual five years ago.
"That business has been a very strong earner for us," Birch said, "and as one looks at the future of the country and the need for the private sector to provide benefits in healthcare and pensions, we're still very small...for an organisation that's the 17th largest company in the UK."
Acquisitions are constantly being looked at in other areas of the business, Birch said, as a means of continuing expansion into personal retail financial services.
Birch said Abbey's core mortgage market, where its share rose to a record 14.7 percent, was showings signs of life.
"All the indications in the housing market are that recovery is getting under way," Birch said. "It has a long way to go, a lot of people want to move house...and the market is now stirring in the rest of the country (outside London). We see transactions increasing by seven to 10 percent this year."
Birch said an expected rise in interest rates after the election would not put a break on the market since this would be offset by low inflation and confidence boosted by a strong economy.
Abbey saw its mortgage margin ease slightly last year with net interest spread at 2.08 percent from 2.15 percent in 1995.
"That doesn't really concern me too much," Birch said, "because we are seeing volume come through. Last year we devoted a lot of time to integrating National &amp; Provincial -- this year, just watch our market share." ($ = 0.613 British Pounds)
