The potential expansion of the British life and pensions market means Abbey National Plc needs to boost its involvement and lies behind its offer for Scottish Amicable, Abbey chief executive Peter Birch said on Thursday.
Birch was speaking in an interview after Abbey posted an underlying 1996 pre-tax profit 20 percent higher at 1.229 billion stg and raised its dividend a similar amount to 26.1p per share.
"We are very confident that our proposition will be attractive to the ScotAm board and its policyholders," Birch said.  
The bank earlier confirmed it would be making a formal bid for ScotAm on Friday but Birch declined to comment on any of the details of the revised bid.
Abbey sparked a bidding war for ScotAm in January when it made a preliminary offer of up to 1.4 billion stg and was followed by a larger bid by insurance giant Prudential Corp.
ScotAm, which had been planning to shed its mutual status and eventually float on the stock exchange, then started a formal bidding process and offers have to be in on Friday.
Abbey is known to be keen to diversify further away from its traditional mortgage lending and savings activities and profits from these other sources now amount to 40 percent of the total.
Birch noted that Abbey's life assurance units raised profit 44 percent in 1996 from a standing start after the purchase of Scottish Mutual five years ago.
"That business has been a very strong earner for us," Birch said, "and as one looks at the future of the country and the need for the private sector to provide benefits in healthcare and pensions, we're still very small...for an organisation that's the 17th largest company in the UK."
Birch said adding Scottish Amicable makes a lot of sense and provides a great opportunity for Abbey to build on its Scottish-based life business.
Acquisitions are constantly being looked at in other areas of the business, Birch said, as a means of continuing expansion into personal retail financial services.
Birch said Abbey's core mortgage market, where its share rose to a record 14.7 percent, was showings signs of life.
"All the indications in the housing market are that recovery is getting under way," Birch said. "It has a long way to go, a lot of people want to move house...and the market is now stirring in the rest of the country (outside London). We see transactions increasing by seven to 10 percent this year."
Birch said an expected rise in interest rates after the election would not put a break on the market since this would be offset by low inflation and confidence boosted by a strong economy.
Abbey saw its mortgage margin ease slightly last year with net interest spread at 2.08 percent from 2.15 percent in 1995.
"That doesn't really concern me too much," Birch said, "because we are seeing volume come through. Last year we devoted a lot of time to integrating National &amp; Provincial -- this year, just watch our market share."
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 8864
