An army of financial market regulators were preparing Sunday to descend on NatWest Markets, the investment banking arm of National Westminster Bank, which said Friday it found a 50 million pound ($81.4 million) hole in its options trading books.
The Securities and Futures Authority, which licenses options traders, and the Bank of England, which regulates banks generally, both said they would be working closely together to establish what had gone wrong at NatWest Markets.
"Supervisors work closely together and there is no doubt that we will talking about what has happened at NatWest," a Bank of England spokesman said.
The spokesman could not confirm, however, the existence of a formal joint investigation with the Securities and Futures Authority, as reported in some British newspapers Sunday.
The Serious Fraud Office, which investigates large fraud cases in Britain said it was not yet involved in the case.
"We are not investigating the case, it has not been referred to us and it's not appropriate to speculate about whether it will be," a Fraud Office spokesman said Sunday.
It also remained unclear Sunday whether the operations of an interest rate options trader, named by banking sources as Kyriacos Papouis, who now works for U.S. securities house Bear Stearns, included any element of fraudulent behaviour.
"At the moment, this looks like a trader trying to trade his way out of a loss," a banking source said. "But it's not clear how or why, or how it took so long to discover."
A spokeswoman for NatWest Markets said the deals had taken place over a period of time in 1996 and had come to light only in the past few days.
She confirmed the suspension of a senior options trader at NatWest Markets, named by sources as Neil Dodgson. A spokesman for Dodgson said he could not comment on the case but would be cooperating fully with any investigations.
The case is sure to raise again the question of supervision of derivatives trading, especially as all London firms went through an apparently exhaustive review of their risk management control systems following the collapse of the Barings investment bank in 1995.
Barings collapsed under losses of 800 million pounds ($1.3 billion) after rogue trader Nick Leeson embarked on a spree of unauthorised derivatives trading.
While the current case does not compare in terms of scale and does seem to have been nipped in the bud, it will still cause major waves around London's financial circles.
"We are making a very thorough review of our control systems -- both internal and external," the NatWest Markets spokeswoman said. "This is a business that requires constant scrutiny, you can never be complacent about the control procedures."
The question in the NatWest case is whether the "mis-pricing" of options was done for personal gain or to hide the real position or was just hopelessly bad trading.
NatWest is also likely to face criticism in the coming days over the suspicion that it already knew of the loss when it announced its 1996 results last week.
NatWest has vigorously denied this, saying it brought the matter to light as soon as possible and has kept regulators fully informed.
NatWest also said no client had been affected.
Some sources said Natwest should perhaps have said no client had been "adversely" affected since the 50 million pounds ($81 million) must be shown as a gain in a trading book somewhere.
