London-based international bank HSBC Holdings Plc on Monday posted a 23 percent rise in 1996 profits but chief executive John Bond said it saw a challenging year ahead amid increasing competition.
Bond said HSBC, which gets 55 percent of its profits from the Asia-Pacific region, had a strong capital position and balance sheet, making it ready to meet that competition head-on.
"We see 1997 as a challenging year wherever we look whether it be Asia or the UK, the competition continues to increase," Bond said in an interview.
He also told a news conference that HSBC, one of the world's largest banking groups, wanted to make insurance an international core activity.
"We see the biggest growth potential in the Asia-Pacific region, we are already doing it in Hong Kong and we want to roll it out to other countries," Bond told reporters.
HSBC announced a 23 percent rise in pretax profits for 1996 to 4.52 billion pounds ($7.3 billion) -- around the middle of market expectations. A hefty nine pence per share rise in the annual dividend to 41 pence bettered most forecasts.
Bond said HSBC's British unit Midland Bank would continue to grow organically, as the price of acquisitions was impossible to justify to shareholders.
Midland, one of Britain's big four clearing banks, put in a strong performance with pretax profits up more than 20 percent and costs held to a rise of less than one percent, Bond said.
HSBC's capital ratios were strong with tier one capital rising to 9.9 percent from 9.5 percent at the end of 1995 and Bond said he did not see surplus capital being generated.
"As long as we're making a respectable return on capital, we regard capital strength as an asset in our business," Bond said. "It helps you with the ratings, it helps with deposits in Asia and to have a strong capital position shows in the bottom line."
HSBC had a 21.3 percent return on capital in 1996 compared with 20.7 percent in 1995.
Bond said HSBC continues to be confident over Hong Kong's transition from British to Chinese rule in July.
Last year, HSBC was granted a licence to trade in the Chinese yuan and Bond said the bank talking to the Chinese authorities to see how this would work.
HSBC was looking at this massive potential business opportunity in the long-term, he said.
"I think it will take time, of course it will, but the signs are all positive."
Bond said the rise of sterling against the dollar had not had a great effect on the group's results in 1996 where the average rate for the pound against the dollar was below that of 1995.
He said that, very roughly, for every cent the pound goes up against the dollar, the bank loses 13 million pounds in profits.
Analysts said the results held few surprises and were not expecting to change their forecasts for 1997 in any major way.
Nick Collier of Morgan Stanley who expects 1997 pre-tax profits of 4.94 billion pounds said he might raise this estimate marginally. John Leonard of Salomon Brothers, who has been forecasting 4.87 billion pounds, sees a change of just 50 million pounds either way.
HSBC shares ended 30.5p lower at 1,551.5p in a generally lower bank sector.
In Hong Kong dollar terms, attributable profit rose by 25 percent to HK$37.59 billion. ($ = 0.615 British Pounds)
