London-based international bank HSBC Holdings Plc on Monday posted a 23 percent rise in 1996 profits but chief executive John Bond predicted a challenging year ahead with increasing competition.
Despite the prospect of tougher conditions, Bond said the banking group, which is one of the biggest in the world, had a strong capital position and a balance sheet that made it ready to meet competition head-on.
"We see 1997 as a challenging year wherever we look, whether it be Asia or the UK the competition continues to increase," Bond said in an interview.
Earlier, HSBC announced a 23 percent rise in pretax profits for 1996 to 4.52 billion pounds ($7.3 billion) -- around the middle of market expectations. A hefty nine pence per share rise in annual dividend to 41 pence bettered most forecasts.
Bond said HSBC's British unit Midland Bank would continue to grow organically as the price of acquisitions was impossible to justify to shareholders.
Midland put in a strong performance with pretax profits up more than 20 percent and costs held to a rise of less than one percent.
Bond said HSBC's capital ratios were strong, with tier one capital rising to 9.9 percent from 9.5 percent at the end of 1995. He did not see surplus capital being generated.
"As long as we're making a respectable return on capital, we regard capital strength as an asset in our business," Bond said. "It helps you with the ratings, it helps with deposits in Asia and to have a strong capital position shows in the bottom line."
HSBC had a 21.3 percent return on capital in 1996 compared with 20.7 percent in 1995.
Bond said HSBC continued to be confident about Hong Kong's transition from British to Chinese rule in July.
Last year, HSBC was granted a licence to trade in the Chinese yuan and Bond said the bank was talking to the Chinese authorities to see how this would work in practice.
Bond said HSBC was looking at this massive potential business opportunity in the long term.
"I think it will take time, of course it will, but the signs are all positive."
He said the rise of sterling against the dollar had not had a great effect on the group's results in 1996 where the average rate for the pound against the dollar was below that of 1995.
But he said that, very roughly, for every cent the pound goes up against the dollar, the bank loses 13 million pounds in profit. ($ = 0.615 British Pounds)
