Northern Rock Building Society said on Monday that 900,000 of its members would get 500 free shares when the society floats on the stock exchange later this year.
The estimated market price of the shares will be between 260p and 295p, valuing the society at a maximum of 1.3 billion pounds ($2.1 billion).
The value of the shares will be between 1,300 and 1,475 pounds based on a valuation by the society's advisers J. P. Morgan. The flotation day is expected to be October 1.
The society has assets of 13.7 billion pounds and is the seventh largest in the country with roots going back to the 1850s.
Adam Applegarth, Northern Rock executive director, said the society could remain independent and would grow organically. "We don't plan to make any acquisitions," he said. "We have a good track record of organic growth and plan to take that forward."
Draft legislation before parliament means that converting societies which make acquisitions in the financial sector will lose their five-year protection from takeover.
The bill could become law before an election which must take place by May and is, in any case, supported by the Labour Party which is expected to form the next government.
Applegarth said the new law would hit societies which had based their conversion strategy on growth by acquisition. "Those converters who have a strategy based on acquisition are going to find life a lot harder," he said in an interview.
At a special general meeting to be held in the northeastern city of Newcastle upon Tyne on April 15, 75 percent of investing members must vote in favour of the proposal for it to go forward while a simple majority is required from borrowing members.
Newcastle-based Northern Rock said it would also pay a statutory cash bonus of around 8.8 percent of balances held in accounts on December 31, 1996 to those members who are not entitled to vote including those under 18 years of age.
Northern Rock confirmed it planned to set up a foundation to receive five percent of the company's pretax profits which would have been the equivalent of eight million pounds in 1996.
This money will be used to support charitable causes mainly, but not exclusively, in the northeast of England.
The Northern Rock Foundation has been asked to pay a donation of one million pounds to disabled charities to compensate for the loss of benefit from the flotation to those disabled members who are second-named on accounts and do not get shares. ($ = 0.615 British Pounds)
