London-based international bank HSBC Holdings Plc sees 1997 as a challenging year amid increasing competition, its chief executive John Bond said on Monday.
But Bond said HSBC's strong capital position and balance sheet makes it feel as able to compete as anyone.
"We see 1997 as a challenging year wherever we look whether it be Asia or the UK, the competition continues to increase," Bond told Reuters in an interview.
Earlier, HSBC announced a 23 percent rise in pretax profits for 1996 to 4.52 billion stg -- around the middle of market expectations -- and a hefty 9p rise in annual dividend to 41p which bettered most forecasts.
Bond said the bank's capital ratio's were strong with tier one capital rising to 9.9 percent from 9.5 percent at the end of 1995 and said he did not see surplus capital being generated.
"As long as we're making a respectable return on capital, we regard capital strength as an asset in our business," Bond said. "It helps you with the ratings, it helps with deposits in Asia and to have a strong capital position shows in the bottom line."
HSBC had a 21.3 percent return on capital in 1996 compared to 20.7 percent in 1995.
Bond said HSBC continues to be confident over the transition from British to Chinese rule of Hong Kong.
Last year, HSBC was granted a license to trade in the Chinese yuan and Bond said the bank was in talks with the Chinese authorities to see how this would work in practise.
Bond said HSBC was looking at this massive potential business opportunity in the long-term, "I think it will take time, of course it will, but the signs are all positive."
Bond said the rise of sterling against the dollar had not had a great effect on the group's results in 1996 where the average rate for the pound against the dollar was below that of 1995.
He said that, very roughly, for every cent the pound goes up against the dollar, the bank loses 13 million stg in profits.
Bond said HSBC's UK unit Midland Bank would continue to grow organically as the price of acquisitions was impossible to justify to shareholders.
Bond said the unit had put in a strong performance with pretax profits up over twenty percent and costs controlled to a rise on less than one percent.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 8864
