The Halifax Building Society's massive war chest of capital could prove to be problem as well as an opportunity after its 12 billion stg market flotation in June, analysts said on Tuesday.
Chief executive Mike Blackburn said he sees regulatory headroom for the society to boost its mortgage market share from a dominant 20 percent to around 25 percent and with a massive tier one capital ratio of 14 percent, he will have no shortage of cash with which to do it.
But analysts say this could be a double-edged sword because the market will not give the Halifax the benefit of the doubt for too long and it will have to prove that it can make the capital gear up to get a decent return on equity (ROE).
Hugh Pye, banking analyst at BZW estimates that the Halifax will have to get rid of some 3.0 billion stg of capital if it is to see its capital ratios down at a more normal eight percent.
"It's both an opportunity and a problem," Pye said. "If they go for acquisitions, the whole world will see them coming."
The Halifax, along with other major players, is already known to be balking at the price that is being asked for financial sector assets but is still very keen to bolster its long-term savings operation and its core mortgage market.
Blackburn said the Halifax would continue to target long-term savings products -- life assurance, pensions and investments -- for expansion because he believed it had strong growth potential.
"With an ageing population and governments unable to look after people as they have historically been able to do in retirement, the requirement on the private individual to provide for the long-term will be accentuated," Blackburn said.
Analysts say the Halifax will be given the chance to see what it can do but will then have to return some capital unless it can spend it either on buys or on judicious organic growth and to exploit what they see as a seriously under-utilised brand name.
The Halifax could buy back shares but that would be difficult when, after the flotation, most of the shares will be owned by individuals. It might also look a bit odd so soon after paying a lot of money to be floated.
Additionally, the tax position has changed and, as Barclays recently found out, it can be difficult to get your shareholders to part with their shares.
That leaves a massive special dividend to its new ex-member shareholders but before that happens analysts expect to see the liberated Halifax flexing its powerful muscles.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 8864.
