The Halifax Building Society, Britain's largest home loan lender, on Tuesday posted a 6.6 percent rise in pre-tax profits to 1.43 billion pounds ($2.3 billion) in 1996, the last time it will report before its stock market flotation in June.
The Halifax, which is expected to float for some 12 billion pounds after converting from mutual status, also hinted at further acquisitions to increase its 20 percent share of the total mortgage market.
Its chief executive Mike Blackburn told Reuters he saw some headroom before Britain's competition authorities became concerned.
"We do have some headroom before we would excite the attention of the OFT," Blackburn said in reference to competition watchdog the Office of Fair Trading. "We have said to ourselves that we could certainly go to 25 percent (mortgage market share) before any anti-competitive issues arise."
But Blackburn said in an interview the Halifax was not engaged in any acquisition discussions at the moment.
If more than 25 percent of a market is at stake in a proposed merger, British competition authorities usually investigate.
Blackburn said the Halifax was unlikely to want to add another mutually-owned life assurance company to its portfolio since the purchase of Clerical Medical last year had met its need for distribution of long-term savings products through Independent Financial Advisers (IFA).
Clerical Medical would be expanded and this explained the society's lack of interest in Scottish Amicable, an independent life insurer up for sale.
Blackburn said the Halifax would continue to target long-term savings products -- life assurance, pensions and investments -- for expansion because he believed they had strong growth potential.
"With an ageing population and governments unable to look after people as they have historically been able to do in retirement, the requirement on the private individual to provide for the long-term will be accentuated."
The mortgage market had returned to a more normal position in the second half of 1996, he said, following the cut-throat competition of the first half from which the Halifax largely stood aloof.
There was now much less re-mortgaging and the number of transactions was seen rising by around 10 percent in 1997. House prices are set to rise around seven percent on average but more in some areas like London.
"We are seeing regional markets like London looking strong and this is leading to a repeat of the ripple effect we have seen historically," Blackburn added.
He said prices were being squeezed by the shortage of stock on the market with the Halifax's estate agencies reporting they could sell far more houses than were coming onto the market.
The Halifax, which saw total assets grow to more than 115 billion pounds in 1966 from just under 100 billion. It's gross mortgage lending was 11.5 billion pounds, but that represented a drop in market share to 16 percent from 17 the previous year.
Net mortgage lending stood at 2.1 billion pounds and mortgage balances grew to 81 billion pounds from 78 billion at the end of 1995.
Blackburn said any apprehension that the character of the Halifax would change after its conversion from a building society owned by its members into a publicly-owned bank was misplaced.
"Customers are our key focus and if we don't provide a competitive range of products then we won't be able to please shareholders, but we have to please customers first," he added.
The Halifax said its 1996 profits were before 502 million pounds of exceptional charges, made up of 298 million pounds in reorganisation costs and 153 million for the cost of converting into a public company which members approved last month. ($ = 0.619 British Pounds)
