Britain's big banks look set to raise profits by some two billion pounds in 1997, taking the aggregate above 14 billion pounds ($22.6 billion), but volume-based revenue growth could be storing up problems, analysts said on Thursday.
The big six -- Lloyds TSB, Barclays, HSBC Holdings, National Westminster, Abbey National and Standard Chartered -- drove profits up to 12.6 billion pounds in 1996 from 10.8 billion in 1995 but analysts were still a little disappointed.
John Aitken, banking analyst at UBS, expressed concern at a loss of momentum in underlying profit growth in the second half of 1996.
"Operating profit grew by an aggregate 17 percent in 1996 but there was a worrying loss of momentum in the second half which saw growth of only 12 percent, compared to 22.5 percent in the first," Aitken said.
Aitken does not anticipate a similar dip in the first half of this year but expects the momentum to continue to be lost as banks see their margins under pressure in 1997.
"There will be downward pressure on underlying margins in 1997 but growth in higher-margin business such as credit cards and consumer finance will largely offset that," said David Poutney, banking analyst at Panmure Gordon.
But, as Aitken noted, high-margin business has high margins for a reason -- it carries a higher risk, which is likely to result in an increase in bad debt charges in years to come.
Also affecting margins in the second half of 1997 will be the end of a so-called "deposits lock-in".
Large amounts of money are currently tied up in accounts at four mutally-owned building societies which are floating on the stock exchange this year. This has meant that banks and building societies have been able to pay lower rates for deposits because the market has been less competitive than normal.
Faster loan growth of the last three years will also mean that bad debt charges will begin to edge higher this year.
Analysts see even greater pressure on margins in 1998 when the lock-in effect is over.
While many sectors would be keen to have the "problems" of the banks, the warning signs look to be building up.
"All the major components of the profit and loss account are headed the wrong way," Aitken said. "The only thing that is higher is volume growth and that carries both a capital cost and a potential risk cost."
Some banks will show a sharp acceleration in pre-tax profit growth but their underlying performance will need watching, they said.
NatWest, for example, could see profits rise to two billion pounds from 1.12 billion, the latter figure heavily affected by losses associated with its sale of Bancorp, analysts forecast.
Abbey National will have a full-year contribution from National &amp; Provincial, while Lloyds TSB is expected to continue its surge, said John Leonard of Salomon Brothers.
Costs look to be fairly stable with certain major exceptions.
Barclays and NatWest will continue to spend money on their investment banking operations, which still provide low relative returns, and Standard Chartered has signalled a major boost to its investment programme, widely welcomed by analysts.
StanChart and HSBC, with their large Asia/Pacific region franchise, will continue to be dependent on those economies.
Both continue to be relaxed about the return of Hong Kong to Chinese rule. The Hong Kong economy looks to be improving after a slowdown although problems in Thailand seem set to persist, analysts said.
For the future, both banks are well placed for the potentially huge Chinese market. But they are not letting market expectactions get out of control, Leonard added. ($ = 0.620 British Pounds)
