Britain's markets watchdog banned former Barings treasury head Ian Hopkins on Tuesday from being a director in the City for at least three years for his part in the 1995 collapse of the investment bank.
In addition, the Securities and Futures Authority (SFA) ordered Hopkins to pay 10,000 pounds ($16,000) towards the SFA's costs after an independent tribunal found that he was no longer a "fit and proper person" to be a director of an SFA-regulated City firm.
Hopkins, one of nine Barings executives to have been disciplined by the SFA, has always protested that he attempted to "blow the whistle" on irregularities in the Singapore operation but that other managers ignored his warnings.
But this interpretation of his role was rejected by SFA chairman Nick Durlacher. "The facts do not support this suggestion. An impartial tribunal has scrupulously considered all the available evidence and judged (he) did not 'blow the whistle' with any clarity, force or urgency," said Durlacher.
Hopkins was ultimately responsible at Barings Investment Bank for funding the group's international activities. He provided funds to Barings's futures operation in Singapore where trader Nick Leeson ran up losses of 800 million pounds after massive unauthorised trading which led to the collapse of the bank in February 1995.
Barings, its capital spent, was put under administration and later bought by Dutch financial services company Internationale Nederlanden Groep and now trades as ING Barings.
Durlacher added that the tribunal had found that Hopkins's actions "fell far short of the standards expected of a prudent man in such a senior position". Hopkins did not offer a formal defence against the allegations but the tribunal took into account written evidence from Hopkins and others.
The SFA announced the result of its last case against a Barings manager last month when it banned James Bax for 21 months and ordered him to pay costs of 10,000 pounds.
The penalty handed out to Hopkins was at the high end of the range of those imposed on former Barings managers after the tribunal found that he failed to control or reconcile funding to Singapore, acting without "due skill, care and diligence".
Following the collapse of Barings, the SFA started proceedings against nine former senior executives but did not proceed against Peter Baring and Andrew Tuckey, chairman and deputy chairman respectively of Barings group.
The nine were former chief executive Peter Norris, Ron Baker, Bax, Geoff Broadhust, Tony Gamby, Tony Hawes, Hopkins, George Maclean and Mary Walz. The tribunal has yet to hear an appeal by Baker against the reprimand he received.
Baring and Tuckey left Barings after giving assurances that they would never again seek top management jobs in the financial markets.
Britain's Department of Trade has started legal proceedings which could ban the Barings nine plus Tuckey from being directors of any British company for up to 15 years.
The DTI is to hold preliminary hearings and then would set a timetable for a final hearing of the cases.
Norris, Tuckey, Baker, Walz, Hopkins, Gamby, Broadhurst and Bax also face writs from accountancy firm Cooper's &amp; Lybrand in third party proceedings after it was sued by Barings administrator Ernst &amp; Young for what is thought to be around one billion pounds.
