SBC Warburg, the investment banking arm of Swiss Bank Corp, said on Wednesday it had been forced to take a loss on a 300 million pound ($478 million) share deal which is being investigated by Britain's financial markets watchdog.
The deal, the liquidation of part of the Kleinwort European Privatisation Investment Trust(KEPIT), is thought to have lost SBC Warburg around two million pounds and led to the resignation of Peter Corrigan, head of French equities, who left the firm last Friday.
Britain's Securities and Futures Authority (SFA) confirmed on Wednesday that it is probing the deal.
"I can confirm that SFA is formally investigating SBC Warburg," an SFA spokesman said, adding he could make no further comment.
SBC, which announced its 1996 results on Wednesday, did not include a special provision for the loss but executive Marcel Ospel said in Basle that the bank was supporting the investigation "in every way."
An SBC Warburg spokesman told Reuters the firm  had ensured that KEPIT had not been disadvantaged as a result of a share sale.
The spokesman said that in connection with a bid for three of KEPIT's portfolios last October, "the bank sought to sell into the market" and that this had contributed to adverse price movements of the shares in the portfolios.
The fall in the share prices meant KEPIT might have received less than it had expected for the sale but SBC Warburg said it had ensured that the client did not lose out -- effectively taking the loss, thought to be around two million pounds, onto its own book.
Banking sources said the SFA investigation centred on the sharp fall of several European share prices on October, after SBC Warburg carried out the share sales for KEPIT.
The sources said SBC Warburg is denying allegations of market manipulation and is putting the loss down to an error in its attempt to hedge itself.
It appears this operation was mis-timed and Warburg was punished by the market, later agreeing to book the deal at the price which KEPIT had expected to receive.
Share markets on the day in question, October 30, 1996, were volatile after the Bank of England had raised British interest rates.
The Warburg spokesman said its compliance officials had been notified at once of the deal and had started their own internal investigation.
Sources said the SFA has a duty to investigate the background to such market events, usually as a result of being notified by one of the parties involved.
($ = 0.627 British Pounds)
