Martin Owen, under intense pressure as his NatWest Markets operation admitted a 90 million pound ($144 million) loss on derivatives trading, is at first glance an unlikely character to lead an investment bank with global aspirations.
The investment banking unit of British banking giant National Westminster Bank plc is run by a friendly, talkative man with a soft Welsh accent who trained as an accountant and takes an active role in the Salvation Army.
Doubts have persisted about NatWest's investment banking strategy which has expanded aggressively in the last 18 months through several acquisitions which some analysts have criticised as too expensive.
The big spending has included major expansion in the United States with the purchase of Greenwich Capital, a bond trading house, for $590 million and mergers and acquisitions specialist Gleacher for $135 million.
But by all accounts, Owen, 49, has made a good job of bringing the disparate parts of NatWest Markets together although, like its investment banking peers, this has meant a big rise in costs with more to come.
Some market observers say Owen does have difficulty with the mergers and acquisitions side of the business.
His background would support this view as Owen came to the top via NatWest's treasury and capital markets operations.
After working for American company Dow Corning Corp in Wales, Owen joined Welsh independent TV company HTV before starting his own accountancy and insurance business which he sold in 1979.
Three years of full-time work for the Salvation Army followed although Owen did manage to squeeze in an external doctorate in, ironically enough, risk management from the University of Southern California.
Thus qualified for the financial markets, Owen joined NatWest in 1983 only pausing for a short stint as a financial supervisor in the Isle of Man.
Analysts do not doubt Owen's ability to make the business bigger but they do question the wisdom of trying to emulate the big Wall Street investment banks.
Even under 1996's relatively favourable market conditions, NatWest Markets profits rose by 158 million pounds to 462 million. But when a big 96 million drop in provisions is taken into account, the 62 million pounds left have been more than wiped out by the options loss.
Owen, who has headed NatWest Markets since 1992, appears genuinely shocked that the options problem could have begun as long ago as the end of 1994.
"That is clearly unacceptable against the background of incidents at other firms as well," Owen said on Thursday. "Fortunately it does seem to be isolated to this area."
Some would say that fortune should not really come into the equation but at least these losses -- 77 million pounds after provisions and bonus cuts are taken into account -- are dwarfed by those posted by Deutsche Morgan Grenfell or Barings.
Owen will perhaps sleep more soundly after NatWest Group chief executive Derek Wanless expressed his confidence in him.
Wanless told Reuters in an interview that he had complete confidence in Owen, who will give up 200,000 pounds of a 500,000 pound bonus because of the options affair.
"It is a set-back for Martin in one area. We'll learn a lot from it, get those lessons put into practice and that will make us much stronger," Wanless said.
($ = 0.626 British Pounds)
