Britain's takeover watchdog on Friday handed out its strongest sanction to BZW, investment banking arm of Barclays Bank, over its conduct of a bid defence for Northern Electric last year.
The Takeover Panel "criticised" BZW for failing to disclose all the relevant facts, including a performance fee, during hearings over the conduct of the deal last December.
"This is the strongest sanction the panel can take and there is no further action intended," Alistair Defriez, director general of the panel told Reuters. "We have no power to impose a fine."
BZW said it was pleased that the Panel had found it had not deliberately concealed the performance fee and that there was no suggestion that the fee was an inducement for BZW to buy Northern shares which would have been in breach of the Code on Takeovers and Mergers.
The case stemmed from a 782 million pound ($1.2 billion) bid for regional electricity company Northern by CE Electric, a unit of CalEnergy Co Inc of the U.S. which proved to be hotly contested and the result extremely close.
Northern failed in its defence against CE, after the British company lost an appeal to the panel to reverse an extension of the offer period which enabled CE to narrowly win the bid.
The offer extension came after CE raised concerns about the purchase of Northern Electric shares by its advisers British merchant bank Schroders and BZW and a discretionary payment of 250,000 pounds to BZW which was a performance fee.
Northern in turn launched its own appeal against the extension of the deadline because at the time of the first cut-off date, CE had fallen short of the total needed to win.
But the panel finally ruled against Northern and BZW was heavily criticised in the press for effectively losing the bid for its client.
On Friday, the panel said it accepted that BZW had not deliberately concealed the fee but that the firm recognised that it should have considered the fee relevant to the panel's deliberations.
The criticism of BZW comes hot on the heels of a 90 million pound derivatives loss at its rival NatWest Markets and is bound to rekindle discussion of the conduct of British investment banks.
BZW has consistently defended its actions, saying that the performance fee was not based on the outcome of the bid and had nothing to do with its relatively unusual plan to aid the defence by purchasing nearly 20 million pounds worth of Northern shares.
But insiders accept that BZW made errors of judgement that undoubtedly led to Northern losing its independence. ($ = 0.627 British Pounds)
