Just when they thought their strategy had been accepted by the market, British banks which are heavily involved in investment banking, are seeing their policy fundamentally questioned again.
Barclays and NatWest, who both have aspirations to build global investment banks to compete with the "bulge-bracket" Wall Street firms, have had a tough month.
First, BZW, the Barclays unit, posted a massive 29 percent fall in profits for 1996 -- a year which, especially in the bond markets, saw large profits for the big American houses.
Barclays' chief executive Martin Taylor, who has staked a lot on dragging BZW into the top league, vigorously defended the large cash injection into the investment bank.
"You have to be careful not to be frightened of your own shadow," he told Reuters in an interview last month. "The reason that the returns are depressed this year is that we're spending so much," adding that BZW would be weaker without the investment.
Taylor has brought in some big and expensive names, like Bill Harrison of Flemings, to lead BZW through its next development stage but the markets may be running out of patience.
Meanwhile, at NatWest Markets, which has followed an acquisitive strategy over the past year, reputation and morale has suffered a direct hit from a stunning 90 million pound ($142.8 million) loss on derivatives.
This laid bare problems of control in what had been considered a tight ship steered by chief executive Martin Owen.
Owen has publicly admitted that the affair has holed NatWest Markets but only "above the waterline".
Its strategy was already being questioned before the derivatives debacle in much the same terms as that of BZW -- that it was buying units to bolt onto its core at the height of the market cycle.
Compared to banks like Lloyds TSB, firmly entrenched in a UK bancassurance strategy, analysts question how investment banking will add to shareholder value.
Panmure Gordon banking analyst David Poutney has described the banks' commitment to investment banking as "lemming-like" and the returns from the business as "paltry".
Analysts are dismayed at the commitment to cost growth in the investment banks but have been reassured that both are making continuing strides in restructuring and reprofiling their retail business though this is likely to become even more fiercely competitive in the near-term,.
At the moment, the jury still seems to be out but one analyst, who declined to be named, said the market will probably give BZW and NatWest Markets a couple of years to start showing what they can do.
The danger is that the market cycle could be against them.
"They have taken on a lot of staff and invested and acquired at the top of the cycle," the analyst said. "If the market correction which people have been predicting happens in the second half of this year it will mean that profits will be hard to come by in 1997 and 1998."
Already, rumours circulate that Barclays is looking to unload BZW and concentrate on improving the already highly respectable return produced by the retail banking side. But the bank dismisses this talk.
However, Panmure's Poutney said in a recent note, "(A sale or demerger) would be massively bullish, and cynics who share our view should buy the shares."
After nailing their colours so firmly to the investment banking mast, Taylor and Wanless would have a lot of explaining to do if they came, belatedly, to the same conclusion that Lloyds TSB chairman Sir Brian Pitman has been expounding for years.
Pitman has never liked the cyclical nature of investment banking profits and has presided over a stunning performance by Lloyds TSB which has better returns than any UK retail bank.
"Soon, people are going to demand a pay-back from all this investment," said another banking analyst. "When that happens, there had better be some good answers or the market will not like it." ($ = 0.630 British Pounds)
