Interest rates on British home loans may rise this year due to upward pressure on savings rates, even if a new government does not immediately tighten monetary policy, analysts said on Thursday.
This is a separate issue from the question of whether the government should raise interest rates to nip inflation in the bud after the general election on May 1, they said.
The flotation of four building societies and the takeover of another will free as much as 140 billion pounds ($225 billion) of savings locked in nearly 30 million accounts in the societies, which provide home mortages.
This is around 25 percent of British retail savings and analysts expect a good proportion of this to be moved.
"I expect 15 billion pounds to be moved as a conservative estimate," said UBS building societies analyst Rob Thomas. "The effect will be to push up savings rates and, since mortgage lending is largely funded from savings, mortgage margins will come under pressure and rates may rise."
Halifax, Britain's largest mortgage lender with 20 percent of the market; Woolwich ; Alliance &amp; Leicester and Northern Rock are ending their mutual society status and floating on the stock market.
Savers had to deposit money in these building societies to qualify for free shares. But once the societies have floated, savers can move their money where they want.
The societies will have to fight hard to keep hold of the money as other institutions such as Abbey National and Cheltenham &amp; Gloucester, part of the Lloyds TSB Group want to grab a big chunk of the cash.
Analysts expect a fair proportion of the money to flow into pure spending or to other financial products such as unit trusts. But they also expect a large amount to be up for grabs within the savings and loan industry.
On Wednesday, Abbey National, which converted to bank status and floated in 1990, pointedly noted that much of the money can already be moved as members have already qualified for shares.
The Bradford &amp; Bingley Building Society, proclaiming its continued mutual ownership, said it would effectively raise savings rates and cut mortgage rates.
Thomas of UBS said the spread between mortgage rates and base rated was low historically following mortgage rate cuts in 1995 which outstripped an easing base rate.
Pressure on savings rates could trigger a rise for borrowers if institutions want to maintain margin which has already been difficult to do. "This might even result in a round of mortgage rate rises not associated with a base rate rise," Thomas said.
David Poutney, banking analyst at Panmure Gordon expects the situation to be an opportunity for banks such as Abbey National. "While competitive pressure will increase, the freeing up of the market will increase new business opportunities for the likes of the Abbey," he said. ($ = 0.624 British Pounds)
