Prudential Corp Plc on Tuesday beat off rivals to win control of mutually-owned insurance group Scottish Amicable and reinforced its position as Britain's number one fund manager.
By beating bids from Abbey National Plc and Australian Mutual Provident (AMP), Prudential's takeover of ScotAm will raise its funds to more than 100 billion pounds ($160 billion).
Prudential shares rose as analysts saw the company as deriving strategic and earnings benefits from the deal. At 1315 GMT, Pru was up 17 pence at 557p. "Pru has not gone crazy and paid a stupid price," said Michael Lindsay, analyst at Lehman Brothers. "The acquisition looks to be earnings neutral in the first year and enhancing thereafter."
ScotAm said with-profits policyholders would benefit from cash and additional policy benefits worth more than 1.5 billion pounds ($2.4 billion).
These include 600 million pounds from Prudential shareholders' and policyholders' funds in compensation for loss of membership rights and a special bonus from ScotAm's life fund worth 470 million pounds which will go into policies.
In addition, the entire remaining ScotAm life fund will be distributed, estimated to have a current value of 500 million pounds. On this basis, ScotAm with profits policy holders should receive total benefits of around 1,400 pounds, varying according to the size and age of the policy. Policyholders will also benefit from financial support to the tune of 1.3 billion pounds to boost ScotAm's life fund which will be closed.
ScotAm's original plan was to end its mutual status  and float on the stock exchange in two or three years time. But the plan was thrown into confusion after Abbey National made a bid for the firm last month.
The injection into the life fund had probably clinched its bid for the mutually-owned life company, Prudential chief executive Sir Peter Davis told Reuters. "Our offer used the strength of our balance sheet and the Prudential life fund," Davis said in an interview. "We've put together an imaginative structure with the key difference being the capital injection or support we've offered of up to 1.3 billion pounds to the (ScotAm) life fund."
Davis said the boost to ScotAm's fund -- the company will be run as a completely separate entity under the Prudential umbrella -- will mean that it will be able to have a more flexible investment policy. This could include a greater proportion of investments in equities and higher returns.
The 1.3 billion pound investment comes from Prudential's life fund, which totals 51 billion pounds, and will be provided to ScotAm at a commercial rate.
The merger, creating Scottish Amicable Life, is subject to the approval of policyholders at a special general meeting to be held in June. The proposals will be subject to a 75 percent vote in favour by eligible members.
Davis said ScotAm will develop more successfully with Prudential's capital backing and is expected to show a larger rate of growth.
Roy Nicolson, managing director of ScotAm, told Reuters that the Prudential's offer of high up-front payments plus a reversionary bonus added to the capital support had swung the auction in Prudential's favour.
He said the new capital would allow greater investment in equities, providing the opportunity for better returns for policyholders in the future. Prudential's strong investment track record had also been a major factor.
"We're very excited about the business going forward," Nicolson said. "We'll be able to expand our presence dramatically particularly in the IFA (independent financial adviser) market." Nicolson said the deal would remove any doubt about ScotAm's financial strength. He said Prudential had pledged to maintain the number of jobs in the ScotAm head office for three years. Talks were already underway about the possibility of using the expertise in ScotAm's investment management arm in Prudential Portfolio managers. Nicolson said it was far too early to know if there would be job losses outside the head office ($ = 0.627 British Pounds)
