British insurance and asset management giant Prudential Corp Plc on Wednesday beat analysts' forecasts with an eight percent rise in first half profits to 421.0 million pounds ($655 million).
Prudential chief executive Peter Davis said the company wanted to buy a home loan lender to build its customer base but he refused to be drawn on which building society, if any, the Prudential was talking to.
"We are interested in buying a building society but for its branch network and its customer base rather than its mortgage book," Davis said in an interview.
The Prudential, which next month will launch a telephone banking business, raised its interim dividend by 9.4 percent to 5.8 pence per share.
The first-half data included 33 million pounds of start-up costs for the new banking operation, which chief executive Peter Davis said was on course for launch on October 1.
Davis said the life insurance business was benefiting from a general upturn in consumer confidence in Britain.
"Customers are feeling a little more confident and are more willing to make commitments."
But Davis noted that single contribution products were still showing far more growth than those that require a longer-term commitment or regular contributions.
Prudential's single contribution sales rose by 50 percent in the first half of the year compared with a gain of 15 percent for regular contribution sales.
Davis said the personal pensions industry had still not completely thrown off the stigma of a private pensions scandal in the late 1980s and early 1990s, but he said consumers were starting to realise they must make adequate pension provision.
Prudential said funds under management had risen by four percent since the end of 1995 to 85 billion pounds. Profit from this business rose to 14 million pounds from eight million in the first half of last year.
Davis hoped there would be no lasting knock-on effect on the fund management industry from recent events at Morgan Grenfell Asset Management (MGAM), but said the affair was sure to make investors look closely at the standing of the institution with which they have their money invested.
"It's likely to be a swings and roundabouts thing," Davis said. "There will probably be a general loss of confidence but we will also see some flight to quality and security."
MGAM last week suspended three of its unit trust funds for three days after the discovery of alleged irregularities but trade resumed after a casj injection from the company's German parent Deutsche Bank. ($1=.6430 Pound)
