British insurance and asset management company Prudential Corp Plc said on Wednesday it is interested in buying a building society but chief executive Peter Davis refused to be drawn on the names in the frame.
"We are interested in buying a building society but for its branch network and its customer base rather than its mortgage book," Davis told Reuters in an interview.
Davis was speaking after Prudential raised first half operating profit, a measure it prefers to pre-tax profit, by 8.0 percent to 421 million stg compared to 390 million last time.  
Davis said he would not comment on any specific names that have been linked to Prudential which have recently included Lloyds Abbey Life, currently controlled by LLoyds TSB Plc.
But industry sources say it is extremely unlikely that the Prudential would be interested in Lloyds Abbey.
Davis was upbeat about the prospects of the Prudential's telephone banking operation which is launched on October 1 and will see its direct sales force selling products like mortgages to its existing customer base.  
Customers will also be introduced to the company's deposit products.
The start-up has cost the Prudential around 33 million stg which was included as a charge in the calculation of operating profit.
Davis said that Prudential's funds under management have risen by four percent since the end of 1995 to 85 billion stg while profit rose to 14 million stg from eight million in the first half of last year.  
Davis hoped there would be no lasting knock-on effect on the fund management industry from recent events at Morgan Grenfell Asset Management but said the affair was sure to make investors look closely at the standing of the institution with which they have their money invested.
"It's likely to be a swings and roundabouts thing," Davis said. "There will probably be a general loss of confidence but we will also see some flight to quality and security."
Davis said the Prudential's insurance business was benefiting from a general upturn in consumer confidence in the UK.  
"Customers are feeling a little more confident and are more willing to make commitments," Davis said.
But he noted that single contribution products were still showing far more growth than those where a longer-term commitment or regular contributions have to be made.
Illustrating this, the Prudential's single contribution sales rose by 50 percent in the first half of the year compared to a gain of 15 percent for regular contribution sales.
Davis said the personal pensions industry had still not completely thrown off the stigma of the pensions mis-selling scandal but he said consumers were starting to realise more that they must make adequate pension provisions.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 8864
