Royal Bank of Scotland has seen its corporate and institutional banking (CIB) unit show good growth in recent years using a strategy which rejects any idea of competing in the increasingly crowded investment banking world.
Its managing director Iain Robertson told Reuters in an interview that CIB now produces some 30 percent of the banks profits, a figure expected to rise to around 40 percent.
"We are not an investment bank and we're not a securities house," Robertson said, "and frankly, I don't have the billion pounds that I would actually have to spend to become one, nor have I any desire to do so."
Royal Bank's strategy contrasts with some others which have been devoting large amounts of capital, investment and other resources in fully-fledged investment banking with, to say the least, questionable returns.
Royal Bank's success has been based on its traditional features which have been updated by Robertson who insists that it will persist along its current profitable line.
CIB has seen those profits rise to 207 million stg last year from 43 million in 1991 and they are expected by analysts to rise again in the 1996/97 results to be announced soon.
These figures produce a return of over 20 percent on risk adjusted equity -- highly respectable and a lot better than some higher profile investment banking operations.
Since October 1 last year, Royal Bank has been running all of its corporate relationships, big and small in CIB whereas previously only large corporates, financial institutions and companies with a turnover of over 100 million stg, were grouped there.
The transfer of small and medium corporates will immediately raise CIB's share of profits of the group to 40 percent and Robertson sees this staying fairly stable given that the retail side will also grow.
The move to bring in the small and medium corporate sectors into CIB stemmed from the fact that Royal Bank's retail operation has developed a much stronger personal focus in the last few years and managers perceived that the smaller corporate customers no longer identified with the retail side.
Robertson, a Glaswegian who came to Royal Bank after being deputy chief executive at County NatWest, the forerunner of NatWest Markets, is delighted that, in the homogenous world of modern banking, CIB has some "unique" features to offer.
He said Royal Bank was well known among its clients for having probably the shortest management lines in the business and has brought in staff with a big diversity of experience outside banking.
"In areas like property, we have brought in professionals who know the terms and conditions of property investment -- what will stick and what will not stick."
Robertson says he wanted CIB to be the leading independent provider of corporate banking services in the UK.
"We have no axe to grind in terms of providing equity or securities or anything else. We will tell them what we think they can achieve in the debt markets and we'll put our corporate reputation behind what we say," he added.
CIB's major business groupings are Treasury and Capital Markets including foreign exchange; bond sales; securitisation, Structured Finance, which includes syndicated loans; project finance; and credit trading and Risk Finance which includes acquisition finance and development capital and Trust Bank which is substantial investor services business.
The group has main offices in Edinburgh and Manchester as well as London.
Robertson said the bank wanted to develop its niche products outside the UK possibly with joint ventures such as that in project finance with Banco Santander in South America.
Royal Bank has a high quality book of around $1.0 billion in the US but sees little opportunity for indigenous major growth.
In the core business, he also sees the opportunity to grab market share from competitors by adopting the same strategy seen in its large corporate business of cross-selling products.
