News that HSBC Holdings is to follow its recent Mexican investment by dipping a rather bigger toe in Brazilian waters was greeted with enthusiasm by analysts tinged only with the caution that the words "Latin America" still engender.
But they recognised that the economic and political strides made by the major countries in Latin America -- Mexico, Argentina and Brazil and in the smaller economies like Chile, Peru and Ecuador -- make the continent a hotbed of opportunity.
"It's a large and growing market where a well-run bank with a large franchise can make money," said one analyst.
HSBC's purchase of Bamerindus has involved the London-based banking giant which has major interests in the UK, Asia and the U.S., in spending 1.0 billion reais ($945 million) in a move which came after the Brazilian central bank closed the loss-making Bamerindus down.
Of this amount, 400 million reais has been paid out on goodwill, infrastructure and other intangible assets.
Douglas Flint, HSBC's finance director, told Reuters in an interview that the money had been paid in cash and denied speculation that the transaction had included any form of discounted Brazilian debt paper.
He said Banco HSBC Bamerindus, as it now known, will take the assets that it wants from the old bank with the rest remaining with the shell.
Flint said Bamerindus would be expanded but would first have to be re-established following the liquidity problems which had dogged it. He said it would be bold to predict when the investment would prove to be positive for HSBC's earnings but added that this was unlikely to be beyond the short-term.
Among few concerns expressed by London analysts was the durability of Brazil's economic and political stability and the quality of management HSBC could count on at Bamerindus.
Flint said the question of management was the first thing HSBC had addressed, already putting in 50 executives.
"We have got managers and executives who have experience of taking on many-branched operations with large workforces, instilling our operating practices and culture and making a success of it," Flint said, adding that HSBC had given no guarantees on staffing.
The buy is seen as typical for HSBC which has made a speciality of buying in what might be termed opportunistic circumstances. Analysts say this was the case with its purchase of Hang Seng Bank in the Sixties, the UK's Midland Bank and Marine Midland in the U.S.
Last month, HSBC paid around $300 million for a 19.9 percent stake in Mexico's Grupo Financiero Serfin, another previously loss-making institution, and has involvement in Chile, Argentina, Panama and Peru.
Analysts say that a few years ago, Latin America did not seem central to HSBC's strategy but the improving macro-economic and political climate coupled with the continent's growing ties with HSBC's heartland in the Pacific Rim have made the bank reconsider its strategy.
"We are very bullish on Brazil both as an economy and in terms of banking profitability," said Nick Collier, banking analyst at Morgan Stanley. "It's a growth market with a highly bankable population."
Analysts agreed that for a country of its size and population Brazil is under-banked and its history of economic mismanagement has meant that banks are little trusted and general poorly run with the major exception of its largest private bank Bradesco which posted record profits in 1996.
Even Britain's conservative Lloyds TSB Group is expanding its interests in Brazil. It recently bought the consumer finance business of its 50 percent-owned associate Banco Multiplic and is known to be cautiously weighing up further overseas expansion.
This desire may stem from the fact that margins in domestic banking are likely to come under increasing pressure in a market which many regard as over-populated and which, if anything, is likely to become even more so with ever more institutions aggressively chasing the same type of business.
"Around the world, financial markets are consolidating and new competitive threats are arising from non-traditional participants in those markets," said HSBC chairman Sir William Purves recently.
That's just how some Brazilian banks must be feeling this week.
($ = 1.058 Brazilian Reais)
