British insurance and financial services company Legal &amp; General Plc on Thursday posted a larger-than-expected rise in operating profit to 134.3 million pounds ($208.9 million) after 111.1 million in the first half of last year.
The insurer also weighed in with a 13.6 percent rise in its interim dividend to 8.75p per share after 7.7p last time.
Legal &amp; General said it could also benefit from the recent investment management problems at Morgan Grenfell Asset Management (MGAM).
Chief executive David Prosser told Reuters he did not expect the negative impact of the debacle at MGAM, a unit of Deutsche Bank, to be very great.
"I don't think there will be much (negative impact)," Prosser said. "It's a well-regulated market and IMRO will make sure investors don't lose out."
The Investment Management Regulatory Organisation has launched an enquiry into how investment funds at MGAM were managed following their temporary suspension last week after MGAM said it had found possible irregularities.
Prosser added that Legal and General could actually benefit.
"We could have some benefit," Prosser said. "We are a strong company with a triple-A (credit) rating, one of the few life houses to have one."
He added that, given Legal &amp; General's strong brand name, it could see some positive backlash from the affair.
Prosser said the first half results had been achieved in a market which remains highly competitive.
"The strong increase in new business, especially in life and pensions income, enhances the group's future profit potential."
The company's pre-tax profit was inflated to 1.51 billion pounds compared with 119.1 million last time by changes in reporting standards as required by a European Union directive.
The figure for the first half of this year includes 1.402 billion pounds reclassified from its shareholders' retained capital within its UK long-term fund.
The operating result was at the high end of analysts' forecasts and the dividend higher than expected and L&amp;G shares stood 16.5 pence higher at 745p per share by 1000 GMT.
Looking to the future, Prosser reiterated that growth by acquisition does not form part of Legal &amp; General's strategy.
"I would never say "never" but an acquisition is not part of the strategy," Prosser said.
He said Legal &amp; General's strategy consists of organic growth from multi-channel selling approach which, in turn, is based on good value for money products and advice-based selling.
"The strategy is not dependent on buying anyone or merging with anyone," Prosser added.
Prosser said second half trading had continued the good results but noted that the very good performance of the company's bulk annuity business is unlikely to be repeated in the second six months.
L&amp;G said it would perform a five-for-two share split of its ordinary shares subject to shareholder approval, which a spokeman said was being done to aid market liquidity. ($1=.6430 Pound)
