McDonald's Corp. said Tuesday it created a new position of chairman of its U.S. operations, in a move analysts said was sparked by intense competition and soft sales from existing stores in the domestic market.
McDonald's named Jack Greenberg, 54, to the new post of chairman, McDonald's U.S.A. He remains vice chairman of the Oak Brook, Ill.-based company, but will relinquish the chief financial officer post.
Greenberg will continue to report to Michael Quinlan, McDonald's chairman.
"The signal they are trying to send is, 'we clearly recognise that we have problems in the U.S. and we are going to do something about it'," NatWest Securities analyst Damon Brundage said of Greenberg's appointment.
Reflecting the mature and intensely competitive U.S. market, analysts said they expected McDonald's third-quarter same store sales will be down compared with a year ago. Same store data measure sales from units open at least a year.
"They have not had a single positive month in the U.S. this year," Brundage said of its same store sales. McDonald's does not disclose its same store sales.
"Margins have been under pressure for over a year in the U.S.," added Schroder Wertheim analyst Wayne Daniels.
Greenberg's new post indicates that McDonald's was not pleased with the direction of its domestic business, Daniels said. "They are trying to shake things up and put a little more focus on being aggressive in responding to the competition," he added.
The company has been introducing new offerings such as its Arch Deluxe hamburger earlier this year and the recent launch of Deluxe Grilled Chicken, Fish Filet and Crispy Chicken sandwiches.
McDonald's said Greenberg's appointment was aimed at strengthening U.S. management.
"While these changes are evolutionary, they will bring more management firepower where we need it, both for the short and long-term," Quinlan said in a statement.
As part of the management changes, Edward Rensi, McDonald's U.S.A president, will report to Greenberg. But Greenberg was quick to say he and Rensi have a good working relationship.
"Ed and I are good friends. We work well together. He's very enthusiastic about this," Greenberg said in a telephone interview. "We all want this business to do well."
Despite the pressure in the United States, McDonald's international business, which accounts for more than half of its operating income, continues to be strong, analysts said.
"International is a wide-open growth opportunity for McDonald's," Daniels said.
International profit growth is expected to contribute to an expected 12 percent gain in earnings for McDonald's overall in the third quarter, according to analyst estimates.
Given the intense competition between McDonald's, Wendy's International Inc. and Grand Metropolitan Plc.'s Burger King, Greenberg faces a tough job as head of the U.S. operations, analysts said.
"He is going to parachute into ... what looks to be one of the most challenging operating roles in the U.S. fast-food restaurant business," Brundage said.
Greenberg, 54, said he believed McDonald's was well positioned to compete in the domestic market.
"We've got more locations than anybody else. We've got the most powerful brand in the world... We've got the largest marketing budget. We've got enormous purchasing power," he added.
McDonald's operates more than 19,200 restaurants worldwide, including about 12,000 in the United States.
While Greenberg joined McDonald's in 1982 as chief financial officer, he said he has field experience with its restaurants. "I spent a year in the field in restaurants and became a regional manager for a year as well," Greenberg said.
In other management moves, McDonald's also named Michael Conley, currently senior vice president and controller, as chief financial officer, succeeding Greenberg.
