By strengthening its management team with the new post of chairman of its domestic business, McDonald's Corp is attempting to address head-on its problems in the intensely competitive U.S. market.
"The signal they are trying to send is, 'we clearly recognize that we have problems in the U.S. and we are going to do something about it'," NatWest Securities analyst Damon Brundage said.
Those problems include declining same store sales in the mature and intensely competitive U.S. market, analysts said.  
Analysts said they expect McDonald's third-quarter same store sales to be down compared with a year ago.
"They have not had a single positive month in the U.S. this year," Brundage said. McDonald's does not disclose same store data measuring sales from units open at least a year.
"Margins have been under pressure for over a year in the U.S.," added Schroder Wertheim analyst Wayne Daniels.
Naming Jack Greenberg, who remains vice chairman of the company, as chairman of McDonald's U.S.A. indicates the fast-food giant is not pleased with the direction of its domestic business, Daniels said.  
"They are trying to shake things up and put a little more focus on being aggressive in responding to the competition," Daniels added.
As part of the management changes, Edward Rensi, McDonald's U.S.A president, will report to Greenberg.
"Ed and I are good friends. We work well together. He's very enthusiastic about this," Greenberg said in a telephone interview. "We all want this business to do well."
Despite the pressure in the United States, McDonald's international business, which accounts for more than half of its operating income, continues to be strong, analysts said.  
"International is a wide-open growth opportunity for McDonald's," Daniels said.
Given the intense competition between McDonald's, Wendy's International Inc and Grand Metropolitan plc's Burger King, Greenberg faces a tough job as head of the U.S. operations, analysts said.
"He is going to parachute into...what looks to be one of the most challenging operating roles in the U.S. fast-food restaurant business," Brundage said.
But Greenberg, 54, said he believes McDonald's is well positioned to compete in the U.S. market. "We've got more locations than anybody else. We've got the most powerful brand in the world...We've got the largest marketing budget. We've got enormous purchasing power," he added.
McDonald's operates more than 19,200 restaurants worldwide, including about 12,000 in the United States.
While Greenberg joined McDonald's in 1982 as chief financial officer, he said he has field experience with its restaurants. "I spent a year in the field in restaurants and became a regional manager for a year as well," Greenberg said.
Reuters Chicago Newsdesk - 312-408-8787
