Monsanto Co. said Thursday it is considering several options for the future, including splitting into two separate, publicly traded corporations -- one a life sciences company and one a chemical business.
Other options being weighed by the St. Louis-based company are to sell or merge its chemical businesses with other firms or to keep the chemical operations and restructure them.
"In recent years, the strategies and needs of the chemical and life sciences businesses have become quite different," Chairman Robert Shapiro said in a statement.
Wall Street applauded the possible sale or spin-off of the chemical business, which had been expected, sending Monsanto's stock to a new 52-week high of $42.75 early in the day. The shares later traded at $42, up $1.375.
Analysts said Monsanto's life science businesses -- including agricultural chemicals, biotechnology, food additives and pharmaceuticals -- likely would have a higher valuation as a separate company than if Monsanto remained intact.
"The key here is that the chemical business does not have the growth potential as the ag-biotech and the ag-chemical and the drug component could," NatWest Securities analyst Mark Wiltamuth said.
Monsanto Chief Economist Nicholas Filippello said in a telephone interview that no options for the chemical operations had been ruled out.
He added that a decision was expected to be made as soon as possible, but did not give a timeframe. "As soon as practical," he said.
Monsanto had been expected to shed its chemical businesses, which are affected by economic cycles and the price of commodity raw materials, since the sale late last year of its worldwide styrenics plastics business.
In recent months, it has been the strength of Monsanto's agricultural business that has propelled the stock upward.
Spinning off the chemical businesses as a separate company was the option that most analysts favoured, since it would not have the tax implication of an outright sale.
"I would say the chances of keeping it (chemicals) and restructuring it are pretty slim," Dain Bosworth analyst Bonnie Wittenburg said.
The chemical businesses that may be sold or spun off include nylon and acrylic fibers, Saflex plastic interlayer, which is sold to glass manufacturers, and speciality chemicals.
"The chemical operations ... would be very viable as a standalone company," said NatWest analyst Andrew Cash.
Cash said Monsanto's acrylic fiber, nylon and Saflex businesses have limited competition in the United States and very favourable cost structures.
"It would be a focused company with good technology ... and a lot of interest in the assets from a stock market perspective, if they choose to spin it off," Cash said.
However, agricultural chemicals would remain as one of the crown jewels of the life sciences division.
Monsanto's popular Roundup weed killer is key to Monsanto's agricultural biotechnology business. The company has developed crops that are genetically altered to resist Roundup.
The life science operations also would include food additives and Monsanto's G.D. Searle pharmaceutical division. In a recent report, NatWest said it expected Monsanto to keep Searle, which some analysts previously thought would be sold.
In 1995 Monsanto's chemical sales of $3.69 billion accounted for about 40 percent of the company's total sales of $8.96 billion. The chemical businesses' operating profit of $357 million was 30 percent of the total profit of $1.17 billion.
In contrast, agricultural profit of $523 million accounted for nearly 45 percent of the total.
