Shedding its chemical businesses would leave Monsanto Co as a pure play in the high-growth life sciences area with attractive agricultural biotechnology and pharmaceutical holdings.
"This entity is likely to (have) a higher valuation by itself than with the chemical businesses intact," NatWest Securities analyst Mark Wiltamuth said Thursday.
"The key here is that the chemical business does not have the growth potential as the ag biotech and the ag chemical and the drug component could," he added.  
Earlier, Monsanto said it might spin off its chemical businesses, sell or merge them with other companies, or keep and restructure the operations.
The news sent the stock up 1-3/8 at 42 at mid-day, after setting a new 52-week high of 42-3/4.
"It has become increasingly clear, especially over the last couple of years, that the directions and the needs of the life sciences businesses and the chemical businesses were quite different," Nicholas Filippello, Monsanto chief economist, said in a telephone interview. "We feel that we are doing this from a position of strength."  
Analysts said the St. Louis-based company had been expected to shed its chemical businesses since the sale late last year of its worldwide stryrenics plastics business.
"I would say the chances of keeping it (chemicals) and restructuring it are pretty slim," said Dain Bosworth analyst Bonnie Wittenburg.
The chemical businesses that may be sold or spun off include nylon and acrylic fibers, Saflex plastic interlayer that is sold to glass manufacturers, and specialty chemicals.
"The chemical operations...would be very viable as a stand alone company," NatWest analyst Andrew Cash said.  
Cash said Monsanto's acrylic fiber, nylon and Saflex businesses have limited competition in the United States and very favorable cost structures.
"It would be a focused (chemical) company with good technology...and a lot of interest in the assets from a stock market perspective if they choose to spin it off," Cash added.
Agricultural chemicals would remain as one of the crown jewels of the life sciences division, analysts said.
Agricultural chemicals, including Roundup herbicide, is key to Monsanto's agricultural biotechnology. The company has developed crops that are genetically altered to resist the use of Roundup in the fields to kill weeds.
The life science operations also would include food additives and the G.D. Searle pharmaceutical division. In a recent report, NatWest said it expected Monsanto to keep Searle, which some analysts previously thought would be sold.
While Monsanto is expected to spin off or sell its chemical operations, rather than keep and restructure them, Filippello said all options are being studied. He added that a decision is expected soon, but did not give a timeframe.
"As soon as is practical," he added.
Reuters Chicago Newsdesk - 312-408-8787
