Archer Daniels Midland Co's $100 million agreement with the U.S. Justice Department will likely have minimal financial impact on the agribusiness giant, which has about $1.3 billion on hand.
"This is not going to affect their balance sheet in any meaningful way," said NatWest Securities analyst David Nelson.
But the settlement leaves unclear for the moment the fate of two top ADM executives, who had been expected to face indictments in a nearly four-year antitrust investigation into lysine, citric acid and high fructose corn syrup.  
ADM had said in a proxy statement in advance of its October 17 annual meeeting that indictments in the lysine probe were being considered against the company, Michael Andreas, vice chairman, and Terrance Wilson, a group vice president in charge of corn refining.
A government source, however, said the investigation is "ongoing."
ADM did not return a phone call requesting comment on the status of possible indictments against the executives. The Justice Department declined comment.  
"That's intriguing, that there is no mention (of) the individuals," said antitrust attorney Joe Sims, a partner in the Washington office of Jones, Day, Reavis &amp; Pogue. Sims is not involved in the ADM antitrust case.
While the $100 million in fines is a record for Justice in an antitrust case, analysts said ADM has an estimated $1.3 billion in cash, cash equivalents and short-term and marketable securities. The company has another $1.1 billion in long-term marketable securities.
ADM agreed to pay $70 million to settle antitrust charges for lysine and $30 million for citric acid.  
Beyond those two products, the settlement also puts an end to Justice's antitrust probe of high fructose corn syrup, a widely used sweetener. ADM did not pay any fines for this product, which posed the largest potential liability given the size of that market.
Previously, ADM settled civil cases brought by its customers and agreed to pay $25 million for lysine, a feed additive, and $35 million for citric acid, which is used in food and beverages.
A civil case brought by a class of high fructose corn syrup customers is pending.  
"The important news here is just that the criminal investigation is behind them," Dain Bosworth analyst Bonnie Wittenburg said.
The fate of Michael Andreas, son of Chairman Dwayne Andreas, is not expected to impact succession at the Decatur, Ill.-based company.
Piper Jaffray analyst George Dahlman said analysts have ruled Michael Andreas out for the chairman's post since he has been expected to face price-fixing charges.
In an interview in January, however, Dwayne Andreas said he believed there were eight people who could possibly succeed him some day, including his son. He said at the time there was no current succession plan at ADM.
The stock market reacted positively to the settlement, sending ADM's stock up 3/4 to a new 52-week high of 21-3/8. ADM's stock has also been bolstered in recent weeks by lower corn prices that have improved its grain-processing margins.
Reuters Chicago Newsdesk - 312-408-8787
