A federal judge Tuesday accepted Archer Daniels Midland Co.'s price-fixing guilty plea and ordered it pay $100 million in fines, but the action did not put an end to the scandal at the farm products giant.
Shortly before U.S. District Court Judge Ruben (corrects from Rueben) Castillo accepted ADM's guilty plea to two counts of price fixing, U.S. Justice Department officials in Washington said they were continuing their investigation of two company officials.A "This is not a good day for corporate America," Castillo said in accepting the company's guilty pleas and confirming separate fines of $70 million and $30 million -- by far the largest ever in a price-fixing case.
The judge said he recognised that some parties might criticise the fines as being too low, but said he believed they would serve as a deterrant to any company that is tempted to fix prices.
"No American company is above the law," Castillo said.
Under the plea agreement Castillo accepted, ADM will pay a $70 million fine for fixing prices of lysine, a feed additive, and $30 million for fixing prices on citric acid, an additive used in food, beverages and other products.
Earlier in Washington, Deputy Assistant Attorney General Gary Spratling said federal authorities were still gathering evidence in the case involving two ADM officials, Vice Chairman Michael Andreas, and Terrance Wilson, a vice president in charge of ADM's corn refining division.
Attorney General Janet Reno, who joined Spratling at a news conference, also said the settlement should send a message worldwide to corporations that if they engage in collusive behaviour that hurts U.S. consumers, "there will be vigorous investigation and tough, tough penalties."
U.S. Attorney James Burns of the Northern District of Illinois said that under the agreement, Archer Daniels officials are required to cooperate with the Justice Department in its ongoing investigation.
"You should stay tuned," said Burns. "There will be more to come."
The company, meanwhile, said its profits plunged in the latest quarter after it took a $174.4 million charge related to the fines and other litigation settlements arising from the lysine and citric acid cases.
ADM said its net income for the three months ended Sept. 30 fell to $3.6 million, or 1 cent a share, from $163.1 million, or 29 cents a share.
The company's stock was unchanged at $21.625 in late trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
