Archer Daniels Midland Co., which pleaded guilty to price fixing this week, will face tough criticism at its October 17 annual meeting from shareholders seeking to make ADM's board more independent.
"There needs to be dramatic reform at this company, at...both the board and the management level," said Edward Durkin, director of special programmes at the United Brotherhood of Carpenters.
The carpenters union is among four institutional shareholders pressing for changes in ADM's board.
Despite the settlement with the U.S. Justice Department, including the payment of $100 million in fines, corporate governance issues remain at ADM, according to Jon Lukomnik, New York City deputy controller for pensions.
"I think people are looking at this (the Justice settlement) as if it's the last scene in a five-act play. It is not," Lukomnik said.
Going forward, Lukomnik said he is looking for ADM to, over time, enact steps to make its board more independent and to set a succession plan for the eventual retirement of Chairman Dwayne Andreas, aged 78.
The chairman's son, Vice Chairman Michael Andreas, is among two executives still being investigated by the Justice Department as the price-fixing probe continues. Also being investigated is ADM Group Vice President Terrance Wilson.
"Dwayne Andreas is not young. A person they were grooming to be a successor is the target of an investigation," Lukomnik said, referring to Michael Andreas, who had been seen in the past as a possible successor to the chairman's post.
As previously reported, a shareholder proposal calling for a more independent board at ADM is garnering a significant number of votes.
The California Public Employees Retirement System (CalPERS) said earlier a survey of votes cast thus far indicated that 47 percent are in favour of that measure.
CalPERS co-sponsored the proposal with the Florida Retirement System Trust Fund.
"Our primary focus is the proposal," Brad Pacheco, a spokesman for CalPERS said. "But i think we also need to see some increased oversight (of management by the board)."
Other proposals include a measure by the carpenters to hold directors personally liable for gross negligence. The New York City Fire Department Pension Fund proposed that shareholders' votes for directors remain confidential when there is no competing proxy.
At last year's annual meeting, Chairman Dwayne Andreas kept a lid on shareholder comments. When Durkin of the carpenters union tried to gain the floor, he was told by the chairman, "This meeting runs according to my rules."
Durkin, who will attend this year's annual meeting, said he was hopeful shareholders would be able to voice their concerns this year.
He added the company had sent him a fax outlining the agenda, when issues will be raised and how much time will be allotted for comments. "There needs to be some basic rights allowed to the (share) owners," Durkin said.
The Justice Department said its price-fixing investigation continues. ADM has agreed to cooperate with probes involving citric acid as well as high fructose corn syrup.
Hoffman-La Roche Inc, the Nutley, N.J. unit of Roche Holding Ltd of Switzerland, said it has been cooperating with the Justice investigation of citric acid, which is used in food, beverages and other products.
A.E. Staley, a unit of Tate and Lyle Plc of the United Kingdom, said it is not a target in the high fructose corn syrup probe and is cooperating with that investigation.
