Just days after pleading guilty to price fixing and agreeing to pay $100 million in fines, Archer Daniels Midland Co. lost two key executives Thursday, as the giant agricultural products company remained dogged by controversy.
ADM said Michael Andreas, vice chairman and son of influential Chairman Dwayne Andreas, took a temporary leave, and Terrance Wilson, a vice president in charge of corn refining, retired for medical reasons relating to progressive heart disease.
Michael Andreas and Wilson are being investigated by the Justice Department in connection with a price-fixing scheme.
The Decatur, Ill.-based company, which advertises itself as "Supermarket to the World," has said previously that indictments were being considered against Wilson and Michael Andreas.
On Tuesday, ADM pleaded guilty to two counts of pricing-fixing and agreed to pay $100 million in fines to the federal government, the largest penalty ever in a criminal antritust case.
That day, Deputy Assistant Attorney General Gary Spratling said federal authorities were still gathering evidence in the case involving Wilson and Michael Andreas.
William Leach, an analyst with Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette, said some had expected Wilson and Michael Andreas to step down. "I'd say it's hardly unexpected given the circumstances," he said.
The announcement that Michael Andreas was taking leave and Wilson had retired came after the company's shareholder meeting Thursday at its central Illinois headquarters here. No mention of the investigation of the two executives was made by the company during the meeting.
Dwayne Andreas, like other ADM officials who spoke at the meeting, used mostly euphemisms when referring to ADM's guilty pleas to two counts of pricing-fixing and an agreement to pay $100 million in fines to the U.S. government.
"I acknowledge to you that this occurred on my watch as chairman of your company," Dwayne Andreas told shareholders at the annual meeting here. "You have my apology and my commitment that things are arranged so that this will never happen again."
One of the few direct mentions of the antitrust investigation came in response to a question from Ed Durkin of the United Brotherhood of Carpenters, an institutional shareholder.
Durkin asked why ADM had not notified shareholders officially of its guilty pleas to two counts of price fixing and the $100 million plea. Richard Reising, corporate secretary and general counsel, said the company did not consider it necessary given the amount of publicity the antitrust settlement received.
ADM board member Brian Mulroney, former Prime Minister of Canada, told shareholders the "consensual resolution" with the Justice Department was reached after negotiations with the board's special committee of independent directors.
"This has been a terribly unfortunate experience for the company and we as a committee deeply deplore it," Mulroney said."It is our intention to ensure that the company learns from mistakes in the past and acts so that they never happen again," Mulroney said.
A proposal requiring the board be composed of a majority of independent directors was defeated, but received 42 percent of the votes cast.
Other shareholder proposals addressing corporate governance issues did not pass. ADM's slate of 12 directors was approved by about 89 percent of the votes cast, the company announced.
The new board, which was reduced in number from 17, was hailed by ADM as a more independent body since Dwayne Andreas is the only company executive remaining on the board.
The antitrust investigation sparked criticism from some large shareholders who questioned the independence of ADM's board of directors and its ability to oversee management.
In a statement released following the meeting, Charles Valdes, chairman of the the California Public Employees Retirement System (Calpers), said "Calpers will continue to meet with directors and pursue the wishes of shareholders that want a majority of independent directors and increased oversight of the ADM board."
