Archer Daniels Midland Co.'s Chairman Dwayne Andreas apologised to shareholders Thursday for the "difficult situations" that the company faced over the past year.
Andreas, like other ADM officials who spoke at the meeting, used mostly euphemisms when referring to ADM's guilty pleas to two counts of pricing-fixing and an agreement to pay $100 million in fines to the U.S. government.
"I acknowledge to you that this occurred on my watch as chairman of your company," Andreas told shareholders at the annual meeting here. "You have my apology and my commitment that things are arranged so that this will never happen again."
A proposal requiring the board be composed of a majority of independent directors was defeated, but received 42 percent of the votes cast.
Other shareholder proposals addressing corporate governance issues did not pass. ADM's slate of 12 directors was approved by about 89 percent of the votes cast, the company announced.
The new board, which was reduced in number from 17, was hailed by ADM as a more independent body since Andreas is the only company executive remaining on the board.
William Bell of the Florida Retirement System Trust Fund said he hoped the 42 percent of the votes cast in favour of the outside director measure would send a signal to ADM about shareholder concerns regarding the independence of the board.
"I think it's a positive number," Bell told reporters after the meeting. The Florida trust fund and the California Public Employees Retirement System (Calpers) co-sponsored the independent board proposal.
In a statement released following the meeting, Charles Valdes, chairman of the Calpers, said "Calpers will continue to meet with directors and pursue the wishes of shareholders that want a majority of indpependent directors and increased oversight of the ADM board."
During the meeting, no mention was made of a pending U.S. Department of Justice investigation of Michael Andreas, vice chairman and son of Dwayne Andreas, and Terrance Wilson, a group vice president in charge of corn refining.
These two executives are eligible for stock options under an incentive plan that was approved by stockholders Thursday, the company said in response to a question.
The antitrust investigation sparked criticism from some large shareholders who questioned the independence of ADM's board of directors and its ability to oversee management.
One of the few direct mentions of the antitrust investigation came in response to a question from Ed Durkin of the United Brotherhood of Carpenters, an institutional shareholder.
Durkin asked why ADM had not notified shareholders officially of its guilty pleas to two counts of price fixing and the $100 million plea. Richard Reising, corporate secretary and general counsel, said the company did not consider it necessary given the amount of publicity the antitrust settlement received.
ADM board member Brian Mulroney, former Prime Minister of Canada, told shareholders the "consensual resolution" with the Justice Department was reached after negotiations with the board's special committee of independent directors.
"This has been a terribly unfortunate experience for the company and we as a committee deeply deplore it," Mulroney said.
"It is our intention to ensure that the company learns from mistakes in the past and acts so that they never happen again," Mulroney said.
He referred to the investigation of ADM as a "shadow" that was cast on the future of the company.
"While some matters still await resolution, I am pleased to tell you today that we have begun to cast off that shadow and move the company forward into the future...," Mulroney said.
