At Archer Daniels Midland Co.'s annual meeting last year, Chairman Dwayne Andreas declined to give shareholders the floor, saying, "This meeting runs according to my rules."
This year, however, shareholders are pressing for different rules.
Four institutional shareholders will have the floor at Thursday's meeting here to present proposals dealing with corporate governance -- or how the board of directors oversees corporate management at ADM, which on Tuesday pleaded guilty to two counts of price fixing and agreed to pay $100 million in fines, by far the highest penalty ever for violating antitrust laws in the United States.
In its guilty plea, the company admitted it fixed prices for lysine, a feed additive, and citric acid, widely used in foods, beverages and other products.
The shareholder vote at this year's meeting is expected to be close for one proposal that calls for ADM's board to be composed of a majority of independent directors with no personal or business connections with the company.
A survey of early votes showed that about 47 percent were in favour of the measure, the California Public Employees Retirement System (Calpers) said on Wednesday. Calpers, the nation's largest public retirement system, known for its shareholder activism, co-sponsored the proposal with the Florida Retirement System Trust Fund.
"This proposal is prompted by our belief that the employment, business and family relationships of any corporate director has the potential to raise conflicts of interest that may limit the vigilance and diligence of the board," the co-sponsors said in a supporting statement contained in ADM's proxy materials for the meeting.
The independence of ADM's board has been an issue since it was disclosed in late June 1995 that the company was the target of a federal price-fixing investigation. Despite the settlement with the Justice Department, some major shareholders continue to voice concern about the board's ability to oversee ADM's management.
Of particular concern to some is that the department continues to investigate two top ADM executives -- Vice Chairman Michael Andreas, the son of Chairman Dwayne Andreas, and Terrance Wilson, group vice president in charge of corn refining. Lysine, citric acid and other ADM products are refined from corn.
"There needs to be dramatic reform at this company, at both the board and the management level," said Edward Durkin, director of special programmes at the United Brotherhood of Carpenters union, which is sponsoring a proposal this year to hold directors personally liable in cases of gross negligence.
In addition, the New York City Fire Department Pension Fund has proposed that confidential ballotting be allowed in shareholder votes, except in cases where there is a contested board election.
Since last year's meeting, ADM has agreed to cut its 17-member board down to 12 members. All current company executives have left the board, with the exception of Dwayne Andreas.
Some institutional shareholders have questioned the independence of ADM's nominees as outside directors. One nominee, Mollie Hale Carter, is the daughter of H.D. Hale, a former board member who retired from ADM this year. Other nominees include former Secretary of Agriculture John Block and former Ambassador Richard Burt.
At last year's meeting, which was punctuated with rounds of applause for ADM executives, the board defended its independence. Brian Mulroney, a board member and former prime minister of Canada, said at the time that ADM's independent directors "are fully independent and have the utmost integrity."
