McDonald's Corp. on Friday reported a 10 percent rise in net income, despite a weak U.S. operating environment that was offset by growth overseas.
The fast-food giant, which has nearly 20,000 restaurants worldwide, said net income rose to $440 million from $400 million. Earnings per share gained 11 percent, with fewer shares outstanding, to 62 cents a share from 56 cents.
Earnings for the quarter, however, were about 1 cent below what analysts had expected.
McDonald's, based in Oak Brook, Ill., said operating earnings in the United States fell five percent in the third quarter while company revenues rose only one percent.
"Our U.S. restaurants are operating in a complex, dynamic and difficult marketplace and recent operating performance has fallen short of our goals," Chairman Michael Quinlan said in a statement.
McDonald's said U.S. same store sales -- measuring results for units open at least one year -- were negative for both the third quarter and nine-month period.
But U.S. sales may be picking up, said Merrill Lynch analyst Peter Oakes. "I think (U.S. same store sales) are starting to hit bottom," Oakes said. "Thus far in October, it (seems) like they have picked up and are in the flattish range."
McDonald's recently reorganized its management to address disappointing results in the United States.
Outside the United States, McDonald's operating earnings grew 11 percent in the quarter as revenue jumped 13 percent.
It said growth in earnings was strongest in Hong Kong, England, Italy, Spain, Sweden and Taiwan. Results in Mexico remained weak due to the sluggish economy, it said.
While McDonald's continues to expand its global reach, the company said its new restaurant openings for 1996 and 1997 likely will be at the low-end of its targeted range of 2,500 to 3,200 units.
"We will hit the low end of our projected range (with) 2,500-plus restaurants (in 1996)," McDonald's spokesman Chuck Ebeling said. "We're just doing our planning for next year, but we expect to do 2,500 plus next year."
This would be the first time in at least three years that McDonald's failed to meet its expansion projections, as it cuts back on limited menu, or satellite, units.
In 1995, McDonald's opened 2,430 units, beating the projection for that year of 2,300. In 1994, it opened 1,800 units, beating the projection of about 1,400 to 1,700.
McDonald's has nearly 20,000 restaurants worldwide.
"We've been ratcheting up the level of development every year since around 1991," Ebeling said.
Ebeling said McDonald's this year plans to open about "600-plus" satellite units worldwide, down from its original plan of 700 to 1,000 satellites. The biggest decline will be seen in the United States.
"We recognise we need higher volume restaurants to meet the kind of profitability that we'd like for ourselves and our franchisees," Ebeling said.
Merrill Lynch analyst Peter Oakes said the profitability of some satellite units, which are often built in non-traditional sites such as shopping malls, has been uncertain. "In the big picture, the financial performance of satellites appears to be spotty," Oakes said.
Ebeling said U.S. satellite units will acount for about one-third of the total for these smaller sites, compared with 60 percent as originally planned.
Overall, Ebeling said about one-third of McDonald's total restaurant openings will still be in the United States.
