Monsanto Co, which exceeded analysts' expectations for its third quarter, warned analysts not to increase earnings estimates for the full year, according to Nicholas Filippello, chief economist.
"I warned them (analysts) not to increase expectations for the full year," Filippello said, adding the First Call mean of analysts' estimates is $1.48 a share, compared with $1.25 a year ago.
"We're urging people not to increase the number," he added.  
Earlier, Monsanto reported third quarter earnings of $0.28 a share, up from $0.23 a year ago and above the First Call mean of $0.24.
Filippello said certain factors, including the timing of bulk aspartame sweetener shipments and an adjustment in the full-year tax rate, contributed to third quarter earnings exceeding First Call expectations.
Looking ahead, Filippello said Monsanto continues to weigh options for its chemical business, as reported earlier this month.  One possibility is to spin the chemicals operation off as a separate publicly traded company.  
Or chemicals could be spun off and then merged with another company, Filippello added. The "spin-off/merger option," he said, would be preferrable from a tax standpoint from an outright sale of the chemical operations.
But he said it was too early to speculate which options was likely to take place.  "I think it's too early to speculate," Filippello said.
If Monsanto shed its chemical operations, it would be left with a life sciences business consisting of agricultural products, pharmaceuticals and food ingredients.  
Filippello said Monsanto is considering ways to make food ingredients "an important part of this life sciences company." But it remains to be seen how much growth in food ingredients would be accomplished internally or if the company would undertake licensing, partnerships and possible acquisitions, he added.
The life sciences business would include the G.D. Searle pharmaceutical company, which analysts in the past had expected Monsanto to sell.
"There is no interest at this point in selling Searle," Filippello said. "Searle clearly is an appreciating asset at this point...Our expectation at this time is that value is going to continue increase over time."
Reuters Chicago Newsdesk - 312-408-8787
