Quaker Oats Co. said Thursday its profits more than doubled in the latest quarter despite a drop in sales due to lower prices for breakfast cereals and heavy spending on its struggling Snapple beverage line.
Concerns over Snapple, which Quaker bought nearly two years ago for $1.7 billion, sent the company's stock down $1.75 to $34.625 on the New York Stock Exchange.
"The stock is declining because they didn't announce any restructuring in Snapple, and some people had speculated they would," said William Leach, analyst at Donaldson, Lufkin and Jenrette.
Overall, Quaker Oats reported net income for the third quarter of $133 million, or 98 cents a share, up from $61.5 million, or 45 cents per share, last year. The latest's quarter's results, however, included a $133.6 million pretax gain on the sale of its frozen foods business and $23 million in pretax restructuring charges.
Excluding these factors, Quaker's third quarter net income was 53 cents a share, which was well above Wall Street estimates of 46 cents a share, according to First Call, which tracks analysts' estimates.
Chairman William William Smithburg said Snapple was expected to report an operating loss for 1996.
"Clearly, the biggest challenge facing the company is Snapple's disappointing performance," Smithburg said. "The integrated sampling and advertising campaign that ended in mid-September generated some excitement behind the brand this summer, but we're still disappointed."
While he declined to give a specific projection, he said the 1996 operating loss for Snapple likely will be narrower than the loss it reported in 1995, although the business will not generate a profit.
Excluding goodwill and other charges, Snapple's loss for 1995 was about $6 million, according to analysts' estimates.
Smithburg said Quaker executives believe Snapple can show a cash profit, which is the goal for next year. He added that results for Snapple could improve next year, even if sales volume were flat.
Quaker said several alternatives were being considered for Snapple. Those options include making Snapple into a regional brand or perhaps selling the beverage operations.
The company said its overall third-quarter sales slipped to $1.44 billion from last year's $1.55 billion, which included $72.3 million in sales from divested businesses.
Total beverage sales fell 11 percent to $593.4 million, while beverage operating income dropped 43 percent to $34.0 million. In the United States and Canada, beverage income was $57.5 million, excluding a $16.6 million restructuring charge, down 15 percent from last year.
Quaker said Gatorade sports drink, the company's single best-selling brand, had a 20 percent rise in operating profit in North America.
Despite an unseasonably cool summer, which hurt sales of the drink, Gatorade is having another good year, Smithburg said in a teleconference.
U.S. sales of Gatorade will hit about $1 billion by the end of October, compared with sales of just over $1 billion for all 1995. That is "kind of an important milestone for us," Smithburg said.
Quaker said U.S. and Canadian foods' operating income of $92.6 million, excluding a $6.4 million restructuring charge, was up 7 percent from last year. These profits rose in spite of price decreases in ready-to-eat cereals.
Smithburg said Quaker's ready-to-eat cereals, such as Life and Cap'n Crunch, had a 14 percent rise in volume in the third quarter. Value-priced bagged cereals, which carry the Quaker name, are growing at more than 20 pecent.
The company said North American foods sales increased 2 percent to $687.3 million. International foods sales rose 9 percent to $152.9 million, with increases in Latin America, Europe and the Pacific. International foods operating income was $2.8 million, down from $3.7 million.
