McDonnell Douglas Corp. Friday announced the sudden resignation of the head of its aerospace business, Herbert Lanese, sparking speculation that disagreements over cost-cutting tactics might have hastened his departure.
Lanese, who joined the aircraft and aerospace firm in 1989 as senior vice president of finance, left the firm in an apparent disagreement with President Harry Stonecipher.
"Although Herb and I were in total agreeemtn regarding business objectives and strategy, we had sharp differences involving management and leadership styles," Stonecipher said in a statement. "After two years of working together, it became obvious to me that these differences could not be reconciled."
Merrill Lynch analyst Byron Callan called Lanese's departure "a bolt out of the blue."
"Herb had been tasked with reducing costs at McDonnell Douglas at the military aircraft business," Callan said. "It may well have been (a dispute over) how do you go about doing that."
Lanese, who became president of McDonnell Douglas Aerospace in March, 1996, after serving as deputy president since July 1995, had a difficult job from the start, analysts said. His focus on cost-cutting meant he had to tackle the thorny issue of reducing employment.
"When well over 50 percent of your costs are people, cost-cutting is a euphemism for cutting people," PaineWebber analyst John Modzelewski said. "It's the hardest thing that you can do."
Job security became the crux of labor troubles at McDonnell Douglas, with a strike by the International Association of Machinists that lasted from June 5 until Sept. 11 of this year.
Cost-cutting is "where his (Lanese's) expertise lay with the company," said Mike Schoen, assistant director of business at District 837 of the Machinists union. "And we weren't ready to be cut corners on."
Slashing costs and raising capital, however, were hallmarks of Lanese's career when he was chief financial officer of McDonnell Douglas. Analysts credited him with a financial turnaround, which included raising cash and slashing debt, that led to record earnings.
"Singlehandedly, he was the person that I think was majorly responsible for the change in McDonnell Douglas," Modzelewski said.
