Nalco Chemical Co Chairman Ted Mooney said he is comfortable with analysts' estimates for fourth quarter earnings from continuing operations of $0.50 to $0.51 per fully diluted share, up from $0.45 from continuing operations a year ago.
"We're comfortable with that," Mooney said in a telephone interview.  
Looking ahead, the water treatment and process chemicals company expects to increase earnings by a double-digit rate.
"Our overall goal is to grow double-digit, and we certainly think we can do that many more years than not," Mooney said. "Next year, we don't see as atypical as yet."
Earlier this week, Nalco reported third quarter earnings of $0.52 per fully diluted share from continuing operations, up 16 percent from $0.45 a year ago.
To increase its business, which is roughly equally divided between water treatment and process chemicals, Nalco will continue to make strategic acquisitions, Mooney said.  
Earlier today, Nalco, based in Naperville, Ill., agreed to acquire Nutmeg Technologies Inc, a Connecticut-based water treatment company with $9 million in annual sales.
"They (Nutmeg) are operating in an area that is growing rapidly and also have some very fine people," Mooney said.
Technical personnel in the water treatment business are a key asset given the range of customers served, from manufacturers to hospitals. Nalco's technology treats both water intake as well as water that is discharged.
Nalco also provides process chemicals to a variety of industries, such as paper-making.  
Nalco is also split in half between the United States and foreign markets, currently operating in about 20 countries.
With a global presence, Nalco, with about $1.4 billion in annual sales, is able to pursue opportunities wherever they arise, Mooney said. One down side, however, is that such globalization also makes it suspectible to regional economic downturns.  
For example, Nalco's European division, which accounts for 25 percent of its foreign business, faces tough economic conditions there. And as a U.S. company, Nalco's European profits suffer when converted into a stronger U.S. dollar.
"We are growing in dollar terms, if at all, very slowly in Europe right now," Mooney said.
Balancing that weakness in Europe, Nalco is growing by about double-digits in the United States, which accounts for about half the business.  
Nalco's business in the Asia/Pacific market, which accounts for 12 to 13 percent of company revenue, currently is growing at 15 to 20 percent. In Latin America, which also accounts for 12 to 13 percent of Nalco's business, growth is running at 15 to 20 percent, Mooney said.
"Wherever in the world it is, we'll go after that opportunity," Mooney said.
Reuters Chicago Newsdesk - 312-408-8787
