Facing declining U.S. cereal volumes in an intensely competitive market, Kellogg Co said it is launching promotional programs to boost its sales.
"We'll be taking what we believe are appropriate actions," Kellogg spokesman Richard Lovell said Friday.
Kellogg refused to outline what those programs might include. Analysts said they don't expect the cereal giant to return to deep-discount coupons or buy-one, get-one-free promotional giveaways.  
"It's sort of left to speculation what they're going to do," SBC Warburg analyst Chris Jakubik said.
"There is no indication that, at this time, they have shifted from their long-term strategic goal, which is to reduce inefficient promotions," added BT Securities analyst John O'Neil.
Whatever form the marketing actions take -- perhaps offering additional modest coupons in Sunday newspaper supplements or some form of price promotion -- the programs will be launched in the current fourth quarter.  
Kellogg, like other major cereal makers, cut cereal prices earlier this year in an effort to attract consumers back to the cereal aisle.
But those price cuts alone apparently were not enough to jump-start consumer purchases, according to Smith Barney analyst David Rabinowitz.
"The message there is that prices have to come down further," Rabinowitz added.
The drop in U.S. cereal sales contributed to a decline in third quarter operating earnings of $0.85 a share, before a $0.10 charge, compared with $1.05 last year.  
Kellogg's decision to launch promotions follows a decline in its third quarter U.S. cereal sales volume, which analysts estimate at nine to 10 percent.
"We can't detail it. It was a challenging quarter in the U.S. and our volume was down," Lovell said.
Kellogg's sales volume declined due to intense competition in the United States, as other producers continued coupons and other promotions in a sluggish cereal market. Kellogg said third quarter U.S. cereal industry sales grew 1.5 percent, measuring all retail outlets.
"As previously forecast, our third quarter performance was influenced significantly by competitive conditions in the U.S. cereal category," Arnold Langbo, chairman, said in the third-quarter earnings statement.
According to Information Resources data, U.S. ready-to-eat cereal sales in grocery stores only fell 1.6 percent to 2.6 billion pounds for the 52 weeks ended August 11, according to the most recent data available, compared with a year ago.
Kellogg's sales volume declined in that period by 4.1 percent to 881.3 million pounds for a market share of about 34.4 percent, Information Resources said.
Reuters Chicago Newsdesk - 312-408-8787
