McDonnell Douglas Corp said Wednesday it was cooperating with a federal investigation into the sale of $5 million of used machine tools to China, which diverted the equipment to the site of a military plant.
"We're confident that the current investigation will show that McDonnell Douglas violated no laws in the sale of this surplus equipment to the Chinese," said Larry McCracken, vice president of corporate communications.
He said the machine tool sale was not directly linked to a 1994 agreement for 40 aircraft to be co-produced by the St. Louis-based aerospace company and its Chinese partner.  
McCracken said he did not know the focus of the federal investigation into the machine tools, which had been shipped to China between November 1994 and February 1995. But he acknowledged that there were allegations the Chinese had intended all along to divert the equipment for military use.
The sale to China of certain equipment, such as machine tools and presses, requires U.S. government approval and assurances that it will not be used for military purposes.
"We believe that we followed all the rules and regulations...," McCracken said.  
The problem with the machine tools focuses on when McDonnell Douglas learned that some equipment had been shipped to Nanchang, where China has a military plant, instead of being stored in Beijing, as stipulated by the U.S. export license.
McCracken said the company learned of the diversion in March 1995 when investigating the whereabouts of the shipment, and then notified the U.S. Government.  
Nanchang, where some of the equipment was found, was also the site of a Chinese commercial plant. McCracken said it is possible the Chinese could have misunderstood the regulations governing  all of the machine tools.
According to a report in the New York Times Wednesday, U.S. government officials say there was evidence that some company officials may or should have been aware before March 1995 that China would not house the equipment in Beijing.  
In response to that allegation, McCracken reiterated that McDonnell officials did not learn of the shipments to Nanchang until March 1995.
As for allegations that McDonnell Douglas officials should have known about the shipments, McCracken said the equipment was meant for a joint venture between China and another U.S. aerospace firm.
That joint venture was never established.
McCracken said negotiations followed between McDonnell Douglas, the Chinese government and U.S. officials, and the export license for the machine tools was amended in February 1996. Under the amended license, the equipment was shipped to Shanghai to be used to build commercial aircraft under the McDonnell Douglas co-production agreement.
Merrill Lynch analyst Byron Callan said he does not expect the investigation to have an impact on McDonnell Douglas's aircraft business.
"I don't think it's a big deal from a corporate point of view," Callan said.
Reuters Chicago Newsdesk - 312-408-8787
