Archer Daniels Midland Co., which earlier this month pleaded guilty to two counts of price fixing, took steps Thursday to ease the reins out of the hands of its 78-year-old chairman, Dwayne Andreas.
ADM, which faced strong criticism from big shareholders at its annual meeting on Oct. 17, said it formed a four-member office of the chief executive, a post that has been held solely by Andreas.
"The fact that they (ADM) listed the ages is signalling something: They're setting this up as part of their succession plan and ... there is more to come," Dain Bosworth analyst Bonnie Wittenburg said.
ADM also named replacements for two other executives who left the company earlier this month and remain targets for possible criminal indictments in the federal probe -- Vice Chairman Michael Andreas, the son of Dwayne Andreas, and Terrance Wilson, who had been group vice president in charge of corn refining.
The giant agricultural products company said the newly formed office of the chief executive will consist of Dwayne Andreas, James Randall, president, age 72, Charles Bayless, 61, president of ADM's processing division, and G. Allen Andreas, 53, a nephew of Dwayne Andreas and counsel to the executive committee of the board of directors.
Jon Lukomnik, New York City's deputy controller for pensions, which hold about 3.4 million ADM shares, applauded the executive realignment as a means to address succession. But he said more changes were needed within ADM's top ranks.
"There remains another issue, which is corporate culture," said Lukomnik.
New York City pension funds have been among several institutional shareholders pressing for changes in ADM's board and management in the wake of the U.S. antitrust investigation that targeted the company.
A shareholder proposal requiring that the Decatur, Ill.-based company's board be composed of a majority of independent directors was defeated at the annual meeting, but received an usually heavy 42 percent of the votes cast.
On Oct. 14, ADM agreed to pay $100 million in fines and pleaded guilty to fixing prices of lysine, a feed additive, and citric acid, an additive used in foods, beverages and other products.
Among the four-member office of the chief executive, Allen Andreas stands out given his experience building ADM's business in Europe, said Merrill Lynch's Leonard Teitelbaum.
"It goes a long way to putting the events of the last several months behind the company," Teitelbaum said of the management changes.
ADM made no mention of the antitrust investigation, which is continuing, although the company has been given immunity from further prospecution in return for its cooperation.
Earlier this month, ADM said Michael Andreas took a temporary leave and Wilson retired for health reasons. In its proxy statement for the annual meeting, ADM said indictments were being considered against the younger Andreas and Wilson.
The new vice chairman is Gaylor Coan, 60, an outside director, who heads Gold Kist Inc., a farmer-owned cooperative in Atlanta, Ga., that is the second-largest poultry processor in the United States and one of the largest shareholders of ADM.
ADM also named Larry Cunningham, 52, as president of ADM's corn processing division and a group vice president, in addition to his dutues as president of ADM's protein specialities.
The company's lysine and citric acid products are both derived from corn.
