Archer Daniels Midland Co likely will face criminal charges in a U.S. government price-fixing investigation after three companies pleaded guilty, legal experts said Tuesday.
"It puts them (ADM) on notice that their alleged co-conspirators are cooperating with the government, providing both documents and oral testimony," said Robert Stephenson, an attorney with Cotsirilos, Stephenson, Tighe &amp; Streicker in Chicago. "The table stakes have significantly increased that ADM will be charged."  
An ADM spokeswoman said the company declined to comment. The other three firms  admitted to conspiracy in price-fixing of lysine, a feed additive.
Stephenson has no direct involvement in the ADM case but is experienced in antitrust cases.
Earlier the Justice Department said Ajinomoto Co Inc and Kyowa Hakko Kogyo Co Ltd of Tokyo and the U.S. unit of Sewon Co Ltd of South Korea admitted conspiring to fix prices to eliminate competition in the world lysine market. They also agreed to cooperate fully with the investigation by providing witnesses and documents.  
"If they (the government) have signed some of the potential defendants to plea agreements that include a commitment to cooperate, that puts tremendous pressure on the remaining potential defendant, of which ADM is obviously one," said Joe Sims, an attorney with Jones, Day, Reavis &amp; Pogue.
At this point, he added, ADM may decide to enter a plea or may face indictment.
"Either one of those things can come reasonably promptly," said Sims, an antitrust expert who is not directly involved in the ADM case. "I would not be surprised to see something in the next 30 days."  
If ADM should decide to enter a plea, analysts said it could easily afford the $10 million fines that were levied against Ajinomoto and Kyowa.
"Those are not the kinds of fines that are going to break the company," Piper Jaffray analyst George Dahlman said.
He added that, as of March 1996, ADM had about $3.0 billion in working capital.
In a separate proceeding, ADM has agreed to pay $25 million to settle a civil lysine price-fixing lawsuit brought by its customers as part of an overall $45 million settlement that also involves Ajinomoto and Kyowa Hakko.  
The guilty pleas by Ajinomoto, Kyowa Hakko and Sewon came about 14 months after ADM acknowleged the government had asked it for documents and testimony in an antitrust investigation. That probe included high-fructose corn syrup, citric acid and lysine.
Since the beginning, ADM has denied any wrongdoing and has said it cooperated fully with the investigation.
One wrinkle in the case, however, has been the controversy surrounding Mark Whitacre, a former president of ADM's BioProducts Division, who acted as a government informant in the probe for about three years. Whitacre was fired by ADM last year over allegations he embezzled millions of dollars from the company.
Stephenson said the guilty pleas by Ajinomoto, Kyowa Hakko and Sewon diminish the government's need to rely on Whitacre as a witness against ADM.
Reuters Chicago Newsdesk - 312-408-8787
