Kellogg Co. pledged again Friday to halt the erosion of its leading share of the $9 billion U.S. cereal market, but did not say what steps it planned to take.
The uncertainty over its future strategy made some investors nervous, and the stock was down 75 cents to $67 in afternoon trading after earlier falling as low as $65.50 on the New York Stock Exchange.
Earlier, company executives met with analysts to discuss its strategy to stop market share erosion, but offered few details.
"I was unimpressed with the company's presentation," BT Securities analyst John O'Neil said.
Kellogg pledged to stop any further crumbling of its U.S. market share, which has dropped to between 32.5 and 33 percent from what it considers to be a normal level of 35 percent, analysts said.
Kellogg, the leader in the U.S. ready-to-eat cereal market, said it will not tolerate any further market share erosion, a company spokesman said, but did not give any specifics.
"He (Chairman Arnold Langbo) indicated we remain committed to our long-term strategy of lower cereal prices and reducing inefficient price promotion spending, introducing strong new products, cutting costs," Kellogg spokesman Richard Lovell said. "That's the long-term way to go."
In the short term, analysts said, Kellogg is hoping that competitors cut back on their promotions, taking the pressure of its market share.
"The first thing they are going to do is hope the competition will cut back (on) promotions," O'Neil said. "Their initial strategy is a passive one."
But if competitors, such as rival General Mills Inc., do not cut back on discount coupons and other consumer enticements, analysts said Kellogg will have to respond in kind.
Kellogg officials were not immediately available.
"Their primary goal for 1997 is to get volume moving back up again," Schroder Wertheim analyst Robert Cummins said. "In regard to the U.S. cereal business, it is going to cost them some money to do that."
For now, Kellogg is not expected to increase its marketing push too much, given its pledge to report modestly better fourth quarter earnings compared with last year's results of $166.7 million, or 77 cents a share.
"They're very concerned about their credibility after the third quarter and are not likely to do anything that will prevent them from making that very modest increase in fourth quarter earnings," Smith Barney analyst David Rabinowitz said.
Third quarter earnings per share were down 20 percent, which Kellogg blamed on competition in the U.S. cereal market.
Kellogg has said 1996 earnings will be below the $761.6 million, or $3.48 a share, it earned in 1995. The consensus of analysts' estimates for 1996 is $3.07 a share, according to First Call.
Kellogg has said it expects earnings in first quarter of 1997 to be lower than in the first quarter of 1996. Earnings for all of 1997 are expected to be up by a low double-digit percentage from disappointing 1996 results.
Compounding Kellogg's problem is the slow growth in the U.S. cereal market, despite a round of price cuts by major companies earlier this year.
Kellogg said the U.S. cereal market overall grew by about 1.5 percent in the third quarter.
"The price cuts didn't work. It didn't help their (Kellogg's) volume or industry volume," Cummins said. "(That) backs up my contention that consumers who want to eat cereal are eating cereal, whether its $5 a box, which they complain about, or $2 a box, which they would prefer."
