U.S. cereal leader Kellogg Co is hoping its competitors cut back on their promotional efforts, but failing that it may be forced to increase costly marketing efforts next year.
"The first thing they are going to do is hope the competition will cut back (on) promotions," said BT Securities analyst John O'Neil, who attended a meeting between Kellogg and analysts on Friday.
"Their initial strategy is more of a passive one," he added.  
But if competitors such as rival General Mills Inc do not cut back on discount coupons and other consumer enticements, Kellogg will have to respond in kind, analysts said.
"Kellogg is resolved to rebuild their market share," Smith Barney analyst David Rabinowitz said.
Kellogg, the leader in the $9.0 billion U.S. ready-to-eat cereal market, has seen its market share slip to between 32.5 percent and 33 percent due to competitive pressure.
"They consider 35 percent to be normal," said Schroder Wertheim analyst Robert Cummins.  
Analysts who met with Kellogg said the company did not outline its market share strategy, except to say it does not intend to return to deep-discounts and giveaways.
"They say they will do what is necessary to regain their market share, but for now will avoid the deep discounts," SBC Warburg analyst Chris Jakubik said.
Kellogg officials were not immediately available for comment.
Still, analysts say the Battle Creek, Mich.-based firm, which earlier this year was forced to cut prices to respond to the competition, cannot sit and do nothing.  
"I think Kellogg is more likely to increase promotions (in 1997) and target promotional efforts behind new products," O'Neil added.
For now, Kellogg is not expected to increase its marketing push too much, given its pledge to report modestly better fourth quarter earnings compared to last year's $0.77 a share.
"They're very concerned about their credibility after the third quarter and are not likely to do anything that will prevent them from making that very modest increase in fourth quarter earnings," Rabinowitz said.
Third quarter earnings were down 20 percent, which Kellogg blamed on competitive pressures.
Compounding Kellogg's problem is the slow growth in the U.S. cereal market, despite a round of price cuts by major companies earlier this year. Kellogg said the market overall grew by about 1.5 percent in the third quarter.
"The price cuts didn't work. It didn't help their (Kellogg's) volume or industry volume," said Schroder Wertheim's Cummins. "(That) backs up my contention that consumers who want to eat cereal are eating cereal, whether its $5 a box, which they complain about, or $2 a box, which they would prefer."
Reuters Chicago Newsdesk - 312-408-8787
