The green fields of agricultural biotechnology are turning into a legal battle ground as companies file suits and countersuits against each other to protect their stakes in the budding business.
Biotech players are "suing each other over control of the technology," said Ray Goldberg, professor of Agriculture and Business at the Harvard Graduate School of Business. "They are going to redefine how they work together."
At stake are rights to produce and sell genetically enhanced crops. After more than a decade of research, biotech crops are beginning to be commercialized. They include corn and cotton that produce their own pesticides and soybeans that can withstand the use of certain herbicides.
In the end, analysts and company executives say, many of the lawsuits are expected to be settled out of court, resulting in agreements to license and swap technology.
"It is very unlikely, because stakes are very high, that the seed companies will really let this work its way entirely through the court system," said Dain Bosworth analyst Bonnie Wittenburg.
"Ultimately (companies) will cross-license, trade rights and use these pieces of protected technology as assets and trade them back and forth," added Timothy Martin, a spokesman for Pioneer Hi-Bred International Inc.
Pioneer, which provides the leading share of seed for corn, the biggest U.S. crop, has been sued for alleged patent infringement by DeKalb Genetics Corp.
Pioneer's defence is that it has a U.S. patent pending, which if approved could supersede DeKalb's claims. Pioneer said the application for that patent was filed before DeKalb's.
The case illustrates how new and pending patents complicate the legal landscape for agricultural biotechnology as seed and biotech development companies seek protection for their gene portfolios, production methods and the biotech crops themselves.
"The patent positions are not yet clear. The patents that have been issued leave some room for different interpretations," said Michael Sund, vice president of communications and investor relations for Mycogen Corp.
Mycogen and Monsanto Co. have sued each other for alleged patent infringement, and Mycogen is considering appealing some recent rulings in Monsanto's favour, Sund said.
Despite the legal complications, companies are expected to continue full-steam to commercialize biotech crops.
"They've made the decision to go ahead," said Piper Jaffray analyst George Dahlman.
Mycogen, for example, this year commercialized in limited quantities three corn hybrids that contain the Bt gene, which enables the plant to produce a substance that is toxic to the European core borer, a major pest.
Sund said the hybrids have performed well, as expected, in fighting off the corn borer. "Performance has been everything we hoped for," he added.
A genetically enhanced cotton that contains the Bt gene to fight bollworm has come under some tough scrutiny this year after a heavy infestation of the pest in some areas of Texas prompted farmers to use chemical sprays on the crop.
Monsanto, which collaborated with Delta and Pine Land Co. to produce Bollgard cotton, maintained that the biotech crop still performed well. Monsanto said Bollgard cotton had to be sprayed less than traditional cotton.
The collaboration between Monsanto and Delta and Pine Land is but one example of the partnerships that are being forged in agricultural biotechnology.
Monsanto has an ownership stake in DeKalb and Pioneer has a research collaboration with Mycogen.
These partnerships -- like the lawsuits -- underscore one key aspect of the biotechnology business: no one party has all the key pieces to the puzzle.
"No one single firm has the monopoly on the germ plasm," Goldberg said. "No one single firm has the monopoly on the science."
