American Trans Air (ATA), which recently announced plans to cut back its jet capacity and some scheduled service, expects to forge additional alliances with other air carriers.
"We clearly think that code-sharing is an opportunity for this company to expand the markets in which it can participate," Kenneth Wolff, chief financial officer of Amtran Inc, parent of ATA, said in a telephone interview Wednesday.
In late May, ATA and Chicago Express Airlines agreed to a code-sharing agreement.  
Under these agreements, the airlines put their codes on each other's flights in computerized reservation systems.
"In general, it has exceeded our expectations, although this was a relationship which we both went into expecting some good things," Stanley Pace, president of the Indianapolis-based company, said of the alliance with Chicago Express. "The benefits have been much more substantial than we both thought they would be."
Looking ahead, ATA will continue to serve vacation destinations from Indianapolis, Milwaukee and Chicago's Midway Airport with charter and scheduled service.  
But Pace added that expansion of its service will be made more "thoughtfully" than in the past when the carrier underwent rapid growth.
In the second quarter, Amtran lost $0.20 a share, compared with a year-ago profit of $0.29, due to aggressive scheduled service expansion that was not as profitable as it had hoped.
ATA said last week it is cutting back some of its scheduled service, particularly from Boston to destinations like Orlando, Fla., and Nassau, Bahamas.
ATA also has said it is reducing lease obligations for Boeing Co 757 jets to boost its operating efficiency.  
These steps are expected to improve Amtran's profitability, although Pace said the next two quarters will be a transition period for the company.
Pace declined to comment on near-term earnings projections. According to First Call, the mean analyst estimate for the third quarter is $0.28, based on a wide range from breakeven to $0.55 a share. A year ago it earned $0.31.
"We're going to strengthen the bottom line fairly quickly over the next two quarters so that we have a solid foundation...to resume deliberate, systematic, thoughtful and profitable growth through 1997 and into 1998," Pace said.
Company executives acknowledged that some consumers postponed buying tickets on ATA following the May 11 ValuJet Inc crash in the Florida Everglades.
To allay consumer concerns, Pace said ATA emphasized its safety record of flying 23 years without any serious accidents.
Reuters Chicago Newsdesk - 312-408-8787
