Diana Corp said Thursday that its decision to spin off its various business holdings and keep only its Sattel Communications Inc unit should attract analyst coverage of the firm.
"The analysts on Wall Street were not interested in picking up coverage of the company" because of its diverse holdings, said Sattel spokesman Tony Squeglia.
No analysts actively follow Diana, he said, which in addition to Sattel includes telecommunications equipment distribution and meat and seafood businesses.  
Diana said Thursday it would retain Sattel Communications, which provides telephone and Internet switching equipment, and would change its name to Sattel.
The other businesses -- including Atlanta Provision Co Inc, C&amp;L Communications Inc and Valley Communications Inc -- will be grouped together in a yet-to-be-named company that will trade on the Nasdaq.
Atlanta Provision, a meat and seafood distributor, remains for sale, although a deal is not imminent. "I know they are in discussions with potential buyers, but there is nothing close," Squeglia said.  
After the split, he added, the core businesses of the new company will include Atlanta Provision, which currently accounts for about 80 percent of Diana's total revenues.
Diana's plans to split into two companies follows its announcement earlier this year that it would restructure to make Sattel a pure play, or a primary business focus.
"We did a survey of shareholders and found that many of the shareholders who hold the stock today...bought Diana as a proxy for Sattel," Squeglia said in a telephone interview. "So there's a lot of interest in the one operating unit called Sattel Communications."  
He reiterated that Sattel, for its fiscal second quarter ended in September, is expected to have roughly $4.0 million in sales and to be modestly profitable. In the fiscal first quarter, Sattel's revenues were roughly $840,000.
The increase in revenues between the first and second quarters reflects recent sales of its DSS switches, which are used in long-distance telecommunications services.
Diana is expected to report results for its second quarter -- which for the entire firm ended in October -- on November 26.
Diana's decision to split into two companies was applauded by the market. Diana's shares traded as high as 41-3/4 Thursday, and were up 3/8 at 37-1/4 late in afternoon trading.
"We're obviously pleased at the way the market has reacted," Squeglia said.
Diana shares have traded in a wide range, from a 52-week low of 11-3/4 to a high of 114-1/4. Diana has repeatedly declined to comment on its stock movements.
Reuters Chicago Newsdesk (312) 408-8787
