Former Archer Daniels Midland Co executive Mark Whitacre, who acted as an informant in an antitrust case against the company, on Friday filed suit against ADM seeking back wages and punitive damages.
In a suit filed in U.S. District Court for the Central District of Illinois, Whitacre also formally denied charges previously brought by ADM that he allegedly stole $9.0 million from the agribusiness company.
"ADM's claim that Whitacre was fired for embezzlement is merely a pretext," the lawsuit says.  
"Whitacre was in fact fired for assisting the FBI (Federal Bureau of Investigation) with its investigation into ADM," the suit continues.
Last month, ADM pleaded guilty to two counts of fixing prices of lysine, a feed additive and citric acid, which is used in food and beverages. It agreed to pay $100 million in fines, a record for U.S. antitrust cases.
In his suit, Whitacre seeks a judgment against ADM of more than $50,000 and punitive damages of more than $50,000. Potential damages, if awarded, could be much greater, perhaps in the tens of millions, sources close to the case said.  
In September, Whitacre had said he planned to file an $80 million wrongful discharge suit against ADM.
Legal experts said it is common practice in suits to seek damages above or below $50,000.
ADM did not respond to requests for comment on the suit.
In his suit, Whitacre is claiming lost wages from August, 1995, when he was fired as president of ADM's BioProducts Division, until October 1995 when he was hired as chief executive officere of  Biomar International Inc.
Whitacre earned $320,000 a year at ADM, plus stock options.  
In his suit, Whitacre charges ADM with denying him the right to exercise company stock options, defamation of his character and mental and emotional distress.
Whitacre has admitted to trying to kill himself last year after his role as an FBI mole became known.
He also claimed that he was forced to sell his home in the Decatur, Ill., area for only $400,000, even though it had been recently appraised for $1.0 million. Whitacre also said in the suit he had invested about $1.3 million on the home.
Whitacre is now a resident of Chapel Hill, N.C.
Whitacre's attorneys, Richard Kurth of Kurth &amp; DeArmond of Danville, Ill., and Bill Walker of Granite City, Ill., were not immediately available for comment.
The lawsuit was not handled by Chicago attorney James Epstein of the firm Epstein, Zaideman &amp; Esrig, who has been representing Whitacre. Asked if he has fired Epstein from the case, Whitacre replied, "no comment."
Epstein was not available for comment.
Reuters Chicago Newsdesk (312) 408-8787
