Former Archer Daniels Midland Co. executive Mark Whitacre, who acted as an informant in an antitrust case against the company, Friday sued ADM, seeking back wages and punitive damages.
In a lawsuit filed in U.S. District Court, Whitacre also formally denied charges previously brought by ADM that he allegedly stole $9.0 million from the agribusiness company.
"ADM's claim that Whitacre was fired for embezzlement is merely a pretext," the lawsuit says.
"Whitacre was in fact fired for assisting the FBI (Federal Bureau of Investigation) with its investigation into ADM," the lawsuit continues.
Last month, ADM pleaded guilty to two counts of fixing prices of lysine, a feed additive and citric acid, which is used in food and beverages. It agreed to pay $100 million in fines, a record for U.S. antitrust cases.
In his lawsuit, Whitacre seeks a judgment against ADM of more than $50,000 and punitive damages of more than $50,000. Potential damages, if awarded, could be much greater, perhaps in the tens of millions of dollars, sources close to the case said.
In September, Whitacre had said he planned to file an $80 million wrongful discharge lawsuit against ADM.
Legal experts said it is common practice in lawsuits to seek damages above or below $50,000.
ADM did not respond to requests for comment on the lawsuit.
In his lawsuit, Whitacre is claiming lost wages from August 1995, when he was fired as president of ADM's BioProducts Division, until October 1995, when he was hired as chief executive officere of Biomar International Inc.
Whitacre earned $320,000 a year at ADM plus stock options.
In his lawsuit, Whitacre charged ADM with denying him the right to exercise company stock options, defamation of his character and mental and emotional distress.
Whitacre has admitted to attempting suicide last year after his role as an FBI mole became known.
He also said he was forced to sell his home in the Decatur, Ill., area for only $400,000, even though it had been recently appraised for $1 million. Whitacre said in the lawsuit he had invested about $1.3 million on the home.
Whitacre is now a resident of Chapel Hill, N.C.
His attorneys, Richard Kurth of Kurth &amp; DeArmond of Danville, Ill., and Bill Walker of Granite City, Ill., were not immediately available to comment.
The lawsuit was not handled by Chicago attorney James Epstein of the firm Epstein, Zaideman &amp; Esrig, who has been representing Whitacre. Asked if he has fired Epstein from the case, Whitacre replied, "no comment."
Epstein was not available to comment.
