Despite losing out on two potential aircraft deals, McDonnell Douglas Corp's stock remains near its 52-week high, reflecting a strong balance sheet and expectations it will make an acquisition.
"The company is generating on the order of about $1.0 billion to $1.25 billion of free cash flow annually, which translates into between $5 and $7 a share," said BT Securities analyst Wolfgang Demisch, who has a buy rating on the stock.
That could enable the company to buy back shares or make a long-awaited defense acquisition, he added.  
Although it lost out on the race to build a next generation fighter for the Pentagon and rival Boeing Co was awarded a 103-plane AMR Corp deal, McDonnell Douglas shares remain relatively strong.  Shares were down $0.25 at $52.625 a share on Monday, $4.125 below a 52-week high of $56.75 but more than $10 above a low of $42.125.
In fact, losing out on the potential $2.2 billion in jet fighter contracts -- which could eventually be worth as much as $500 billion to the ultimate winner -- could prompt McDonnell Douglas to pursue an acquisition aggressively to build its defense business, analysts added.  
CS First Boston analyst Peter Aseritis said he expected the company's "board and management to take a fairly proactive stance...to do something in the merger and acquisition area."
Analysts also shrugged off Boeing getting the plane order from AMR's American Airlines, saying McDonnell Douglas was not a serious contender after it cancelled development of its next generation commercial plane, known as the MD-XX.
"They were never in the running," Merrill Lynch analyst Byron Callan said of McDonnell Douglas.  
"The events don't affect near-term earnings in either case," Goldman Sachs analyst Howard Rubel said of the lost jet fighter and American Airlines deals.
McDonnell Douglas management said the Pentagon business would have been a significant long-term program for it.  But analysts said the company still has a chance to capture future military sales, particularly with acquisitions to build its portfolio, which now includes the F-18 fighter jet, C-17 military cargo plane and Apache helicopter.  
"The things to keep in mind are, the joint strike fighter is a long ways away.  It doesn't affect McDonnell Douglas' business portfolio near term," Callan said.
Callan added it is possible the new fighter jet might not be developed due to U.S. government budget pressures. And, in the interim, McDonnell Douglas could make its existing fighter jets more affordable and more capable.
Analysts dismissed the ideas that takeover speculation has been boosting McDonnell Douglas shares.  Earlier this year, McDonnell Douglas was reported to be in preliminary merger talks with Boeing, but a deal never materialized.  "I don't think the people who own the stock today are looking at McDonnell Douglas as a takeover candidate," Callan said.
Reuters Chicago Newsdesk (312) 408-8787
