The higher minimum wage signed into law Tuesday will be welcome relief for millions of workers, but it may also translate into higher prices for hamburgers, pizzas and other fast-food items, some restaurant chains said.
The 90-cent-an-hour increase will have little short-term impact on many fast-food chains that already pay workers rates above the federally mandated minimum.
But in the long run, industry officials fear that workers already earning above the new minimum wage, which will rise to $5.15 an hour next year, will be looking for more.
"What we're concerned about is the ripple effect it brings," said Bruce Cotton, chief spokesman for Long John Silver's Restaurants Inc. in Lexington, Ky.
"Our average crew wage is about $5.20 (an hour) so short-term there is not going to be any impact," said Denny Lynch, spokesman for Wendy's International Inc., which operates about 4,300 restaurants in the United States.
President Clinton signed into law the first increase in the minimum wage in five years, boosting it by 50 cents to $4.75 on Oct. 1 and 40 cents more to $5.15 on Sept. 1, 1997.
The White House estimates the new law will mean a raise for about 10 million American workers, many of them in restaurants and stores.
Most small businesses had opposed the increase, saying it would prompt them to hire fewer people, particularly young people looking for entry-level jobs.
But some economists argued that the negative effects of an increase in the wage, first imposed by the federal government in 1938 at 25 cents an hour, would be minimal.
To help get the bill through the Republican-controlled Congress, a package of about $22 billion in tax breaks aimed mostly at small businesses was added to the measure.
As a result of the higher minimum wage, American Restaurant Partners L.P., which operates 62 Pizza Hut restaurant franchises, expects its total wage costs will rise $500,000 over the next 12 months.
"If you raise someone who started in the last two months (to the new minimum wage level), you also have to raise everybody else," said Terry Freund, chief financial officer of American Restaurant Partners.
To compensate, the Wichita, Kan.-based restaurant operator hopes to raise prices by about 3 percent. The risk, Freund added, is that higher prices will keep some customers away or prompt them to scale back on the pizzas or other items they normally order.
Beyond the minimum wage requirements, competition for workers -- from cooks to delivery drivers to counter staff -- has forced many fast-food chains to pay up to hire good help, particularly in metropolitan markets. That competition is being driven by an increase in restaurant openings, particularly fast-food and casual dining establishments.
"There are neighbourhoods where we have to pay $6.00 an hour to $6.50 or $7.00 to get" good workers, Wendy's Lynch said. "The competition is setting the wage."
Fast-food industry executives said there has been competition for workers since the late 1980s, although the increase in restaurant openings is making the search for employees more intense.
Another problem for fast-food chains is wage competition from other employers. A fast-food worker, for example, may be able to earn $50 or $60 a night in tips at a casual dining establishment, executives said.
"For QSRs (quick service restaurants) ... it's even tougher to keep the kids," said Roger Lipton, president of Lipton Financial Services.
