Former Archer Daniels Midland Co. executive Mark Whitacre said Tuesday he was no longer cooperating with the U.S. government in its price-fixing probe, adding yet another wrinkle to the complex antitrust case.
Whitacre, a government informant for about three years in the federal investigation of his former employer, was indicted Tuesday along with two other ex-ADM executives for conspiring to fix prices of the feed additive lysine.
Also indicted were Michael Andreas, former executive vice president and vice chairman of ADM, and Terrance Wilson, a former group vice president. Michael Andreas is also the son of ADM Chairman Dwayne Andreas.
"I have decided not to participate in the government's coverup any longer," Whitacre told Reuters.
Asked to comment on the indictment against him, Whitacre said, "I have no comment other than when all the evidence comes out in this case, the only people that will have questions yet to answer will be the Justice Department and the FBI (Federal Bureau of Investigation) itself."
The Justice Department did not respond to Whitacre's statement.
Legal experts said it was common for federal informants and cooperative witnesses to be indicted, though they often receive lenient treatment and light sentences in return for their cooperation.
"If the informant got too good a deal, it would diminish his credibility," said James Shapiro, a former assistant U.S. Attorney in Chicago who has no direct knowledge of the case involving ADM and Whitacre.
Whitacre's decision to stop cooperating with the government could jeopardise his treatment by the Justice Department. But antitrust attorney Champ Davis of the Chicago firm Davis, Mannix and McGrath, said Whitacre's previous cooperation could still be taken into consideration.
"He can argue, I think, that he was cooperative up to a point," said Davis, who is not involved in the ADM case. "(That) is a factor that ought to be taken into account."
By no longer cooperating -- and presumably not agreeing to testify on behalf of the government in upcoming trials against the defendants -- Whitacre could weaken the government's case somewhat, legal experts said.
"It would weaken the government's case (against Michael Andreas and Wilson) to some extent, not to have the guy who made the tapes to interpret them," Shapiro said.
While he was cooperating with federal investigators, Whitacre had said that he made hundreds of tape recordings of ADM executives allegedly in price-fixing discussions.
But the government's case was unlikely to be derailed since the tapes still could be used, Shapiro said.
In October, ADM pleaded guilty to two counts of fixing prices of lysine, a feed additive, and citric acid, which is used in food, beverages and other products. ADM also agreed to pay a $100 million fine.
A lawsuit Whitacre filed against his former employer in November stated that the government's case against ADM was based "in large part upon the information obtained from Whitacre."
Whitacre gave no further reasons for his decision to stop cooperating with the government. But he has been involved in several legal tangles since the ADM price-fixing probe first came to light in June 1995.
In August 1995, ADM fired Whitacre, who had been head of its BioProducts division, for allegedly stealing $9 million from the company. Whitacre has denied those charges, saying the money allegedly involved off-the-books bonuses that he received that were approved by company management.
ADM has sued Whitacre over the $9 million. Whitacre filed a wrongful dismissal suit last month against ADM.
The Justice Department has been conducting a separate investigation into the money that Whitacre received and allegations of off-the-books payments by ADM.
