Monsanto Co's board of directors, at its regularly scheduled meeting on Friday, is expected to decide the fate of the chemical business that the company has said it wants to shed, analysts said.
A Monsanto spokeswoman on Thursday confirmed the Monsanto board is meeting on Friday, but she declined to comment on what it might do.
"I can confirm that the board is meeting tomorrow," she said. "I cannot ever presume board discussions, actions or vote, and we won't comment on that sort of speculation."  
In October, Monsanto said it was considering several options, including possibly spinning off its non-agricultural chemical business.
The remainder of Monsanto would be a life sciences company with core businesses of agricultural chemicals such as its flagship Roundup herbicide, biotech operations and the G.D. Searle pharmaceutical unit.
Another possible option for Monsanto would be to sell or merge the chemical business with other firms.  
"Probably a spinoff is likely," said PaineWebber analyst Paul Raman. "There is a significant tax liability of selling it (the chemical business). The capital gains tax on it could be about $500 million plus or minus."
Among the possible suitors mentioned for Monsanto's chemical business was Hercules Inc, analysts said. They added that Monsanto could be interested in the Tastemaker food and beverage flavors business held by Hercules and its joint venture partner, Mallinckrodt Inc.  
Hercules and Mallinckrodt have previously said they were seeking a buyer for Tastemaker. But a Mallinckrodt spokeswoman said no offers had been received for Tastemaker and no agreements had been signed.
The Monsanto spokeswoman declined to comment. Hercules was not available for comment.
Should Monsanto opt to swap its chemical business for assets of another company it would reduce its tax liability, analysts said.  
Whatever action Monsanto takes, analysts said they expect the board of directors to decide the course of action at the meeting on Friday.
"This is the last board meeting of the year. It is a planned meeting," Merrill Lynch analyst Doug Groh said.
Speculation that Monsanto was near a long-anticipated final decision on its chemical businesses helped boost the stock, which ended the day up 2-1/4 at 41-3/4.
Analysts have previously said that shedding the chemical operation, which are profitable, would enable Monsanto's life sciences business to trade at a higher multiple.
((Reuters Chicago Newsdesk (312) 408-8787))
