Western Resources Inc said its alliance with natural gas company ONEOK Inc could boost its earnings by $0.10 to $0.15 a share in the first full year of operations.
"We could see earnings be improved by maybe $0.10 or $0.15 a share in the first full year of operation," David Wittig, Western Resources president, said in a telephone interview.
The Western Resource-ONEOK alliance is expected to become effective in mid-1997, making calendar 1998 the first full year of operation.  
According to First Call, the consensus earnings estimate for Western Resources is $2.63 a share in 1996, down from $2.71 a year ago.
In addition, Western Resources, which is swapping its natural gas assets in return for about a 45 percent stake in ONEOK as part of the alliance, is expected to see its cash flow increase by $35 million in the first full year.
"The best way to look at this transaction is on a cash basis," Wittig said. "And we expect this transaction to improve our cash flow in the first full year of operations by around $35 million."  
The alliance also reflects Western Resources' strategy to become a brand-name supplier of electricity and home-security products nationwide, while its natural gas assets become part of a larger, focused gas company.
"They (ONEOK) are a total gas company. They understand the gas business better than we do," Wittig said.
In addition, ONEOK's 735,000 gas customers present a marketing potential for Western Resources' electricity and home-security businesses. With ONEOK as a partner, Western Resource hopes to offer gas supplies to customers nationwide.  
Western Resources, based in Topeka, Kan., continues to look for acquisitions to expand its electricity and home security businesses.
Western Resources' planned acquisition of utility Kansas City Power &amp; Light Co is pending. In home security, Western Resources, which holds about a quarter of ADT Ltd, has made five acquisitions related to that business this year, Wittig said.
"Obviously, we're acquisitive," he added.
Wittig said electricity and home-security businesses are similar, beyond the common customer base of households.
"You are providing a service on a 24-hour basis," he said. "You are monitoring a home when you are selling electricity (and with home-security services)," he added.
((Reuters Chicago Newsdesk (312) 408-8787))
