Conseco Inc. said Monday it would buy Pioneer Financial Services Inc., a health and life insurer, for about $417 million in stock, extending its acquisition spree.
Carmel, Ind.-based Conseco will also pay $60 million to retire bank debt and pay other costs, the companies said.
For Conseco, the Pioneer acquisition -- its seventh deal announced this year alone -- is aimed at building its offerings for senior citizens.
Conseco is already among the leading providers of supplemental health insurance, retirement annuities and life insurance for consumers aged 40 and older, analysts said.
"The (aged) 65-plus consumer is a key part of the current marketplace and also a rapidly growing piece of that 40-plus marketplace," added James Rosensteele, Conseco spokesman.
The companies said the merger would create the largest distribution organisation selling health and life insurance products in the markets where it operates.
"It's an excellent match," Conseco Chairman Stephen Hilbert said in a statement.
Under the transaction, Conseco would use a fraction of a share of its common stock worth $25 to $28, depending on the price in the days before the closing, to buy Pioneer Financial stock. Pioneer debt notes would also become convertible into Conseco stock.
Pioneer Financial jumped $5.50 to $24.50 in afternoon trading on the New York Stock Exchange, while Conseco stock was up 50 cents at $60 in consolidated trading.
The transaction is subject to approval by regulators and Pioneer Financial stockholders. It should be completed within 180 days, the companies said.
For Pioneer, a health and life insurance and annuities company based in Schaumburg, Ill., its agreement to join forces with Conseco reflects continued consolidation in the industry. Pioneer markets mainly to people 65 and older, small business owners and the self-employed.
"With the consolidation that's going on in the industry, you're going to have to be a mega-company to have the greatest efficiency and the greatest value to the customer," Everen analyst Frederick Sandburg said.
That consolidation is apparent in Conseco's track record of completing 16 acquisitions involving a total of 29 insurance companies since 1982.
Conseco is one of the nation's leading providers of supplemental health insurance, retirement annuities and universal life insurance.
Rosensteele said while acquisitions continued to be a part of Conseco's strategy, roughly half of the growth of its assets has been from new business generated by companies after they have been purchased.
Conseco said it would have $29 billion of assets and $32 billion of investments under management after completion of the Pioneer acquisition and other deals.
Beyond the portfolio of policies, the Pioneer acquisition also will add to Conseco's marketing efforts, particularly to senior citizens, analysts said. Pioneer has 90,000 agents, in addition to Conseco's 90,000 independent and career agents.
Founded in 1979, fast-growing Conseco has completed several acquisitions recently. In October, it completed the purchase of American Life Holdings Inc., a provider of annuities for retirement savings plans, for $165 million in cash.
On Aug. 26, Conseco agreed to acquire American Travellers Corp., a provider of long-term care insurance, for $793 million in stock, and Capitol American Financial Corp., which markets cancer insurance and other health coverage, for $650 million in cash and stock.
Also in August, Conseco completed the acquisition of Life Partners Group, a life insurer, for $600 million in stock, a deal that was announced on March 12.
