Conseco Inc's $477 million planned purchase of Pioneer Financial Services Inc, its seventh acquisition announced this year, is aimed at building the company's product offerings for senior citizens.
Conseco is already among the leading providers of supplemental health insurance, retirement annuities and life insurance for consumers aged 40 and older, analysts said.
"The (aged) 65-plus consumer is a key part of the current marketplace and also a rapidly growing piece of that 40-plus marketplace," added James Rosensteele, Conseco spokesman.  
For Pioneer, a health and life insurance company based in Schaumburg, Ill., its agreement to join forces with Conseco reflects continued consolidation in the industry.
"With the consolidation that's going on in the industry, you're going to have to be a mega-company to have the greatest efficiency and the greatest value to the customer," EVEREN analyst Frederick Sandburg said.
That consolidation is apparent in Conseco's track record of completing 16 acquisitions involving a total of 29 insurance companies since 1982.  
In the latest deal, Pioneer shareholders will receive a fraction of a Conseco share worth $25 to $28 for each Pioneer share held.
Rosensteele said earnings from Pioneer operations will more than offset the dilutive effect of the Conseco shares to be issued in the deal. Conseco said previously it expects Pioneer to add about $0.15 per fully diluted share to its operating earnings in the first year.
Pioneer shares were up 5-7/8 at 24-7/8 at mid-day on Monday, and Conseco shares were up 2-1/8 at 61-5/8.  
Rosensteele said that while acquisitions continue to be a part of Conseco's strategy, roughly half of the growth of its assets has been from new business generated by companies after they have been purchased.
Conseco said it would have $29 billion of assets and $32 billion of investments under management after completion of the Pioneer acquisition and other deals.
Beyond the portfolio of policies, the Pioneer acquisition also will add to Conseco's marketing efforts, particularly to senior citizens, analysts said.  Pioneer has 90,000 agents, in addition to Conseco's 90,000 independent and career agents.  
"It really helps them (Conseco) in distribution capability," Dean Witter analyst Michael Lewis said.
Through its Bankers Life and Casualty unit, Conseco sells to senior citizens through career insurance agents.
((Reuters Chicago Newsdesk (312) 408-8787))
