Kansas City Southern Industries Inc said it is weighing options to finance its part of a joint $1.4 billion venture to control a Mexican rail line, a key link in its plans to offer Canada-to-Mexico service.
"We absolutely have the ability to finance this," Michael Haverty, president of the Kansas City Southern Railway subsidiary, said in a telephone interview on Thursday.
Financing concerns hit Kansas City Southern since it and partner Transportacion Maritima Mexicana SA de CV (TMM) were awarded control of the rail line this month.
Kansas City Southern holds 49 percent of the Laredo, Texas to Mexico City rail line, known as Line 1, with TMM holding 51 percent. Responsibility for financing the deal will be split along those lines as well, Havery said.
While financing has not been finalized, options include potential equity investments from partners, Haverty said, but added, "We would prefer to jealously guard the equity."
"We've also talked to some strategic partners about the possibility of loaning us money in exchange for commercial arrangements," he added.
Gruntal &amp; Co analyst Steven Lewins said one option would be to raise its portion of the financing in dollars, but pay for the Mexican rail stake in pesos. If the peso loses value, as he expects, that would create currency translation gains for the company and reduce Kansas City Southern's costs.
Recent concerns over financing and dilution of earnings has brought Kansas City Southern's shares from 50-3/8 on December 5, before the Mexican deal was formally announced, down to 44-3/4 on Friday, unchanged from the day before.
At this level, Lewins said he considers Kansas City Southern shares "buyable."
Haverty said the company told analysts it expects the deal to hurt its earnings in the first year, be "slightly" dilutive in the second and add to earnings in the third. Lewins cut his 1997 earnings estimate for Kansas City Southern on December 10 to $2.85 a share from $3.20 due to the Mexican deal.
The potential investment in Line 1 will not stop with the initial bid. Haverty said the partners may spend up to $900 million over five years to upgrade Line 1.
He stressed that the $900 million figure is a maximum, saying there are other alternatives including leasing equipment instead of purchasing.
But the challenge remains that only about 12 percent of the freight along the Mexico City to Laredo corridor moves by rail, with the remainder hauled by truck, compared with 20 percent moving by rail about 10 years ago. About 35 to 40 percent of U.S. freight moves by rail, Haverty added.
Haverty said he believes Kansas City Southern and TMM can increase the amount of Mexican freight moving by rail. He views Line 1 as the key component in his company's plans to build a "NAFTA railroad," referring to the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) that allows the flow of goods between the United States, Canada and Mexico.
((Reuters Chicago Newsdesk (312) 408-8787))
