Morton International Inc., the maker of Morton Salt, has gained a key European presence for two of its businesses due to planned acquisitions, its chairman said Thursday, and is likely to expand there with further purchases.
"We're prepared to look at specialty chemical investments anywhere in the world. There are more opportunities in Europe and Asia than in the U.S. right now," Morton Chairman S. Jay Stewart said in an interview.
Earlier this week, Morton said it plans to acquire Italian powder coatings company Pulverlac Spa and French salt company, Compagnie des Salins du Midi et des Salines de l'Est.
Morton International's major product is Morton Salt, known for the signature phrase, "When it rains, it pours."
"We had been looking for an opportunity to get a reasonably significant powder coatings base in Europe," Stewart said of the Pulverlac agreement.
Morton has other specialty chemicals operations overseas, including making packaging adhesives in Italy and the Netherlands.
Stewart said he saw good demand growth for powder coatings, which are now applied to metal parts for protection and coloration. That demand could expand greatly in the future if use of these coatings expands to plastics and wood, he added.
Morton said Pulverlac will join Morton's North American coatings business and the combined operations will have sales of more than $200 million.
Morton's total sales for fiscal 1996, ended June 30, were $3.3 billion, including $1.6 billion in specialty chemicals sales.
"The acquistion of Pulverlac is very much consistent with the company's focus on growing its specialty chemical operations," William Blair analyst Robert Bartels said.
Morton also established a European presence in its core salt business with a definitive agreement to acquire two-thirds of Salins du Midi for about $195 million. Morton said it will make a public cash tender offer in France for the remaining shares of Salins du Midi, bringing the total price to about $290 million.
Salins du Midi, with estimated 1996 sales of almost $270 million, will join Morton's salt group, resulting in combined sales of $870 million.
Salins du Midi, headquartered in Paris, supplies salt for food and agricultural products, water treatment, de-icing and industrial applications. Salins produces salt at nine sites in France and four in Spain.
Morton operates 22 salt facilities in the United States, Canada and the on the Island of Inagua in the Bahamas.
Stewart said the acquisitions are expected to close in the third or fourth quarters of fiscal 1997, which ends in June. The acquisitions are expected to add modestly to earnings in the first year of operation, which would be fiscal 1998, and then contribute more significantly a few years later.
Looking ahead, Stewart said specialty chemicals remains "a priority" for making acquisitions.
Morton is growing its salt and specialty chemicals businesses as it moves ahead with plans to merge its auto airbag business with Autoliv AB of Sweden. That merger is expected to be completed in calendar 1997.
Stewart said the current debate over potential safety hazards from airbags, which critics say may harm children and smaller adults, underscores what he saw as the value of the business combination.
The combined company would make not only airbags but also car passenger restraints, enabling it to capitalize on whatever safety systems are employed in the future, Stewart said.
