Monsanto Co said Monday its pending acquisition of Holden's Foundation Seeds, a $1.0 billion deal that gives it access to the worldwide seed corn market, will dilute earnings for two or three years.
In the first year, dilution could be as much as $0.10 to $0.17 a share, Filippello said, but cautioned the number could be lower than that due to pending accounting issues.
"But by the end of the decade, this will be accretive even from an accounting standpoint," Nicholas Filippello, chief economist for Monsanto, said in a telephone interview.  
Variables in determining the amount of earnings dilution include charges Monsanto may take in the future related to the Holden's deal. Those charges may include write-offs of Holden's in-process research and development, which would reduce the amount of ongoing amortization from the deal.
Based on Monsanto's benchmark of measuring itself on an "economic value added" (EVA) basis, the acquisition is positive for the company, Filippello added.
"We are willing to accept some near-term dilution in (earnings per share) from an accounting standpoint if in fact we are creating value in a net added value sense," he said.  
EVA is derived by taking net income and subtracting a charge for the capital used to generate that income, Monsanto said in its 1995 annual report.
Earlier, Monsanto said it will buy Holden's,  Corn States Hybrid Service Inc and  Corn States International for up to $1.02 billion.
Filippello said Monsanto will pay up to $945.0 million for Holden's, which produces corn germplasm used by seed companies to create hybrid seeds. It will pay up to $75 million for Corn States and Corn States International, which are the exclusive worldwide marketing and sales representatives for Holden's.  
Both prices may later be reduced, Filippello added.
Analysts said Monsanto's acquisition of Holden's, which had been expected, is also a defensive move to block its competitors from gaining access to the seed company.
NatWest Securities analyst Mark Wiltamuth said he considers the planned acquisition of Holden's and Corn States "a strategic positive".
By buying Holden's, Monsanto gains an outlet for its genetic developments. Simply put, Monsanto can implant the genes it develops in the germplasm -- or parent seeds -- produced by Holden's.
Monsanto said more than 35 percent of the approximately 80 million acres of corn planted in the United Sates use genetic material developed by Holden's.
Filippello said the Corn States International acquisition also gives Monsanto access to some 300 million acres of corn worldwide.
The other positive for Monsanto is the ability to sell more of its flagship Roundup herbicide to farmers who plant genetically-enhanced seeds from Holden's. Monsanto has developed a gene that makes crops, like corn, resistant to use of its Roundup herbicide to kill weeds in the field.
