Competitive pressures in the U.S. cereal market are expected to put a crunch on earnings for two companies -- one the branded leader and the other the largest maker of private-label cereals.
Analysts said Kellogg Co, the largest U.S. cereal maker, is expected to report flat fourth quarter earnings, although it may be able to eke out a rise of a penny or two.
Ralcorp Holdings Inc, which makes private-label -- or store brand -- cereal, is expected to report lower earnings for its fiscal first quarter, analysts added.
In both cases, earnings are pressured by price cuts and promotions in the intensely competitive U.S. cereal market.
Kellogg has seen its market share decline recently in the face of heavy promotions by its rival, General Mills Inc . General Mills last month reported an increase in its fiscal second quarter earnings to $1.00 a share from $0.92.
"(Kellogg's) domestic earnings are clearly going to be down on lower sales and some increase in marketing spending," said Goldman Sachs analyst Nomi Ghez.
She added Kellogg's market share appeared to have risen somewhat in December as it increased promotions.
Among the other food companies reporting quarterly earnings, poor pork and beef margins are expected to hurt fourth quarter earnings for meat processor IBP Inc.
"IBP will have down earnings, how far down we don't know," Piper Jaffray analyst George Dahlman said.
Quaker Oats Co is expected to report an operating profit for the fourth quarter compared with a year ago operating loss. Quaker, however, is expected to take a charge in the fourth quarter to reduce the carrying value of its Snapple beverage business.
"The issue for Quaker is how big of a charge they take for Snapple," said BT Securities analyst John O'Neil.
Quaker said in a recent Securities and Exchange Commission filing that it was reviewing Snapple for a possible charge to reduce the carrying value. A Quaker spokesman declined to comment on the possibility of a charge in the fourth quarter.
Sara Lee Corp is expected to report a double-digit earnings increase for its fiscal second quarter, with the biggest improvement in its meat and bakery division, said Donaldson, Lufkin and Jenrette analyst William Leach.
Analysts said CPC International Inc is expected to report a smaller than typical rise in its quarterly earnings, due to the previously reported impact of high corn costs.
Company     Qtr     First Call Mean EPS Estimate   Yr-Ago EPS
CPC Int'l   Q4		   $1.08			$1.02
IBP Inc     Q4		   $0.29			$0.59
Kellogg     Q4		   $0.77			$0.77
Quaker Oats Q4	  profit $0.12		loss  $0.18
Ralcorp     Q1		   $0.20*		     $0.46
Sara Lee    Q2		   $0.63			$0.55
*Ralcorp estimate based on analysts contacted by Reuters, not First Call
((Reuters Chicago Newsdesk (312) 408-8787))
