The Hong Kong government said it is focusing on negotiating new overflight arrangements with several countries in time for the 1997 handover to China.
Up to now, Hong Kong has come under Britain's traffic rights umbrella. Now it must negotiate its own agreements so airlines can continue to fly over countries on key air routes, the government said.
A spokesman said the countries involved are located on routes from Hong Kong to Europe and to Africa, which are not signatories to International Air Services Transit Agreements with.
He declined to name them or say which negotiations were the most important as overflight fees will also be discussed and more pressure could be brought to bear on Hong Kong's negotiators.
Industry observers said the government is up against the clock to sign the new agreements before next year's handover.
"Some countries will be no problem, others may be sticklers," said a source close to the negotiating procedure.
Any proposed deal must be approved by the Joint Liaison Group, the Sino-British body set up to oversee the transition to Chinese rule. The text of a model overflight agreement to be used as the basis for the negotiations was cleared by the JLG in September.
Michael Arnold, who will be Hong Kong's chief negotiator, told Reuters that the negotiations will start as soon as possible with airlines fully involved. He said the agreements which are a form of international treaty will give greater certainty of routes.
"On flights to Europe, for example, given weather and the sometimes unstable political situation in some countries, the airlines need to have access to alternative routes. We need overflight agreements with a number of countries in order to offer several route options," he said.
He said overflight rights are now a priority following the successful completion of Hong Kong's final Air Service Agreement (ASA) with the Philippines last week.
"The number one task was to negotiate full ASAs to separate Hong Kong's air services from those previously provided for under the UK ASAs. This we have completed with the initialling of the Philippines agreement. We can now turn to focus on negotiating overflights," Arnold said.
When asked about overflight costs and whether airlines faced an increase Arnold said: "We would hope to continue the present arrangements, obtained under the UK umbrella." -- Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542 8982 Fax +44 171 542 5017
