Hong Kong-based freight forwarding company U-Freight Holdings Limited is considering opening an office in Guangzhou to take advantage of China Southern Airlines' growing international network, U-Freight managing director Anthony Fong said.
Until now, U-Freight's Chinese operations which started nine years ago have been concentrated in the north with freight forwarding operations in Beijing, Dalian and Shanghai, Fong said. U-Freight's new US$2 million, 4,200 square meter warehouse near Shanghai airport is on schedule for completion in December and Fong said he sees new potential just across the border from Hong Kong where the company was established 28 years ago.
"If Guangzhou is to have foreign flights then eventually other foreign carriers will fly into Guangzhou. It should save the trouble of trucking cargo down from Guangzhou to Hong Kong and we are investigating opening an office there," Fong said.
Industry observers said Guangzhou-based China Southern has invested in a new fleet of Boeing 777 aircraft to begin transcontinental services to Europe and the west coast of the USA and U-Freight is among a group of many well known freight forwarders who are eyeing the potential new market. Recent Hong Kong press reports said China Southern is starting a Guangzhou-Beijing-Amsterdam service next month and planning additional services to Los Angeles and Brisbane next year. No one at China Southern could be contacted for confirmation.
"We are just awaiting a start date for China Southern's new trans-Pacific flight," Fong told Reuters in an interview here.
Fong said the licensing procedure to start operations, especially to gain a Class one licence which allows freight forwarders to hold a stock of airway bills, will take time and patience.
"A proper licence in Shanghai took three years to achieve so it is early days yet but we would like to go into Guangzhou and a first step would be to set up a liaison office in the near future," Fong added. - Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542 7706 Fax+44 171 542 5017
