Investment bankers Salomon Brothers forecast "phenomenal" long term growth prospects for Thai Airways International Ltd and said management is "finally getting serious" about cargo.
In a recent 24 page equity research report, its Hong Kong based author Peter Negline recommended traders buy Thai shares below 50 baht because of the carrier's good prospects.
"Thai has phenomenal long term growth prospects resulting from a strong local economy," the report said.
In an analysis of Thai's strengthens it noted its global alliances with Deutsche Lufthansa AG and United Airlines and its regional competitive advantage because it is closer to European markets and the stability of the baht currency.
"A robust Thai economy should support strong passenger and cargo traffic growth. We assume Thai's improved service and price competitiveness will support higher load factors," Negline told Reuters.
In his report's Forecast Assumptions, Negline says economic growth on the whole should remain robust but warns of lower yields.
"This should continue to provide an ongoing platform for solid growth in passenger and cargo traffic. At an operating level, the airline is likely to suffer from further yield declines in both passenger and freight operations. However, through fiscal 1997/98, management should be able to ensure costs fall as fast, or faster, than the corresponding yield decline - largely due to the lower operating costs of the new aircraft fleet," the report said.
It also highlights opportunities for growth in lower operating costs through cargo.
"Thai has only really started to focus on growing its cargo business over the last two years, (over the last four years, freight revenue tonne kilometres (RTK's) have grown at only 11 per cent per annum) which is on the low side compared with other regional competitors. Thai has improved its freight load factors from 60 per cent in 1991 to 71 per cent in 1995, although cargo still represents only about 13 per cent of total revenue. Volume increases have been at the expense of yield declines. The recent announcement of a joint lease with Lufthansa indicates management is finally getting serious about this market," says the report.
Earlier on Tuesday the Thai Cabinet approved a proposal to allow Thai Airways to take a 40 percent stake in a new cargo company. -- Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542 7706 Fax+44 44 171 542 5017,JG 2987 7212
