This is Reuters' 2nd ex-Hong Kong air cargo market report.
It will be published regulary until a new version is published at a later date.
HONG KONG, Oct 17 - (Reuter) Current average ex-Hong Kong air cargo market rates in Hong Kong dollars per kg for a 100kg shipment, with volume-to-weight of six to one.
						Oct 17	     Sept 30
				EUROPE
HK-LHR					22.25		20.85
HK-FRA					22.40		21.09
				USA
HK-JFK					20.70		20.50
HK-LAX					21.05		20.95
				MIDDLE EAST
HK-DXB					15.80	     15.18
				ASIA PACIFIC
HK-SIN					 9.10		9.06
HK-TAIPEI				    4.10		3.90
HK-TOKYO				    30.70	     30.50
* The rates in this report were obtained by Reuters journalists on a confidential basis from a range of airlines, large forwarders and smaller cargo agents.
* All prices were quoted in Hong Kong dollars.
* The tariffs represent average calculated from a range of prices and are indicative of current market acitivity.  
Demand for space has eased slightly as a recent backlog is cleared and some airlines provide extra capacity, but key ex-Hong Kong rates have continued to rise, Reuters research shows.
Airlines and freight forwarders report brisk business as the territory's traditional peak season gathers pace and high demand for space has allowed airlines on European routes to again raise rates for the second time within three weeks.
A rise of 50 HK cents a kg on October 16 follows a HK$2 a kg rise imposed on October 1 on key routes to Europe. Transpacific demand is also said to be especially strong allowing rates to firm slightly.
Pressure for cargo space is also being exacerbated by high demand on passenger flights which is reducing bellyhold capacity for many airlines.
Sam Chung, the chairman of the Hong Kong Association of Freight Forwarding Agents and director and general manager of Fritz Air Freight (HK) Ltd, said the market was very strong especially in his company's main sector, the United States.
"Every single flight is full but space should become a little better because some airlines are putting on extra capacity. In early October there was a backlog everywhere but that is now easing," Chung said.
He also highlighted the HK$2 a kilo rate rise on routes to Europe from October 1 with more "unfair rises" due to bite.
Two U.S. airlines have drafted in extra aircraft to cope with heavy trans-Pacific demand.
Polar Air Cargo is employing two additional Boeing 747 freighters between the territory and Chicago and New York.
"At the start of October it was really busy with a lot of airlines having a backlog in Hong Kong, Japan and Taiwan. But right after China's national day and the mid-Autumn festival when a lot of factories closed down it gave us the chance to move a lot of cargo out of Hong Kong and gave us the chance to clear the backlog," said David Sung, Polar Air's Hong Kong sales manager.
More extra capacity on the trans-Pacific route has come from Evergreen International Airlines Inc which says it now offers six Boeing 747 flights a week instead of four previously. The additional flights on Mondays are to Columbus,Ohio then onto New York and Los Angeles.
"All flights are absolutely full and if we had additional flights. into Hong Kong we would have no problem filling them because there is a lot of freight being moved and a backlog is building up," said Evergreen's Vice President Kersti Krepp
There is also extra capacity being drafted onto a main European route. Lufthansa Cargo AG says it will put an additional freighter on the Hong Kong to Frankfurt route before the end of the month because of high demand.
The extra flight will increase the total number of flights Lufthansa operates to Germany in a joint venture with Cathay Pacific Cargo to 11 per week. September also saw an additional freighter being drafted onto the route increasing the number of joint freighter from nine a week during July and August to 10 now.
British Airways World Cargo ,which has three freighter flights per week between Hong Kong and London Gatwick wet-leased from Atlas Air, in addition to belly cargo space on its twice daily passenger flights to Heathrow, also reports a very strong market.
"This is the peak of the year and we have been very strong and are very pleased with our performance. Every available metre of space is full and we think that will carry on for the forseeable future," said Chris Humphrey, British Airways s regional cargo manager Pacific who is based in Hong Kong.
He said rates to Europe have increased to reflect the strength of the market and thinks another rate rise is justified.
"Fuel prices have gone through the roof. Yields are again at the same level they were last year but underlying costs are increasing, particularly fuel," complained Humphrey.
Mark Wilson, Managing Director of freight forwarders Benair Freight also said pressure for space has recently eased as a backlog is cleared.
"Space is tight but available which proves that the airlines are working together and not discounting too much. Rates have stayed firm and the airlines are trying to keep rates up," he said.
He said rates to Europe have recently increased by around 20 per cent and by 15 per cent to the U.S. Inter-Asian rates are stable where yields are traditionally stronger.
Stanley Hui, the chief operating officer of the territory's only all cargo airline AHK Air Hong Ltd, which flies 747 freighters both east and westbound, said he had no complaints especially about the trans-pacific sector.
"Unlike in previous years, there has not been that much additional capacity employed during the peak period. Demand both in and out of Europe is also firm and services to Japan are busy. After last year's record year and a slow start to this year we have high expectations about Japan," Hui said
The latest statistics from Hong Kong's Civil Aviation department show Tokyo-Narita to be the biggest importer of Hong Kong goods. 8,742 tonnes of air cargo was flown from Hong Kong to the Japanese capital during August, according to the statistics.
Hui also said he expected rates to Europe to continue to rise.
"We are not trying to be greedy but we can't lose money forever and all cargo airlines are trying to recover what we have lost," Hui said.
Many airlines report being especially badly hit by Hong Kong's seasonal monsoon winds. Northerly winds mean aircraft have to take off in a steep climb over densely populated Kowloon and payload has to be reduced.
Air France Cargo said all carriers were being affected on both European and trans-Pacific long haul routes by having to suddenly off-load pallets and a backlog of more than 400 tonnes built up in early October.
"Everybody is being hit by these weather conditions and customers are unhappy about having their cargo left behind - but so are we. It is the first time I've ever known so much having to be offloaded," said Philippe Bour, the airline's regional cargo manager for Hong Kong, China, Macau, Taiwan and South Korea.
Paul Choi, assistant general manager of MSAS Cargo International in Hong Kong said the back log has now eased, partly due to more cargo being flown from Macau.
Gemini Air Cargo flew its first McDonnell Douglas DC-10-30 freighter into the Portuguese enclave from New York on September 27 with about 40 tonnes of cargo mostly destined to be shipped to Hong Kong. The airport which opened last November says Gemini is the fourth all cargo service to serve Macau on a regular basis and unlike Hong Kong has no severe space and slot restrictions or curfew.
Hong Kong Air Cargo Terminals Ltd (HACTL), which enjoys a monopoly on cargo handling at Kai Tak airport said after a "pretty lack lustre" first half the market has picked up during August and September which should continue in the traditional peak period towards Christmas.
HACTL reported a 7.1 per cent increase in throughput during September over last year whnn exports and imports rose by 5.5 per cent to 68,673 tonnes and 7.3 per cent to 49,063 tonnes respectively over September last year.
HACTL managing director Anthony Charter said transshipments "soared" 13.7 per cent to 16,775 tonnes "which interestingly may point to sign of a regional pick-up."
"There seems to be a shortage of capacity which is traditional at this time of year along with the hike in rates. I think this year we are seeing a slightly more positive outloook," Charter said.
HACTL says it is on course for another record year and expects a rise of around four per cent which is a far cry from the 23 per cent growth in previous years but "still welcome." - Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542 8982 Fax +44 171 542 5017
