Hong Kong Air Cargo Terminals Limited (HACTL) may retain its facilities at Kai Tak as a 'down-town' depot after the territory's new airport at Chek Lap Kok opens, its managing director Anthony Charter said.
Air freight forwarders in Hong Kong said they are putting new pressure on the Government to keep Kai Tak's twin terminals open. Charter said HACTL has now made new approaches to the Government but added that a final decision is not expected until next year when a team of planning consultants report on what should happen to the valuable land which the airport occupies.
"We would be very happy to protect this bit of infrastructure which would help freight forwarders get over some of the difficulties they have with the new airport. It makes sense not to see the highly automated facilities just knocked down. We are keen on the idea of serving the freight forwarding community in the future," Charter told Reuters.
HACTL's private franchise at Kai Tak is due to run out when the new airport opens in April 1998 and its terminal facilities returned to the Government for the nominal fee of one Hong Kong dollar. HACTL will then move into its new one billion HK dollar state-of-the-art Super Terminal at Chek Lap Kok which it says will be the world's largest air freight complex under one roof.
But some freight forwarders, especially smaller companies, are baulking at the high cost of moving to the new airport, said the Hong Kong Association of Freight Forwarding Agents (HAFFA). Many firms have invested heavily in infrastructure close to Kai Tak and fear large staff relocation costs and high rents at the new out of town airport, it added.
HAFFA has supported calls for Kai Tak's cargo facilities to be retained and said it first proposed the idea more than five years ago but HACTL management then rejected it.
"It would make agents life easier if, as we proposed, there was a town centre facility," said HAFFA's chief executive Pauline Hui.
DHL International (Hong Kong) Ltd is backing the call. Andy Tseng, DHL's area manager for Hong Kong and China said he's written a letter urging that Kai Tak's cargo facilities be retained as a consolidation centre.
Supporters said the terminals could be rented out to another operator or run by HACTL.
HACTL said the former is unlikely because they own the computer software which runs the highly automated centre. Another suggestion that cargo from Kai Tak could be taken by barge to the new airport as well as along the new toll expressway has been discounted by HACTL as too slow.
HACTL said its integrated and highly automated twin cargo terminals at Kai Tak handle more than 1.5 million tonnes from 70 airlines a year making it the second busiest international cargo airport in the world. About 20 per cent of Hong Kong's external trade passes through HACTL. The company has invested more than US$256 million in Kai Tak, excluding land costs, which is probably the largest investment in air cargo facilities worldwide.
Aviation analysts said much of that investment will wasted if the Kai Tak terminals are closed down.
The lobby to keep the cargo terminal open is running alongside another campaign to keep Kai Tak open as an airport for smaller commuter aircraft. The Hong Kong government says it has rejected that proposal but is being urged to rethink its long term policy by business interests including commuter aircraft manufacturers.
HACTL, which has a monopoly on all air cargo handling at Kai Tak airport, is jointly owned by Swire Pacific Ltd, Jardine Matheson Holdings Ltd, Wharf (Holdings) Ltd, Hutchison Whampoa Ltd, China National Aviation Corp, CITIC Pacific Ltd and Cathay Pacific Airways Ltd. - Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542-7706 Fax+44 171 542-5017
