DHL Worldwide Express plans to strengthen its role as market leader in China by opening 14 new offices and employing another 600 staff within the next three years, said the company's area manager for Hong Kong and China, Andy Tseng.
DHL celebrates its tenth anniversary of China operations next month "far ahead of our competitors and with 30 per cent market share", Tseng told Reuters in his Hong Kong office near Kai Tak airport.
Tseng said China may win 10 per cent of all DHL sales within Asia by the year 2000. DHL expects to expand its Chinese network to 26 by the end of this year and 40 within the next three years from the current 19. The new offices, to include Harbin, Pudong and Kunming, are in 50-50 joint ventures witrh Chinese partners, DHL said.
DHL's China venture began in 1986 when it set up a joint venture with China's largest forwarding company Sinotrans. DHL says it received another boost three years ago when it became the first joint venture to offer express links between domestic Chinese companies.
"Choosing the right partner was vital as is demonstrating a long term committment to China. We have demonstrated that," Tseng said.
Like all fast freight companies trying to do business in China, Tseng says the lack of infrastructure is a handicap but DHL is leading the way by expanding its network.
"The distribution network and lack of freight links has been identified as the key problem. But service quality and flexibility is particularly important in China," he added.
The 20 year veteran with DHL said that unlike rivals such as Federal Express, it enjoys a competitive advantage in China by not having its own fleet of aircraft running in competition with Chinese airlines. Tseng says he wants to strengthen the company's "very good" existing relationships with third party local airlines such as China Northern and China Eastern.
Tseng also said the average express shipment is getting heavier and pointed to the marketing success of DHL's Jumbo Box as offering a simple one price product which customers find easy to understand. But he said DHL has not yet started offering the Jumbo Box to customers in China. - Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542-7706 Fax+44 171 542-5017
