All three airlines flying directly between Hong Kong and London said they can start to use a new, short cut to Europe across China from this weekend with the start of winter timetables on Sunbday October 27.
This means more cargo and less fuel can be carried along with a cut in passenger journey times of up to an hour, industry sources said.
Cathay Pacific Airways, British Airways and Virgin Atlantic all say they can begin to utilise the new northern route over China instead of the traditional longer southerly route over Thailand and India in their winter schedules. The short cut was agreed during recent talks between the British and Chinese governments, they say.
A Cathay Pacific spokesman said up to an hour can be cut off the flying time for its Boeing 747-400 aircraft on some European routes which will also have the ability to carry an additional four tonnes of cargo. BA can carry an extra 70 tonnes of air cargo a week if its twice weekly 747-400 aircraft utilise the new routing, its Hong Kong based spokesman said.
A spokesman for Virgin Atlantic said the new routing will enable its Airbus A340 aircraft to carry an extra six tonnes of freight westbound and two tonnes eastbound and save around 50,000 pounds of fuel.
Aviation analysts say the new routing offers significant cost saving advantages and allows airlines to carry full cargo loads all year round because strong headwinds during the summer restricts cargo payload.
But they say it is not all good news because the airlines haven't been granted permission for all flights.
"It is fantastic news for the airlines and very influential on the bottom line but realistically Cathay can't utilise the new routes on all flights because it has not been given a full quota and neither have the others," Peter Negline, Vice President and senior research analyst of Asia Pacific equity research at Salomon Brothers Hong Kong Limited told Reuters in an interview.
A Cathay Pacific spokesman said it will have the most access to the number of flights that can use the new routing. Other European services to Paris, Amsterdam and Frankfurt will also be able to benefit as well as London bound ones, he added.
Curfews at both Heathrow and Kai Tak airports will also cause scheduling difficulties until Hong Kong's new, around the clock airport at Chek Lap Kok is due to open in 18 months time, analysts say.
"Aircraft need to leave Hong Kong before the 11.30 pm local (16.30 GMT) curfew starts but the new routing could mean arrival at Heathrow at round 04.30 GMT which is two hours before the end of their curfew so the new routing doesn't offer a lot there,"Negline said.
"You can also see a further deterioration in cargo yields because the airlines are getting extra capacity for next to nothing," Negline added.
Negline said the airlines will also benefit from better aircraft and crew utilisation; the aircraft will be able to fly extra sectors and its crew who fly for less hours can be redeployed on other services.
Declan Magee, a Hong Kong based airline analyst for regional stockbrokers and investment bankers HG Asia also said the new routing will obviously benefit aircraft utilisation and fuel efficiency.
"Yes shorter routes will save money but if all three airlines are allowed to do the same thing that rules out competitive advantage. If only one airline could use the new route then it would be different but the consumer will feel the benefit.
Magee said the Hong Kong to London route is Cathay's fourth largest passenger revenue generating route of around HK$1.4 billion a year.
"It is a relatively important route but even if they can save four or five per cent on this route compared to Cathay's total turnover of around HK$30 billion a year.it's not that much. Yes, it's a useful way in which Cathay can offset some of the negatives it is facing in terms of yield decline," Magee said.
Analysts reckon the airlines can save around 10 tons of fuel per flight but that may be offset by expected higher overfly fees set by the Chinese who are aware of how much the airlines can save.
Analysts say the airlines need all the help they can get by utilising shorter routes and using new technology such as FANS - Future Air Navigation System which allows aircraft more direct routing. Because of successful negotiations earlier, Swissair and Lufthansa have been able to fly the shorter route over China to Europe for the past two years. - Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542-7706 Fax+44 171 542-5017
