Japan Airlines (JAL) is expanding its new express cargo service called "J Speed" to meet rising demand for rapid deliveries throughout Asia, a JAL spokesman told Reuters.
The recently introduced system guarantees delivery for shippers facing urgent deadlines on high volume cargo routes and also offers late acceptance at the departure airport and early delivery, he added in a statement.
Next on the J Speed network is a proposed service from Bangkok to Tokyo with plans for a gradual expansion over JAL's entire international network, JAL says.
Kazuto Yamamoto, JAL's assistant vice president, international sales and marketing department for freight and mail said he had high hopes for the new service which aims to boost high-yield cargo sales on key Asian routes.
"There is great potential on certain routes and we're looking closely at future expansion in the near future," he told Reuters.
The busy Tokyo Narita - Manila sector was chosen for the J Speed launch. With average annual growth in the Japan-Philippines market over the past three years of 50 per cent, JAL said there is an increasing need for an express service.
The flag carrier said there is usually a two hour deadline before departure from Japan while some regular cargo has to be accepted the day before.
J Speed cargo is accepted up to an hour before take off and, because the air waybill is faxed to Manila, the cargo is cleared through customs before the flight arrives, the airline says.
JAL said customers are prepared to pay a premium price.
"Yes, there is clear demand for this service on busy routes - from Narita to Manila and from Jakarta and Singapore to Japan. Shippers are prepared extra for the "on board" guarantee. The rates vary in each market," Yamamoto said.
The service has now been extended from Singapore and Jakarta to Japan. JAL also said it plans a return service soon from Japan to Jakarta, Kuala Lumpur and Bangkok and is also studying a service to Singapore.
JAL insists J Speed is a response to customer demand and not a competitive response to aggressive marketing by U.S. carriers.
"United Parcel Service and Federal Express Corp have many cargo products and services including door to door small package operations. J Speed is not such a small package service. It is an airport to airport guaranteed on board service featuring the latest acceptance of shipments at airport of departure with rapid clearance and delivery to consignees' agents at airport of arrival," Yamamoto said.
Typical shipments include high technology components but JAL says some cargoes are ineligible - valuables and fresh produce cannot use J Speed. --Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542 7706 Fax +44 171 542 5017
