Major airlines operating cargo flights to Europe are to raise their ex-Hong Kong cargo rates by HK80 cents per kg from November 4 to try and offset increased jet fuel prices, airline officials told Reuters.
Stanley Hui, the chief operating officer of the territory's all-cargo airline, AHK Air Hong Kong Ltd, said an emergency meeting of airlines was held in Hong Kong this morning to discuss a fuel surcharge.
Among the airlines represented were Cathay Pacific Airways Ltd, Lufthansa Cargo, Air France, Martinair and Cargolux, he said.
However British Airways World Plc -- a major carrier from Hong Kong to London was not represented, industry sources said.
"Fuel costs have escalated to such a level that it is only right and fair that the shippers share some of the cost because the impact on the airlines has been very obvious," Hui said.
Other carriers operating trans-Pacific routes for instance are also expected to follow suit with a similar increase, Hui added.  
Philippe Bour, regional cargo manager for Air France in Hong Kong said his airline will apply the increase from November 4 along with Lufthansa Cargo. Cargolux, Air Hong Kong and other carriers would follow a few days later, he added.
"It is a world-wide problem. Fuel prices in France rose 51 per cent from June to October, in Asia they have risen 33 per cent this year and something has to be done. We hope this will help us," Bour said.
Another cargo manager said, "It is not a case of running out of patience but of running out of money."
Japan Airlines Co Limited yesterday reported a 60.7 percent slump in profits in the six months to September due to higher fuel costs and the yen's retreat against the dollar.
JAL said fuel costs had risen by US$128 million compared with a year ago.
Other major Asian cargo airlines in the region say they are watching the situation closely.
Ming Fai Lai, cargo manager for China Airlines in Hong Kong, said it is waiting before deciding to follow suit but said an 80 cents rise would only have a limited benefit.
"If all European carriers unanimously raise their rates then we will follow but it is not clear if they will all adopt the same policy. 80 cents may help a little bit but for the future I don't think it will help that much," said Lai. --Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542 7706 Fax +44 171 542 5017
