Federal Express Corporation (Fedex) is planning to utilise another former U.S. military base in the Philippines, Fedex and Philippine officials told Reuters.
Senior officials from Fedex, which has its main Asian hub at the former U.S. naval base at Subic Bay, have made detailed visits to the former Clark U.S. air force base, which is trying to attract traffic to its special economic zone.
Operations Vice President at Clark International Airport Corporation, Tereso Isleta, said Fedex is expected to become the airport's first cargo operator next month with the first flight of breeding cattle from Australia.
"We have been very happy to show senior Fedex officials around and we have been to their main hub in Memphis to see how they work. The first flight of cattle from Australia is expected in the next few weeks. It is very important for us to see Fedex coming here and hopefully Clark will become a hub too and attract many more airlines," Isleta told Reuters in a telephone interview from Clark, north of Manila.
Asia Pacific public relations manager for Fedex, David Clarke, said the former base could be used as an alternative to Subic in case of bad weather and for charter traffic.
He emphasised his company's commitment to Subic Bay where Fedex recently completed the first anniversary of operations as its Asian hub.
Better known for its overnight express freight business, Fedex says the transport of live breeding cattle from Sydney, Australia would be flown into Clark aboard a Fedex McDonnell Douglas MD-11 specially adapted as an animal transport.
"It's a branch of our general operations. Charter has always played a role for us. Transporting cattle is a specialised business but we're also used to handling thoroughbred horses in Japan, Hong Kong, Singapore and the Middle East and we hope more business of this type will come our way," Clarke said.
Clark International Airport Corporation is funded by the Philippines government's Bases Conversion Development Authority, which helped establish the Clark Special Economic Zone, following the withdrawal of U.S. forces. --Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542 7706 Fax +44 171 542 5017
