Polar Air Cargo is to start new services to New Delhi, Dubai, Bangkok, Kansai in Japan and Manila within the next four months, the all cargo carrier's executive vice president Jack Kane said.
Speaking after the handover of Polar's first Boeing 747-200 and 14th 747 freighter in all, Kane said the new acquistion from Air Hong Kong will offer longer ranges, higher weights and reduced fuel consumption for the company's Asian network which is about to rapidly expand.
Polar is awaiting final U.S. Depart of Transportation approval to begin flying to Kansai after agreement with the Japanese transportation ministry that Polar should become the third U.S. all cargo carrier, he said.
"The indications seem very favourable," he said.
The U.S.-based airline has also won permission to fly to Bangkok and expects to start services to Manila in the first quarter of 1997. With approval for Kansai, and new services to London and Amsterdam which began in April, Kane said the way is now opens for a round the world service to begin early next year.
"In the next 120 days we will inaugurate services to New Delhi, Dubai, Bangkok, Kansai and the Philippines," Kane told reporters.
When the Kansai operation begin, Polar expects to offer four cargo flights a week from Hong Kong to the U.S. west coast and five or six to east coast all via Anchorage . The 747-200 means Polar no longer has to stop in Khabarovsk in Russia to refuel.
Polar does not have rights into China but has been holding discussions with Chinese airlines on a possible joint venture. Kane declined to name the possible partners but said Polar has already cooperated with China Eastern on charter cargo flights.
Kane said Polar intends to start operating a second 747-200 aircraft, an ex Philippine Airlines Combi which is to be converted, in the first quarter of next year. The company's long term strategy is to acquire two or three 747-200 aircraft each year for the next five years bringing the fleet total then to 23 or 24 aircraft.
"Our commitment is to provide our customers with a global network and let them compete against the integrators," Kane said. -- Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542 7706 Fax+44 171 542 5017
