Air Hong Kong Ltd (AHK) chief operating officer, Stanley Hui said the August 25 start of its first trans-Pacific service means the airline is now firmly headed in the right direction.
The head of Hong Kong's only all-cargo airline told Reuters in an interview said it was "an important milestone towards a much brighter future."
However Hui said the cargo carrier did not make any money in the first half of 1996 suffering, like many others, from low yields.
Last year AHK made its first ever profit and although Hui would not disclose the exact amount, he said it was "very healthy" after "huge losses" in the past.
Four years ago, things were so bad that the airline was just a telephone call away from going under, industry sources said.
But then a new management team was installed, Cathay Pacific Airways Ltd came to the rescue by taking a 75 percent stake, loss-making routes were cut, old aircraft were retired and three newly converted Boeing 747-200s acquired, Hui added.
The new aircraft are able to carry 25 tons more tonnes than the carrier's old aircraft and complete with a new Chinese wheel company logo signifying brisk business, they began a twice weekly service to Chicago on August 25.
When Air Hong Kong's third converted 747 leased from Cathay Pacific for 15 years joins the fleet in October, the Chicago service will become three times weekly.
Hui says the new route has been possible with the leasing of the three former combi 747s which formerly flew with the Brazilian airline Varig.
The aircraft, converted at Boeing facilities in Wichita, Kansas and at Hong Kong Aero Engine Services Ltd, will give AHK a much higher aircraft utilisation rate from 12 to 14 hours per day.
AHK existing fleet of older 747s are being returned to the leasing company.
"We're talking about more expensive aeroplanes but they're more reliable, with better payload and can help save on maintenance so it's a good investment for this company."Hui said.
Cathay Pacific has handed its once weekly Chicago service over to AHK in order to concentrate on its own new twice weekly freighter service to New York which also started on August 24.
The new U.S. services have been made possible after a new air agreement was drawn up between the U.S. and Hong Kong government.
AHK also fly to Dubai, Brussels and Manchester five times a week and twice weekly to Osaka. It has applied for a twice weekly service to Seoul in South Korea on Friday.
Hui said there has been a 20 per cent drop in cargo selling rates over the past six months.
"But I'm not surprised, the market is very competive, very seasonal and slow in the first half. We have seen a slower market this year consequently rates have dropped, tonnage is down, rates and yields are down but I think we are seeing a nice recovery. Developing for us and Chicago will help that. It is a very important gateway for us," Hui said.
--Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44-171-542-7706 Fax+44-171-542-5017
