An American airline has successfully completed a proving flight over Russian air space which the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) said is an important milestone in the introduction of the Future Air Navigation System (FANS) on trans-Pacific routes.
The United Airlines Boeing 747-400 flight from Chicago to Tokyo's Narita airport on November 15 is expected to be followed by more pioneering trials over the next three weeks by Singapore Airlines, Japan Airlines and Cathay Pacific Airways Limited, said David Behrens, international programme officer of the FAA.
FANS, or Communication Navigation Surveillance/Air Traffic Management (CNS/ATM), is the next generation air traffic management system which uses satellite navigation for the more efficient use of air space.
"Aircraft which are FANS equipped will have the competitive edge with reduced costs all round. The technology will mean more direct routes, less fuel burned, more cargo carried, reduced air traffic controls costs, reduced errors and ground delays -- there is no turning back", David Behrens told this week's Asian Air Cargo Summit.
The U.S. was working towards a new bilateral agreement with Russia to develop air traffic control infrastructure in the Far East to open up air space to airlines flying between Asia and American cities such as New York, Chicago and Detroit.
"There have been a lot of problems in getting demonstration flights approved by the Russian authorities. The use of English which is the international language of the skies is still a major problem. This is another milestone in the development of FANS and the most successful proving flight to date although it is still early days," Behrens said.
Speaking after the conference Behrens said further advances are hoped for at the Informal Pacific Air Traffic Control Co-ordination Group meeting in Tokyo on January 20.
Airlines which have already invested in FANS cockpit technology are waiting on the go ahead for a new "fast track" routing across the central Pacific Ocean cutting up to an hour off journey times between Hong Kong or Taipei to San Francisco or Los Angeles. China Airlines, United Airlines and Cathay Pacific which is awaiting Hong Kong government approval to use FANS cockpit technology, could be the first airlines to benefit, Behrens said.
Korean Airlines, which has to make a big U-turn to avoid military training areas near North Korea air space, is also expected to make "huge savings" from FANS technology with a 40 minute saving on U.S. bound flights from Seoul when a new agreement with the North is signed, the FAA estimate.
Only about 70 Boeing 747-400 aircraft, the inter-continental workhorse of many airlines, are currently equipped with FANS avionics but that total is about to mushroom and all airliners will be FANS equipped by the year 2002, Behrens predicted. - Air Cargo Newsroom Tel+44 171 542 7706 Fax+44 171 542 5017
