Netscape and Microsoft and others agreed on Tuesday that the so-called Internet browser wars were silly, although that did not stop some sparks from flying between the two battling CEOs at a computer conference here.
Microsoft Corp. and Netscape Communications Corp. are locked in a few battles over Internet software, with the most attention being paid to the fight for share in the Internet browser market, where Microsoft is an underdog.
"I do think there is a certain silliness about these browser wars," said Steve Case, chairman and CEO of America Online Inc, on a panel at a Gartner Group technology symposium here. Case's AOL was one of the first online services to embrace Internet Explorer as its preferred browser software, in exchange for a spot on Microsoft's Windows 95 desktop.
Case said that he believes Microsoft and Netscape will end up with comparable market share and he likened the battle to the set-top box war in the early days of the cable television industry during the 1980s.
Netscape still dominates the Internet browser market with its Navigator software, which has an approximate 70 to 80 percent share of the market.
But Microsoft recently said that its Internet Explorer is gaining momentum, as it continues to sign on more deals to have Internet Explorer bundled as the primary browser with more online services and Internet access providers.
Just last week, Internet Explorer became the preferred browser on AT&amp;T's WorldNet Internet access service, fueling some analysts to say the deal was another blow to Netscape's dominance of the browser market.
James Barksdale, president and CEO of Netscape, pointed out that while the feud between Navigator and Internet Explorer is the "current blood sport in the popular press," he pointed out that 80 percent of Netscape's revenues are from sales to the corporate network or "intranet" market.
In that market, Netscape is aiming to hold onto its dominance of the server that runs internal corporate networks and is competing with Microsoft's BackOffice and with International Business Machines Corp's Lotus Notes.
Bill Gates, chairman and CEO of the software behemoth Microsoft, said that the competition between Netscape and Microsoft is good for the market.
"We compete with Netscape and there is a lot of value there," he said, adding that Microsoft has many developers working pretty much at "full speed" to develop new Internet software. He conceded that in part, the fast-moving competition from Netscape has fueled this intensity.
One area where the sparring companies did agree was on the Internet itself, which both Gates and Barksdale said should remain free of government intervention.
"No one will come to dominate standards on the Internet, that's why it works," said Barksdale.
Gates drew laughter when he said that Microsoft, which dominates the operating system arena with Windows software, will still make "some percent" of the operating systems. But he also said that "no one will control the printing presses" of the Internet.
One Gartner Group analyst asked Barksdale if that view was contradictory with Netscape's recent request to the Department of Justice to investigate Microsoft's Internet marketing tactics.
"In that matter...all we've asked is 'let's stay with the consent decree,'" Barskdale said, referring to the 1994 consent decree between Microsoft and the U.S. Department of Justice, which set restrictions on Microsoft's behavior.
"We don't believe they are doing that," said Barksdale, in an interview with Reuters after the panel. But he declined to speak further on the DOJ's latest request for information from Microsoft, saying that he is having his lawyers do the talking.
Gates was mum on the DOJ during the panel and he shook Barksdale's hand after the session. The two also pointed out that they are working together to develop industry standards for credit card transactions over the Internet, after being on opposing sides of that battle.
"I don't want this to sound like a love-in, but Bill's company and my company work together with Carl's company (Carl Pascarella, president and CEO of Visa U.S.A.) to make (credit card transaction) standards," Barksdale said. "Otherwise we would all be dead."
But the two CEOs collided on their views of the future. Gates, who is known for being an industry visionary, forecast that within five years many things on the Internet will change and be easier to use, such as the use of URLs (universal resource locators) to find World Wide Wed sites.
"In five years I am quite optimistic that there will be some radical breakthroughs," Gates said, adding that users will look at things like URLs and see how silly they were.
Barksdale, however, pointed out that such predictions are impossible to make.
"We have to be honest, despite my learned colleague Mr. Gates's comments," Barksdale said. "It's very hard to predict five years. How many of you would have predicted two and a half years ago that we would have a panel on this topic or that Netscape would be on this panel?" he asked, pointing out that Netscape did not even exist two and a half years ago.
