International Business Machines Corp is discontinuing some unspecified research and development projects as part of a wider effort to cut costs, Louis Gerstner, the company's chairman and chief executive, said on Wednesday.
Gerstner, speaking on a panel of top IBM executives at a Gartner Group technology symposium, said IBM would cut projects for products and services it thought customers would not  want. The move is part of a reallocation of the company's $6.0 billion research budget for 1996, he said.  
"Are the dogs eating the dog food," Gerstner asked. "Is the customer liking this stuff?"
Previously, he said, IBM cut overhead expenses from its research projects. He said that on Monday he sat down with several top IBM executives and painstakingly reviewed the company's entire research and development program.
"We have been able to cut overhead," Gerstner said. "A lot of what has been done in the past was cutting duplication....We are now at the point where we are cutting projects."  
Gerstner took over IBM in April 1993 and quickly embarked on a massive cost-cutting program.
"We spend $6 billion in research. That just happens to be equal to Microsoft's revenues," Gerstner said.
He said the company had moved about 20 percent of the R&amp;D budget to its networked computing research.
In 1995, IBM spent a total of $6.01 billion on research.
Gerstner declined to be more specific about what projects IBM decided to halt. But he stressed that IBM was discontinuing "projects" -- not products that IBM's customers depend on. "I don't want to start any rumors here," he said.  
Analysts said Gerstner was likely trying to prevent any possible misinterpretation of his comments and stop any speculation that IBM was cutting research on products already on the market, such as its much-maligned OS/2 Warp operating system.
"Some industry solutions will go away," said Gary Helmig, a SoundView Financial analyst, referring to projects aimed at specific industries, such as travel. He declined to speculate any further on what projects IBM was cutting.
"We used to develop solutions country by country," said Nick Donofrio, an IBM senior vice president, who was on the Gartner conference panel.  
When asked why IBM remained in the unprofitable home PC business, executives said the potential of the $60 billion market -- which may grow to $100 billion by 2000 -- was too rich to ignore. A second reason is that IBM is able to leverage its development and manufacturing of corporate PCs, they said.
"We are not doing this just so we can put a box in the home," said Robert Stephenson, a senior IBM vice president in charge of the PC business. "I hope that we will (eventually) have a server in every home."  
"We can make a profit," Stephenson added.
Industry analysts have said the home PC business is the least profitable segment of the market. Indeed, many companies are losing money, they say.
