Prodigy Inc. said Wednesday that on Monday it will launch its Internet-based version of the Prodigy online service, called Prodigy Internet, with two pricing models, including a flat-rate plan of $19.95 a month for unlimited service.
The company said its introduction of Prodigy Internet makes it the first of the original three commercial online service companies to offer its rebuilt service, embracing the open technological and content standards of the Internet, the global computer network.
Prodigy also said its Internet focus will form the basis of its international expansion plans, and that it will offer a Spanish-language version of Prodigy Internet in Mexico early next year.
Sources close to the White Plains, N.Y.-based company said the online service plans to spend about $100 million in 1997 to market the new service, through advertising in newspapers, magazines, trade journals and radio, but for now it has no plans for television, because it feels it has an established brand name.
Prodigy Internet is targeted at the "New to the Net" market and the 90 percent of American homes that have yet to sign up for an online or Internet service provider.
"The focus of the new offering is certainly not focused at our existing subscriber base," company President Paul Delacey, said in a telephone interview. "It's focused at the very broad market out there who are not current users or who are users of bare-bones ISPs (Internet service providers), who are looking for more for their money."
Prodigy Internet is designed to overcome current limitations in navigating the Internet while also addressing the fears and anxieties that many Internet novices experience.
Prodigy Internet would offer two pricing schemes -- a low-cost, entry-level plan for low-volume users and a flat-rate plan for Internet enthusiasts.
The company said its basic plan costs $9.95 a month for 10 hours usage of both regular Prodigy and Internet content, with additional hours at $2.50 each.
The other plan costs $19.95 a month and provides unlimited access to Prodigy, Prodigy Internet and add-on features not available elsewhere, the company said .
Prodigy will still offer its current proprietary online service, which it is calling Prodigy Classic, but it will offer incentives for its current members to migrate to Prodigy Internet, such as two months free, with 20 hours of usage.
"We expect that it's going to be a long, protracted service," Delacey said. "I wouldn't be surprised if we are still offering Prodigy Classic a few years from now."
Prodigy will be the first to deliver an Internet-based service of the three major online service providers.
One rival, CompuServe Inc. of Columbus, Ohio, has announced plans to rebuild its service around Internet protocols and standards, but it has not yet begun offering its Internet-based service.
The leading online service provider, America Online Inc., says it brings more users to the Internet via its proprietary service, but it does not have any immediate plans to move its service to the Internet.
And indeed, AOL and other industry pundits, some of whom have predicted the demise of online services because of the growth of the Internet, are seeeing a blurring of distrinctions between online services and the Net.
AOL says it is the Internet and a whole lot more.
Last week, the fourth major entrant in online services, Microsoft Corp., rolled out a hybrid Internet online service as it relaunched the Microsoft Network.
Since its August 1995 rollout, Microsoft has become the third-largest online service, as Prodigy membership has declined. Prodigy says it currently has 1 million households, or about 1.6 million total members. But some analysts dispute these figures, saying it has fewer members.
Prodigy also announced a licensing deal with privately held Progressive Networks to provide Real Audio technology to be integrated with Prodigy Internet. Real Audio software enables users to listen to music and other audio material on the Net.
Prodigy also said that its Africa Online unit is now providing Internet access in Ivory Coast as well as in Kenya.
Prodigy said its Internet service is designed to work with two leading Web browsers, Microsoft Corp.'s Internet Explorer and Netscape Communications Corp.'s Navigator, but Internet Explorer is its preferred browser through a cross-distribution pact announced last week.
The online service, formerly a joint venture owned by International Business Machines Corp. and Sears Roebuck Corp., is now owned by a group of private investors, including Grupo Carso, a leading Mexican industrial company.
In July, the privately held investor group, called International Wireless, merged with Prodigy. The group's founders, Greg Carr and Delacey, are now at the helm of Prodigy. Carr is chairman of Prodigy Inc.
