Compaq Computer Corp., the world's biggest personal computer maker, said Wednesday that profits jumped 43 percent in the third quarter on higher sales of PCs and accessories, as well as streamlined operations.
The results exceeded published estimates on Wall Street, but Compaq's stock fell $1.125 to $73.625 on the New York Stock Exchange after it had risen sharply in recent weeks ahead of the earnings report.
Houston-based Compaq said net income for the three months ended Sept. 30 rose to $350 million, or $1.26 a share, from $245 million, or 89 cents a share, in the 1995 period.
Analysts had forecast earnings of $1.07 a share, according to First Call, which tracks profit estimates.
Sales grew 25 percent to $4.5 billion from $3.6 billion.
Compaq said its accessories business, which includes monitors, hard drives, keyboards and compact disc drives, grew significantly in the third quarter and remained one of its most profitable segments.
"We're very pleased with Compaq's continuing solid financial performance and especially with improvements in earnings and the growth of gross margins to 23.8 percent (of revenues)," Compaq President Eckhard Pfeiffer said.
Compaq said it now has the strongest line-up of products and alliances in its history. At the end of October it plans to launch powerful computer workstations that run Microsoft Corp.'s Windows NT operating system, priced 50 percent below other workstations, for engineers and other users.
The company said it still expected a good fourth quarter, which is traditionally its strongest, driven by Christmas sales of PCs.
"Demand is strong," said John Dean, a Salomon Brothers analyst. "In June, they rolled out their best product line they have ever had and their competition has not done a great job in some international markets, such as Europe."
Compaq Chief Financial Officer Earl Mason said in an interview that he was comfortable with analysts' estimates of $1.40 a share for the fourth quarter, but many analysts said he was being cautious.
"He is clearly conservative," said Eugene Glazer, a Dean Witter analyst. "This is the same man who said on the second-quarter conference call that he was comfortable with $1.03 a share and they came in at $1.25 a share."
In the quarter, Compaq generated almost three times as much cash as in the year-earlier period, $3.2 billion, through improved inventory, asset and receivables management.
"As the team continues to work on the balance sheet as a major focus and as we continue to focus on operations, cash ought to increase," Mason said.
He said Compaq plans to expand its international sales operations and may also make selective acquisitions in the computer networking and corporate-wide computing areas.
Net income for the first nine months of 1996 grew 20 percent to $851 million, or $3.07 a share, from $707 million, or $2.59 a share. Revenues rose to $12.7 billion from $10.1 billion.
