International Business Machines Corp reported strong third quarter results on Monday but raised concern about the fourth quarter, sending shares on a roller-coaster ride.
IBM's third quarter earnings of $2.45 a share was just two cents above the Wall Street consensus estimate of $2.43. IBM opened off, then climbed to 135-3/8 during its analysts' call.
But analysts said comments by its chief financial officer about continuing negative impact from currency, memory prices and higher expenses dampened his otherwise bullish outlook.  
"There were some cautionary comments about fourth quarter," said Jay Stevens, a Dean Witter analyst, adding that he was revising his fourth quarter estimates.
Some analysts started cutting fourth quarter numbers after the conference call, reflecting the company's comments about a bigger currency impact, continued drop in memory chip prices and higher-than-expected fourth quarter restructuring costs.
In general, analysts said they were pleased with IBM's ongoing cost-cutting, its successful transition to new products in all its hardware areas and its investments in its future growth. Revenue growth was also better than expected.  
"I think the most impressive was the revenue growth," said Stephen Dube, a Wasserstein Perrella analyst. "It's coming from all other products except for mainframes." As expected, IBM said its mainframe revenues fell in the quarter.
Previously, IBM had expected that currency and memory chip prices would have a diminished impact on the second half.
But Monday, IBM said it could have a slightly bigger negative impact from currency rates than the $0.08 a share it saw in the third quarter and memory prices would continue to hurt its semiconductor business, comments that had a dampening effect on analysts hoping for a very strong fourth quarter.  
Analysts still expect IBM to report a strong fourth quarter, because many other products are doing well and it will also begin to see sales of its recently shipped models of its lower-cost mainframes. But they also need to account for IBM's comments that it will begin spreading out some of its mainframes sales over several quarters.
G. Richard Thoman, IBM's chief financial officer, told Wall Street that a "growing proportion" of IBM's mainframes sales are going through its computer services business, and therefore, IBM will not see the full sales in a quarter for all its machines.  
"If you sell a mainframe for $100,000 and you lease it or it's on a services contract ... rather than $100,000 at once, you have $8,000 a quarter," Thoman said in an interview, adding that this is "just an example."
Thoman buoyed analysts with news that IBM's mainframe installations, which grew 25 perent, are growing "almost back to 1980s" levels. But even with such strong customer interest, IBM's prices are still so low that revenues are still expected to decline, while mainframe profits are forecast to be hefty.
"This quarter it did not come from mainframes," said Stephen Dube, a Wasserstein Perella Securities analyst.
"Mainframes are not a growth area for them," he said. But mainframes are still IBM's second most profitable hardware product, after its AS/400 minicomputers.
The fourth quarter was also marred by a prediction that IBM will take a bigger-than-expected restructuring cost. Originally, IBM had predicted about $200 million per quarter this year, but said on Monday that it will spend an additional $100 million to $200 million in the fourth quarter.
IBM said the increase resulted from more employees taking its voluntary buyout plan in Europe in the fourth quarter.
