International Business Machines Corp. Monday reported a third-quarter profit that came in a shade better than Wall Street had expected, boosted by strong sales of personal computers and services.
The world's largest computer maker said net earnings were $1.29 billion, or $2.45 a share, for the quarter, compared with a loss of $538 million, or 96 cents a share, in the year-ago quarter.
Excluding a one-time charge of $1.8 billion related to its Lotus Development Corp. acquisition from the year-ago period, IBM's earnings were $1.3 billion in the 1995 quarter.
Sales grew 8 percent to $18.06 billion from $16.75 billion on the strength of PCs, minicomputers and computer services, IBM said. As expected, sales of mainframe computers declined.
Wall Street took IBM shares for a rollercoast ride after the report. They fell initially, then rallied on comments by the chief financial officer, and closed a fraction higher.
The midday rally took IBM to a new high for the year of $135.375. The stock closed at $130, up 75 cents.
The rally followed remarks by Chief Financial Officer G. Richard Thoman, who said in a meeting with analysts that he was "very comfortable" with the computer giant's prospects for the rest of 1996.
"I feel very good about the quarter and very good about the year," Thoman said.
But analysts still were concerned about company warnings that currency exchange rates, low prices for memory chips and higher-than-expected restructuring costs would hurt fourth quarter results.
"There were some cautionary comments about the fourth quarter," said Jay Stevens, a Dean Witter analyst who was among several who lowered their fourth quarter profit estimates.
Analysts said they generally were pleased with IBM's ongoing cost-cutting, its successful transition to new products in all its hardware areas and its investments in its growth. Revenue growth was also better than expected.
"I think the most impressive was the revenue growth," said Stephen Dube, an analyst with Wasserstein Perrella.
While mainframe computers no longer generate sales growth for Armonk, N.Y.-based IBM, they remain one of the company's important profit centres.
Thoman told analysts that more of IBM's mainframes sales were coming through its computer services business, and that IBM will not see the full impact of sales in one quarter for its new machines.
"If you sell a mainframe for $100,000 and you lease it or it's on a services contract ... rather than $100,000 at once, you have $8,000 a quarter," Thoman said in an interview, citing an example.
The company said revenues were higher in North America, Asia and Latin America but were flat in Europe. Revenue at its services division grew 26 percent to $3.9 billion, IBM said.
Total hardware sales rose 8 percent to $8.4 billion. PC sales, AS/400 minicomputers, and storage systems were up, while RS/6000 work stations, mainframes, and semiconductors fell.
IBM said pricing pressures hurt its semiconductor business.
Software revenues were off 1 percent to $3.1 billion, largely due to a decline in host-based software, which runs on mainframes. Distributed software revenues grew significantly from the 1995 period. Maintenance revenues fell 7 percent to $1.8 billion.
