Unisys Corp. posted improved results in the third quarter, the company said Wednesday, as its new business structure began to pay off, while Stratus Computer Inc. reported better-than-expected profits.
Unisys, based in Blue Bell, Pa., reported a third quarter profit of $14.2 million, but a loss of 9 cents a share after paying $30.2 million in dividends on preferred stock. That compared with a net loss of $32.2 million, or 36 cents a share a year ago.
Revenues for the third quarter were $1.63 billion, up 9 percent from $1.49 billion in the year-ago quarter.
Unisys said revenues were up at each of its three business units: information services, computer systems and computer services. The three units were formed in a restructuring.
"After nine months of operations under the new business structure, our three businesses ... are more cost-competitive, streamlined, and focused on capturing opportunities in their respective markets," said James Unruh, chairman and CEO.
Unisys shares closed at $6.875, up 37.5 cents, on the New York Stock Exchange.
Unisys said its computer systems group has made excellent progress in working through a major product transition to its new lower-cost mainframes, which have experienced a delay as it tested problems with a new chip.
Unisys said while the transition continued to affect its results, sales of computer systems were up 14 percent and profitability in this unit "rebounded nicely" in the quarter.
Analysts said a sale of more than 50,000 election systems in Brazil helped its computer systems unit. Revenue increased strongly both in the United States and internationally.
"The Brazilian deal was over $50 million," said John Jones, a Salomon Brothers analyst.
Unisys said it planned to meet its revised shipment schedule for its new mainframe computers, which are a major transition to a new lower-cost architecture. Analysts said they expected the high-end versions of these systems to begin shipping around March and April.
Separately, Stratus Computer Inc. of Marlboro, Mass., reported a better-than-expected third quarter, citing a positive contribution from its once-beleaguered software business and improved sales of its new computers.
Stratus reported third quarter income of $10.8 million, or 45 cents a share, compared with a loss of $9.3 million, or 40 cents a share in the third quarter of 1995.
Revenues totalled $150 million vs. $151 million last year.
Stratus's results were better than Wall Street expectations. According to First Call, the consensus estimate was for third quarter earnings of 42 cents a share. The company's shares closed at $24.25, up 25 cents, on the NYSE.
Stratus said its software business contributed to earnings for the first time this year, as the benefits of its recent restructuring began to take effect.
"With a sharpened focus on the best opportunities, we expect that results will continue to improve in this part of our business," said Bill Foster, chairman and CEO, in a statement. Stratus restructured its software unit in the second quarter.
Hardware revenues were up 15 percent on a sequential basis and were up 5 percent vs. the year-ago period, as its Continuum Series computer line saw strong sales growth. It expects even stronger Continuum growth in the current quarter.
Jones of Salomon said its new Radio systems, which run Microsoft Corp.'s NT operating system, will also be a contributor when it begins volume shipments this quarter.
Stratus develops so-called fault-tolerant computers specifically designed with a backup system in case of system failures.
