A top executive at Compaq Computer Corp. said Thursday he was leaving the world's biggest personal computer maker and joining an Internet startup, giving credibility to the startup and setting in motion a realignment of Compaq's sales managers.
The executive, Ross Cooley, is leaving a position where he was in charge of Compaq's $7 billion North American computer business for a job at a four-month-old company with the high-tech name of pcOrder.com
At pcOrder.com, Cooley, 55, will fill the as-yet unfilled positions of chairman and chief executive officer and have a salary of $1 a year, plus stock options.
His move from an executive suite at a Fortune 500 company to a technology startup mirrors that of several other executives over the past few years, notably, the departure of Alex Mandl from AT&amp;T earlier this year.
Cooley's move provides instant credibility to pcOrder.com, which provides a marketplace on the Internet for buying and selling personal computers and related equipment.
Cooley's retirement had been rumored in the industry for several months, and Compaq announced that James Schraith, formerly president of The Cerplex Group Inc. and president of AST Research Inc., is replacing Cooley.
"Ross's plan to retire has been in discussion for awhile and there were some rumors flying," Eckhard Pfeiffer, president and CEO of Compaq, said in an interview. "The time has come and obviously as you can see the succession is already in place ... Ross has been a great leader."
At the same time, Compaq created a new sales infrastructure, hiring Richard Snyder, a Dell Computer Corp. executive, for a newly-created position of general manager, worldwide sales. All the heads of Compaq's five geographical sales regions -- Asia Pacific, Europe, Middle East and Africa, Japan, Latin America and North America -- will report to him.
Previously, these regions all reported directly to Pfeiffer. But as Compaq has quickly grown to an almost $18 billion company in recent years, Pfeiffer said he needs another executive to stay in touch with the day-to-day activities of its worldwide sales and support organization.
"Fifteen people have been reporting to me up until this morning when we announced this change," Pfeiffer said. "That is a huge top management organization. As the company grows, my tasks change."
Compaq has grown from its origins as one of the first companies to successfully clone the IBM PC in the early 1980s to become the leading PC maker in the world. Cooley is known for his strong relationships with the PC sales channel and his role in building Compaq's massive distribution.
"My feelings in joining pcOrder are similar to those I had in joining Compaq almost 13 years ago," Cooley said in a statement. "Back then, I saw the irrefutable logic of the PC as a new paradigm in computing. Today, I believe pcOrder's technology and vision represent an irrefutable value proposition."
Before joining Compaq in 1984, Cooley held several sales and marketing positions at International Business Machines Corp., where he worked for 18 years.
"Getting Cooley is really a coup for pcOrder," said John McCarthy, a Forrester Research analyst, adding that Cooley's connections in PC distrubution will give pcOrder more credibility as it builds its system. Cooley's acceptance of $1 a year for salary, plus stock options, is also a "big bet on the company's upside (potential)," McCarthy said.
pcOrder for now is still private, but the company is contemplating a public offering eventually.
"We do not have a set plan or a set timetable, but we are seriously considering it," said founder and President Christina Jones. Jones will continue as president of pcOrder. The post of chairman and CEO had been vacant since the start-up was founded in June.
pcOrder.com is a marketplace on the Internet, where PC makers, components makers and distributors list information and receive orders.
Currently, sales representatives and customers user pcOrder to configure build-to-order PCs, compare prices, and place orders over the Internet. The system contains information on over 150,000 products in the PC industry from over 800 manufacturers.
