Compaq Computer Corp., the world's largest personal computer maker, will launch its first computer workstations this week with low-cost entrants that already have at least one workstation maker scrambling.
"They have a fighting chance to really threaten some of the traditional vendors," said Keren Seymour, an analyst with International Data Corp., a market research firm.
On Tuesday Compaq will unveil three systems in the "personal workstation" area, the faster-growing segment of the $15.1 billion market for workstations -- high-powered computers used by engineers and designers to perform complex calculations requiring enormous power.
Traditional workstations run on the UNIX operating system and the market has been dominated by Sun Microsystems Inc., Digital Equipment Corp., International Business Machines Corp. and Hewlett-Packard Co.
But in the past two years, Microsoft Corp's Windows NT operating system has been making major inroads and a host of companies now develop lower-cost workstations running NT.
According to IDC, the personal workstation market -- workstations selling at prices from $4,500 to $10,000 -- is growing at a faster pace than traditional, UNIX-based arena, where systems cost from $17,000 up to $100,000.
While Windows NT cannot yet handle some of the memory-intensive, highly technical applications, Seymour said, NT-based workstations are widely used for financial modeling, animation, and computer-aided design.
Engineers can also run their desktop applications, such as spreadsheets, word processing, and electronic mail, on the same system, instead of having two separate computer systems.
"It's growing at an average rate of 44 percent a year," Seymour said of the personal workstation area, compared with traditional workstation growth of 7.5 percent, on a compounded annual growth rate, through the year 2000.
Already, Houston-based Compaq's expected entry in the market has at least one major vendor nervous.
Last week, IBM held a hastily-arranged conference call for analysts to discuss the formation of a new business unit that will develop Intel-based workstations running NT.
"It was an answer to Compaq's initiative," said Sam Albert, an industry consultant in Scarsdale, N.Y. Otherwise, he asked, "Why would IBM give a heads up for a product that isn't ready until March?"
IBM's current line of workstations, the RS/6000 family, are designed around IBM's PowerPC chip and run on the UNIX operating system. In its third-quarter earnings report, however, IBM said its workstation business was flat, another indicator of the increasingly popularity of the lower-cost NT-based machines.
Compaq is expected to introduce three models in the $5,000 to $10,000 range, IDC's Seymour said. A Compaq spokeswoman declined to comment on the products to be unveiled Tuesday.
PC Week, an industry trade magazine, reported last week that Compaq will price its entry-level workstation at $5,000, targeted to molecular modeling and computer-aided design.
Two other models, for the animation creation business, are priced from $8,000 to $10,000, PC Week said.
As part of its recent product revamp, Silicon Graphics Inc., long a leader in the animiation workstation area, also recently introduced a less-expensive model called the O2, which runs on UNIX, in response to the growth in the NT-based machines.
But analysts said SGI and Sun Micro will not likely embrace the Microsoft operating system NT anytime soon, even though it is poised to become the faster-growing workstation segment.
"Sun and SGI would rather die than do NT," said Seymour. "That's the unfortunate thing ... At some point, the NT market share is going to be bigger than theirs."
