America Online Inc., responding to the competion posed by the Internet, said Tuesday it would reorganize its business and unveiled a flat-rate $19.95-a-month pricing plan.
The world's biggest online services company said it was taking $460 million in charges this year as it restructures its operations.
As part of its reorganization, AOL plans to separate into three operating units -- AOL Networks, to oversee its flagship Internet online service; AOL Studios, for creating online programming; and ANS Communications, its network arm, the Dulles, Va.-based company said.
AOL said it would begin offering a number of new pricing options, including a flat monthly rate of $19.95 for unlimited access. The pricing action, which was widely expected, matches the recent pricing by Microsoft Corp. when it re-launched the Microsoft Network and the rates of Internet access providers.
As part of its restructuring, AOL named Robert Pittman, former chief exectutive of MTV Networks, to oversee AOL Networks. Pittman, most recently chief executive of Century 21 Real Estate Corp., had forged MTV into the first profitable basic cable network company.
Pittman also headed Time Warner's Inc.'s Six Flags amusement park chain, where he oversaw four straight years of record growth in attendance, revenues and earnings, AOL said.
The company said it was taking a $385 million charge in its fiscal first quarter, which ended Sept. 30, to account for deferred subscriber acquisition costs, an accounting method for which it has been heavily criticised by Wall Street.
AOL also said it plans to take a one-time charge of up to $75 million in the current quarter for costs it expects to incur as it reorganizes.
AOL's stock, which recently moved to the New York Stock Exchange from the Nasdaq market, jumped $1 to $25.675 and it was among the most active issues on the NYSE, as Wall Street applauded its rejigging of its accounting methods.
"We are moving to remove this distraction from earnings," AOL Chairman Steve Case told reporters on a conference call. "The focus here is to simplify how people really look at this business. We are confident that people will see the underlying momentum."
Analysts do expect some pressure on the company's gross profits as a result of the new pricing, but they said the moves were necessary to compete with the growing pressures from Internet access providers and to keep its subscribers.
AOL expects to report a second fiscal quarter loss, break-even in the March quarter and return to profitability in the quarter ending in June, its fourth fiscal quarter.
"It's a very bold, clever and necessary set of moves by America Online to get their financial house in order and reposition themselves as a diversified media company," said Adam Schoenfeld, a vice president at Jupiter Communications.
"AOL was for a long time able to ignore the going rate and market vicissitudes because of its pre-eminent position, but those positions only last so long," Schoenfeld added.
AOL said the company added nearly 250,000 net new subscribers in October as it began to address some of the customer retention problems it encountered during the traditionally slower summer months.
Case said the company was still on target for reaching its 10 million subscribers sometime during calendar 1997.
"The phones have been ringing off the hook today from people who are eager to subscribe to the new AOL," Case said. "We now believe we have the strategy in place and a team in place to take AOL to the next level."
Ted Leonsis, who currently heads AOL Services Co., was named to head the newly formed AOL Studios, and Bruce Bond, hired this year to lead ANS Communications, will continue in his current role with that unit.
AOL said its new, more competitive pricing structure would take effect immediately.
The plans calls for two unlimited pricing tiers to provide a "comfort factor" for heavy and medium users, and a $4.95 plan for light users. AOL said it will offer a standard monthly plan for unlimited AOL use, including Internet access, for $19.95.
It will also offer advance-payment rates of $14.95 a month for customers who pay for two years, and $17.95 per month for those who pay in advance for one year.
The company also said it will charge a "bring-your-own-access" rate of $9.95 per month, offering unlimited access to the proprietary content available only on AOL to people who already have a separate Internet access connection.
AOL will also offer a light-usage programme providing three hours of AOL a month for $4.95, with additional time priced at $2.50 per hour.
