America Online Inc, the world's largest online service, said with the changes it implemented earlier this fall and its major restructuring announced this week, it is seeing a renewed momentum.
Steve Case, AOL chairman and CEO, told the company's annual meeting that with the reoganization of AOL, its new flat-rate pricing, and its big accounting changes, "the pieces are now in place" for growth, not only in new subscribers, but with major new sources of revenue, such as advertising.  
"Now we have a new structure in place...and the momentum is stronger than ever," Case told shareholders, adding that in the month of October alone, AOL added 250,000 new subscribers, a sign of its "renewed momentum."
The company, which has seen its stock decline, has been under pressure from the lower-cost Internet access services and has seen its subscriber growth slow this summer.  
AOL, based in Dulles, Va., was further pressured when Microsoft Corp relaunched the Microsoft Network this month at a flat price of $19.95 for unlimited access, on par with most direct Internet access services.
Previously, AOL had added a 20/20 pricing plan to combat the growing competition, with 20 hours for $19.95 a month, in addition to its $9.95 for 10 hours plan.  But on Monday, it succumbed with its own flat rate $19.95 a month, and it will discontinue its direct Internet access, called GNN.  
Case and other AOL executives highlighted to shareholders how the company will see new sources of revenue from advertising and merchandising and how one area of its new business will be running on a cable industry model, with more revenues from advertising than subscriber fees.
"Increasingly, we are evolving where we depend less on subscriber revenue and increasingly on advertising and other sources," said Lennert Leader, the company's chief financial officer.  
One of the areas from which the company expects this growth to come is its new unit AOL Networks, headed by former MTV executive Bob Pittman, to oversee AOL's flagship online service.  The other two units in AOL's reorganization are its AOL Studios, to create content for its service and ANS Communications, to manage the core network infrastructure.
Pittman said he expects that in the future, over 50 percent of AOL's revenues will come from advertising and other revenue sources, such as merchandising the AOL brand name, through books, television, etc.  
"To me, it looks very similar to the cable network business," Pittman said, adding that in the early days of Viacom Inc's MTV network, subscriber revenue was greater than advertising revenue.  "Our growth curve looks very similar to the cable business.  Ad revenue is growing faster than subsciber revenues."
Pittman said he plans to "ride the tremendous wave" of AOL's brand recognition for new sources of revenue growth, for which he said there are multi-levels of possibilities. One area, he mentioned after his second day on the job, is the catalog business, which can move to electronic shopping.  
Shareholders, some of whom said the stock has been a very good investment because of its many stock splits, said they were pleased with AOL's recent actions, in particular the measure to restructure accounting methods.
"The fact that they are getting a more straightforward accounting system is a step in the right direction," said David Ryan, a retired shareholder from the Washington, D.C. area. "Their financial statements were hard to understand. It's more straightforward now."  Ryan said the stock has split three times since he has owned it in the past four or five years.  
AOL said on Monday that it will now expense all its marketing costs, which includes the hefty subscriber acquisition costs, as they are incurred, instead of deferring those costs over time.
To reflect those immediate changes, AOL is taking a $385 million restructuring charge in the September quarter, to account for the balance of its deferred subscriber acquisition costs.  AOL CFO Leader also told the meeting that the cost to acquire new subscribers will be lower in the future, as AOL depends less on sending out floppy disks, and as AOL comes with more new PCs.
"The good news is the growth is accelerating," Case said. "We have taken the step of expensing the marketing and we can avoid some of the debates about the earnings."
