Upstart satellite company EchoStar Communications Corp -- in the business only since March -- gave the nascent industry a major jolt this month when it cut prices sharply.
Then on Monday, Thomson, which dominates the satellite TV dish market, matched EchoStar's $199 price.
Thomson executives said the new price will surely shake up the industry and fuel sales for what is the said to be the fastest growing consumer electronics product ever -- one that even now is taking market share from the cable industry.  
"It will completely change the nature of the business," said Joe Clayton, an executive vice president at Thomson, the U.S. unit of Thomson-CSF in France.
The move by Thomson cut the price of the RCA brand digital satellite system by as much as $200 a unit. Combined with a $200 cash back offer by programming providers DirecTV -- a unit of Hughes Electronics Corp -- and U.S. Satellite Broadcasting Co, it cuts the total price to $199 for consumers who pre-pay for one year of programming.
The lower price will make it harder for new entrants in the industry to make money.  
"We know the telcos and the cable companies are getting more involved," Clayton said. "We are going to capitalize on our strengths now."
He added that the $199 price will make the "awareness base explode."
Thomson has an estimated 45 percent of the digital satellite system dish market, which amounted to 3.4 million units at the end of July, according to the Carmel Group.
"It's been a real winner for them," said Jimmy Schaeffler, an analyst at Carmel, a market research firm in Carmel, Calif. "Plus it has launched them into the international marketplace."  
Schaeffler said that, outside the United States, satellite television is gaining markets where there is no cable because it can leapfrog installing massive cable systems.
"Most of the rest of the world is not very cable wired, so there is a clear opportunity for direct broadcast satellite," Schaeffler said. Satellite TV is also becoming big in the U.S., as vaunted digital cable systems undergo trials.
New competitors see an opportunity in digital satellites -- a technology that is here now and working. MCI Communications, aligned with Rupert Murdoch's New Corp Ltd, already has a valuable U.S. satellite slot.  
When asked how low prices of the satellite dishes could go, Clayton joked he had never seen prices in consumer electronics go up. Analysts expects prices to keep falling.
"Maybe Charlie will take it to zero, but I don't think we will," Clayton said of EchoStar chairman Charles Ergen.
A spokeswoman said Englewood, Colo.-based EchoStar, which launched its satellite network in March, already has 125,000 subscribers for its programming, which has 40 TV channels and 30 of music, compared with 175 channels offered by DirecTV. The launch next month of a second satellite will increase its offerings to up to 200 channels, EchoStar said.
