America Online Inc., the world's largest online service, Thursday reported a first quarter net loss of $353.7 million due to its widely-expected restructuring charges to change its accounting practices.
The Dulles, Va.-based company said its loss, of $3.80 a share, in the first quarter ended Sept. 30, included a write-off of $385.2 million in marketing costs it had originally planned to defer for up to two years.
The company announced its write-off plans last week when it also unveiled a flat-rate pricing plan of $19.95 a month, and a corporate realignment into three business units. Wall Street has largely applauded the changes in its accounting, because some investors said the practice inflated earnings.
AOL also said its total revenues jumped 77 percent in the quarter, including a boost from advertisers and electronic commerce. Revenues climbed to $349.9 million from $197.9 million a year ago.
AOL said its other revenues, from sources such as advertising and electronic commerce, rose to a record of $38.8 million, roughly 24 percent above the June quarter levels.
AOL said eight advertisers have committed to spend $1 million or more this fiscal year, as it moves to seek more revenues beyond its base subscriber fees, which still make up the lion's share of its revenues.
Before the big accounting charge, AOL said it earned $19 million, or 17 cents a share, exactly in line with the mean estimate on First Call, which compiles analysts' estimates.
Revenues fell slightly short of some expectations because of the one-day outage of its service in August, analysts said.
Abhishek Gami, an analyst with Nesbitt Burns Securities, estimates the almost 19-hour outage on Aug. 7 cost AOL about $6.5 million in lost revenues and to pay subscriber credits.
However, AOL said its customer retention rate improved as the quarter progressed, reaching its best levels in September since mid-1995. Customer churn rate, or the drop-off in new customers, has been an issue at AOL, particularly this summer when subscriber growth slowed.
AOL also said it saw strong subscriber growth following the September launch of its new marketing campaigns. It added 400,000 new subscribers in the first quarter.
With the addition of nearly 275,000 new members in October, AOL said its total subscriber count reached 6.9 million worldwide. Analysts said 35,000 of those subscribers were from its online service in England, France and Germany.
AOL also said average hourly usage improved to 6.95 hours per member in the recent period, and in October, hit its highest level in the company's history.
"In the spring we indicated that member growth would slow in the summer, but would likely pick back up in the fall as we rolled out our 3.0 software and increased our marketing expenditures," said AOL CEO Steve Case, in a statement. "We're pleased to report that growth has indeed accelerated, and now....we believe we are poised for continued strong growth."
Last week, AOL said it would write off $385 million in the September quarter to account for the balance of its hefty subscriber acquisition costs, such as its mass mailing of floppy disks. It had been deferring certain marketing costs and amortizing some costs over a period of 24 months.
Analysts said they are now waiting to see how the new flat-rate pricing policy will effect the company's profit margins, which are expected to decline from the plan. The heavier users of AOL will now simply pay an all-you-can-eat rate of $19.95 instead of the heavier bills they incurred.
Th company acknowledged in a statement that its new pricing plan will result in lower-margins but that it is also expecting benefits from new revenue sources in the future, as it seeks to generate new higher-growth revenue streams.
"These are all issues that will clear up over time," said Jamie Kiggen, a Cowen &amp; Co. analyst. "Clearly the response to the new pricing plan has been very positive," Kiggen added, referring to the positive feedback AOL has received from customers. Analysts said AOL still expects to lose money in its second quarter ending Dec. 31, which will be the first period that the company expenses its quarterly marketing costs.
AOL's stock fell 50 cents to $24.75 on the New York Stock Exchange.
