International Business Machines Corp will provide an update on its strategy for electronic commerce on Tuesday and will also unveil new partners and show examples of projects already in the works.
Electronic commerce is a now widely-used buzz word in the computer industry that refers to buying and selling goods and services or conducting transactions over computer networks.
For IBM, the world's largest computer maker, electronic commerce is a potentially huge opportunity to provide products and services to help its customers do business online.  
An IBM spokesman declined to provide any details on what IBM would be discussing, except to say IBM will provide an update on where it is now and where it is going in electronic commerce.
Top executives from IBM's Lotus Development Corp unit, its Internet division and its just-announced Network Computer unit will be hosting a press conference.
Analysts said IBM plans to announce several new partners for various applications it has developed, targeted at specific industries, such as an automotive company that is co-developing an auto-loan application on the Internet.  
IBM will also unveil and demonstrate an application targeted to the petroleum industry, a Web site called PetroConnect, that will let energy companies share geographical information over the Internet, to aid in their oil exploration searches.
The computer giant is also expected to add 10 new retailers to its World Mall, its online shopping site on the Internet.
IBM will also officially roll out its Network Computer division and possibly some new models of the Network Station, its first network computer, aimed at a specific industries.  
Earlier on Monday, IBM announced that it had formed a unit to focus all its development and marketing efforts in the embryonic market for these scaled-down computer devices.
Analysts said that, while electronic commerce represents a big opportunity for IBM and the rest of the computer industry, the market is still so young that it is hard to estimate what revenues will be, where they will come from and how long it will take for these ventures to be profitable.
"I think IBM is very well poised to make money from all of these things, but it will be a year or two before anything happens," said Stan Dolberg, a Forrester Research analyst.  
"The Internet commerce offerings, whether they are services or products, have to be really focused on a specific industry to be complete," Dolberg added.
Indeed, IBM is developing many industry-specific services, such as its petroleum industry Web service, and the automotive industry application. IBM will also announce a partnership with Charles Schwab Corp, the discount brokerage firm that has already been very active in developing online brokerage and trading services. But it is not yet clear whether or not IBM will make much money from services and transactions, of which it will get a piece.  
For example, in its World Avenue consumer retailing site on the Internet, IBM receives a start-up fee from its vendors and it gets a five percent commission from its retailing partners on sales and a monthly maintentance charge.
"What they are trying to do is build a recurring revenue stream," said John Jones of Salomon Brothers. "They are trying to get into as many aspects of network computing as they can."
Some analysts said that, of all IBM's electronic commerce ventures, the World Avenue site is the least likely to succeed, because it does not add a great deal of value, other than the convenience of not leaving your home to shop.
"Malls on the Internet are not what people want," said Forrester's Dolberg. "If they want a mall, they want products grouped together by categories, say like shoes, so they can comparison shop...The Internet itself is like a whole mall, where a lot of different things are already grouped together."
Other recent Internet shopping mall efforts have failed, such as MCI Communications Corp's MCI Marketplace.
IBM is hoping its technology such as Net.Commerce and Net.Commerce Payment software, will provide an easy-to-use and secure way of conducting credit card transactions and help end consumer fears about using credit cards over the Internet.
