International Business Machines Corp unveiled several new partnerships as part of an all-encompassing strategy unveiled at a session on electronic commerce, but said it will make money from these ventures the "old fashioned" way - through hardware, software, and services.
IBM announced a wide array of partnerships, ranging from retailers to petroleum companies to insurance companies to a utility, all developing applications for conducting business over corporate computer networks and the Internet.  
"We feel very, very good about the Internet as a business and about where we are going," said Irving Wladwasky-Berger, the general manager of IBM's Internet division, at a press conference. The Internet unit was formed less than one year ago and has become one of the key focal points at IBM.
IBM is helping customers develop a wide range of electronic commerce applications, including an electronic trading system, an Internet retailing outlet, and a service for buying electrical power over networks. Revenues, however, will come from the usual sources of hardware, software and services as it fuels demand for its products and services.  
"We will continue to make money the 'old-fashioned' way, by selling a lot more systems, software, services and solutions," Wladawsky-Berger said. "By leveraging our core businesses, we can sell more of what we are good at."
He was not more specific about what kind of financial opportunity corporate networks and the Internet represent for IBM.
But IBM expects the worldwide information technology industry to grow to $1.2 trillion, from $800 billion, in the next four years, with 60 percent of that growth driven by network computing, he said.  
One novel partnership IBM announced Tuesday was a project with Siemens AG for the electric utility industry.
IBM and Siemens Power Systems Control announced a service to let electric utilities use computer networks, including the Internet, to sell excess power transmission capacity. Pacific Gas and Electric Co is the first customer.
IBM also announced 13 additional new retailers who are joining its Internet shopping mall, called World Avenue, such as Gottschalk's and Hudson Bay, Avante Jewelry and others. Consumers can purchase goods quickly and securely via the World Avenue service on the World Wide Web.  
IBM also announced PetroConnect, a network-based service for the petroleum industry, with digital databases, maps, surveys, well logs, seismic data and other geographical and geological data, for all segments of the industry.
In another industry-specific application, IBM and partner Charles Schwab Inc demonstrated its electronic trading system, called e.schwab, which lets customers request quotes, check account balances and execute trades on their Internet Web site, which runs on IBM's SP2 supercomputers.
IBM also touted Lotus's Domino software, which is the next version of Lotus Notes designed using Internet technology.  
IBM said that Domino is one of the "jewels in its crown," that will be targeting the Web server software market, which Forrester Research predicts will be $9 billion by 1999.
Jeff Papows, the president of Lotus Development, made several jabs at both Microsoft Corp and Netscape Communications Corp and their initial emphasis on the browser wars, but said the battle is moving to groupware.
Papows quoted Netscape's co-founder Marc Andreessen as saying that in 1997 the big war will be over groupware and e-mail. "We think Marc is right," Papows said, adding that whether they can take those markets by storm is the question.
