International Business Machines Corp said its $80 million acquisition of Edmark Corp will serve as the core for the computer giant's plans to focus on education in its fledgling consumer products unit.
The deal will also give Edmark access to IBM's worldwide distribution tentacles, which it needs to compete in the cut-throat consumer retail market, where the brutal fight for shelf space can sometimes make or break a software company.
"This gives us a very strong foundation," said Jim Firestone, general manager, IBM Consumer Division.  
"We are working with a handful of other firms, but I expect Edmark to be the real core of this activity," Firestone added. "It is a base upon which we expect to grow."
Firestone, formerly of American Express Co, was appointed to head up IBM's newly-created consumer business in July, 1995. He was faced with a daunting task because IBM's previous forays into the home PC market have not met with much success and it is not well known for its consumer software.
As part of his refocusing of IBM in the consumer arena, Firestone said IBM will only choose a few places to compete, and one of those areas will be the family educational market.  
"I am not interested in the entertainment side of consumer software," Firestone said. He also said IBM's latest models of its Aptiva home PC that it introduced in September, is gaining market share, where it is being marketed as a family learning tool. Software from Edmark will fit in with that focus.
"IBM is focused on learning as the magic bullet that will elevate their position and raise their profile," said Richard Zwetchkenbaum, director of consumer research at IDC/Link. "Edmark has some very valuable properties...This acquisition should be seen as one in a series of major moves that will help IBM achieve some of its goals in the consumer market."  
Analysts said that many of Edmark's software titles, such as its newly-released Mighty Math Series, Stanley's Stickers Stories and its Thinkin' Things Series are very popular in the industry. IBM's consumer software titles, such as its recent CD-ROM based on the Pinocchio movie, have not fared well.
"They have had mixed results," said Zwetchkenbaum.
Analysts also that there could be more deals in the educational software market, because some of the stock prices have fallen so low and the competition is fierce. Edmark's shares once traded at a 52-week high of 43-1/2.
