International Business Machines Corp. unveiled its Internet strategy Tuesday and announced partnerships with retailers, oil companies and other companies to boost business over the global computer network and corporate "intranets."
"We feel very, very good about the Internet as a business and about where we are going," Irving Wladwasky-Berger, the general manager of IBM's Internet division, said at a news conference.
The Internet unit was formed less than a year ago and has become a key strategic business for the world's largest computer maker.
IBM is helping customers develop a wide range of electronic commerce applications, including an electronic trading system, an Internet retailing outlet, and a service for buying electrical power over networks. Revenues, however, will come from the usual sources of hardware, software and services as it fuels demand for its products and services.
"We will continue to make money the 'old-fashioned' way, by selling a lot more systems, software, services and solutions," Wladawsky-Berger said. "By leveraging our core businesses, we can sell more of what we are good at."
He was not more specific about what kind of financial opportunity the corporate networks known as intranets and the Internet represent for IBM.
But IBM expects the worldwide information technology industry to grow to $1.2 trillion, from $800 billion, in the next four years, with 60 percent of that growth driven by network computing, he said.
One novel partnership IBM announced Tuesday was with Siemens AG, the German conglomerate, for the electric utility industry.
IBM and Siemens Power Systems Control announced a service to let electric utilities use computer networks, including the Internet, to sell excess power transmission capacity. Pacific Gas and Electric Co. is the first customer.
IBM also announced 13 additional new retailers which are joining its Internet shopping mall, called World Avenue, such as Gottschalk's, Hudson Bay, Avante Jewelry and others. Consumers can purchase goods quickly and securely via the World Avenue service on the World Wide Web, the graphical portion.
IBM also announced PetroConnect, a network-based service for the petroleum industry, with digital databases, maps, surveys, well logs, seismic data and other geographical and geological data, for all segments of the industry.
In another industry-specific application, IBM and partner Charles Schwab Inc. demonstrated its electronic trading system, called e.schwab, which lets customers request quotes, check account balances and execute trades on their Internet Web site, which runs on IBM's SP2 supercomputers.
IBM also touted Lotus' Domino software, which is the next version of Lotus Notes designed using Internet technology.
IBM said that Domino is one of the "jewels in its crown," that will be targeting the Web server software market, which market research company Forrester Research predicts will reach $9 billion by 1999.
Lotus Development President Jeff Papows made several jabs at both Microsoft Corp. and Netscape Communications Corp. and their initial emphasis on the browser wars, but said the battle was moving to group-oriented software.
Papows quoted Netscape's co-founder Marc Andreessen as saying that in 1997 the big war will be over groupware and e-mail. "We think Marc is right," Papows said, adding that whether they can take those markets by storm is the question.
