International Business Machines Corp. said Wednesday it agreed to buy Edmark Corp., a publisher of children's education software, for $80 million in cash in a move to focus its consumer business on learning at home.
The world's largest computer maker said it would launch a tender offer for all of Edmark at $15.50 a share. The company, based in Redmond, Wash., where software giant Microsoft Corp. is based, makes software aimed at students in kindergarten through 12th grade.
Analysts said the move will strengthen IBM's effort to market personal computers and software to consumers.
"Edmark has some very valuable properties. This acquisition should be seen as one in a series of major moves that will help IBM achieve some of its goals in the consumer market," said Richard Zwetchkenbaum, director of consumer research at International Data Corp., a market research firm.
Analysts said many of Edmark's titles, including its newly released Mighty Math Series, Stanley's Stickers Stories and its Thinkin' Things Series, were gaining popularity.
Some of IBM's consumer software titles, such as its recent CD-ROM based on the Pinnochio movie, and other CD-ROMS with movie tie-ins, have not fared well.
"They have had mixed results," Zwetchkenbaum said, referring to IBM.
The deal will also give Edmark access to IBM's worldwide distribution network, which it needs to compete in the cut-throat consumer retail market, where the fight for shelf space can sometimes make or break a software company.
Following the news, Edmark's stock jumped $3.8125 to $15.25 on Nasdaq and IBM rose $1.50 to $134.75 on the New York Stock Exchange.
IBM said the directors and executive officers of Edmark have agreed to sell their shares.
IBM said it plans to operate the unit under the Edmark name in Redmond, with Jim Firestone, the head of its consumer business, overseeing and directing operations. Edmark will be the core of its plans to focus more on educational computers.
"This gives us a very strong foundation," said Firestone, general manager, IBM Consumer Division, in an interview. "We are working with a handful of other firms, but I expect Edmark to be the real core of this activity. It is a base upon which we expect to grow."
Firestone, formerly an American Express Co. executive, was named to head IBM's newly created consumer business in July 1995. He faced the daunting task of overhauling IBM's previous forays into the home PC market, which have not gone well. Nor is it well known for its consumer software.
As part of refocusing IBM in the consumer arena, Firestone said IBM will only choose a few places to compete, and one of those areas will be the family educational market.
"I am not interested in the entertainment side of consumer software," Firestone said. He also said IBM's latest Aptiva home PC models introduced in September were gaining market share. The machines are being marketed as a family learning tool and Edmark software will fit with that focus.
Analysts also said more deals in educational software could be coming since stock prices have fallen. Edmark's shares have traded as as $43.50.
The low price that IBM paid for Edmark, "reflects the distress of the industry," said Scott McAdams, of Ragen Mackenzie. "The whole sector's fortunes have changed."
