The stock of IBM, which in recent years was derisively dubbed "I've Been Mugged," is back trading at historic highs, with many analysts and traders predicting its shares will continue to soar.
The major rally was sparked last Friday when an influential Wall Street analyst, Daniel Mandresh of Merrill Lynch, raised his 12-month price target on International Business Machines Corp, to $195 from about $155.
Since Friday, IBM's shares have soared 20.2 percent to 153-3/4 at Tuesday's close of market.  
One question now among investors is whether to jump in at these levels like sheep, or wait for IBM's stock to decline.
Market technicians and some analysts who follow IBM say that its once-beleaguered stock still has room to climb.
Even after Friday's run-up, analyst Steve Milunovich of Morgan Stanley on Monday raised his 12-month price target to $170, from $145.
IBM's shares are now trading at levels its shares have not seen since before the 1987 stock market crash, having in fact reached a nine-year high.  
"It still sells at a relatively low valuation, relative to the technology sector," Milton said.
Technology stocks typically trade at a price/earnings ratio of about 20 times their earnings estimates. But even with its intraday surge Tuesday of 7-1/4, IBM is still trading at a P/E of only about 14.2 times its trailings earnings estimates.
IBM's shares have climbed nearly 70 percent since July 15, when it was trading around 90-7/8.  
Market technicians, who use charts, graphs and computer analysis without considering company fundamentals, said that IBM's shares have recently broken out of two previous resistance levels on the charts, one at 128 and another at 148, and are now poised for a further uptick.
"At these levels there really isn't much resistance, this can continue to work higher," said Susan Stern, a senior technical analyst at Smith Barney. Resistance refers to a price ceiling where a stock price consolidates.  
"I think the primary trend remains up," said Gregory Nie, a technical analyst at EVEREN Securities Inc. "The stock is getting a little extended on a short-term basis."
Traders seem to agree. One technology trader said he has now covered a short position in IBM. "I think the move has probably been overdone short-term, but on a valuation, it is a lot cheaper than a lot of tech stocks," the trader said. "The way it's been trading, it's got a little more to go."
However some more bearish analysts point out that since Mandresh and Milunovich upped their price tagets on IBM's stock price, neither analyst increased earnings estimates.  
Stephen Smith, a PaineWebber analyst, said that he believes some of the fourth quarter 1996 and 1997 earnings estimates on Wall Street for the world's largest computer maker are too high.
"Obviously they have done a good job financially, but it's going to be a lot tougher for them going forward," Smith said, adding that he believes IBM has already seen the biggest positive swing in its earnings it will get from its transition to lower-cost mainframe computers based on CMOS technology.
When IBM was in the midst of a huge losses, a management upheaval and restructuring, and its first dividend cuts in 1993, its shares sunk to a low of 43, where it gained the moniker of "I've Been Mugged" by many traders on Wall Street.
Now, with a steady stream of profits and many bullish views by analysts, some market analysts are again viewing the stock as a bellwether that is also helping fuel movements in the Dow Jones Industrial average.
