The stock of IBM, years ago dubbed "I've Been Mugged," is back in style and hitting historic highs on Wall Street, where investors say shares of the world's biggest computer company can continue rising.
The rally in International Business Machines Corp. stock started on Friday when an influential analyst, Daniel Mandresh of Merrill Lynch, raised his 12-month price target on IBM to $195 from about $155.
Since Friday, IBM's shares have soared more than 20 percent and touched $159 on Wednesday, a level last seen before the 1987 stock market crash. Investors called the stock a relative safe haven among technology shares. IBM hit an all-time high of $175 in August 1987.
The stock ended at $152.75 Wednesday, off $1.375, on some mild profit-taking, but the shares are still up about 68 percent since July 15, when they stood at $91.
When IBM was losing money and restructuring, and after its first dividend cuts in 1993, the stock sank as low as $43 and gained the moniker of "I've Been Mugged" on Wall Street.
Now, with a steady stream of profits and many bullish opinions by analysts, some analysts are again viewing the stock as a bellwether that is also helping fuel the rally in the Dow Jones industrial average.
One question now hounding investors is whether it would be wise to jump in and buy Big Blue, or wait for the stock to decline.
Market technicians and some analysts who follow IBM say that the once-beleaguered stock still has room to climb.
Some analysts still have buy ratings on IBM, even at these levels, because its value remains low relative to many other technology stocks, a point IBM officials have tried to bring home to investors in recent months.
Apparently, many on Wall Street are hearing the message, and some are encouraged by IBM's progress and double-digit revenue growth in areas such as services.
"Investors are looking for more defensive plays with companies with solid earnings outlooks," said Bill Milton, an analyst at Brown Brothers Harriman. "It still sells at a relatively low valuation, relative to the technology sector."
Technology stocks typically trade at a price about 20 times their estimated earnings. But even with its latest surge, IBM is still trading at a only about 14 times its current estimates.
Technicians, who use charts, graphs and computer analysis without considering company fundamentals, said that IBM's shares have recently broken out of two previous resistance levels, one at $128 and another at $148, and are now poised for further gains.
"At these levels there really isn't much resistance, this can continue to work higher," said Susan Stern, a senior technical analyst at Smith Barney. Resistance refers to a price ceiling where a stock price consolidates.
"I think the primary trend remains up," said Gregory Nie, a technical analyst at EVEREN Securities Inc. "The stock is getting a little extended on a short-term basis."
