America Online Inc. said Monday it was starting a major expansion of its online network and planned to spend $250 million through the end of its fiscal year in June to build capacity and improve service.
The nation's largest online service provider said it was upgrading its network to meet the surge in demand generated by its new pricing and recent marketing initiatives. As of Sunday, AOL began offering a new flat-rate pricing plan to its 7 million subscribers.
AOL said it will double its system hardware over the next six months, which would grow large enough to cover nearly two football fields.
Since September, AOL has doubled its electronic mail capacity and its capability to connect users to the Internet's popular World Wide Web.
An America Online spokesman said that despite heavy usage over the Thanksgiving holiday weekend, there were no serious problems with its online network.
The Dulles, Va.-based company said that since July 1, it has added tens of thousands of new modems to AOLnet, which it said was the world's largest dial-in network. The expansion is to accelerate through the spring with tens of thousands of new modems being installed monthly, it added.
AOL, the world's largest online service, recently sent out postcards to its members about the new pricing plan of $19.95 a month for unlimited use of the service.
The postcards also warned members that the company expected a slowdown in its service during peak hours on Sunday, as users celebrated the flat-fee by going online for hours. "There were no serious problems," the spokesman said.
Analysts said with more new users expected, AOL needs to upgrade its network, especially after its nearly 19-hour outage on Aug. 7, which happened during regular maintenance caused by a software glitch and angered many users.
Already this quarter, AOL's subscriber growth is on the rebound, and in October, the company added 275,000 new members. In the summer, AOL was hurting from a slowdown in subscriber growth.
The online service provider did not make any further mention of the recent investigation into its pricing policy by the attorneys general of about 18 states.
Last month, AOL said it had received inquiries from states' attorneys general expressing concern with how it was implementing and disclosing the new pricing plans to members. A spokesman said at the time that its plan and the implementation was "fair in every sense."
Last week, the attorney general of the state of Washington signed a letter of agreement with AOL, resolving allegations that AOL had violated Washington's Consumer Protection Act by planning to bill subscribers the new $19.95 rate for unlimited service, without their positive assent to it.
AOL agreed to notify customers of the upcoming price changes by using a "pop-up" screen which appears when members sign on. Customers must choose one pricing plan by March 31.
