Several U.S. computer retailers reported a sluggish start to the big holiday season, with November sales showing ongoing weakness and heavy promotions, which may bode poorly for sales of consumer PCs this quarter.
But retailers also noted in their monthly reports that the November holiday shopping season was shorter this month, because of the late Thanksgiving holiday weekend in the U.S.
"Bad would be a better word than sluggish," said Stephen Baker, a retail channel analyst at International Data Corp. "Promotional is a code word for lower profits."  
Circuit City Stores Inc, the largest retailer of brand-name consumer electronics and a leading retailer of personal computers, said that industry sales remained weak.
The Richmond, Va.-based company reported an eight percent increase over total November 1995 sales, but its comparable store sales fell eight percent in November.
"Industry sales trends remained weak and promotional activity intensified," said Richard Sharp, Circuit City's chairman and CEO, in a statement.
Best Buy Co Inc, based in Minneapolis, said that the PC category "became more promotional in November."  
"Third quarter sales were well below earlier expectations," said Allen Lenzmeier, Best Buy chief financial officer. Third quarter sales were up four percent.
But for the four-week period ending November, Best Buy's comparable store sales in the month of November fell eight percent, versus an increase of 15 percent last November.
"The numbers in general in computer retailing were pretty weak," said Tom Courtney, a Montgomery Securities analyst. He estimates that in the computer category at Circuit City, for example, November sales fell 20-25 percent. "Those data points suggest that it's pretty weak out there."  
"We think that what's happening is there is a big shift to the direct channel," Courtney added, referring to direct resellers such as Dell Computer Corp and Gateway 2000 Inc, which sell PCs through phone and mail order.
Analysts said that the big surge in PC sales this fourth quarter is expected to come from sales to the corporate sector instead of the typcially money-losing consumer arena. And there are no major innovations this quarter driving consumers into the stores for a "must have" purchase of a PC.
"The market of first-time buyers seems to be shrinking," said Baker of IDC, which is based in Framingham, Mass.  
"You've already gotten a PC into the homes that can afford a decent quality PC.  The rest of the households say it's either too much or what am I going to do with it," Baker said.
"This is the first Christmas in a few years when there hasn't been a really compelling new reason to buy a PC," said Nick Donatiello, president of Odyssey LP, a market research firm in San Francisco. "Last Christmas and the year before you had CD-ROMs, fast modems, the Internet and new Pentium chips."
Tandy Corp was lukewarm about the start of the season.  "Traffic in our stores was very good the first few days after Thanksgiving," CEO John Roach said in a statement.  
Tandy's comparable store sales in November at its RadioShack outlets were down five percent, Computer City was up three percent and its Incredible Universe superstore sales were flat.  Total comparable store sales in November were down two percent from the prior year.
But some analysts who follow personal computer hardware makers are not terribly worried by the sluggish retail environment, because they are looking to corporate sales for the bigger profits this quarter.  The consumer sector, fraught with price cuts, is still barely profitable for some.  
Even before Thanksgiving, industry leader Compaq Computer Corp cut prices on its Presario home PCs by up to 21 percent. Analysts said Sony cut prices on new PCs.
"I don't think it means a lot," said Andrew Neff, a Bear Stearns analyst, of the sluggish start to the holiday season. "People are in no hurry to buy."
Neff added that this year, PC makers are expecting corporate sales to be the driver of PC growth, not consumer sales. Dataquest Inc has predicted that the PC market will grow at about 19.7 percent worldwide in 1996, which is still strong but is a slower growth rate than the record growth of 24.7 percent growth in 1995.
"I just view anything that happens in retail as icing on the cake," Neff said.
