Computers appear to have taken a back seat this holiday season to gifts of other sorts as several computer retailers this week reported a sluggish start to the big holiday season.
Among major computer retailers, November sales showed ongoing weakness and heavy promotions, and analysts said this combination may bode poorly for sales of personal computers to consumers this quarter.
"Bad would be a better word than sluggish," said Stephen Baker, an analyst at Framingham, Mass.-based International Data Corp. "Promotional (discounting) is a code word for lower profits."
Retailers noted, however, that calendar quirks made some year-to-year comparisons look negative because Thanksgiving, the traditional start to the holiday shopping season, was later this year.
Circuit City Stores Inc., the largest retailer of brand-name consumer electronics and a leading retailer of personal computers, said that industry sales remained weak.
The Richmond, Va.-based company reported an 8 percent increase over November 1995 sales, but at stores open at least a year sales fell 8 percent compared with a year earlier.
"Industry sales trends remained weak and promotional activity intensified," said Richard Sharp, Circuit City's chairman and CEO, in a statement.
Best Buy Co. Inc., based in Minneapolis, said that there were more discounts in the PC category in November.
"Third quarter sales were well below earlier expectations," said Allen Lenzmeier, Best Buy chief financial officer. Third quarter sales were up 4 percent.
But for the four-week period ending November, Best Buy's sales in stores open at least one year fell 8 percent, compared with an increase of 15 percent last November.
"The numbers in general in computer retailing were pretty weak," said Tom Courtney, a Montgomery Securities analyst. He estimates that in the computer category at Circuit City, for example, November sales fell 20 percent to 25 percent.
"We think that what's happening is there is a big shift to the direct channel," Courtney said, referring to companies such as Dell Computer Corp. and Gateway 2000 Inc. that sell PCs through phone and mail order.
Analysts also cited increased interest in apparel this holiday season, following years of heavy buying of all sorts of home electronics -- from computers to satellite dishes to audio and video products.
"This is the first Christmas in a few years when there hasn't been a really compelling new reason to buy a PC," said Nick Donatiello, president of Odyssey LP, a market research firm in San Francisco. "Last Christmas and the year before you had CD-ROMs, fast modems, the Internet and new Pentium chips."
"The market of first-time buyers seems to be shrinking," said Baker.
"You've already gotten a PC into the homes that can afford a decent quality PC.  The rest of the households say it's either too much or what am I going to do with it," Baker said.
Tandy Corp. was lukewarm about the start of the season. "Traffic in our stores was very good the first few days after Thanksgiving," Chief Executive John Roach said in a statement.
Tandy's November RadioShack sales for stores open at least one year were down 5 percent; Computer City was up 3 percent and Incredible Universe superstore sales were flat.
Some analysts said they were not worried by the sluggish retail sales, because they were looking to corporate sales for the bigger profits this quarter. The consumer sector, fraught with price cuts, is still barely profitable for some companies.
Even before Thanksgiving, industry leader Compaq Computer Corp. cut prices on its Presario home PCs by as much as 21 percent. Analysts also said Sony cut prices on new PCs.
"I don't think it means a lot," said Andrew Neff, a Bear Stearns analyst, of the sluggish start to the holiday season. "People are in no hurry to buy."
Neff said this PC makers expect corporate sales to be the driver of PC growth, not consumer sales. Dataquest Inc. has predicted that the PC market will grow at about 19.7 percent worldwide in 1996, still strong but behind the record growth of 24.7 percent growth in 1995.
"I just view anything that happens in retail as icing on the cake," Neff said.
