Philip Zimmermann, a computer programmer and cryptographer who was investigated by the U.S. government for three years because his encryption software given away over the Internet was classified as a weapon, is going mainstream with the hopes of making money.
At this week's Internet World trade show in New York, Zimmermann, who has become a hero among the Internet cognoscenti after his battle with the government will unveil his company, a private firm called Pretty Good Privacy Inc. and two security software products for Internet users, aimed at protecting privacy in cyberspace.
Zimmermann's original data scrambling software, also known as encryption software, is already being used by more than 2 million users since Zimmermann first began distributing it over the Net in 1991.
PGP Mail, as the product is called, scrambles electronic mail, which can be unscrambled by the designated recipient.
But Zimmermann's software was so powerful that it attracted the attention of the U.S. Justice Department and the Department of Commerce. Its encryption was stronger (and harder to crack) than the legal limits set by the United States for export and was therefore considered a munition.
Last January, the United States dropped its investigation of Zimmermann, without ever saying what it was investigating, after three years of intense scrutiny.
"It was like a sword of Damocles hanging over his head," said a spokesman for PGP, based in San Mateo, Calif.
Now, as Zimmermann goes from a "shareware" model of giving the software away for free, into a real commercial venture, he joined with some heavy hitters in Silicon Valley. Jonathan Seybold, a noted industry analyst, is a founder of Pretty Good Privacy, as is Dan Lynch, who founded the InterOp trade show. Other executives who recently joined the company include Phil Dunkelberger, formerly vice president of marketing at Symantec Corp. Inc. and Tom Steding, most recently of 3Com Corp..
PGP so far is privately funded, with no venture capital help, even though some venture capitalists offered to become investors. The company has also purchased two other small software firms, whose products make a good match with PGP's.
For example, PGP acquired ViaCrypt, which was the company Zimmermann licensed PGP software to while he was under federal investigation. Now with ViaCrypt's enhancements, PGP Mail is even easier to use and will "plug in" easily to popular electronic mail packages, such as QualComm Inc.'s Eudora Mail.
PGP Mail, because of its heavy encryption, still cannot be used outside the United States, but it can be used to send mail within the United States and Canada. It has the strongest encryption available, using mathematical algorithms to encode the data that can be as big as 3,072 bits long, which is considered military-grade.
Currently, the United States allows software with 128-bit encryption to be exported, but that is only if the users will provide a key to decipher the data.
Pretty Good Privacy will also introduce a product called the PGP Cookie Cutter, based on software from a company it bought called PrivNet, of Chapel Hill, N.C., but now moving to San Mateo as it merges with PGP, which has about 60 employees.
The PGP Cookie Cutter lets a user selectively block the so-called "cookies" on the Internet, which monitor his or her Web visits. Cookies are data files which track where a user has been and what the user is doing on the World Wide Web. They are increasingly used by companies and advertisers to monitor and accumulate Internet user data.
Both products will be commercially available next year.
