Home use of the Internet's World Wide Web has more than doubled in the last year, with about 11 percent of U.S. households claiming to have used the Web in the last month, according to a study by PC-Meter.
The market research company said 11 percent of all 98.7 million U.S. households was equivalent to about 11 million homes and was up from 4.4 percent (or 4.3 million) a year ago.
In addition, 13.9 percent of households claimed to have used some type of Internet access service in the last month.
Twenty-five percent of these home Web users now visit shopping sites, PC-Meter's audience rating reports show.
According to PC-Meter's audience rating report, of the cybershoppers, men represented the highest percentage of users. In September, for example, 62.8 percent of Web surfers were men and 37.2 percent were women.
Four basic types of shopping are represented in the top 10 shopping sites; free software downloads, interactive auctions, clubs that sell to members and retail operations.
"These cybershopping statistics suggest that home surfers are increasingly finding value in electronic commerce opportunities offered on the Web," Pamela Smith, a vice president of PC-Meter, said in a statement. "With the holiday season upon us, the greatest growth to date at these sites may well occur during the coming weeks."
Shareware.com, a software service of online publisher C/NET Inc., was the top consumer shopping site on the Web, PC-Meter said, followed by Columbia House Co., which sells music CDs, computer CD-ROMs, videotapes and laser disks; and ZDNet's Software Library of shareware.
Columbia House and ZD Net were tied for the second most popular consumer shopping site. CUC International Inc., which offers discounts on a wide range of consumer goods and services, is the third most popular site and has the highest percentage of women among the top shopping sites.
Other top shopping sites included Amazon.com, at No. 5, which is a cyber-book store with more than 1 million titles to choose from. Surplus Direct was No. 6, with sales of computer hardware and software.
Coming in as the 10th most popular shopping site was Onsale, an auction site for computer hardware, software and consumer electronics. Onsale also led the category in minutes of usage per month, averaging 41.99 minutes per person per month.
PC-Meter said its results on home Internet use came from an October survey of 9,928 personal computer-owning and non-PC-owning homes. The survey is conducted on a quarterly basis. Its audience rating report is done monthly.
PC-Meter LP is a subsidiary of the NPD Group Inc., a privately held company based in Port Washington, N.Y.
