Netscape Communications Corp. and five regional Bell phone companies said Tuesday that the five "Baby Bells" will use Netscape's Navigator software as the main browser for their Internet access businesses.
Participating in the deal with Netscape were the Internet access units of Ameritech Corp., Bell Atlantic Corp., BellSouth Corp., Pacific Telesis Group and SBC Communications Inc..
The move was seen as a much-needed boost for Mountain View, Calif.-based Netscape, which has seen its popular Navigator software become the secondary browser to Microsoft Corp.'s Internet Explorer as the software behemoth made big inroads with the biggest online services.
"A few months ago, they (Netscape) announced a focus on the corporate marketplace," said Abhishek Gami, an analyst at Nesbitt Burns Securities. "This is a little reminder from them that they are still a big player in the consumer marketplace."
This year, America Online Inc, and CompuServe Inc. have forged deals with Microsoft to make Internet Explorer their primary Internet browser, and in return the online services have gained a spot on the Windows 95 desktop.
"It's a very good boost of confidence for Netscape, which has seen a very large defection from the online services," said Peter Krasilovsky, an analyst at Arlen Communications Inc. in Bethesda, Md.
Netscape shares jumped $3 to $63 in heavy trading on Nasdaq.
Together, the five Bell companies represent a potential market of 72 million consumers and businesses in 26 states, including Washington, D.C., and 15 of the nation's 20 largest markets.
Bell Atlantic said it also has an agreement with Microsoft and that it will begin offering Internet Explorer as an option to its customers in the first quarter of 1997.
Robert Beran, president of Bell Atlantic's Internet unit, told reporters in a conference call that the arrangement gives the phone companies a new way to market their Internet services via Netscape's Web site. He also said it gives new Net users a way to find another Internet service provider.
But analysts also pointed out that the five Baby Bells combined represent under 100,000 Internet users. Ameritech of Chicago still has not yet introduced its Internet service, but said it will do so "reasonably soon."
Pacific Bell, has the biggest Internet access business of the five, with 51,000 members at last count.
The agreement includes a feature to simplify how computer users select an Internet service provider, or ISP.
Users running Netscape Navigator would be able to contact their telephone company's Internet service provider through the new Netscape ISP Select feature on Netscape's Web site, the companies said. After users enter their area code and phone number, they will be presented with a list of service providers with coverage in their particular area.
Netscape said the ISP Select service will allow people to set up a personal Internet account and establish an Internet connection easily and quickly. In addition, phone company customers would have free access to newspaper and magazine content from the Netscape In-Box Direct service, in which personalized publications arrive via e-mail.
Netscape In-Box is a service recently introduced by Netscape to provide information from 40 selected content providers. The company said that since it was launched just a few months ago, its In-Box service has obtained more than 1.5 million subscriptions.
The ISP Select feature will be available on Netscape's Web site, with its Personal Navigator edition that is sold in stores, and will be bundled with some PCs.
They said future plans include offering the ability for ISP Select users who choose their local telephone company's Internet access service to have their Internet fees billed directly to their phone bills.
