International Business Machines Corp. said Friday it was reorganizing its global sales and services businesses under a single brand, IBM Global Services.
IBM's services business has operated under various names outside the United States and the move should help clarify the IBM brand as well as boost efficiency, the company said.
The Armonk, N.Y.-based computer giant also named Lucio Stanca, general manager, global marketing operations.
Stanca, who has headed IBM operations in Europe, the Middle East and Africa since the autumn of 1994, will continue as chairman of that operation, based in Paris. In his new role, he will head a new direct-marketing effort around the world using the new structure and single brand name.
Previously, IBM's direct marketing efforts have been in various regions without a consistent focus, analysts said. The efforts include direct mail, telemarketing and electronic marketing via the Internet in 159 countries.
Separately, IBM said it and its partners will discontinue development of Microsoft Corp.'s Windows NT software to run on systems using the PowerPC chip IBM developed with Motorola Inc. and Apple Computer Inc.
IBM was working with Microsoft and Motorola to develop a version of Windows NT for the PowerPC chip, but an IBM spokesman said that they will no longer develop the product.
Analysts said the Power-PC-based systems running Windows NT were not very successful for IBM.
Succeeding Stanca as general manager of Europe, Middle East and Africa is William Etherington, who was general manager of IBM Industries, which manages 11 industry-specific business units.
The industry units will now be managed by David Thomas, who was general manager, IBM North America. In his new role, Thomas will be responsible for IBM's industry-specific strategies and performance.
He will be succeeded in North America by John Thompson, who had been general manager of IBM's personal software products including the beleaguered operating system OS/2. No successor was named.
An IBM spokesman said a replacement will be named for Thompson.
"Some people are saying, what does this mean for OS/2?" said the IBM spokesman. "It means no change whatsoever in strategy. We have not selected anyone yet."
While the OS/2 software has made inroads with about 13 million users, according to IBM, it is still a small share of the world personal computer market, dominated by Microsoft Corp.'s Windows operating system.
IBM stock rose $1.25 to $152.875 on the New York Stock Exchange in late trading after falling on profit-taking in recent sessions.
