Personal computer makers next week will simultaneously roll out flashy multimedia PCs designed around a new chip by Intel Corp, a move that is expected to give the consumer sector of the industry a much-needed boost.
On Wednesday Intel will officially launch its P55C microprocessor, with its so-called MMX (multimedia extension) technology. A slew of companies will roll out consumer PCs, notebooks and desktops using the new chip, which offers much faster performance than earlier designs.  
"(The impact of MMX) will be significant in the second half," said David Wu, a Chicago Corp analyst. "I should hope it helps -- the corporate world is strong and the retail world is very weak."
He said there was currently nothing new and sexy to drive sales in the consumer market other than better price performance.
CompUSA Inc on Thursday became the latest retailer to report disappointing sales of PCs during the holiday shopping season, normally the industry's strongest.  
To be sure, analysts said that PC makers with a strong presence in the corporate market would not be hurt very much by the disappointing consumer sales.  
Consumer anticipation of the new PCs was one reason that retailers were showing weaker-than-expected sales, as savvy computer buyers waited for next "big thing" to hit the market, analysts said.
In tandem with Intel's announcement, Compaq Computer Corp , Dell Computer Corp, Gateway 2000 Inc, Toshiba America Corp, Sony Corp, International Business Machines Corp and other companies are expected to unveil new high-end PCs, priced at more than $3,000.
On Friday, Intel shares jumped eight to 138-3/8 after two analysts made bullish comments about the company.  
"It's a tremendous kickoff to 1997," said Rod Schrock, a vice president of Compaq's Presario division. "We are so excited about the new MMX processor that we redesigned the entire line of Presarios from the ground up. Customers are going to get a pretty dazzling experience."
Schrock declined to give any product specifics, but he said that Compaq will launch its Presario consumer PCs with MMX at about the same time as Intel's announcement.
"It should provide an added boost to the demand for the new generation of PCs," Schrock added. "There was no major industry event in 1996. This year you have a new processor."
