After a turbulent first year on the Internet, Rupert Murdoch's News Corp. will launch a revamped Web site on Monday with a new strategy more tightly focused on its well-known TV Guide.
The company's entertainment Web site will remain free on the Internet but will be renamed The TV Guide Entertainment Network with a new address (www.tvguide.com). The former name for the site was iGuide.
The new site will feature four areas including movies, music and sports in addition to television. Fox Sports and other Murdoch properties will also provide content, News Corp. said.
News Corp. expects money generated through advertising sales and eventual online transactions will allow it to turn a profit from the site in three to five years.
"Three to five years is the time frame," James Murdoch, Rupert Murdoch's youngest son who is vice president of music and new media at News Corp., said when asked about the goals for the site.
News Corp. is also embracing the WebTV Internet access device, which turns a standard television into an Internet access tool. Through an agreement with WebTV Networks Inc. in Palo Alto, Calif., it will develop customised TV-oriented content for WebTV.
Murdoch dismissed any suggestion that News Corp.'s foray on the Internet so far has been less than successful, even after the its partner MCI Communications Corp. pulled out of their joint online venture, the Internet directory service known as iGuide, last February.
"When something is at the very beginning in a new medium, it changes very quickly," Murdoch said. "Like everyone else in new media, we've been evolving. A year ago, we redirected it. It's been a well-kept secret on the Internet. Now it's a question of reaching users and telling them it's there."
Peter Krasilovksy, an analyst with Arlen Communications Inc in Bethesda, Md., said he believed "iGuide is one of the overlooked sites on the Web," adding, "it got lost in the corporate brouhaha between MCI and News Corp."
Murdoch pointed to data from market research firm PC Meter, which counts the current iGuide site, before the new format being announced this week, as number 96 out of 3,000 Web sites surveyed, up from about 500th or so a year ago.
News Corp. hopes to gain repeat visitors who will check the site for TV listings. It can then build up demographic profiles to enhance the site for advertisers, including ways to target local TV audiences.
A big Web "chat room" with celebrities, specialised bulletin boards, entertainment facts, trivia and games are a few of the features News Corp. hopes will draw Internet users to the site.
