Revisions to Ivory Coast's coffee and cocoa auction system have been finalised in line with donor loan conditions and need only government blessing to come into effect, donor sources and exporters say.
"It could be done in 12 hours if the government wanted it," one exporter told Reuters on Tuesday.
Talks with the World Bank and the Caistab cocoa and coffee marketing board to boost transparency and prevent overbidding were concluded in September, he said.
"There will be a weighted allocation among the highest bidders in proportion to the size of each bid," said a banker close to the reforms.
The Caistab launched an electronic screen auction system to replace telephone dealing six months late in May to meet World Bank loan conditions, but it has been under review since July after complaints.
Bankers said the final touches needed ministerial approval before $45 million of a three-tier $150 million World Bank loan to Ivory Coast could be disbursed in mid-October.
"There will be changes in management rules when Yves-Marie Koissy (the new Caistab president) arrives but the management will have to be approved by the government rather than the Caistab," one told Reuters.
The exporter confirmed that the Caistab would award export contracts for the price and quantity bid by the five highest bidders, but bids would be downscaled pro-rata if they outstripped total sales slated for that session.
One source close to the market said the system had been flawed. "If you knew the quantity on sale at a particular time you place a high bid for the right amount and walk away with the lot. Apart from that it was a matter of speculation with the best information to hand or who you knew," said another.
Smaller exporters, cooperatives and unions say exporters with less financial clout in international markets were pushed aside by overbidding.
Caistab staff said Koissy, appointed in September but yet to finish his contract with the International Monetary Fund in Washington, was due in Ivory Coast on October 9-10.
This raised expectations that the 1996/97 cocoa marketing season would open as announced on October 15 despite some doubts in the market. Koissy would then leave again to return at the end of the month.
Exporters had complained that two European-backed firms had priced others out of the market earlier this year to win contracts under a rule that rewarded the highest bidders.
Under the existing system the Caistab offers to sell an undisclosed quantity of produce in two daily sessions.
The highest bidder in terms of price gets the quantity he requests at the second highest bid price provided there is enough produce on offer. Anything left over goes to the next highest biddder at his price and subsequent buyers thereafter.
Donor sources say $60 million of the $150 million loan have been granted already as the auction system was in place even though about 600,000 tonnes of the 1996/97 had been sold forward by telephone before the auction opening in May.
"We expect next year's crop to be entirely sold through the auction. This year the only condition was for it to be operational," a source close to the negotiations said.
He said a third, $45 million, part of the loan would be given in 1997 depending on the auction's success. London trader ED &amp; F Man in a September report put the total forward sale of 1996/97 crop by the end of August at 590,000 tonnes, 65,000 up on the previous year.
"I would say the figure, which is not really known, is closer to 500,000," said the source close to the negotiations. "Next year all the cocoa should be sold on the system."
($1=515 CFA francs)
--Abidjan Newsroom +225 21 90 90
