Ivory Coast 1996/97 cocoa marketing season began on Thursday with the farm-gate price unchanged, the export tax lower, but confusion over freight rates.
Agriculture Minister Lambert Kouassi Konan told a news conference late on Wednesday that the farm-gate price would remain at 320 CFA francs per bagged kilo.  
Kouassi Konan, whose comments were broadcast on Ivorian state television on Thursday, said the Droit Unique de Sortie (DUS) export tax would be cut from 160 CFA francs to 150.
"To maintain the price, the government itself had to agree to a sacrifice of about 10 billion CFA francs, through the lowering of the Driot Unique de Sorti for cocoa," he said.
"If we had not made this cut we would have had to touch the price. The head of state insisted that the price of 320 CFA be maintained for our producers."
Exporters had been expecting no significant price change.
Shipowners spoke of disagreements with officials over an indicative freight rate for 1996/97.
The Office Ivoirien de Chargeurs had requested detailed information on proposed freight rates on shipments for 1996/97, they said.
"We cannot give that kind of information now that markets have been liberalised. This is a part of our business strategy," one said.
"Normally (the Ivorian shipping industry forum) FEDERMAR would organise a meeting to discuss matters but we have been waiting."
Kouassi Konan said the government had approved on Wednesday without amendment a decision taken by the Caisse de Stabilisation marketing board on the campaign.
Noting that the 1995/96 campaign was ending on Wednesday, he added, "As a result, remaining stocks must be declared to the Caistab."  
The opening of the season had been delayed by about three weeks. The government had given no explanation but some exporters linked the delay to the appointment only last month of new Caistab head Yves-Marie Koissy.
Koissy, who previously worked for the International Monetary Fund in Washington, has formally taken over but is not expected back in Ivory Coast until mid-November.
The 1995/96 season produced a record of around 1.2 million tonnes but a dispute over shipping rates blocked exports from early October to mid-November.
Export financers say bank liquidity was good with interest rates down on last year after Ivory Coast repaid some external debt.
"When exporters present their licences and backing contracts we can go ahead. Export licensing should be no problem," said an international banker.
Commodities Minister Guy-Alain Gauze, speaking on the sidelines of a two-day ministerial review in Gabon of the 1993 International Cocoa Agreement, said on Monday that Ivory Coast's 1996/97 cocoa production would be between 900,000 and 950,000 tonnes.
--Abidjan newsroom +225 21 90 90  
(c) Reuters Limited 1996 (c) Reuters Limited 1996
