Cocoa arrivals in Ivory Coast at the start of the 1996/97 season are slower than normal with exporters awaiting financing and warehouses filling up at the main port, Abidjan, exporters and shipping sources say.
"There is a problem of finding space in the port," the head of the exporters' trade body, GEPEX, Rene Ekra, told Reuters.
He and others say delays in issuing export licences and freight rates had blocked shipments of cocoa. Large consignments of cotton were also taking up port space, they added.
Exporters were also unable to secure bank finance without export licences and contracts.
"Some are financing buying operations themselves but up-country buyers are keeping busy," said a San Pedro exporter.
Ivory Coast opened its 1996/97 cocoa marketing season on October 24 with its farmgate price unchanged at 320 CFA per bagged kilo and the cocoa export tax down 10 CFA to 150, but has yet to set reference exporter rates and buyer commissions as well as freight rates.
"Arrivals are lower than normal but we should get back into a rhythm in the next couple of weeks," said the San Pedro exporter.
"We are hoping all rates will be out within a fortnight," said GEPEX President Ekra. He said 31 exporters were given licences last year but 1996/97 applicants were still waiting for government approval.
About 600 buyers were expected to be approved, he added.
Yves-Marie Koissy, new head of the Caistab cocoa marketing agency which grants licences and sets reference exporter and buyers' commission rates is expected to return from the United States in early November.
Precise arrival figures remain unclear. Market estimates range from 8,000 to 9,000 for San Pedro in the week to October 25 and over 7,000 tonnes for Abidjan.
"It is too early to get a clear picture of quantities. Wait until mid-November," said one exporter. "Last year, arrivals were 180,000 tonnes in November. I think it will be less this year but 950,000 tonnes for the whole year cannot be discounted," he added. "Bean sizes and quality are very good, around 95 per 100 grammes."
Early arrivals were also greater at San Pedro.
"Liberalisation of transport means it is cheaper to go to the nearest port. If San Pedro exported 30 percent of cocoa last year, it could well be 35 to 40 percent this year (1996/97)," said the San Pedro exporter.
Buyers around Daloa and Gagnoa said rains were regular with good sunshine. "There are plenty of flowers. But we need regular showers between now and December for a good April and March crop," said Daloa-based buyer Makkram Haddad.
Up-country buyers around Gagnoa and Daloa said some stocks were still held up-country because heavy rains in July, August and in some areas, September had made bush tracks impassable.
"We are buying 20 new three-tonne covered trucks to get through to farmers who cannot move their stocks," said Gagnoa buyer Hussaini "Some tracks have been repaired but there is a lot of damage and 15-tonne trucks are too big."
Buyers say they usually replace their trucks every two years. One truck importer told Reuters sales were rising.
Sunny weather south of Gagnoa in the past couple of weeks had dried many areas, Khaled and others said. Intermittent rain has continued north of Gagnoa.
Up-country sources said stocks of cocoa being held by buyers in centre-west and south-west areas around Soubre, Daloa, Duekoue and Guilgo would be taken to port when the full scale of marketing costs was known.
-- Abidjan Newsroom, + 225 21 90 90
