Exporters have united to oppose an Ivorian government plan to make them liable for income tax owed and frequently unpaid by upcountry buyers, exporters said on Tuesday.
Tax laws approved by parliament in February allowed for deductions equivalent to about 7.5 percent of commission paid by exporters to agents buying cocoa on their behalf in the 1996/97 season, they told Reuters.
"Because we hold export licences does not mean we are qualified to act as tax collectors. We are in discussions with the government," GEPEX exporters' forum president, Rene Ekra, told Reuters on Tuesday.
One exporter said the dispute had contributed to export delays at the start of the 1996/97 marketing season but a decision was expected by the end of the week. "Banks are ready to finance but we still do not have an export rate to work on and now we are into November," he said.
Exporters say the plan means a deduction of about 2.5 CFA per kilo from buyers' commissions. Buyers are currently paid a 1995/96 commission rate of about 32 CFA per kilo of collected cocoa, but Ivory Coast opened its 1996/97 cocoa marketing year October 24 without setting new reference rates for exporters and buyers along the farmgate-to-shipment marketing chain.
Exporters say if the law is applied, tax collection costs should be given by the government to exporters.
"We would also have to find ways of getting buyers to pay up and cover the tax collection costs if it goes through," one told Reuters.
Donors say the plan is part of a clampdown on tax evasion by up-country buyers.
"Buyers must pay their income tax and the government has found it difficult to get them to pay. The idea is to get exporters to pay it up front," said a bank official.
Exporters say the tax plan is poorly defined as well as misdirected.
"We cannot pay such amounts in advance," said one. "For every thousand tonnes exporters would have to pay the govenment 2.5 million CFA (francs)."
Some up-country buyers said they would avoid the tax by setting up as GVCs, tax-exempt buyers' cooperatives currently under government review for lack of accounting transparency.
"It would be easy to hire someone to set up on that basis," said one trader, but cooperatives say laws under consideration could make such a move more difficult.
"Buyers might set up as GVCs but it will be harder in future. Accounting standards might be tightened later this year and licensing could be stricter," a UNECACI farm cooperative leader said.
Exporters say the law might not be implemented. "It is possible. GVCs crop up and disappear overnight. There is talk of tightening up GVC management but no sign of it yet." said one.
The government has had problems identifying traitants because of the sporadic nature of their work and their locations, said one international banker. "Exporters usually know whom the buyers are as well as where they are," he added.
--Abidjan Newsroom + 225 21 90 90
