One of Ivory Coast's largest cocoa and coffee exporters, SIFCA, will appoint a liquidator for its loss making up-country buying subsidiary, SOGEPAG, but exporters and buyers say port arrivals will not be affected.
"Our cost calculations were wrong and farmers never really caught on to our new ideas," Pierre-Dominique Blind, spokesman for SIFCA, owners of the SOGEPAG buying subsidiary, told Reuters in an interview. "We lost too much money and could not go on refinancing debts."
"Purchase volumes were too small and farmers' debts became a vicious circle," said Blind, managing director of UCEPAG, a holding company set up by SIFCA to run SOGEPAG.
SOGEPAG's warehouses could be empty for the rest of the season after a liquidator is named this week, and SIFCA would probably take back assets it wanted, he added.
Liquidation is expected to take at least three months.
Minority 33 percent shareholder DAFCI, an Ivorian exporter, was not immediately available for comment.
UCEPAG figures show cocoa purchases of 46,000 tonnes of cocoa and 9,741 tonnes of coffee in 1995/96, but other exporters said the figure was underestimated. In 1994/95 the amounts were shown as 43,000 and 9,000 tonnes.
SOGEPAG was set up in 1991 and guaranteed farmers fixed farmgate prices when world prices dipped. It paid official reference prices while other buyers paid less, said Blind.
"Our operation was based on protection against prices going down, but prices went up after 1991," he said. "The aim was to take 20 percent of the market in three years but our sales only rose by about seven percent a year."
The total Ivorian cocoa crop in 1995/96 was about 1.2 million tonnes.
Up-country buyers said SOGEPAG had not understood buying strategy upcountry. It paid cash but sometimes three days late.
"Our strategy was wrong. Farmers preferred immediate cash in hand, even if less than our prices," said Blind. "We gave prefinancing and logistical support to farmers on good terms and then they would sell to someone else."
SOGEPAG built up the number of its sites to 17 from four at its inception.
Other exporters said SOGEPAG's closure would have no effect on the market. "SIFCA and DAFCI will probably take control of the key assets and others will step in to buy whatever is sold," said one.
"We will buy some of their trucks," said one buyer. "No cocoa will be left in the bush."
SOGEPAG has 120 vehicles, mainly collection trucks and tractors it used to hire to farmers and GVCs -- farmers' cooperatives which aim to sell directly to exporters.
SIFCA's parent SIFCOM is a main distributor of Nissan vehicles.
Blind said SOGEPAG was owed 160 million CFA francs for vehicle hire at one point but only 60 million had been repaid. "Farmers saw us as a cash cow," he said. "Variable cost inflation after depreciation of the CFA also got out of hand."
He said many modern trucks on the market were too sophisticated and expensive for farmers.
Some industry analysts said farmers had made money out of SOGEPAG but did not see why a decision had been taken to close operations at this point.
"It is a pity for the farmers.  The World Bank had just approved funding for us to give them more training," said Blind. "Now they will be paid less than reference prices and many GVCs have poor little logistical expertise."
Ivory Coast, the world's largest cocoa producer, opened its 1996/97 cocoa marketing season on October 24, setting farmgate cocoa prices unchanged at 320 CFA per bagged kg but delaying an announcement on guideline buyers and exporters rates.
($1=512 CFA francs)
-- Abidjan newsroom +225 21 90 90
