A prolonged dry spell In Ivory Coast has stretched into the small rainy season, but its impact on mid-crop cocoa pod setting and main crop growth may not be clearer until later this year, crop and weather analysts said on Wednesday.
"The weather is very, very strange. We have a mixture of harmattan (hot, dry) conditions in some places but light rains nearby," said one crop analyst. "Pod setting and progression could be affected. It just depends on rains before December as the front passes," he added.
Weather analysts said the front that usually heads southwards in September, giving Ivory coast a light rainy season between September and December, had finally moved south over the weekend. But rains were still far below average.
"It is now over Dimbokro (seventh northern parallel) but rains are well over a month late. So far we have not had a small rainy season," said one weather analyst.
Weather data showed less than 50 percent of average October rains fell in Ivory Coast. Data for early November were not available to build a clear picture of the overall rainfall pattern in early November, said analysts.
"Flowering and soil moisture vary greatly between regions but cherelle (early pod) setting should be clearer later in November," said a crop analyst who recently toured Ivorian farms.
Up-country buyers around Daloa told Reuters intermittent rains had started in the centre-west cocoa region but more rain was needed for late main and early mid-crop development.
Ivory Coast opened its 1996/97 cocoa marketing season late on October 24 after rain deluges in July and August. Bean moisture was no longer a problem, they said.
"Now there is a nice mixture of rain and sun but we need more rain up to the end of the year to avoid small mid-crop bean sizes," said one buyer. Beans sizes of over 110 per 100 grammes are not considered to be of export quality.
Crop analysts said soil moisture levels were low in some areas and could affect pod sizes if sunny weather continued. One crop analyst told Reuters he had only seen rain on two out of his 10 days of treking around the whole cocoa belt.
Official weather data showed average or above rains in Man and Gagnoa, but rain deficits elsewhere, particularly south of Gagnoa, around Sassandra, Abidjan and Adiake.
Sunny conditions had prevailed in the south as monsoon air was at higher altitudes south of Gagnoa than usual, said the weather analyst.
"The sun is burning off low clouds," he said.
Elsewhere, one crop analyst said the danger in Ghana of blackpod, a fungus hitting cocoa pods in prolonged cool and damp spells, had gone after regional attacks in September. Rains there had been heavier than in Ivory Coast.
--Abidjan Newsroom +225 21 90 90
