Delayed export financing is slowing Ivory Coast cocoa arrivals but shipments for existing contracts will continue ahead of an imminent government decision on licences and marketing rates, exporters and shipping sources said on Friday.
"The central bank has stopped backing private lenders," said one exporter. "Buying activity has slowed down in the past two days."
No immediate figures on  latest arrivals were available on Friday.
At least one major bank has stopped financing, and exporters expect others to follow suit unless rates are published soon.
"Exporters with licences from 1995/96 and enough money are carrying on buying and shipping. November contracts are fewer than December but still have to be met," said one exporter.
Ivory Coast opened its 1996/97 cocoa marketing season on October 24 but delayed an announcemement on guideline buyer and exporter marketing rates. "They have never been so late," said an exporter.
Almost no cocoa trucking activity was visible at Abidjan on Friday. But large consignments of cocoa can be seen in warehouses and total port stocks are now estimated by shippers to be over 100,000 tonnes.
One banker financing some large exporters said many of their clients had no cocoa in port and the owner of the stocks was not clear. A large shipment to Amsterdam from Ivory Coast is expected within two weeks.
"Port stocks will probably slip before cocoa arrivals pick up after licensing," said one exporter. "Activity will probably pick up after November 15 when licence finances have been sorted out."
Exporters are expecting total arrivals for November of between 150,000 and 180,000 tonnes, rising to a December peak before a slow January tail-off. Exporters' total year crop estimates pivot around 900,000 tonnes.
Shipping companies expected licences to be out by Friday but are now waiting for an announcement next week.  "Many companies we deal with were saying licences would be out by the weekend but we have heard nothing about rates," said one source.
Licences are usually announced by the Ministry of Agriculture but no date has been set.
Caistab sources said this week a list of approved cocoa exporters had been drawn up by Wednesday but still had to be signed by the Minister of Commerce. The list had been expected by exporters on Wednesday.
Caistab president Yves-Marie Koissy is still in the U.S, but could return next week, said Caistab sources.
Exporters have rejected Caistab requests to them to argue for a cut in freight rates. They have also rejected a government plan to make exporters responsible for collecting buyers' unpaid income taxes.
"The Caistab is also trying to get exporters to pull down freight rates but they (exporters) are refusing to approach shipping lines," said another port source.
"Exporters want the rates set the same, so their rebate from the Caistab is not cut," the source added.
Pod counters recently up country said large quantities of cocoa were seen along roadsides and moving through warehouses.
"November arrivals will be strong as soon as the uncertainty is over," said one.
--Abidjan Newsroom +225 21 90 90
