Cocoa buyers in central Ivory Coast say their purchases are down by 30 percent from this time last year and expect the country's total 1996/97 cocoa output to be under 850,000 tonnes.
"The estimates have been too high. The crop will be about 800-850,000 tonnes for the whole year," said one buyer. Most other buyers in the area visited by Reuters agreed.
"We have had two strong years but now we are going back to normal levels," said one buyer with nine purchasing centres. "Our business is running at 65 percent of last year."
The state of cocoa farms between the main central towns of Gagnoa and Daloa seen by Reuters varied widely with cocoa pod deterioration strongest in the north around Daloa.
Ivory Coast exporters said this week cocoa arrivals were down 25 percent on this time last year.
Exporters and buyers in southwest Ivory Coast expect arrivals of the 1996/97 crop to be no more than 900,000 tonnes.
Private forecasters last summer projected a main crop alone of 850-900,000 tonnes. The 1996/97 season opened on October 24.
Prime Minister Daniel Kablan Duncan said recently he expected his country's total cocoa crop to shrink to 950,000 tonnes in 1996/97 from a record 1.2 million tonnes last year.
Buyers in Daloa told Reuters production from older trees in their area would pull down average Ivorian cocoa production figures boosted by higher yields from young hybrids around Soubre and San Pedro in the southwest.
They said bean sizes varied widely from farm to farm and between trees, with a range of 90-100 per 100 grammes and 9-10 percent humidity.
Beans totalling no more than 105 per 100 grammes are considered exportable.
"The trees here are older and have not recovered from giving a massive mid-crop last year," said the biggest cocoa buyer in Daloa. "Overall quality is good but the beans are smaller and mid crop beans might be too small for export."
Several buyers said they would close their stores in June.
"Crop forecasts have been too high while pod survival has been poor. There is little on trees for the rest of the year," said the main Gagnoa buyer.
Pods had wilted on trees because of sparse rains since September and insects had thrived in the dry conditions as farmers could not afford treatments early in the harvesting season, said one plantation owner.
Six farms visited by Reuters between Daloa and Gagnoa showed plenty of wilted, deformed or undersized pods with insect damage and occasional "black pod" fungal disease.
Mature but discarded November and December-harvest pods lay in heaps on some farms with mid-crop flowering rare.
However, the situation south of Gagnoa was markedly different with little disease, insect damage or pod wilting.
"If farmers could afford to spray (treatments) other plantations would be in much better shape," said one farmer.
Several farms had good pod sizes and age distribution with flowering concentrated on some trees.
"Rains south of Gagnoa have been more spread out so the situation is better there," said the manager of one well-kept plantation.
He said Harmattan season sun mixed with some cloud cover and daily showers would help flowering for mid-crop pods.
Buyers said most cocoa had now been brought out of the bush with few village stores remaining full. Transportation to port would not be delayed much by road conditions, they said.
The up-country buying operations of recently liquidated SOGEPAG, a subsidiary of large Ivorian exporter SIFCA, have been taken over by Daloa-based private buyer Enza Diaby -- an associate of SIFCA.
Larger SOGEPAG stores have stopped receiving cocoa but smaller centres were operating. The firm offered cooperative-like terms and logisitical help to farmers.
"Diaby is running the small stores. He has enough trucks for collecting cocoa," said other buyers.
One farmer said long-term output around Gagnoa was set to decline as trees aged and government agencies encouraged farmers to plant rubber and diversify agricultural production.
-- Abidjan bureau +225 21 90 90
