Sporadic rain showers up to the end of November have continued to water Ivory Coast's cocoa belt but mid-crop campaign prospects are not yet clear, say weather and crop analysts.
A weather front expected to bring hot dry weather southwards over the whole of Ivory Coast had backtracked to the country's northern border with light rains taking hold in dried out areas.
"It has moved up to Korhogo (10th northern parallel) from Dimbokro (8th)," said one weather analyst. Rains usually fall in a sweep 200 km to the south of the front's position, he added.
Crop analysts said the front's retreat meant no dramatic changes in cocoa pod development but they welcomed continuing rains.
"We are now seeing the first fruits for the mid-crop ," said one crop analyst. "December weather will now determine the full potential. It is too early too draw conclusions," he addded.
Weather data show variable rains for the last 10 days of November with 650 percent of normal levels falling around Bondoukou in the north-east, put down to local effects, compared to 53 percent for San Pedro and Tabou in the southwest.
An average of 30mm fell at ten weather stations monitored in the last ten days of November with heavy showers concentrated around Abidjan and Yamassoukro. In the preceeding ten days the average was 42mm, also boosted by heavy showers in Abidjan.
Overall November rains in three successive ten day periods rose from 104mm to 423mm before dropping to 295 mm in the last third of the month.
Light rains fell in Daloa and Man, after none in the first ten days of November. More southern cocoa belt areas received 53 percent of end-November average rains around San Pedro, and 62 percent around Gagnoa. Rains around Abidjan and Yamassoukro were 200 percent above average.
"November rains moved into surplus in the south towards the end of the month but we are still in deficit in the north," said a weather analyst.
Crop analysts said the latest weather picture was highly variable and mid-crop development would depend on December's pattern. Rains last year continued into December, they said.
"This year, dry weather up to early November slowed down mid-crop development but we could still be heading towards a reasonable crop," said the crop analyst.
"It is too early to draw conclusions as last year's weather picture was different," he said.  "We had twice the normal rains for December but then a strong mid-crop."
One crop analyst said on November 20 a long dry spell pushing into the year's short rainy season could slightly affect young cocoa fruits. The degree would depend on an extension rains seen since early November which would cushion the drying effect of Harmattan conditions, he said then.
Up-country buyers welcomed rains after dry weather in September and October but said drying problems had increased harvested cocoa humidity levels to up to 10 percent.
"Drying has slowed deliveries a bit, but overall quality is still good," said one.
Abidjan newsroom +225 21 90 90
