Revised rules for Ivory Coast's electronic cocoa and coffee auction system have been agreed to stop overbidding, a source close to discussions on the issue said.
Changes agreed between marketing board Caistab, exporters and the World Bank were expected to be put in place but no date had been set.
"Bidders will be held to the price they offer rather than the second highest bid price now applied," said the source.
"There are two main changes we have agreed which should now be applied quickly," he told Reuters, pointing to a date in late December or early 1997.
The second rule change would allow exporters to buy 15 percent of contracts previously reserved for Caistab direct sales to traders abroad if prices were right, said the source.
Existing rules mean the Caistab's 15 percent is withdrawn and submitted for later auction even when exporters are prepared to pay more than outsiders.
The rules were originally designed to ensure lots could be held back in the hope of higher offers later.
"Direct sales only act as a safety valve when traders bid more than exporters," said one observer. "The changes on that point will favour the exporters as more will remain on offer."
Contracts would also be awarded to the five highest bidders rather than one and scaled down pro rata if total demand outstripped supply. Bids are made without knowing what quantities are on offer for a particular session.
The donor-backed auction was launched on May 2 as part of a $150 million World Bank loan deal, but Commodities Minister Guy-Alain Gauze said at the time it could lead to distortion of contract prices.
"There is a double speculation here because the futures
market is a type of speculation and the same goes for the auctioning system," he said.
Up to 115,000 tonnes of cocoa is estimated by exporters and industry analysts to have been sold forward for 1996/97, plus another 100,000 tonnes for 1997/98, since the new screen-based system replaced telephone trading.
About 660,OOO tonnes of 1996/97 cocoa was sold before the auction opened.
Exporters told Reuters average quantities now offered at each auction session were too small.
Others said exporters had bought cocoa on the spot market but lacked Caistab contracts for shipping to clients abroad.
About 2,500 tonnes are auctioned daily, or about 20,000 tonnes in each of 50 trading weeks after allowing for about 15-20 percent destined for local production, one said.
"We would prefer two weekly sessions of 10,000 tonnes to make sure we can secure whole contracts in one go," he said. "Coffee contracts are smaller so the same problem doeen't arise there."
"Support for the system is disappearing, especially for physicals traders. Most of this year's crop is sold so we are really talking about contracts for next year," said one exporter.
The exporters' GEPEX trade body was still in talks with the Caistab this week after claims that a few firms had won too many contracts by bidding unrealistically high prices.
Exporters have said they lack the financial clout of foreign operators and face higher costs.
"It (the auction) is completely unworkable," said one exporter.
The Caistab has estimated a total of 950,000 tonnes of cocoa and 230,000 tonnes of coffee for the 1996/97 season.
