Ivory Coast's coffee industry faces more Caistab market reforms and fresh uncertainties over its returns in 1997, exporters and analysts said.
"The Caistab has a battle on its hands to keep farmers interested while meeting obligations to liberalise the sector to meet (World Bank) loan conditions," said one analyst. "There could be a lot of changes in store and not all of them welcome."
Ivory Coast slashed its reference farmgate price to 500 CFA per kilo from 700 CFA and opened its 1996/97 marketing season late on November 14.
Prices were set high in 1995/96 to encourage rehabilitation of plantations, but world prices slid to levels well below prices guaranteed by the Caistab.
The World Bank fears a repeat in the coming year. It wants a rapid end to cross-subsidies to the coffee sector from cocoa earnings and is waiting for new Caistab chief Yves-Marie Koissy to unveil plans early in 1997.
One export bank risk manager doubted whether all subsidies to the coffee sector would be paid this year.
Some exporters project coffee output to exceed the 230,000 tonnes forecast by Caistab, which could mean higher-than-budgeted subsidies.
"We are not funding (exporters) until we are sure the Caistab will keep its word," the risk manager said. "It (Caistab) has funds but export margins are already non-existent."
Industry opinion is split on what action the World Bank should take when British consultant Landell Mills (LMC) presents its ideas for market liberalisation in January.
Ivory Coast no longer guarantees a set coffee price to farmers, using instead to a guideline minimum price.
"Internal prices have been liberalised but it is still not clear if you would be jailed for paying below that level. The law is not clear," said a buyer. "What is clear is the government exerts a quasi-monopoly on external marketing by its allocation of export contracts and export licences."
"We have nothing to fear if quality checks are kept in place along with some back-seat stabilisation functions," said one.
Thin up-country buying this month has seen merchants paying farmers less than the reference price. Farmers were being paid only 300 to 340 CFA per kilo, one crop analyst said.
One large coffee processor operating in Ivory Coast said it was now paying 40 CFA above the reference price for premium quality coffee, even though other buyers paid less.
"We are for a completely free market with quality checks," said a manager.
Exporters said they were generally satisfied with trading via a new electronic auction system introduced in May to make dealings more transparent. Cocoa traders using a similar system have complained about contract sizes and excessive bidding to win contracts.
Exporters expect no changes to the 1996/97 list of coffee marketing prices issued by Caistab in November.
