Port dues at Ivory Coast's main port of Abidjan will rise by up to 6.4 percent from January 1 to fund expansion projects, a government statement said.
Rates would increase by 6.3 percent for ships, 6.4 percent for container gantry cranes, 5.8 percent for containers and 2.5 percent for cargo and other items, it said.
The charges, which caught shipping companies off guard, were agreed by Abidjan Port Authority in September but awaited government blessing. "The cabinet has approved the new rates," the statement said.
Shipping companies said the costs would probably have little impact but were awaiting more details from Port Authority.
"We have not done our calculations yet but if this is just a port charge rather than a direct handling charge it will passed straight on to the consumer," said one container line manager.
Others said growing competition on West Africa-European routes would mean some companies might choose to absorb some costs to attract business.
"Competition determines what costs are passed on," said another shipping manager. More ships had been deployed in the West Africa region recently as freight rates were higher than on Far Eastern routes.
"Port costs are a hell of a lot higher than in the Far East but freight rate earnings are also better," said the manager. "We will wait for clearer details."
International donors have been pushing for efficiency measures rather than investment in infrastructure as a way to boost cargo handling capacity. In December 1995 the government urged port operators to meet efficiency targets to attract private sector development loans from the World Bank.
"Things have definitely improved. Container throughput time at the port for imports was 17 days," said a container shipping manager. "Now it is only 11 and the target was set at seven."
The efficiency drive began last December but shippers say export cargo efficiency targets have been less successful. A target of three days was set for export container throughput.
"For exports we are talking about rapid documentation for transit cargo. Bureaucracy there has not changed much," said another line manager. This is mainly cotton from the Sahel.
Measures include shortening times for declaring ships' manifests to customs, under the threat of port fines, and avoiding duplication of paperwork.
Gantry cranes, plagued by downtime, were expected to be in use 90 percent of the time and handle 16 containers an hour.
Local shipping agents said they were also concerned by talk of a bunker surcharge. Large customs fines for non declaration of ships' bunkers have been levied over the past year.
"It's a problem. But the port needs money and still competes well with others in the area," said one. "Other ports in the area have applied all kinds of add-on charges."
Projects put on hold after devaluation of the CFA franc in 1994 included new gantry cranes, renovating a fruit terminal, building a fish wharf, dredging and a new container park.
Increasing quantities of Ivory Coast's principal cocoa and coffee exports are being shipped in containers. --Abidjan newsroom +225 21 90 90
