Ivorian 1996/97 cocoa arrivals stood at around 390,000-410,000 tonnes by mid-December, after a slow start to the month, analysts and exporters say.
Exporters blamed a combination of crop profile and demand factors for the dip in December -- usually the strongest month.
The figures to December 16 were down from an estimated 540,000 tonnes by that date last year, but some analysts said a further 50,000 tonnes should be added to this year's total for comparative purposes as the season had opened three weeks late.
An averaged figure plus the 50,000 tonnes would put arrivals since October 1 at 450,000. Various sources put arrivals at San Pedro since October 1 at 130,000-140,000 tonnes with the rest going to the main port of Abidjan.
"Arrivals were slower than usual for December but in the past week arrivals have overtaken last year's (weekly) rate," said one exporter. "People are completing December contracts but January will be strong," he added.
Subsequent arrivals up to December 22 were said by exporters to be around 50,000 tonnes per week. They expected the deficit in arrivals compared to last year to grow in December before narrowing sharply in January, when arrivals pick up again.
Difficulty in obtaining export contracts from the Caistab marketing board and problems with bean drying after rains upcountry had accentuated the usual Christmas period drop-off.
Rains had damaged bushtracks, delaying collection and raising humidity and moisture to above acceptable levels in some areas.
"We are refusing some cocoa. There is a lot more coming down now the sun is out," said one Abidjan-based exporter.
Drying problems and poor fermentation had raised bean humidity to 11 percent in some areas, extending both normal and machine drying times.
"Humidity levels are slipping back down from anything up to 11 percent," said one San Pedro-based buyer, and the guideline farmgate price of 315 CFA per kilo had on the whole been paid to growers.
Upcountry buyers visited by Reuters over Christmas had taken the chance to dry out large quantities of fresh through to greyish moist beans as a wet early December gave way to usual dry sunny weather ahead of the holiday.
"It's patchy, but sunny days are here again," said one buyer. "Whatever was cut off in village stores or too wet can now be properly dried out," he added.
San Pedro received over 15,000 in the week from December 16, exporters there said.
Reports of smuggling to Guinea continue to surface but one Western diplomat recently returning by road from Conakry said road conditions were appalling and few covered trucks had been seen.
Large shipments in the past weeks are expected to cut into port stocks.
"Port area stocks are unclear but there are a lot of bulk shipments," said one exporter.
-- Abidjan Newsroom +225 21 90 90
