Rains ended abruptly throughout most of Ivory Coast in the second 10 days of December, allowing crops to dry after the extended rain, upcountry buyers and weather analysts say.
Weather data showed average rain down to 8mm from about 45 mm at the start of December, with little or no rain falling at six of eight stations monitored in the 10 days to December 20.
A total of 65 mm fell compared to 400 mm at nine stations in the first 10 days of the month. Only the northern Daloa area, with 21.8 mm, and the far southwest around Tabou, with 42.5 mm, received noticeable amounts.
Around 250 mm fell in San Pedro and Tabou alone in early December during a late, small rainy season usually seen in October and November.
"The inter-tropical weather front has still not brought down Harmattan (drier conditions usually seen in early December and on through January after rains)," said one weather analyst.
Farmers visited by Reuters over Christmas had begun drying beans but some exporters in Abidjan were rejecting moist beans, some of which had sat uncollected in villages before mud tracks solidified.
Heavy rains fell in early December, leading to deterioration of bushtracks and raising cocoa bean humidity levels to up to 11 percent, compared to exportable levels of about eight percent.
One crop analyst said before the latest figures that mid-crop (April-September) prospects would be boosted by another 20mm rain by January. Sporadic rains have fallen upcountry since December 20 but month-end rainfall figures were not immediately available.
Midcrop flowers are expected to give cherelles (small cocoa pods) as insect activity gets underway after rains end. Crop analysts will be looking for clear indications of prospects in early January.
Crop analysts see the rains as beneficial for pods still on trees as a preceding small dry season had also been late and wetting would cushion the effects of coming dry Harmattan winds.
The data, from Ivory Coast's national weather station, shows rainfall for the second 10 days of December in the following key growing areas -
Dalao 21.8mm, Gagnoa 0 mm, San Pedro 0.7 mm, Tabou 42.5 mm and Man 0 mm, Dimbokro 0 mm, Yamoussoukro 0 mm, Adiake 0 mm.
No data was available for Abidjan and Sassandra but sporadic rains have been seen by Reuters in south coast areas, including Abidjan, since Dec 20. --Abidjan Newsroom + 225 21 90 90
