Chad holds much-delayed parliamentary elections on Sunday with voters hoping that democratic reforms and oil development will bring a lasting end to sometimes bloody ethnic rivalry.
An estimated 300,000 nomads in the sprawling arid nation on the edge of the Sahara Desert started voting on Thursday, three days before the rest of the 3.5 million voters throughout the Moslem north and centre and largely Christian south.
A total of 658 candidates from 49 parties will be vying for the 125 seats in a new national assembly which will convene on March 31 when the former French colony's democratic transition finally draws to an end.
"Oil is really what is at stake. Christian and Moslem differences have calmed although Islamic fundamentalism is rising," one diplomat told Reuters.
Polls open from 7 a.m. (0600 GMT) to 6 p.m. (1700 GMT).
French troops, stationed in Chad under a defence pact, will help fly voting materials and the 30 international observers to far-flung polling stations.
President Idriss Deby, the former northern guerrilla leader who seized power in a French-backed coup in 1990, won a long-delayed presidential election in July against southern rival and fellow general Wadal Abdelkader Kamougue.
Deby's Patriotic Salvation Movement, leading member of the 27-party Republican Front coalition, starts favourite to win Sunday's election or to be able to cobble together a working majority after the poll.
Election officials expect vote counting to end by Wednesday, provisional results a week later and final results by January 25, once the appeal court has checked them. Any run-offs will be held on February 23.
Many opposition parties disputed the first-round results of the presidential poll and urged their supporters to boycott the runoff but polling passed off peacefully. The opposition are grouped in a 17-party coalition.
The capital was calm on Saturday following a peaceful campaign, which ended on December 31.
Election issues tended to be local or ethnic but diplomats said that all parties were looking for a fair distribution of any wealth from oil, which is expected to come on stream by the year 2000. Chad has about 100 ethnic groups.
"People still largely vote on local grounds and Deby is not president of all Chadians," former national assembly leader, Jean Alingue, another defeated presidential hopeful, told Reuters.
"Turnout will be low because people know the fraud apparatus is still in place and nothing much will change," he predicted.
Chad has known coups, civil war or conflict with northern neighbour Libya for much of its life from independence in 1960.
It had a 57-member interim legislature under a 1993 transitional charter. Elections were repeatedly delayed, the parliamentary poll at least twice in 1996. Election officials cited organisational delays.
