Chad held much-delayed multi-party parliamentary elections on Sunday but there was little enthusiasm in the sprawling and volatile African nation for its fourth round of voting in less than a year.
Some polling stations in the capital opened late as voting materials were not ready for the scheduled 7 a.m. (0600 GMT) start. Few queues formed in the shimmering heat of the day and those that did were small.
Some opposition candidates denounced incidents of fraud but the 30 or so international observers reserved judgment and there were no immediate reports of electoral unrest in the majority Moslem nation with a lively southern Christian minority.
President Idriss Deby, the former northern guerrilla leader who seized power in a French-backed coup in 1990, paid tribute to Chad's democratic progress after voting in the capital.
"We have made a non-negligible step in the democratic process set up in 1990," he told reporters.
Others took a different view. "Turnout will be low because people know the fraud apparatus is still in place and nothing much will change," said former national assembly leader Jean Bawoyeu Alingue, a defeated presidential hopeful.
More than 650 candidates from 49 parties contested the 125 seats in the national assembly, which will convene on March 31 to end the former French colony's transition to democracy.
Chad has known coups, civil war or conflict with northern neighbour Libya for much of its life from independence in 1960.
After repeated electoral delays, Deby won a multi-party presidential election in July after a run-off against southern rival and fellow general Wadal Abdelkader Kamougue.
Almost 68 percent of voters took part in the first round of that poll, which followed a March constitutional referendum. Voter interest tailed off in the second round.
A total of 3.5 million people were eligible to vote on Sunday in the nation on the fringes of the Sahara Desert. An estimated 300,000 nomads started voting on Thursday.
Deby's Patriotic Salvation Movement, leading member of the 27-party Republican Front coalition, started favourite to win or to be able to cobble together a working majority after the poll.
The opposition, which called a boycott of the presidential runoff alleging first-round fraud, has a 17-party coalition.
Election issues tended to be local or ethnic but diplomats said that all parties were looking for a fair distribution of any wealth from oil, which is expected to come on stream by the year 2000. Chad has about 100 ethnic groups.
"Oil is really what is at stake. Christian and Moslem differences have calmed," one diplomat said.
"It does not take much to make people feel better off," Alingue said. "We don't want to see the money vanish abroad."
Polls were to close at 6 p.m. (1700 GMT). Election officials expected provisional results within 10 days and final results by January 25, once the appeal court had checked them. Any run-offs will be held on February 23.
