Voters in Chad, who showed little apparent enthusiasm for Sunday's election to end their much-delayed transition to democracy, face a long wait before they know the shape of their new national assembly.
"Provisional results are set for January 15 and final results for January 25 after approval by the court of appeal," the president of the Independent National Electoral Committee, Pascal Yaodamnadji, told Reuters.
Runoffs are scheduled for February 23.
Polling for the 125-seat assembly, which began last Thursday for nomads in the sprawling and volatile African country with a Moslem majority and lively southern Christian minority, passed off calmly with no reports of major incidents.
A total of 658 candidates from 49 parties stood for the assembly, which will convene on March 31 to end the former French colony's transition to democracy.
Chad has known coups, civil war or conflict with northern neighbour Libya for much of its life from independence in 1960.
President Idriss Deby, a former northern guerrilla leader, seized power in the arid nation in a 1990 French-backed coup.
After repeated electoral delays, he won a multi-party presidential election in July after a runoff against southern rival and fellow general Wadal Abdelkader Kamougue.
Almost 68 percent of voters took part in the first round of that poll, which followed a March constitutional referendum. Voter interest tailed off in the second round, which many opposition parties urged their supporters to boycott.
About 3.5 million of Chad's 6.4 million people were eligible to vote on Sunday but there was little enthusiasm for the poll in the capital, which accounts for 10 percent of all voters and where turnout appeared well down on previous polls.
Some opposition candidates denounced instances of fraud.
Former national assembly leader Jean Bawoyeu Alingue, a defeated presidential contender, cited three types of fraud.
"Electoral cards were copied, pre-stuffed envelopes were taken into booths by voters and nomads have been allowed to vote in an uncontrolled manner," he told Reuters.
The 30 or so international observers, many of whom were yet to return from monitoring polling in the provinces, were expected to report their findings on Wednesday.
British European Parliament member Michael McGowan praised the organisation of polling in the capital. "On the whole the elections seemed to me to be well-organised and thorough."
Deby's Patriotic Salvation Movement heads the 27-party Republican Front coalition. The opposition, which alleged fraud in the presidential poll, has a rival 17-party coalition.
Election issues tended to be local or ethnic but diplomats said all parties sought fair distribution of any wealth from oil, expected to come on stream by the year 2000.
