Security forces in Chad have summarily executed scores of people since a November official decree sanctioned instant justice for criminals caught in the act, local human rights officials said on Friday.
A pregnant woman, streetchildren and supected thieves are among victims of public executions reported, but human rights groups fear scores of other killings were carried out secretly.
"The policy has been carried out since November. It is quite open but the total numbers killed are not," a charity worker who gave her name only as Marie-Odile told Reuters.
"We are called out to scenes of executions and we talk with relatives of those killed," she said.
Officials confirmed the shoot-at-sight decree, but refused to go on the record. Instead they cited a public statement by President Idriss Deby whose office issued the order to paramilitary gendamrie commanders nationwide.
"N'Djamena is being held hostage by real organised gangs which, when they are apprehended by the law, are systematically freed again by the justice system. After they are freed they continue to give law enforcers problems," Deby told a news conference after meeting rights groups on November 23.
Insecurity is a major problem in Chad, which has been gripped by internal conflict or war with Libya for more than two decades until 1990.
"Crime is a huge problem. The whole place is run by the army and bandits and roads outside N'Djamena are subject to roadblocks by robbers," a Western resident said.
The vast but largely desert country also borders the volatile states of Sudan and Central African Republic, with whom it is seeking a common strategy against cross border banditry.
A transport worker at a dock on Lake Chad was among victims of the shoot-to-kill order listed by the human rights groups.
"A docker accused of breaking into an empty container was executed in the market. The shooting caused one pregnant woman at the scene to miscarry under emotional shock," the Chadian Human Rights League (LTDH) said in a December 26 report.
A Paris-based human rights group, in its account of the executions, said a pregnant woman suspected of stealing grain in a market was shot dead on the spot by gendarmes on November 16. A boy was put in a bag and shot dead on the banks of the Chari river in similar circumstances two days earlier.
Three suspected livestock thieves were shot in public on December 26, the International Federation of Human Rights Leagues told Paris daily Liberation.
A copy of the November 14 order to security forces seen by Reuters in N'Djamena read in part:
"We remind you once again that robbers must not be the object of normal procedures (of arrest). If one is caught in the act, you must immediately proceed with his physical elimination.
"Non-application of this order will result in very severe punishment including possible loss of rank and sacking from the force."
LTDH workers say two gendarmerie officers who leaked the order were taken into custody and had not been seen since. The two, named as Job Mbaibougue and Abel Djimong were arrested on November 23 and taken to Faya Largeau prison, they said.
