Foreign Minister Saleh Kebzabo defended Chad's new policy of summarily executing alleged criminals, saying it was justified because the country's courts systematically freed wrongdoers.
Human rights groups say scores of Chadians have already been executed by security forces, including 11 people shot in public on New Year's eve.
"The policy has worked. We no longer see the levels of violence before it was introduced," Kebzabo told Reuters in an interview in the capital N'Djamena on Saturday.
His comments were the most senior official confirmation of a decree issued by President Idriss Deby. An order to police commands in the country to forget the courts when dealing with criminals caught in the act was leaked to reporters last week.
"It came to force around the beginning of November," Kebzabo said. "If you want to know how effective it has been, ask a white woman in the market. Before they couldn't even go there without being attacked for their jewellery."
Deby justified the policy, saying the courts were corrupt and systematically freed criminals.
Insecurity is a major problem in Chad, which was gripped by civil war or conflict with Libya for more than two decades until 1990. The vast but largely desert country also borders the volatile states of Sudan and Central African Republic, with whom it is seeking a common strategy against cross-border banditry.
Kebzabo, a former journalist and close political associate Deby, dismissed critics who say the shoot-at-sight policy is a gross human rights violation.
"While the situation continued there was no question of human rights for those attacked," said Kebzabo, who heads the National Union for Development and Renewal party.
He said there were no official figures for those executed so far, but he did not directly dispute the Chad Human Rights League's reports of scores killed.
"Some people, if they heard 10 people had been killed, they would say 100. There are no figures. But when the League makes a statement it is usually pretty true," said Kebzabo, himself a former activist who had brushes with authorities before joining the government.
In one crackdown, nine people accused of theft and banditry were executed at Fianga in the southwestern region of Mayo-Kebbi on Christmas Eve, campaign group Chad Non-Violence said in a report submitted to the Human Rights League on Friday.
"Nine people were arrested on December 22 and kept at the Fianga gendarmerie. On December 24 they were tied up and executed in a public market in the presence of administrative, political and military authorities," said the report signed by Chad Non-Violence president Lazare Serge Tikri.
"Also in Fianga, 11 others were arrested and received the same treatment on December 31," it added.
A League spokesman said it was not unusual for reports to reach N'Djamena two weeks late because of poor communications.
A December 26 League report listed some of the people killed since November, including a pregnant woman, streetchildren and suspected thieves.
"A docker accused of breaking into an empty container was executed in the market. The shooting caused one pregnant woman at the scene to miscarry under emotional shock," it said.
"It is quite open but the total numbers killed are not," an aid worker said. "We are called out to scenes of executions and we talk with relatives of those killed."
Many ordinary Chadians interviewed about the shoot-to-kill policy said they initially supported it because of rampant crime but that they now feared it could get out of hand.
