As Chad's odyssey to oil production from 2001 enters financing and tender stages, senior officials are asking for guarantees that benefits will trickle down to the impoverished population.
"I am afraid about the oil because the experience of other African countries shows that it is always mismanaged," Chad's Foreign Minister Saleh Kebzabo told Reuters in an interview.
"It will change people's mentality for the worse. No preparations have yet been made at political and management levels and there has been no public debate," he said.
After decades of civil strife or conflict with neighbouring Libya, Chad held its first multiparty legislative elections on January 5, marking a symbolic transition to peace.
Other political party leaders, who like Kebzabo, contested the elections, voiced similar concerns.
"We must have laws to ensure all interests are served, with Chad at the centre," said Lol Mahamet Choua, who draws support near the smaller Sedigi oilfield on the shores of Lake Chad.
Exxon's unit Esso Exploration and Production Chad Inc., a 40 percent-share consortium member with Shell's Chad unit (40 percent) and Elf (20 percent) in November sealed a deal with Chad on finance and legal terms for Chad's main field 350 miles (560 km) south of N'Djamena.
Doba, due on stream in 2001, is forecast to yield 900 million barrels, or 200,000-250,000 bpd over 15-20 years, at a cost of $3 billion, according to Exxon, Houston. Cheaper electricity is expected from power stations using Sedigi crude.
"There are some milestones needing to be resolved but something could happen next month," Exxon spokesman Ed Burwell told Reuters last week as Chad's finance minister left for discussions in Washington and officals held talks on a pipeline through Cameroon.
Chad's Gross National Product per capita income at $237 in 1995 is one of Africa's lowest. It is dependent on cotton, livestock and gum arabic revenue and badly needs foreign currency after 30 years of war since independence from France in 1960 and devaluation of the regional CFA franc in 1994.
Investors hope Moslem President Idriss Deby, once dubbed "Cowboy of the Sands" for lightning jeep-based warfare against Libya, can both welcome oilmen to his country -- twice the size of Texas -- and heal North-South, Moslem-Christian strife.
The consortium is nearing the end of exploration and engineering studies, despite logistics problems in the sprawling Sahel state with only 300 km (170 miles) of paved roads.
Doba's geological profile is such that horizontal flow and recovery of oil is small, meaning costly vertical well-drilling.
Most financial aspects of Doba remain unclear. "Chadians are told nothing at all about what is going on," Assistant Government Secretary Saleh Makki told Reuters. "Royalties are a closely guarded secret, but if there is no transparency people will find other ways to express themselves."
Production slipped back from 1998 to 2001, partly due to rebel activities in southern areas led by Moise Kette. The group wants an autonomous Chrisitan region in the south where Chad's cotton, and soon oil, wealth is concentrated.
Chad buys oil from southern neighbours Nigeria and Cameroon.
"Oil has not made people's lives much better in those countries, despite United Nations figures. Our oil money should not also disappear abroad," former National Assembly leader and ex-prime minister Jean Bawayou Alingue told Reuters.
Compared with Chad's per capita income of $237, that for oil-producer Cameroon is $813 and Gabon -- with Elf dominating offshore oil production -- $4,400. Chad has appealed for food aid for 1997.
"There will be enough money in government coffers for them to do some smart things," said Louis Adande, vice-president at the Abidjan unit of Citibank, reviewing finance options for the consortium. "But Chad is obviously still looking for stability and has an interest in promoting it."
A private Swiss firm, Cotecna, hired to manage Chad's treasury funds, recently ended a two-year contract. Opposition parties fear political use of future revenues.
The half-desert central African state of 6.5 million has held talks with the World Bank over partial funding of a 30-inch (76 cm), 650 kilometre (404 mile), pipeline with four pumping stations to take landlocked Chad's oil to French-built refineries, and marine terminals, at Kribi port in Cameroon.
An airport for supply planes is planned for Doba along with roads to N'Djamena and 300 long-term jobs are expected.
