Ivory Coast's 1996/97 coffee season has begun amid slow buying and reports of variable quality, industry sources said.
"SIFCA (the largest Ivorian buyer) has started buying, so we are likely to see others follow," said one large exporter. "You could say that marks the real start of the season."
Buying had been limited in December although up-country agents had been active with larger than usual volumes.
Output is put at 230,000-250,000 tonnes for 1996/97, against 180,000 in 1995/96.
The season was officially opened on November 14, rather than early October, as the Caistab marketing agency struggled to set a recommended price closer to falling world market levels.
"It will be a very large crop," said one local analyst. "The coffee is now mainly off the trees and being sat on by farmers at village level."
Buyers reported variable quality and humidity up to 15 percent in some areas, against export limits of 13 percent. "Quality is particularly good around (northwestern) Man but elsewhere you will find opinion dependent on who you talk to," said one.
One source put arrivals by January 10 at San Pedro port at 3,337 tonnes, but figures for Abidjan were less clear.
Bank sources said in December they were reluctant to put money into coffee because of fears borrowers would not receive transfer payments from Caistab and would default on loans.
"That remains the case," said one exporter. "Banks are certainly reticent, so purchasing is still low." Continuing low world market prices added to the uncertainty, others said.
Bush tracks had dried out and some farmers were profiting from January sun to dry produce that was still damp because of the failure of harmattan desert winds to arrive in some areas in late December.
"Some farmers are also being paid below offical, recommended (500 CFA) a kilo prices," said one buying source.
Prices ranging between 300 and 500 CFA per kilo were being offered, depending on area and quality, the source said. But others said they were offering up to 540 for top quality grades.
One industry analyst said 44 exporters were licensed, against 32 last year, so some would struggle to balance accounts amid more acute internal price competition.
Attention is also turning to a report on further coffee sector liberalisation expected to be with donor market reform sponsors by the end of January.
Private British consultant Landell Mills and Co will submit its report amid donor calls for an end to cross-subsidies to the coffee sector from cocoa profits from the beginning of 1997/98.
"The price support is running at around 100 CFA a kilo based on current world prices," said one source.
The focus is also turning to Association of Coffee Producing Countries (ACPC) talks on January 23 which will focus on pushing up world prices through voluntary export restraints.
