An Ivory Coast liberalisation study focusing on quality, competition and less bureaucracy will be ready as planned by January 31, according to sources close to reforms.
"Four options have to be reviewed," said one source. "Price stability while making each year self-financing (with no carryovers between years) will be looked at," the source added.
The donor-sponsored study by private British firm Landell Mills Consultants (LMC) would also seek to avoid pitfalls seen in countries such as Cameroon where unfettered liberalisation led to coffee quality problems and loss of premium.
Ivory Coast embarked on a series of coffee and cocoa sector reforms in 1995 as conditions for a three-tranche $150 million World Bank Agricultural Sector Adjustment Loan.
Although the guideline farmgate coffee price was cut by 200 CFA a kilo to 500 CFA when the 1996/97 season opened in November, exporters point to continuing low world prices and the need for further support for the sector out of cocoa revenues.
"We are in favour of complete liberalisation but with good quality controls kept in place," said one industry buyer. "The Caistab's role should be limited to a hands-off marketing role giving quality assurance and statistical information."
Coffee exporters expect support for coffee to run at around 100 CFA a kilo, as world prices remain low, until recommended prices are reset or entirely scrapped for 1997/98.
The Caisse de Stabilisation (Caistab) marketing board sets a guide price for farmers whereas once it dictated prices. Donors have already demanded further streamlining of its operations and increased transparency about a shadowy set of costs referred to in accounts as "Delta" costs.
Delta expenditures for 1996/97, which will partly determine stabilisation fund levels for coffee, are due to be set from January when the Caistab gives details of coffee forward sales.
"The problem is that the Caistab has not released any (forward sales) data since October," said one source. "That puts everyone in a very difficult position."
The Delta cost for both coffee and cocoa is budgeted to be largely unchanged in 1996/97 from 53 CFA a kilo in 1995/96.
The Caistab, whose new managing director Yves-Marie Koissy was appointed in September but did not formally take over until October, declined immediate comment on the planned report.
The Caistab employs over 900 people but with its role reduced it is expected to cut staff levels after overruning many budgeted running cost items in 1995/96.
"The real number of employees in unclear," said on source.
The report will also look at how the Caistab can cut marketing margins through competition to below levels in competitor countries.
"Some exporters who were expected to be off the list in 1996/97 for debts were let back in through the window this year," said one source.
Advice for further competition in transportation, quality control and coffee bean hulling is also under review.
Forward sales policy amid volatile world market prices and an increasingly spot-driven world market are also expected to be considered in the LMC report.
Ivory Coast aims to encourage plantation rehabilitation and boost output to closer to 300,000 tonnes a year from a forecast 230,000 tonnes in 1996/97.
The Caistab phased out purchasing centres from 1995/96 to speed up the flow of produce to Ivory Coast's main ports.
It has also ended its monopoly over the import and distribution of collection sacks for coffee upcountry, but provides protection to local manufacturers against cheap imports from Asia.
($1= 542 CFA francs)
-- Abidjan newsroom +225 21 90 90
