Light rains in Ivory Coast after a dry start to January will help mid-crop (April-Sept) cocoa crop development, particularly if they extend into February, a crop analyst said on Thursday.
"We have seen around average rain levels for January so far but a little more now and in February would help," another local crop analyst told Reuters.
Distribution of rains was patchy.
Most fell in central and northern cocoa and coffee areas, particularly around Man, Daloa, Yamoussoukro and Gagnoa, the data showed. Little fell in coastal areas around San Pedro and Abidjan.
"The front (associated with rain) is now over central areas," said one weather analyst. "Central areas have seen a surplus for the period but southern areas are in deficit," he added.
One crop analyst told Reuters rains seemed to have reached most cocoa and coffee areas.
"There seem to have been good light showers in most cocoa areas," said the crop analyst after returning from an up-country tour. "There is no dust on most bush tracks."
Dry harmattan conditions from the Sahara had now retreated northwards after failing to reach southern Ivory Coast as usually expected in late-December or early January.
Exporters and crop inspectors said cocoa humidity levels remained around 8-10 percent against exportable quality of eight percent, despite drying efforts
Coffee farmers have also had drying problems but export activity remained low after shipments put by port sources at 10,492 tonnes for October to December, exporters said.
Quality inspectors said a better picture of coffee humidity and quality after rains would emerge as arrivals picked up.
The data, from Ivory Coast's national weather station, showed the following rainfall for the second 10 days of January in key growing areas plus the commercial capital Abidjan:
Dalao 47.5 mm, Gagnoa 7.8 mm, San Pedro 0.1 mm, Tabou 6.2 mm and Man 0 mm, Dimbokro 4.6 mm, Yamoussoukro 44.8 mm, Aidjan 6 mm, Sassandra n/a, Adiake n/a, Korhogo 0 mm.
No data were available for Adiake and Sassandra.
-- Matthew Bunce Abidjan Newsroom +225 21 90 90
