After years of war-induced poverty, gum arabic is offering drought-stricken Chad's rural poor a lifeline to the production plants of the world's food and beverage giants.
The name gum arabic may mean little to most people but the sticky acacia tree sap balls are a valued commodity in companies as diverse as Coca Cola Co, drug manufacturer Hoechst and bubble gum factories around the globe.
For impoverished sub-Saharan states producing the bulk of world demand, gum arabic simply means export currency.
"Gum arabic is one of nature's best emulsifiers but the industry has suffered from low prices in recent years," a senior U.N. Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO) official said.
"But with synthetic food-substitutes losing favour prices could move up again as quality is improved," FAO's programme director Mahamat Ali Hassam told Reuters in the capital N'Djamena.
Soft drinks makers now consume 30 percent of world output but it is also used in sweets such as pastilles and chewing gum. The food industry uses it as a stabiliser and a preservative.
Chad, neighbour of the world's largest gum arabic producer, Sudan, is planning a quality blitz to win markets after years of falling yields and bloody turf disputes between foraging nomads and commercial farmers.
"About 70-80 percent of world output (about 35,000 tonnes) is African with Sudan producing 25,000 to 30,000 tonnes," said FAO Chad director Pierre Gence. "But Chad has the potential to match Sudan's output."
The FAO and the French aid agency Caisse Francaise de Developpement (CFD) are both working on projects to propel Chad's output to 30,000 tonnes from around 3,000 tonnes today.
Some experts say Chad has the capacity to produce 160,000 tonnes a year but that world demand would have to increase dramatically to accomodate that.
Gum arabic has a history dating back to ancient times. Arab traders brought it north from Africa in caravans to Middle Ages Europe and the Middle East along with gold, ivory and slaves.
It is also highly prized as a soluble food fibre because, unlike other strong vegetable emulsifiers with thickening and gelling qualities, it can be used in foods and beverages without altering texture.
It is used in everything from indelible ink for Chad's Koranic schools to textile dyes, glues, pastilles, perfumes and pharmaceutical products.
Despite traces of arsenic it is also nutritious, with 90 percent sugar and 2.5 percent each of fat and protein in addition to copper, calcium, sodium and magnesium.
Hungry nomads pluck gum arabic as they pass with grazing goats and cattle.
But state land rights for Chad's 25,000 producers are poorly defined. "People get killed over this," said one French worker.
"Our studies aim to entirely review and reform the whole sector so everyone's interests are respected and output can grow," said a spokesman for the French CFD development agency.
Trees take five years to mature yielding about 150 grams in each of two main harvests between November and March.
"Some super-trees yield eight kg per harvest so we are trying to find out their genetic code and plant more," said the FAO's Mahamat Ali.
Gum arabic is dried from squash-ball sized yellow blobs of sap into quartz-like chunks and split into top grade Kitir followed by Tarlah grades before it enters a highly secretive marketing chain in 2.5 kg Corlo lots.
Marketing data is kept secret.
Commercial planting has not got underway but existing trees have suffered from 20 years of drought. Rains of 300-500 mm are needed whereas some areas are only forecast to get little over 100 mm in 1997. Chad has already appealed for food aid.
Chad's four-year "Gum Arabic Project" to 1999 seeks to improve knowledge of the sector and its practices -- from commercial tree bleeding, tooling, drying, sorting, stocking, transporting to dealing along the murky marketing chain.
The FAO's two-year $285,000 project up to 1997 on inventory assessment, mapping, training and standards completes the picture of sectoral reform.
Neighbouring countries are also planning more output, from Senegal, Burkina Faso, and across the arid Sahel desert fringe to strife-torn Central African Republic.
Nigeria is already second only to Sudan in terms of production. India is the main producer outside Africa.
