Ivory Coast's 1996/97 coffee is likely to be well up on last season but rising volumes are bringing quality problems, regional buyers and exporters' agents said.
They expect coffee marketing, sluggish for the time of year, to pick up in February.
"There's a lot of coffee about but quality is poor," said one buyer based in the Man region. "We could see well over 230,000 tonnes but exporters have bought little so far and made large quality adjustments."
Port forwarding agents said they had noted no major quality problems with coffee received for export. One quality inspector suggested that as little as 150,000 tonnes could be shipped out this season.
Ivory Coast opened its 1996/97 coffee season late on November 14 amid plummeting prices, and forecast output at 230,000 tonnes against 180,000 last year.
Farmgate prices were cut by 200 CFA to 500 CFA a kilo.
"Farmers have been waiting for a price rise hoping it will be a sellers' market," said one buyer. "Little care has been taken over sorting as farmers have less time, but exporters want better quality than last year."
Farmers face a higher than normal January cocoa harvest as well.
"This season will be twice a long as usual," said one buyer north of San Pedro, commenting on the slow start.
"We should be busy into April," said a buyer around Soubre.
Buyers expected to be at their busiest in February and March with port forwarders slating peak arrivals in April and May.
Large amounts of coffee could be seen along roadsides around buyers' stores this week with stocks said to be rising.
Buyers in most regions pointed to high percentages of black beans, fragments and bean husks.
"Humidity is around 16 percent," said one buyer in San Pedro, against a 13 percent export standard. "Exporters are rejecting around 10 percent even after sorting," he added.
One buyer in Sassandra in the south said some farmers were delivering sacks with 50 percent of problem beans.
Quality is widely seen as better in more productive northern areas around Man, where weather had been more favourable.
"Farmers are only now getting the message about quality but we have been buying since November," said the manager of a new buying unit in Man opened by a processor.
The unit was advertising 30 CFA above guideline prices for top grades but paid 477 CFA for lower grades. Margins of up to two percent for quality variation applied within each grade.
About one thousand tonnes had been bought by the end of January. Around 420 tonnes had left for Abidjan, with the rest, including 299 tonnes of low grade stocks, in Man warehouses.
Other buyers in the Man area, which is expected to produce 30 percent (corrects from 80 percent) of Ivory Coast's coffee, said they could not match the prices paid by processors.
"They can buy directly and save on transport and lower middleman charges," said one. Farmers had got into the habit of not sorting coffee in the past two years, he added.
Banks have been reluctant to fund exporters' buying operations out of concern that the Caistab would not pay up price support to its clients.
Buyers said some large exporters had not bought any crop.
A French coffee scientist based in Man said coffee bush flowering was good in many areas but dry Harmattan conditions could kill new fruits if rain did not fall.
-- Abidjan newsroom + 225 21 90 90
