Ivory Coast's 1996/97 cocoa crop is likely to top one million tonnes after good January harvests and abundant flowering for the mid-crop (April-Sept), crop analysts and buyers say.
"The total crop will be at least one million tonnes," said one crop analyst returning from an upcountry tour of cocoa farms. "The flowers and cherelles (early pods) are there and with a little more rain we could see well over a million."
One source estimated arrivals by January 27 at over 750,000 tonnes. Industry estimates of arrivals up to January 20 from October 1, were in the 710,000 to 720,000-tonne range. This compares with around 800,000 in the previous season.
Attention is now focused on rainfall figures and pod survival rates in coming weeks for a firmer indication of midcrop tonnage.
Ivory Coast posted a record 1.2 million tonnes crop in 1995/96 after an unexpectedly strong 200,000 tonne mid-crop and has forecast 950,000 tonnes for 1996/97.
Crop analysts said pod loads were heaviest in younger hybrid tree farms in southwestern areas where rainfall had also been more favourable for late main crop and mid-crop development.
"Canopies are in reasonable shape and there are plenty of one to four inch cherelles and pods," said one analyst.
Farms north of San Pedro seen by Reuters still bore noticeable late main crop pod loads but older trees, around Daloa and Gagnoa, generally had few flowers and pods.
Upcountry buyers' stores were surrounded by large amounts of drying January cocoa, with more arriving from village farms.
"Cocoa is coming out fast. Farmers have no incentive to stock so we are seeing fresh crop," said one store owner in Meadji. "Exporters are not buying but we expect things to get (cocoa) moving again in February and March." Stocks would rise in some areas for a short period, he added.
"January has been better than last year," said one buyer at in Issia. "Our November estimates were too low." He and others agreed that February and March harvests would be down on 1995/96.
Buyers around Gagnoa and Daloa said most main crop pods had been harvested by mid-January but large amounts of cocoa still up-country would not be seen at ports until mid-February.
Harmattan wind conditions had returned to cocoa areas a week ago making drying of cocoa easier, but farmers said they expected rains to return after a brief wave of showers in mid-January.
A new manager at Ivory Coast's largest plantation near Gagnoa said care of trees would be more determinant for pod and flower survival rates away from hybrid areas.
"Farmers have not kept up maintenance and canopy trimming around here and the results are clear," he said.
He pointed to plantation trees at one side of a bush track with late main crop pods, and plenty of cherelles and flowers.
On the other side of the track, more densely planted and villagers' untrimmed trees on similar soil were largely bare.
Exporters' agents and buyers say cocoa purchasing has dropped off now that Ivory Coast's warehouses are full.
Shipments remain low on weak overseas demand.
"There are no shipments so exporters have cut purchasing," said one exporter. "At San Pedro, arrivals are coming in at 10,000 tonnes a week compared to 30,000 in December."
Exporters said port stocks estimated at upwards of 380,000 tonnes would shrink in February and especially March when they expect export contract deadlines to boost shipment levels.
Cocoa humidity levels of 6-8 percent were being recorded upcountry. Buyers said they would mix new arrivals with 8-10 percent cocoa stored in San Pedro stores waiting for an upswing in demand. Only 15 exporters out of 44 were actively purchasing, one said.
Shipping forwarders at San Pedro said empty warehouse space would rise from February. "Contracts will pick up next month but March will be a boom (for shipments)."
-- Abidjan newsroom + 225 21 90 90
