French chocolate manufacturer Cantalou will sign a deal by 1998 on building a cocoa processing plant in Ivory Coast, a Cantalou official said on Monday.
"There will be a signature by the end of this year," public relations manager Catherine Poirier told Reuters by telephone.
Cantalou said investment plans had not been finalised despite recent reports that the Perpignan-based manufacturer of "Cemoi" brands was going ahead with plans.
But Poirier added that plans were solid and very likely to be confirmed in coming months.
Speculation about new market entrants had already risen following a decision by Cargill to open an office in Abidjan in late 1996 to explore processing and other options.
Cargill's new Ivory Coast-based representative has already begun negotiations on setting up a processing plant with decisions expected from March, industry sources close to the discussions told Reuters recently.
Talk of new entrants to Ivory Coast's expanding local processing industry intensified in December after an official visit to Ivory Coast by Cantalou representatives in late 1996. Officials from Cantalou, which has European turnover of 2.9 billion French francs and owns 15 other plants, discussed setting up a 160 million French franc cocoa processing plant.
Cantalou's plans for a 60,000 tonne per year capacity processing plant resurfaced last week in the French business daily La Tribune Defosses but Poirier, quoted in the report, told Reuters plans had still not been finalised.
Other aspiring processors are also still in discussion stages.
Ivorian exporter SICC in December outlined to Reuters its own plans for processing up to 50,000 tonnes a year of cocoa. Plans for a $2 million investment were expected to be finalised in early 1997 after talks with potential partners.
SICC, which also has shipping plans, expects to handle a total of 200,000 tonnes of cocoa exports in 1996/97 for clients including Cargill's Netherlands processing subsidiary Gherkens.
Other firms are also said to be in discussions about starting processing. More are waiting on the sidelines.
"We badly want to get into processing," a manager for British development firm Commonwealth Development Corp told Reuters last week.
Cocoa processing in Ivory Coast is dominated by Abidjan-based processor UNICAO and rival Callebaut-Barry. Factory bean processing capacity stands at 180,000 tonnes but Ivory Coast aims to add more value to exports by raising this to 50 percent of annual output - which varies widely each year.
Local industry sources had expected Cargill or Dutch group Cacao De Zaan to buy into UNICAO in December. But minority 30 percent shareholder U.S-based W.R. Grace then sold its stake in UNICAO's parent, SIFCA, to rival Archer Daniels Midland (ADM).
A UNICAO spokesman said plans to add 21,500 tonnes of processing capacity to take production potential to 86,000 tonnes by late 1997 were unchanged by the deal.
"They (ADM) have still not visited companies with a shareholding (in UNICAO)," UNICAO factory production director Kanga N'Ze told Reuters on Monday. "There has been no contact."
UNICAO's only main rival Callebaut-Barry has three plants grinding up to 80,000 tonnes of beans a year.
Ivory Coast posted a record 1.2 million tonne crop in 1995/96 but has forecast closer to a million tonnes for 1996/97. It expects cheaper energy from offshore gas to encourage investment in cocoa processing but critics have said investors are more interested in winning short-term government incentives gains than long-term commitment.
-- Abidjan newsroom + 225 21 90 90
