Ivory Coast opened three days of cocoa sector reform talks on Wednesday aimed at fine-tuning donor-sponsored liberalisation policies, with bean quality high on the agenda.
"Liberalisation is about reducing the role of the state. We need less state but a better state," said Philippe Mian, president of Ivory Coast's Consultative Committee, which is hosting the talks which end on Friday.
Dutch Cocoa Association president Louis Bensdorp told Reuters two issues would dominate the talks.
"The main issues are the quality of the cocoa and the assurance of contracts," he said before going into talks.
Ivory Coast's Consultative Committee, grouping Ivorian officials, loan donors and international cocoa industry bodies, was set up in October under the terms of a World Bank Agricultural Sector Adjustment Credit (ASAC).
Ivory Coast has liberalised internal and some external cocoa marketing functions since 1990 but there have been industry concerns over cocoa quality and the functioning of a new commodities auction system in place since May 1996.
Other agenda items include an overall review of reforms, cocoa quality issues, local processing of cocoa and policy revision recommendations.
Ivory Coast's commodities minister, Guy-Alain Gauze, said reform revisions would help Ivory Coast's competitiveness.
"A problem remains with importers about quality," Gauze told reporters before going into the private talks.
"The proposals forming part of the sector reforms deal with quality and security of supplies for European and American importers," he added, referring to complaints by exporters that some firms were overbidding on the auction system to win contracts.
Revisions to the auction system would be discussed but were not officially on the agenda, Mian told Reuters.
"Nothing is perfect and the auction system could well have weak points which could be corrected and for which proposals could be made," he said during a midday break in talks.
Further cuts in the role of the Caistab marketing board would also be discussed, he added.
Dutch Cocoa Association president Bensdorp said industry would argue for changes to the auction system and seek better quality controls.
"What we do not like is the 85 to 15 percent rule as there is too little chance for foreign companies to buy cocoa directly," he added.
Under auction rules 85 percent of Ivorian cocoa export rights are auctioned to local exporters, with the remaining 15 percent reserved by the Caistab for direct sale to traders abroad.
"The problem is that, of the 15 percent, 10 percent is sold to Phibro so only five percent is available for the rest of international trade," he added.
U.S.-based trader Phibro has a long-standing cocoa contract with the Caisab which is due to expire this year.
Bensdorp also referred to concerns over cocoa quality.
"Usually we see a deterioration of quality after the main months, in fact about now. The main problem is a lack of proper quality checks," he said.
World Bank, International Monetary Fund, European Union, International Cocoa Organization, France's development agency and Ivorian officials will issue their findings on Friday. -- Abidjan newsroom +225 21 90 90
