Delegates to Ivory Coast's cocoa Consultative Committee focused on bean quality and marketing on Thursday, the mid-point of their review of industry reforms.
"I would prefer to get down to talking about cocoa quality and continuity of supply," Cacao Barry managing director Alain Leblond said before the second day of the talks, which end on Friday.
Ivory Coast's Consultative Committee, a tripartite group of Ivorian, industry and donor officials, was set up in 1996 to monitor cocoa sector reforms since 1990.
After opening the talks on Wednesday, International Cocoa Organization Chief Executive Edouard Kouame said changes must benefit farmers and other local players.
"At the same time the legitimate interests of others in the sector must be safeguarded," he added, referring to foreign traders, cocoa butter manufacturers, and chocolate and confectionary industries.
An electronic export contract auction set up in May 1996 to increase market transparency is widely seen as encouraging overbidding and concentrating export contracts in a few hands.
Local exporters, allocated 85 percent of contracts, and foreign traders, allocated 15 percent, have complained they cannot win export contracts at favourable prices.
"The question needs to be asked how some people can bid as much as they have (been bidding)," Cocoa Association of London Chief Executive Philip Sigley told Reuters.
Industry concerns have been voiced about quality since the state marketing monopoly was ended.
"Quality has to do with liberalisation and the auction system," Netherlands Cocoa Association Managing Director Louis Bensdorp told Reuters. "The lack of quality checks is the major problem. That and the second thing, the education of farmers."
Industry watchers are wondering whether strong arrivals so far in 1996/97 means that output will rival the 1995/96 (Oct-Sept) record of 1.2 million tonnes.
"There is a very good crop coming in which suggests that last year was not a fluke of nature," said Bensdorp.
Commodities Minister Guy-Alain Gauze declined to confirm whether buoyant cocoa arrivals would mean an adjustment of the Caistab state marketing board's 1996/97 production forecast of 950,000 tonnes. Industry forecasts are increasingly putting total output at more than one million tonnes.
Industry delegates said mid-crop forecasts for April to September had not yet been finalised.
"It is still too early to talk about the mid-crop but it tends to be bigger and bigger," said Bensdorp.
Ivory Coast wants to process 50 percent of its output by 2000 to shore up world prices and add value the cocoa sector's output.
At least two cocoa processors have expressed interest in building factories in Ivory Coast.
-- Abidjan newsroom +225 21 90 90
