Europe's cocoa industry will shortly issue a draft contract document for increasingly popular loose-bean bulk cocoa shipment techniques, according to the head of the Dutch cocoa industry.
"We will put forward very shortly Netherlands Cocoa Association ideas on a bulk contract," Association Managing Director Louis Bensdorp told Reuters on the sidelines of a cocoa conference in Ivory Coast which began on Wednesday.
"We are in discussions with the AFCC (the French cocoa and coffee industry body) and the Cocoa Association of London," said Bensdorp. "It (bulk) requires changes in the contract conditions. We are thinking about how to write a new bulk cocoa contract for mega-bulk." he added. The contract would be on cost, insurance and freight (CIF) terms.
Mega-bulk, an industry term for the recent trend of loading cocoa ships with loose beans rather than 60 kilo jute bag-loads, gained favour after trial shipments from the Ivory Coast in 1996.
Another bulk technique involves pouring beans into containers packed with drying agents to prevent water condensation damage as ships steam from tropical origin to consumer country climates.
"It has revolutionised the industry," Bensdorp told Reuters. "We will receive 250,000 tonnes to 300,000 tonnes of cocoa at Amsterdam this year but next year we expect 350,000," he added. Amsterdam is Europe's cocoa processing hub.
Labour and time savings, as well as better quality, favoured the growth of bulk techniques.
"There is a struggle to keep costs down and bulk means everything is cheaper," said Bensdorp. Quality was better because of tighter origin port quality checks than for bagged cargo and selection of quality ships, he added.
One problem was that bulk ships could not get close enough to some Amsterdam receivers unloading facilities, meaning costly road transport by container trucks.
"I think containers are an intermediate step," said Bensdorp. "In future it will be done by transhipment to barges," he told Reuters at cocoa sector reform talks ending on Friday.
Bensdorp said large Amsterdam-based industry processors, including Cargill subsidiary Gherkens and Dutch processor Cacao de Zaan, still dominated demand for bulk.
"Soon you will see more bulk going into Hamburg and Hull " said Bensdorp. British trader E D and F Man has a new processing plant in Hull.
Bulk cocoa is not tenderable on London's LIFFE terminal market.
"It is useless to set up a separate exchange in Amsterdam so we have to find a way of doing it through LIFFE," said Bensdorp.
Cocoa exporters and receivers in Ivory Coast have put in place bulk loading facilities at both Abidjan, and the second Ivorian port, San Pedro port.
Ivory Coast's largest cargo forwarder, SAGA, told Reuters it plans raise bulk loading rates from 40 tonnes an hour to 100 tonnes to match rising demand for the technique.
Local exporters and European industry officials expect Ivory Coast to ship 270,000 tonnes in bulk in the 1996/97 (Oct-Sept) season, mainly to Amsterdam. West African shipments could reach well over 300,000 tonnes.
Ivory Coast exported aboput 120,000 tonnes of bulk cocoa in its record 1.2 million tonne output 1995/96 season.
-- Abidjan newsroom + 225 21 90 90
