Ivory Coast must boost quality controls, improve farmer training and market different grades of cocoa separately, to retain its quality image, Netherlands Cocoa Association (NCV) head Louis Bensdorp said on Friday.
"Ivory Coast produces extremely good cocoa but somewhere along the line the bad 10 percent is bringing down the quality of the rest," NCV Managing Director Bensdorp told Reuters in an interview.
"Quality is the name of the game but it is easily lost."
Amsterdam, Europe's cocoa processing hub, imports cocoa mainly from Ivory Coast and increasingly in bulk form.
Bensdorp was speaking as Ivorian Consultative Committee cocoa sector reform talks continued. Cocoa quality and teething problems with a new export contract auction system have topped the agenda.
"There is a total lack of quality control," Bensdorp said, outlining three corrective measures he put before International Cocoa Organization, industry, donor and Ivorian government committee delegates.
He cited an urgent need for quality checks at all stages of the marketing chain and an increased role for farmers' cooperatives in training and quality checks.
"The third quality issue is what I call government interference," said Bensdorp. "The government has in the past said the mid-crop (April-Sept) would be kept off the market. In practice that means it is kept in upcountry stores."
Poor storage meant a risk of middlemen mixing deteriorated cocoa and smaller beans usually seen in midcrops with the larger main crop (Oct-Mar) beans preferred by industry for its higher fat content.
"About 15 to 17 percent of chocolate is cocoa butter so it is very important for the shelf life of products," Bensdorp said, adding that long storage and poor quality bean pushed free fatty acid levels above the European legal food standard of 1.75 percent.
"There is no specific trade condition on free fatty acids so we as an industry are thinking about what to do with existing cocoa bean contracts (to change that)," he said.
"That does not necessarily mean a free fatty acid clause but we need better checks on quality than we have today," he added.
"Good cocoa should be separated from bad cocoa and sold separately. There is a market for everything."
Ivory Coast has in the past announced it would withold mid-crop cocoa and process it at home to add value to its cocoa exports.
"Usually it is mixed in with main crop cocoa," said Bensdorp. He said poor quality at the end of the 1995/96 season had partly been due to a flow of cocoa from farmers in the southwest who were using a new hybrid tree but who lack the expertise of farmers in the less productive but long-standing eastern plantations.
Bensdorp said buyers of bulk cocoa, increasingly favoured by some processors over cocoa in jute bags, had put in place their own origin port quality checks. Most of these buyers were Dutch.
Consultative Committee president Philippe Mian, technical advisor to Ivorian Prime Minister Daniel Kablan Ducan, told Reuters more checks from village level downwards were needed.
"The only administrative control is at the port of loading," he said. "We are now preoccupied with quality and there have been discussions with who should be responsible for contracts, the industry or the state."
Other delegates feared that cocoa in Ivory Coast's full-to-capacity warehouses could deteriorate if not shipped by March.
Stocks have risen as exporters who bid too high for export contracts wait for better prices.
"I do not see the auction as the cause of quality problem but the rules have been discussed," said Bensdorp.
Ivory Coast's Caistab marketing board has pulled back from a monopoly internal and external marketing role and closed upcountry buying centres and quality checkpoints.
Export contracts are now allocated by auction as part of a donor-sponsored market liberalisation policy.
--Abidjan newsroom +225 21 90 90
