African robusta producers will meet discuss to export limit quotas on February 26-27 after a January world agreement in Rio de Janeiro to shore up prices, Ivory Coast's Commodities Minister told Reuters on Friday.
Gauze, who is also chairman of the Interafrican Coffee Organisation, gave no venue details but said African robusta exporters would afterwards seek to meet other producers.
"There will be a meeting to decide how to divide export limits between African producers," said Gauze. "The meeting will be for two days, on February 26 and February 27," he added.
"We will then call on other producers for a meeting," he said without giving agenda details.
Gauze on February 5 called off talks in Bali with Asian robusta producers.
The world Association of Coffee Producing Countries (ACPC) decided on January 23 to cut robusta exports by one million bags (60 kg) after low prices seen in late 1996.
The limitation was expected to be shared between African and Asian producers.
"The talks have been postponed," Gauze said after returning to Ivory Coast to attend cocoa sector reform with International Cocoa Organisation and donor officials.
Indonesian officials told Reuters export cut sharing between Africa and Asia had not been discussed as the Bali meeting.
Gauze said African producers would discuss how to divide Africa's export limitation share, which he said was 850,000 bags, between exporting countries.
IACO chief economist this week delined to comment on African sharing arrangements saying the decision was an internal IACO matter.
Indonesia has decided to reduce its exports by 150,000 bags in the January to June 1997 period covered by the volutary export restraint.
ACPC members are concerned that rising production from non-ACPC member such as Vietnam will undermine their own export restraint policy.
Indonesia's ACPC representative Paian Nainggolan said informal discussions had taken place after Gauze cancelled his trip. No ACPC export cut sharing cut talks took place, he said.
Ivory Coast, Africa's largest exporter, expects to produce 230,000 tonnes in 1996/97 but local quality inspectors say quality problems mean not all of it will be exportable.
--Abidjan newsroom +225 21 90 90
