Computer makers are expected to report solid fourth-quarter earnings in what is normally the strongest quarter of the year, but the stronger dollar will hurt some big systems makers.
Despite all the negative reports from computer retailers about lackluster personal computer sales, analysts said most U.S. PC makers -- with the exception of Apple Computer Inc. and AST Research Inc. -- will show strong sales growth, fuelled by hefty corporate buying.
Apple is the first to report, with first-quarter results late Wednesday.
Earlier this month, Cupertino, Calif.-based Apple forecast it would report an operating loss for its first quarter ended last month, citing weak U.S. demand for its Performa consumer PC and continued shortages of notebook computers.
"Most of the indications are that business throughout the (PC) sector, other than Apple, was strong," said Dean Witter analyst Eugene Glazer. "With all the negative comments you are hearing from retailers, some of that market was going to the direct marketers" like Dell Computer Corp. and Gateway 2000 Inc.
Analysts said the world's largest PC maker, Compaq Computer Corp., was likely to report strong earnings, especially after semiconductor giant Intel Corp. reported a blowout fourth quarter, surpassing Wall Street predictions.
Compaq gets about 20 percent or so of its revenues via store sales to consumers and the rest of its revenues from sales to corporate customers, which were booming.
"The consumer business didn't hurt them," said Jim Poyner, an Oppenheimer &amp; Co. analyst. "Dell and Compaq are benefiting from the same forces, the transition to the Pentium Pro (chip), a hot notebook (computer) market and progress in the server (network computer) business."
On the larger systems side, companies like International Business Machines Corp., Digital Equipment Corp. and Unisys Corp. are expected to see some negative impact from a stronger dollar overseas and sluggish sales in Europe, while business in the United States remains strong.
"Business is quite good in the U.S.," said Jay Stevens, another Dean Witter analyst. "Where it's slower, or where the concerns have been expressed, is overseas, mostly in Europe."
Digital is expected to report a slight profit as it slowly recovers from sales force problems in Europe and a money-losing PC business. PCs are expected to break even.
"I think it will be a good quarter," said Morgan Stanley analyst Steve Milunovich.
Analysts said that they expected IBM's earnings to be a bit better than expected, but that its expenses for job cuts will be greater than previous quarters.
"Europe remains a slower grower, which has led to a number of organisational and planned efficiency changes," said John Jones, a Salomon Brothers analyst. IBM reports its earnings next Tuesday.
