America Online Inc. was hit with two more lawsuits Wednesday from frustrated subscribers, and the world's largest online service also suffered a computer glitch that led it to shut down half of its system for nearly four hours.
Late Wednesday, AOL's system suffered a partial outage when system problems led it to shut down half of its system from 3:45 p.m. EST until about 7:30 p.m. to find the problem.
"The system was able to accommodate 124,000 subscribers," an AOL spokeswoman said. Normally AOL, which has more than 7 million subscribers, accommodates about 258,000 users simultaneously.
The problem was with an interface board in a router device, which manages the flow of data in a network, the company said. AOL said its network was back to full capacity by 8 p.m. EST.
The spokeswoman said the outage was not related to the onslaught of member usage since AOL switched to unlimited use for a flat rate of $19.95 a month.
AOL suffered another much more massive network outage in August last year, when the entire AOL network was down for almost 19 hours due to a software glitch.
That outage drew front-page headlines around the world, as millions of users were unable to access electronic mail, the Internet, and a variety of services and publications online, for almost a day.
While AOL said the latest network outage was not due to the influx of users, the current demand for its service is clearly testing the patience of some subscribers, who have begun filing lawsuits against AOL.
On Wednesday, two more lawsuits were disclosed, both filed in New York state court this week, claiming breach of contract, deceptive trade practices and false advertising.
Those suits came on the heels of a class-action lawsuit filed Tuesday in Los Angeles on behalf of five subscribers, seeking damages for what they call fraudulent and malicious representation.
In addition, at least two state attorneys general have confirmed they are in discussions with America Online, seeking some resolution to complaints they have received from consumers about the continuing problem of network access.
New York state Attorney General Dennis Vacco and Wisconsin state Attorney General Jim Doyle are in discussions with AOL, spokesmen said.
Since AOL switched its more than 7 million members to unlimited access for $19.95 a month, its network has been deluged by subscribers, many of whom cannot log onto the system during peak evening hours or on weekends.
The spokeswoman for the Dulles, Va.-based company could not immediately comment on the New York lawsuits, but on Tuesday, AOL said it was upgrading its network and that it understood its users' frustration.
"Although we understand the frustration some members are experiencing ... the average AOL member gets more value under unlimited pricing than ever before," AOL said in response to the Los Angeles lawsuit.
Many Wall Street and industry analysts said they are not worried about the lawsuits, which they consider frivolous.
