America Online Inc. was hit with two more lawsuits Wednesday when two New York law firms said they filed class actions on behalf of their clients and AOL members frustrated with the world's largest online service.
The two lawsuits, both filed in New York state court this week, come on the heels of a class-action lawsuit filed Tuesday in Los Angeles on behalf of five subscribers, seeking damages for what they call fraudulent and malicious representation.
In addition, at least two state attorney generals have confirmed they are in discussions with America Online, seeking some resolution to complaints they have received from consumers about the continuing problem of network access.
New York state Attorney General Dennis Vacco and Wisconsin state Attorney General Jim Doyle are in discussions with AOL, spokesmen said.
Since AOL switched its more than $7 million members to unlimited access for $19.95 a month, its network has been deluged by subscribers, many of whom cannot log onto the system during peak evening hours or on weekends.
A spokeswoman for the Dulles, Va.-based company could not immediately comment on the New York lawsuits, but on Tuesday, AOL said it was upgrading its network and that it understood its users' frustration.
"Although we understand the frustration some members are experiencing ... the average AOL member gets more value under unlimited pricing than ever before," AOL said in response to the Los Angeles lawsuit.
One of the New York lawsuits, filed by the law firm of Goodkind Labaton Rudoff &amp; Sucharow LLP, represents four AOL members.
"Anyone who has tried to access AOL and its Internet service recently knows there is an interminably long wait and that the company is not providing what it has promised to its subscribers," attorney Edward Labaton said in a statement.
"It is particularly damaging to the millions of those who have been promised unlimited access on AOL for $19.95 per month and cannot benefit from the contractual obligation America Online has with them," he continued.
The lawsuit claims breach of contract, unjust enrichment, deceptive trade practices and false advertising by AOL. An AOL spokeswoman said she had not yet seen the lawsuit.
The other lawsuit was filed Monday by Wechsler Harwood Halebian and Feffer in New York, representing one user, Ezra Graber. This lawsuit seeks to recover damages due to breach of contract for failure to provide services.
Peter Zinman, an attorney for Goodkind Labaton Rudoff &amp; Sucharow, said their lawsuit is separate from the one filed in Los Angeles but that all the cases could be consolidated into one class action.
"I would predict that there would be many suits filed all over the country," said Zinman.
