International Business Machines Corp. is expected to report solid fourth-quarter earnings Tuesday, but analysts expect the stronger dollar will hurt the computer giant's profits.
The Armonk, N.Y.-based company will report earnings after the stock market closes, the first time it has done so in recent memory.
Wall Street analysts are predicting earnings of $3.13 a share to $4.32 per share, with a consensus of $3.88 a share, according to First Call, which tracks analyst estimates.
A year ago, IBM earned $3.09 a share, or $1.7 billiion, including special charges, in the fourth quarter.
"I think it will be a good quarter," said Morgan Stanley analyst Steve Milunovich.
"I'm not looking for a blowout quarter," Milunovich said, adding that the dollar strengthened in the fourth quarter and that IBM could see as much as a 25-cent-per-share negative impact on earnings from currency fluctuations.
The earnings report comes amid mixed results from the computer industry for what is traditionally its biggest quarter of the year.
Apple Computer Inc. reported a bigger-than-expected loss, but Sun Microsystems Inc. had stronger-than-anticipated second-quarter earnings and Digital Equipment Corp. reported a slightly better-than-expected profit in its second quarter.
Analysts also expect IBM to report bigger expenses in the fourth quarter for its restructuring, which it no longer writes off as a charge. In the third quarter, IBM had restructuring costs of about $200 million for employee buyouts.
"They will have an expense for restructuring, and it could be twice as much as the September quarter," said Dean Witter analyst Jay Stevens.
Analysts said IBM's employees in Europe have been much slower to accept its buyout plans. John Jones, a Salomon Brothers analyst, predicts IBM will have costs of about $700 million in 1997 for organisational changes in Europe.
"Europe remains a slow grower, which has led to a number of organisational and planned efficiency changes, which we expect will require over $700 million in 1997," Jones said in a report. He said these expenses are included in his 1997 earnings estimate of $11.20 a share.
For 1996, analysts expect IBM to earn between $10.30 to $11.50 a share, with a consensus of $11.05, according to First Call.
Analysts said sales of IBM's midrange computers, the AS/400, should post growth of about 10 percent and that there should be a big improvement in RS/6000 workstations.
IBM will host its quarterly analyst meeting and conference call sometime after its earnings are released late Tuesday.
Analysts said the company was releasing its earnings after the close to avoid the recent volatility in its stock -- which has climbed or fallen as much as $10 on the days it reports earnings -- during its conference call with analysts.
IBM stock was down $1 at $164.50 in afternoon trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
