International Business Machines Corp is expected to report solid fourth quarter earnings on Tuesday, but some negative impact from currency is also expected. It will report earnings after the U.S. stock market closes, for the first time in recent memory.
According to First Call, Wall Street estimates range from $3.13 to $4.32, with a consensus of $3.88 a share, versus reported earnings of $3.09 a year ago, including charges.
"I think it will be a good quarter," said Steve Milunovich, a Morgan Stanley analyst.  
"I'm not looking for a blowout quarter," Milunovich added, adding that the U.S. dollar strengthened in the fourth quarter, and that IBM could see as much as a $0.25 negative impact on earnings from currency fluctuations.
Analysts also expect IBM to have bigger expenses this quarter for its restructuring, which it does not write off as a charge anymore. In the third quarter, IBM had restructuring costs of about $200 million for employee buyouts.
"They will have an expense for restructuring and it could be twice as much as the September quarter," said Jay Stevens, a Dean Witter analyst.  
Analysts said IBM's employees in Europe have been much slower to accept its buyout plans and John Jones, a Salomon Brothers analyst, is expecting IBM will have costs of about $700 million in 1997 for organizational changes in Europe.
"Europe remains a slow grower which has led to a number of organizational and planned efficiency changes, which we expect will require over $700 million in 1997," Jones said in a report. He said these expenses are included in his 1997 earnings estimates of $11.20 a share.
For 1996, analysts expect IBM to earn between $10.30 to $11.50 a share, according to First Call.  
Analysts said that there are several bright spots in IBM's fourth quarter, with computer services and personal computers among the stand outs. Even though industry PC sales at the consumer/retail level have been sluggish and disappointing, analysts said that IBM saw strong quarterly growth in PCs.
"PCs had probably in excess of 25 percent growth, with decent profits," said Milunovich.
IBM also had strong sales of its new models of mainframe computers, but Gary Helmig, a SoundView Financial analyst, said that IBM did not sell out the new systems, as some had previously forecast.  
Analysts said that sales of its midrange computers, the AS/400, should post about 10 percent growth, and added they expect a big improvement in RS/6000 workstations.
The Armonk, N.Y.-based computer giant will host its quarterly analyst meeting/conference call sometime after its earnings are released late Tuesday.
Analysts said that the computer giant is releasing its earnings after the close to avoid volatility in its stock, which in recent quarters has climbed or fallen as much as $10 on the days it reports earnings, during its conference call with analysts.
