America Online Inc., beset with network overload problems and angry subcribers, said Thursday it will spend even more than planned to shore up its network, amid another soaring subscriber growth report.
The Dulles, Va.-based company has experienced growing pains in the United States in the form of service outages -- including a partial outage of nearly four hours Wednesday -- since it switched its members to unlimited usage for $19.95 a month in December.
The largest online services company in the world said it will now spend $350 million to upgrade its network, instead of $250 million as previously planned, to add new modems and build an 180,000 square foot data centre. It also will add new customer service representatives and halt its nationwide television advertising campaign for the time being.
AOL said the current usage of its network was exceeding its most aggressive forecasts, much of it due to the unlimited pricing plan. In December, its usage skyrocketed to more than 100 million hours, up from 60 million hours in November.
In his monthly letter to members, AOL Chairman Steve Case addressed the problems.
"We all dial in from our homes at night, just like you do, so we see the problems firsthand. And we're working day and night to fix them," he wrote.
Case also made an unusual plea to AOL members, many of whom are clogging up the system by staying on all day or for long periods of time, to cut back on their usage.
"There is something you can do to help and that is to moderate your own use of AOL a bit, during our peak evening periods," Case said. "Use AOL as much as you want during the day, but try to show some restraint at night during the next few months when we're in this transitional mode."
Peter Krasilovsky, an analyst with Arlen Communications in Bethesda, Md., said he thought the network problems would be solved in about three months.
"The letter was very contrite, and as usual Steve's communications are very good, it was just overdue," Krasilovsky said. "It's a difficult economics issue, you don't want to overbuild and be stuck with a bunch of extra modems and extra capacity."
But at the rate AOL is growing, it may need all the 150,000 modems it is adding.
AOL said that its worldwide subscriber growth, fuelled by the unlimited plan, boomed to more than 8 million members, with 500,000 new members in December alone, a record. AOL added 1.2 million members in the quarter ended December.
AOL also said its local services launched in Britain, Canada, Germany and France had grown to more than half a million, since they were launched in the past 14 months.
Wall Street was impressed by the faster-than-expected growth in U.S. membership, fuelling a $3.375 jump in AOL's stock to $41.50, most of it at the end of the day.
Analysts said the good news was a much-needed boost for AOL, which was hit this week by three class-action lawsuits, by angry members frustrated by their inability to get online.
Their allegations range from breach of contract for failure to provide services to false advertising. Attorneys general in several states confirmed they were in talks with AOL to seek some remedy to the growing consumer complaints.
To add to AOL's problems, late Wednesday afternoon, it had to shut down half its system when it noticed around 3 p.m. EST that more people could not sign on. The system ran at 50 percent capacity until 7:30 p.m. EST and full capacity was not reached until 8 p.m.
The company said it will sharply reduce the number of mailings of free trial disks, especially to cities where its customers were experiencing the most busy signals.
AOL said that between now and June it planned to increase by 75 percent the current total of 200,000-plus modems in its AOLNet system. More modems will allow more customers to dial in at the same time.
AOL said it will add 600 additional customer support people over the next six months, bringing the total to 4,500.
