International Business Machines Corp. Tuesday reported fourth-quarter earnings that were slightly better than expected, bolstered by its service business, growth in software sales and tight expense controls.
The world's largest computer maker said net income rose about 18 percent to $2.02 billion in the quarter from $1.71 billion in the 1995 quarter.
Earnings per share rose faster, to $3.93 from $3.09, since IBM had 7 percent fewer shares outstanding in the quarter due to stock buybacks. Wall Street analysts had expected profits of $3.88 a share on average, according to First Call, which tracks earnings estimates.
Analysts and investors said the results looked good, but some said IBM stock might come under profit-taking pressure on Wednesday.
"It's an excellent number, it's an excellent quarter. You really can't say anything bad about it. But I think it may cause a brief period of selling because Wall Street (sells) on that kind of news," said Thom Brown, managing director of Rutherford Brown and Catherwood.
"They were mixed results, software and services were great" and European results were somewhat encouraging, said David Takata, a Gruntal &amp; Co. analyst.
But he said weak mainframe computer revenues were disappointing. Some analysts had been predicting mainframe revenues rose in the quarter due to strong new products.
The Armonk, N.Y.-based computer maker said service revenues jumped 22 percent in the quarter and personal computer sales rose, but sales of mainframes fell and RS/6000 minicomputers were flat.
Software revenues rose 4 percent in the quarter, and hardware sales increased 2 percent.
Revenues overall rose 5.6 percent to $23.14 billion from $21.92 billion. Expenses fell 2 percent in the quarter from the 1995 period, IBM said.
"We showed good growth in the fourth quarter despite a difficult year-over-year comparison, continued weakness in Europe and a greater-than-expected currency impact," IBM Chairman Louis Gerstner said in a statement.
"Although we still face many challenges, IBM is a much different company than it was only a few years ago," he said, noting IBM's services business accounted for 21 percent of revenues at the end of 1996 compared to 13 percent in 1993.
The impact of converting revenues received in foreign currencies into dollars erased three percentage points from the fourth-quarter revenue gain, IBM said. That compared with about a two point positive impact in the 1995 quarter.
Net earnings for the year rose to $5.4 billion, or $10.24 a share, from $4.2 billion, or $7.23 a share, in 1995. The 1996 results included a charge for research and development from the acquisition of Lotus Development Corp.
Full-year revenues rose 5.6 percent to $75.95 billion from $71.94 billion.
In a break with tradition, IBM released its results after the stock market closed rather than before the market opened.
Analysts said there was no particular significance to IBM reporting after the close. IBM was trying to avoid the drastic swings in its stock that have come during a conference call with analysts it hosts after the earnings are released.
The stock closed up $1 at $168 in consolidated trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
By region, revenues in North America rose 11 percent to $9.6 billion in the fourth quarter, Asia-Pacific rose 6 percent to $4.3 billion and Latin America gained 4.0 percent to $1.1 billion. Revenues in Europe, Middle East and Africa were $8.1 billion, little changed year over year.
