International Business Machines Corp. Tuesday reported fourth-quarter earnings that were slightly better than expected, bolstered by its service business, growth in software sales and tight expense controls.
The world's largest computer maker said net income rose 17.6 percent to $2.0 billion in the quarter from $1.7 billion in the year-ago period.
Earnings per share rose faster, to $3.93 from $3.09 a share, since IBM had 7 percent fewer shares outstanding in the quarter due to stock buybacks.
Wall Street analysts had expected earnings of $3.88 a share, on average, according to First Call, which tracks earnings estimates.
While analysts and investors said the results looked good, some said IBM stock might come under profit-taking pressure on Wednesday.
"It's an excellent number, it's an excellent quarter. You really can't say anything bad about it. But I think it may cause a brief period of selling because Wall Street (sells) on that kind of news," said Thom Brown, managing director of Rutherford Brown and Catherwood.
"They were mixed results, software and services were great" and European results were encouraging, said David Takata, a Gruntal &amp; Co. analyst.
But Takata said weak mainframe computer revenues were disappointing. Some analysts had been predicting mainframe revenues rose in the quarter due to strong new products.
The Armonk, N.Y.-based computer maker said service revenues jumped 22 percent in the fourth quarter and personal computer sales rose, but sales of mainframes fell.
Software revenues grew 4 percent in the quarter, and hardware sales grew 2 percent.
Revenues overall rose 5.6 percent to $23.14 billion from $21.92 billion. Expenses fell 2 percent in the quarter from the 1995 period, IBM said.
"We showed good growth in the fourth quarter despite a difficult year-over-year comparison, continued weakness in Europe and a greater-than-expected currency impact," IBM Chairman Louis Gerstner said in a statement.
Currency fluctuations cut revenues by about 3 percentage points in the quarter, compared with about a two point positive impact in the 1995 quarter, IBM said.
Net earnings for the year rose to $5.4 billion, or $10.24 a share, from $4.2 billion, or $7.23 a share, in 1995. The 1996 results included a charge for research and development from the acquisition of Lotus Development Corp.
Full-year revenues rose 5.6 percent to $75.95 billion from $71.94 billion.
In a break with tradition, IBM released its results after the stock market closed rather than before the market opened.
Analysts said there was no particular significance to IBM reporting after the close. IBM was trying to avoid the drastic swings in its stock that have come during a conference call with analysts it hosts after the earnings are released.
The stock closed up $1 at $168 in consolidated trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
