America Online Inc. is under the gun again, amid growing member outrage due to its network overload and analysts said AOL risks losing the new users it worked hard to gain, once they cannot sign onto the service.
Last week, AOL said it would spend more to upgrade its network, as class action suits were filed against the world's largest online service in at least four states, as users complained that they are not getting the service AOL touted, when it switched members to unlimited usage for a flat fee.
Now, AOL has asked users to cut back on prime-time usage.
"If you sit there and think about it, this is an absolutely unbelievable strategy," said Roger McNamee, a partner at Integral Partners, a fund in Menlo Park, Calif, at a conference last week. "Every customer is now dissatisfied."
Last week, as it tried to address its growing problems, AOL also said it would add customer service personnel, decrease its marketing such as its advertising campaign featuring the music from "The Jetsons" cartoon and mailing out free disks.
Chief Executive Steve Case made an unusual plea to subscribers, asking them to curb usage during peak hours and use "flash sessions" to read and write electronic mail offline.
"It seems like it's an admission that they are overcharging for the service," said Edward Labaton, a partner at Goodkind Labaton Rudoff &amp; Sucharow, one of the law firms that has filed a class action suit against AOL in New York.
"If you are an AOL user, you know it's a lottery now. The chances of getting online during peak hours are as good as your chances of getting four numbers in the lottery," he said.
Since AOL switched to unlimited access for $19.95 on Dec. 1, it has had record numbers of subscribers join the service, including 500,000 in December alone. Last week, its stock jumped as it reported its membership passed 8 million.
"Yes, I think they will lose some (members), but still it is a very good deal, if you want any of the proprietary content," said Gary Arlen, president of Arlen Communications Inc., a market research firm in Bethesda, Md.
He said that national Internet access providers, such as AT&amp;T Corp.'s WorldNet service, Netcom Online Communications Inc., Mindspring Enterprises Inc. in Atlanta, may gain some users at AOL expense.
"But it won't be a stampede," Arlen said. "Do you go to the little guy with a dozen unlimited lines, or companies that have had regional overloads, like Netcom?"
"We are seeing something," said an AT&amp;T WorldNet spokesman. "In about the last three weeks, we have seen our subscriber rates double ... and we cannot account for this on the basis of our ad programs in place." The AT&amp;T spokesman said that AT&amp;T was trying to determine if the spike in subscribers was due to AOL's woes or other factors.
Currently, AT&amp;T WorldNet has 600,000 users.
Recently, on one Internet newsgroup, users complained in postings that they could not cancel their AOL accounts, because the 800 numbers were busy for hours, and e-mail requests to cancel were told to call these 800 numbers.
AOL and all the online services face a difficult economic model, analysts said, as they spend millions to build out their networks to support growing demand, because it is difficult to estimate what will be the real demand level.
"They are not totally to blame," said Lise Buyer, an analyst with T. Rowe Price. "No one has seen this kind of membership ramp-up before, they are pioneers in this area."
