Wall Street's year-old love affair with IBM showed signs of fraying Wednesday after investors felt jilted by the computer maker's fourth-quarter earnings report.
International Business Machines Corp. stock tumbled $13 in early trading and closed $10 lower at $158 on the New York Stock Exchange, where it was the most active issue with more than 12.2 million shares changing hands.
The drop contributed accounted for most of the decline of nearly 34 points in the Dow Jones industrial average, which includes IBM in its 30 stocks. It had some market pundits wondering if the issues affecting IBM's profits in the quarter point to a broader slowdown in corporate earnings this year that could mean an end to the stock market's stellar rally.
The world's largest computer maker late on Tuesday said fourth quarter earnings rose 18 percent to $2 billion, or $3.93 a share, beating the average Wall Street estimate of $3.88 a share but falling short of more optimistic forecasts.
In fact, several analysts said they were disappointed with the results, which were boosted by a lower tax rate and lower-than-expected restructuring costs, but hurt by sluggish mainframe sales and currency fluctuations.
"This quarter took the wind out of their sails," said Daniel Ries, a Nomura Research analyst.
"Rather than easily achieve (Wall) Street estimates, IBM appeared to be huffing and puffing," Morgan Stanley analyst Steve Milunovich said in a note to clients.
IBM stock more than doubled in the last year, aided late in the year by Merrill Lynch analyst Daniel Mandresh, who in November raised his price target for IBM stock to $195.
On Wednesday Mandresh cut his 1997 earnings estimate for IBM to $13 a share from $13.40, traders said. Mandresh did not return calls seeking comment. But traders said he reiterated his buy rating on the stock and the $195 price target.
For all of 1996, IBM earned $5.4 billion, or $10.24 a share.
While IBM's service business continued to perform well in the fourth quarter -- revenues there grew 22 percent -- mainframe sales were disappointing and its microelectronics unit was hurt by a drop in computer memory chip prices.
In addition, sales of RS/6000 workstations were flat.
"It was disappointing in a number of dimensions, partly hardware growth and the gross margin being low," said Painewebber analyst Stephen Smith, who reiterated what he called a controversial "unattractive" rating on IBM.
Smith said he expected less profits from mainframes, IBM's traditional stronghold, in 1997 than in 1996.
John Jones of Salomon Brothers said mainframe sales fell 12 percent in the quarter, with 10 percent of those revenues coming from IBM's older less profitable machines that are being discontinued.
Not every analyst saw the earnings report as negative.
"Hardware is the thing that was off the mark," said SoundView Financial analyst Gary Helmig, who cited "some good news underneath" and reiterated a buy rating on IBM.
Bear Stearns analyst Andrew Neff said he held his attractive rating on IBM shares and kept his 1997 estimate of $12.75 a share unchanged.
Some market analysts said the issues surrounding IBM could foreshadow problems for corporate earnings, and stock prices, down the road.
One issue is the strength of the dollar, which IBM said ate into fourth quarter revenue growth by 3 percentage points.
"The strong dollar is something I think is going to impact earnings for many multinationals," said Edgar Peters, chief investment strategist at PanAgora Asset Management. "That's something that hasn't been talked about much before today."
The strong dollar can hurt U.S. companies in two ways: profits from overseas are worth less when translated into dollars and companies have a harder time raising prices since foreign competitors have the advantage of a weaker currency.
"It means the pricing power of domestic corporations is hurt," said Michael Metz, chief investment strategist at Oppenheimer &amp; Co. "This foreshadows the real problem of 1997 because one of the pillars of this market has been earnings growth."
The dollar, recently at its highest level in years against the German mark and Japanese yen, shows few signs of retreating.
Still, some said Wednesday's IBM sell-off was overdone.
"I think there was a lot of retail panic selling," Soundview's Helmig said, referring to sales by customers of retail brokerages as opposed to institutional investors.
David Takata of Gruntal &amp; Co. raised his price target on IBM to $200. "1997 looks like IBM's year of execution," he said.
