New York state Attorney General Dennis Vacco said Friday that he planned to sue America Online Inc. if the company's negotiations with prosecutors from 20 states over consumer issues broke down.
Vacco told a news conference he would sue the world's largest online service, with more than 8 million subscribers, to halt allegedly deceptive business practices and to win refunds for the company's frustrated customers.
But America Online Chairman Steve Case said in an interview with the CNBC cable television channel that he was not considering subscriber refunds. He said the company was doing all it could to alleviate problems and said he understood customers' frustration.
Vacco and other attorneys general or their aides from 20 states met with America Online Thursday in Chicago, either in person or via conference call, to discuss a barrage of complaints by subscribers who have experienced difficulty accessing the service from their computers.
Vacco said he sent notification Thursday of New York state's proposed litigation to America Online's headquarters in Dulles, Va. He said a lawsuit would allege the company engaged in deceptive sales practices, false advertising and fraud in selling online services.
Company officials did not immediately comment on a possible New York lawsuit.
America Online stock dipped $1 to $36.25 in afternoon trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
The online service, which enables subscribers to send electronic mail, browse the World Wide Web and view proprietary content, has seen an upsurge in the number of subscribers -- and busy signals -- since it switched to a flat-rate, unlimited use pricing plan Dec. 1.
Previously, AOL had billed subscribers according to how long they were online.
AOL moved to placate angry customers last week, telling them it would spend $350 million to upgrade its network. It also asked them to try to cut their use during peak hours.
Vacco said, "We want to give the consumers a choice that gives them a refund if they want it. Don't just say 'Hang on;' give them a choice, which includes getting out with their money."
But Case, asked on CNBC about customer refunds, said, "It's not something we are considering."
AOL already has been hit with at least four class-action lawsuits by subscribers.
Vacco would not comment on Thursday's meeting.
Case also was reluctant to talk about the meeting.
"I'm not going to discuss what is on the table with the attorneys general," he said. He said the meeting was "constructive" and that the attorneys general asked AOL not to talk about it.
"Our interests are really in paraellel," Case told CNBC.
"Most customers have seen a tremendous price cut (with the change in pricing), they have doubled their usage," he said.
Case said he understood the frustration users feel when they cannot log onto AOL, saying he, too, experiences the same problem when he tries to log on from home in the evening.
"The reason we went to unlimited pricing is because our customers asked for it," he said. "Once they are online, they don't have to worry about the clock ticking. We did say there will be a surge in demand and there will be some busy signals. It will probably take us a few months to build out our capacity. That's our intent and we are doing everything we can to do it as soon as possible."
The move to unlimited access itself incurred the ire of many of the same attorneys general. Last month, AOL reached an agreement with 19 state attorneys general over the flat-rate pricing, with AOL agreeing to pay automatic refunds to subscribers who did not want to pay $19.95 a month.
