New York State Attorney General Dennis Vacco said Friday that he planned to sue America Online Inc. if the company's negotiations with prosecutors from 20 states over consumer complaints about its service broke down.
Vacco told a news conference he would sue the world's largest online service, with more than 8 million subscribers, to halt allegedly deceptive business practices and to win refunds for the company's frustrated customers.
"I'm not interested in contrition, I'm interested in restitution," Vacco told reporters in Manhattan.
AOL has been hit by a slew of consumer complaints, including several class-action lawsuits, since switching to a new pricing plan because many frustrated users cannot get on the service or are dropped after they manage to log on.
America Online Chairman Steve Case said on the CNBC cable television channel that he was not considering subscriber refunds. He said the company was doing all it could to fix the problems and that he understood the frustrations.
"It is not something we are considering," Case said on CNBC. "Most customers have seen a tremendous price cut, they have doubled their usage" with the new plan, which costs $19.95 a month for unlimited access.
Vacco and other attorneys general or their aides from 20 states met with America Online officials on Thursday in Chicago, in person or via conference call, to discuss a barrage of complaints by subscribers who have experienced difficulty accessing the service from their computers.
Vacco said he sent notification Thursday of New York state's proposed litigation to America Online's headquarters in Dulles, Va. He said a lawsuit would allege the company engaged in deceptive sales practices, false advertising and fraud in selling online services.
"Getting some sort of rebate or refunds from consumers is one of our primary concerns in this issue," said a spokesman for Attorney General Vacco, when asked about Case's comments. He said that New York State would file this lawsuit alone.
Washington state, one of the 20 states, said it was considering a range of options.
"Obviously one of the options is to file a lawsuit and obtain relief through the courts," senior assistant attorney general Sally Gustafson said in Seattle. Another was to negotiate a settlement, she said.
A spokeswoman for Dulles, Va.-based AOL said the company was still in discussions with all the attorneys general.
"We are likely to reach an understanding that will allow us to best meet the needs of our members," she said.
America Online stock fell 50 cents to $36.75 on the New York Stock Exchange. Wall Street remains largely unfazed by the swirl of legal and media attention surrounding AOL.
AOL moved to placate angry customers last week, telling them it would spend $350 million to upgrade its network, $100 million more than it had announced in December.
It also asked them to try to cut use during peak hours, an unprecedented plea to its subscribers. Case even told members in his monthly newsletter to learn how to write and receive electronic mail offline, in so-called "flash sessions."
But New York's Vacco called AOL's attitude disingenuous.
"We want to give the consumers a choice that gives them a refund if they want it. Don't just say 'Hang on;' give them a choice, which includes getting out with their money." There are 600,000 AOL users in New York state.
AOL has been hit with at least four class-action lawsuits by subscribers, including two in New York.
Vacco would not comment on Thursday's meeting.
Case also was reluctant to talk about the meeting.
"I'm not going to discuss what is on the table with the attorneys general," he said on CNBC, adding that the meeting was "constructive" and that the attorneys general asked AOL not to talk about it. "Our interests are really in parallel."
The move to unlimited access itself incurred the ire of many of the same attorneys general. Last month, AOL reached an agreement with 19 states over the flat-rate pricing, with AOL agreeing to pay automatic refunds to subscribers who did not want to pay $19.95 a month.
But analysts noted AOL had already told subscribers, before the agreements with the states, that it would give refunds to those who were switched to unlimited usage without their consent, if they wished to continue at a lower cost plan.
