As the bad news continues to swirl around America Online Inc, some of its competitors are now swooping in, hoping to gain new members from the growing number of disgruntled AOL users who are fed up with its woes.
On Sunday, CompuServe Corp, the second largest online service, plans to run its first-ever Super Bowl ad, a 30-second television spot, called the "Busy Signal."
CompuServe said it will not specifically mention AOL, but the ad is clearly a jab at AOL's current woes, since it has been besieged with users since it switched to unlimited use.  
CompuServe also plans a print campaign with the theme of reliability in accessing the Internet without frequent connectivity problems. The company declined to say how much it is spending for the total campaign.
"We are doing the print compaign and the spot simply because our competitors problems have been so widely reported and so widely known, we think the public feels that all online service providers are having the same problems," said Gail Walls, an acting vice president at CompuServe. "We don't have these problems. Our network is our strength.
Two months ago, CompuServe exited the consumer business.  
When asked why CompuServe is advertising during one of the most expensive advertising time slots aimed at consumers, Walls said CompuServe is not changing its strategy.
"We are interested in the serious Internet customer, we are not pursuing the mass consumer," she said. "The point is to raise awareness about our strength...When you need to make a point, it's a great venue."
CompuServe's move comes on the heels of comments made by the head of AT&amp;T Corp's WorldNet Internet access service. Late Wednesday, Tom Evslin told Reuters that AT&amp;T is gaining new subscribers who are dissatisfied AOL members.  
He also said that AT&amp;T WorldNet plans a new advertising campaign, one that will focus more on the reliability of its network, in print, television, radio and on the Internet. AT&amp;T does not plan any advertising during the Super Bowl, however.
"This is predatory marketing. They are in a very competitive marketplace," said Kate Delhagen, a Forrester Resarch analyst. "It's not surprising that (many of) the ISPs (Internet service providers) are going right for the jugular. They see consumers who are frustrated and they are capitalizing on this opportunity." AOL is the world's largest online service with over eight million members.  
AT&amp;T said it will not refer directly to AOL in its new advertising, which will begin sometime in February.
"Rather than targeting AOL users, I think we will make a point about our reliability and let people make their own conclusions," Evslin said.
But Microsoft Corp, usually known for its hardball marketing tactics, is taking a kinder, gentler approach to AOL's problems, knowing full well that AOL is not alone in the industry with outages or capacity problems. Just Monday, AT&amp;T said it had a 19-hour outage at WorldNet's managed Internet service, its service for corporate users.  
"We don't think it's a healthy thing for the industry to do anything other than actions which try to expand the market," said Jeff Sanderson, general manager of marketing for the Microsoft Network, which is now the third-largest online service with over two million subscribers.
"The message is you should get on the Internet, and MSN is the easiest way to the coolest stuff that is there, including AOL," Sanderson said. He said that Microsoft is doing significant marketing for MSN in general, but added that when the software giant mails out the CDs for its service, it tries to target the cities where it has the most capacity available.
"Meeting the unprecedented demand will be a continuing problem for the industry as a whole," said Adam Schoenfeld, a Jupiter Communications analyst. "The twist here is that Internet access in this very competitive market will not be profitable for everyone."
