New York state Attorney General Dennis Vacco said Friday that he planned to sue America Online Inc. if the company's negotiations with prosecutors from 20 states over consumer issues broke down.
Vacco told a news conference he would sue the world's largest online service, with more than 8 million subscribers, to halt allegedly deceptive business practices and to win refunds for the company's frustrated customers.
The New York attorney general and other prosecutors or their aides from 20 states met with America Online Thursday in Chicago, either in person or via conference call, to discuss a barrage of complaints by subscribers who have experienced difficulty accessing the service from their computers.
Vacco said he sent notification Thursday of New York state's proposed litigation to America Online's headquarters in Dulles, Va. He said a lawsuit would allege the company engaged in deceptive sales practices, false advertising and fraud in selling online services.
America Online, or AOL, has five business days after receving the notice. Company officials were not immediately available to comment on a possible New York lawsuit, but late Thursday, AOL said it was cooperating with the 20 states.
The online service, which enables subscribers to send electronic mail, browse the World Wide Web and view proprietary content; has seen an upsurge in the number of subscribers -- and busy signals -- since it switched to a flat-rate, unlimited use pricing plan Dec. 1.
Previously, the service had billed subscribers according to how long they were online.
AOL moved to placate angry customers last week, telling them it would spend $350 million to upgrade its network and asking them to try to cut their use of the service during peak hours.
Vacco said, "We want to give the consumers a choice that gives them a refund if they want it. Don't just say 'Hang on;' give them a choice, which includes getting out with their money.
"I'm not interested in contrition, I'm interested in restitution," he said "They paid for a service they are not getting."
AOL already has been hit with at least four class-action lawsuits by subscribers.
Vacco would not comment on what happened at Thursday's meeting.
"I'm not going to characterise it except to say ... that AOL fully appreciated where we were coming from," he said.
The move to unlimited access itself incurred the ire of many of the same attorneys general. Last month, AOL reached an agreement with 19 state attorneys general over the flat-rate pricing, with AOL agreeing to pay automatic refunds to subscribers who did not want to pay $19.95 a month.
