America Online Inc., which is under siege by an onslaught of consumer complaints and scrutiny by 20 state attorneys general, is facing a major dilemma as it continues its negotiations with the states.
On Friday, New York threatened to sue the world's largest online service for allegedly deceptive business practices and false advertising if its negotiations with America Online seeking relief for consumers break down.
Other states could follow and at least one, Washington, said it is considering its options.
The Dulles, Va.-based online service has been besieged with complaints by subscribers who began encountering repeated busy signals when they tried to log on after the company switched to a pricing plan offering unlimited access for $9.95 a month.
New York state Attorney General Dennis Vacco said his priority is getting refunds or free time for frustrated consumers, something America Online Chairman Steve Case said he is not willing to do.
New York said America Online, or AOL, had five business days to respond and show why such a legal proceeding against it should not be instituted.
New York's announcement came one day after prosecutors from 20 states met in Chicago with AOL, in person or via conference call, to discuss consumers' complaints. While AOL is talking to the attorneys general to try and show it is doing all it can to help solve the congestion problem on its service, it is also trying to appease Wall Street and keep its stock propped up. AOL stock fell 50 cents to $36.75 Friday, not much by technology standards. So far, Wall Street is not worried because most analysts do not think that AOL will have to cough up any refunds, or if it does, they will not be "onerous," said Jamie Kiggen, a Cowen &amp; Cod. analyst.
"The attorneys general have looked at AOL on a number of issues in the last couple of years and the settlements have not been onerous from a financial standpoint," Kiggen said. "By the time the legal machine grinds here, the overcapacity will not be an issue anymore."
But still, amid the storm of bad publicity and busy signals, AOL is losing the new subscribers it has been spending millions of dollars to gain. It said it was cutting back on its television advertising campaign and mailings of floppy disks to curtail interest in its service while it upgrades its network with more modems, spending $350 million.
Already, both Prodigy Services Co. and AT&amp;T Corp.'s WorldNet Internet service have said they gained new subscribers this month, at a faster pace than normal. Both attribute the upsurge in their memberships to frustrated AOL subscribers.
"I would not be surprised if they are seeing a lift," said Kate Delhagen, an analyst with the Forrester Research firm. "This is a land-grab opportunity they did not expect."
Delhagen predicted that many AOL users may go into an inactive mode for a few weeks and see if the service improves with the new modems.
The next quarterly announcement of AOL's subscriber data will be a closely watched number on Wall Street. Many analysts predict that other pricing changes will occur in the not-too-distant future.
Some analysts said pricing can only go down because more and more of AOL's future revenues will come from advertising and transactions, even though the "all-you-can-eat" subscription model is not expected to be profitable.
"You have a very large subscriber base, but they are not going to throw off much in earnings, there are no economies of scale," said Steve Harmon, a senior investment analyst for iWorld, an Internet news Web site. "In the future ... they want AT&amp;T and other access providers to direct people to AOL. It will be a destination instead of a network. This is the rough period in between."
So, as AOL continues to talk to the attorneys general, analysts also predict it could come up with some other agreements with other network providers, to further improve direct access to its service.
AOL already has a cheaper version of AOL, for $9.95 a month unlimited access, if you "bring your own access" to get to AOL, from any Internet access provider. But analysts said AOL could also share some space on these vast networks, which are underutilized compared with AOL's, to host parts of its proprietary content.
"They have to put a network in faster than they can build it and any way they can affordably do it, and that is a big question, (how they will do it)," said Gary Arlen, president of Arlen Communications Inc.
In the past few days, analysts said it has been easier to get online and they have not been getting busy signals as much as before, already a sign that either the bad publicity is scaring away users or the new modems are helping users sign on faster.
In the past two weeks, AOL suffered a partial outage of almost four hours of its entire service and another one when users could not access e-mail, for a total of almost three hours.
