America Online Inc chairman and chief executive Steve Case said at this time he cannot estimate the financial impact of AOL's plan to provide refunds to customers experiencing problems with its system.
Earlier, AOL announced a plan to provide refunds and credit, upon request, to its members as a result of its recent negotiations with dozens of state attorneys general. AOL said that it hopes to have a formal agreement in place shortly.
"We are not going to estimate any numbers at this point," Case told Reuters in an interview.  
Case said the company is focusing on meeting the needs of its members.
"We are doing what is right to meet the needs of our members. We believed consumers wanted unlimited pricing, the reaction was very enthusiastic," he said. "Unfortunately, that created a situation where we had more demand than supply."
Since last week, AOL has been in talks with dozens of state attorneys general over how to resolve the "busy signal" problem its members have had since AOL switched to unlimited access for a flat rate of $19.95 a month on December 1.  
At least one state, New York, threatened to file a consumer fraud lawsuit against AOL. Other states were considering their options.
Case said that AOL's current $350 million program to upgrade its network should be completed by June, but that some cities will be able to handle increased capacity sooner.  
Case said that AOL had planned on issuing this refund and credit plan Wednesday to address its members needs and questions, and to respond to the recent requests by the attorneys general. The attorneys general then decided to hold their own press conferences in support of it.
"We felt like today we had to move forward with our program, with or without an agreement," Case said. "We were pleased at the final hour that the attorneys general are supporting it...It was a concern that our members were waiting for us to respond. If there hadn't been so many states involved, we could have responded a few days ago."
