America Online Inc.'s massive refund plan, part of its effort to appease angry customers, will be offset by related cuts in its hefty marketing expenses that mgiht actually improve its near-term financial results, some analysts said Thursday.
On Wednesday, the world's largest online service -- under pressure from 36 state attorneys general -- announced a plan to give refunds and credits to subscribers fed up with repeated busy signals when they try to log on.
The refund plan is part of a preliminary deal with the state prosecutors. At least one state, New York, had threatened to sue America Online if no relief was offered to consumers.
Wall Street analysts said the moves by America Online removed a cloud that has been hanging over the Dulles, Va.-based company's stock in recent weeks.
America Online's stock Thursday rose 25 cents to $37.875 on the New York Stock Exchange.
On Wednesday, America Online Chairman Steve Case declined to estimate how much the refunds would cost his company.
Analysts said restrictions on the refunds and the requirement that customers have to request them will limit the financial impact.
"A lot of people can request refunds, but that doesn't mean they will get them," said Jamie Kiggen, an analyst at brokerage Cowen &amp; Co. He estimates the refunds will cost the company $10 million to $15 million, using "pretty aggressive assumptions" on the number of members getting refunds.
Lehman Brothers analyst Brian Oakes' worst-case estimate for the cost of refunds was $16 million.
America Online's refund plan is two-pronged. Any America Online member can request a credit of one free month online, no questions asked.
But, if they want a full $39.90 monetary refund for December and January, based on their usage, they must have used the service for less than two hours during that time.
Subscribers who were able to log on to the service for two to eight hours in December and January can request a 50 percent refund and those who were on for eight to 15 hours a 25 percent refund. Customers who used America Online for more than 15 hours will not get a refund.
Oakes said the refund expense will have no impact on his earnings estimates because it will be funded by America Online's $500 million annual marketing budget.
As part of the proposed settlement, America Online will not do any new advertising in February and ads already in the works will carry a disclaimer that users may have problems accessing America Online.
So, as America Online cuts way back on its marketing expenses, it will hold its subscriber count at 8 million. Abhishek Gami, a Nesbitt Burns Securities analyst, said this will assure America Online will be profitable in the quarter ended in June.
Gami said America Online had been expected to return to profitability in the quarter under its new accounting measures, but said the marketing cuts now give him more confidence.
"It costs them a lot of money to support new users," Gami said, because new customers get the first month free.
In November, America Online reported a net loss for its first quarter ended Sept. 30 of $353.7 million, including a charge of $385.2 million to defer its costs for acquiring subscribers, in a major revamp of its accounting practices.
Most analysts decline to estimate how many subscribers may have left America Online or how many will leave because of its problems. America Online's rivals have already begun crowing about their gains in subscribers, some of whom are dissatisfied America Online users.
Analysts are not unanimously bullish on America Online.
"They will be lucky to retain their 8 million subscribers throughout this whole fiasco," said Kate Delhagen, an analyst with Forrester Research in Cambridge, Mass.
"I think there will be a huge attrition, even with their plans" to increase network capacity, she said. " ... Unless they double their network plan, there will still be a lot of unhappy people."
