America Online Inc., besieged by complaints by frustrated customers unable to log on and facing the threat of a lawsuit by at least one state, agreed Wednesday to give some members refunds or credit.
The world's largest online service, with 8 million subscribers, agreed in principle to give customers their choice of a free month online or up to $39.90 -- the cost of two months of its unlimited service -- as a result of its recent negotiations with dozens of state attorneys general.
AOL also said it planned to hold its membership at 8 million members for the short term, until it was confident it could meet the needs of its current members.
America Online Chairman Steve Case said the company had been working out a refund offer to its members and that the attorneys general in several states agreed Wednesday afternoon to support its proposed plan to members.
"We felt like today we had to move forward with our programme, with or without an agreement," Case said in an interview. "We were pleased at the final hour that the attorneys general are supporting it... It was a concern that our members were waiting for us to respond. If there hadn't been so many states involved, we could have responded a few days ago."
Illinois Attorney General Jim Ryan held a news conference in Chicago, to announce the preliminary deal with the company and 36 states including Illinois, before AOL's announcement.
Ryan said he expected the Dulles, Va.-based company would formally sign the agreement by Thursday.
"We're comfortable with it. We think it's a good deal for consumers," he said.
America Online, which since Dec. 1 has been struggling to deal with an unexpectedly big surge in subscribers, also agreed to halt for a month advertising aimed at attracting new customers.
The proposed settlement headed off, for now, consumer fraud lawsuits threatened by at least one state, New York and under consideration by several other states. Several class action lawsuits have been filed against AOL, and AOL said this agreement has nothing to do with the class action lawsuits.
The agreement calls for customers to receive graduated refunds of up to $39.90 based on how much time they spent over the past two months logged onto AOL, Ryan said.
Any customer can demand a free month's service, no questions asked, but the consumer must request the credit.
"It's a way of saying thank you to our members for their support," said an AOL spokeswoman.
Case declined to estimate the cost of the refunds, but New York state Attorney General Dennis Vacco told a Manhattan news conference he expected the refunds will cost the company several million dollars in his state alone. There are 600,000 AOL members in New York state.
Wall Street analysts said they did not expect the refunds to have much of a financial impact on AOL, because it will be cutting way back on its quarterly marketing expenses, which average about $120 million to $130 million a quarter.
"Even if you make some pretty aggressive assumptions about how many people will call for refunds, then you have the number who will qualify," said Jamie Kiggen, a Cowen &amp; Co. analyst. "I come up with $10 to $15 million in terms of cash cost, which will be offset by reduced marketing expenses."
AOL moved to placate angry customers on Jan. 16, telling them it would spend $350 million to upgrade its network, $100 million more than it had announced in December.
Ryan said the pact originally covered 37 states, but said Missouri's attorney general backed out at the last minute to take a closer look at the proposed refunds.
AOL ran into capacity troubles after it switched its customers from a subscription plan based on the number of hours online to a flat $19.95 monthly rate for unlimited use.
Under the agreement announced Wednesday, AOL agreed to cease all new advertising for the month of February unless already contracted for. Vacco said any ads must include a disclaimer that congestion may prevent customers from getting online.
The prosecutors had complained America Online was continuing to advertise and sign up new customers even as it could not deliver the service to existing users.
AOL also agreed to hire additional operators to field calls from customers seeking to cancel the service, and will set up facilities to accept faxed or online requests to cancel the service. Members had complained they could not cancel.
Customers in the 36 states also could contact the attorney general's office in that state to file a refund request.
Attorneys general or their aides from 20 states met last week in Chicago with the company.
"If there are fresh complaints, we can still file a lawsuit under the consumer fraud laws," Ryan said. "This does not preclude us from acting on behalf of consumers."
