International Business Machines Corp. Thursday unveiled its first network computer, one of the first major personal computer makers to deliver the hyped low-cost computers for accessing the Internet and corporate networks.
IBM's network computer, a scaled down PC, will be priced at under $700, without a monitor.
IBM said the new computer, called the Network Station, is the first in a series of network devices it plans and will be out by the end of the year.
It will put IBM among the first computer companies to offer an inexpensive device that will link people to the Internet as well as provide typical applications such as word processing and spreadsheets.
Unlike the devices touted by other companies, including those that access the Internet and use a television screen for the display, IBM is targeting corporations and corporate networks with its Network Station.
The computer is eight by 10 inches by 1-1/4 inches and weighs 2.5 pounds. It has an IBM PowerPC microprocessor, with a minimum of eight megabytes of memory, going up to 32 megabytes, a network adaptor card, keyboard and mouse, with the monitor optional.
IBM said its Network Station offers more than a "dumb terminal" -- the name for the disk-less terminals used to access mainframes -- because it offers graphical interfaces, programming capability in Sun Microsystems Inc.'s Java language, the popular Netscape browser to access the Internet, corporate intranets and server networks.
The machine will be manufactured by IBM and Network Computing Devices Inc. of Mountain View, Calif.
IBM first talked about developing its own version of the network computer at the Fall Comdex trade show last November. It was the first major U.S. PC maker to adopt the vision promulgated by Oracle Corp. Chairman Larry Ellison, whose company is now developing software for the devices.
IBM's Network Station is based on the common standards announced earlier this year by Oracle, Sun Microsystems Inc., Netscape Communications Corp., and others.
Analysts said that IBM's move to target the business market is more practical and realistic than aiming these devices at the home, where telephone lines offer sluggish and sometimes unpredictable Internet access.
"We believe the market for network computers is much more likely to take off among corporations than it is among consumers," said Josh Bernoff, a Forrester Research analyst. "It appears IBM is taking on the right strategy by creating a corporate machine as opposed to attempting to target television set top boxes."
Analysts said corporations, many of which have higher speed network lines, also have more internal data to be accessed over their own corporate networks, instead of just accessing the Internet.
"The bonanza is to get more access to the network," said Nicholas Donofrio, an IBM senior vice president and group executive in a telephone interview. "It's what doors it opens -- more services, more servers, more software ... that's why we think the network computer model makes so much sense."
On Wednesday, while holding a customer meeting in New York, Oracle's Ellison made more bullish predictions about the Network Computer, telling reporters that he expected such machines to have "explosive growth" after a possibly rocky start-up period of between six to 12 months after the first products come out.
"I believe by the year 2000, we will sell 100 million network computers," Ellison told reporters.
"I think Larry Ellison is talking about things that are too much in the future," said Eileen O'Brien, an analyst at International Data Corp. in Framingham, Mass. "To target a device to the consumer market to just use it for Internet access is not a very compelling reason. There needs to be another feature of the device."
The Network Station will support network access via corporate intranets using Ethernet and Token Ring technology connections.
The system can access Sun Microsystems' Java language, Microsoft Corp.'s Windows NT software, UNIX, IBM's OS/2 operating system, and IBM's AS/400 minicomputers, RS/6000 workstations and System 390 mainframe computers.
