America Online Inc. stock tumbled Friday, a day after the online computer service reported a bigger-than-expected second-quarter loss and after some analysts downgraded its stock.
America Online stock dropped $2.25 to $35.875 in consolidated trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
The world's biggest online service Thursday reported a second-quarter loss of $56 million before one-time charges, or 60 cents a share, for its fiscal second quarter ended Dec. 31.
Analysts on average had predicted a loss of 55 cents a share, according to First Call, which tracks analyst estimates.
After the extraordinary items, which included a charge of $74.3 million related to a restructuring, America Online reported a loss of $154.8 million, or $1.64 a share.
The company also took an unexpected $24 million charge in estimated refunds and credits for subscribers stemming from its recent network woes.
The company's switch in December to flat-rate pricing caused an unexpected upsurge in the number of subscribers and the amount of time they spent online. That led to repeated busy signals for customers trying to log on from their personal computers, angering them and drawing attention from state attorneys general in 37 states.
Under pressure from the attorneys general, the Dulles, Va.-based company agreed last month to provide refunds and usage credits.
America Online has nearly 8 million subscribers.
Smith Barney analyst Jonathan Cohen on Friday lowered his rating on America Online stock to underperform from neutral, saying that, excluding the charges, operating results fell below his expectations.
"In our view, many of America Online's extraordinary charges during the quarter were somewhat less than extraordinary and would have been more appropriately recognised as regular operating results," Cohen said.
He pointed out that America Online chose to recognise as revenues subscriber payments while at the same time treating the refund of those same payments as a non-recurring charge.
Morgan Stanley analyst Mary Meeker also downgraded America Online, to outperform from buy but details of her comments were not available.
Other analysts said the quarter was not a disappointment, but that they believed the stock fell because it became clear America Online will not break even until the quarter ended in June, as opposed to the third quarter ending in March, as previously hoped.
"They aren't going to do it because of the modems, said Nesbitt Burns analyst Abhishek Gami, who reiterated a strong buy rating. "But by doing what they are doing with the modems, they are accelerating the healing process."
America Online said Thursday it will spend $10 million to $15 million to lease 50,000 modems from a computer network provider that it declined to name. It said the move will enable it to expand its network to meet subscriber demand by April, two months ahead of schedule.
