America Online Inc signed a hefty marketing pact with little-known long distance provider Tel-Save Holdings Inc, immediately giving AOL a big chunk of cash and Tel-Save access to eight million AOL users.
AOL and Tel-Save signed a deal to offer AOL members lower-cost long distance telephone service through Tel-Save, which AOL will promote and market to its members. AOL will get an upfront payment of $100 milllion in cash from Tel-Save, a telecommunications service provider based in New Hope, Pa.
AOL will also get warrants to buy Tel-Save shares.  
Analysts and AOL said that the deal was a boost for the company because it showed that AOL was able to put a big value on its growing subscriber base and that it can derive revenues from sources other than subscriber fees.
"This is a proof of promise," said Bob Pittman, chief executive of AOL Networks. "This is not a deal a search engine could do because they don't have the assets. We have put a number on it and we have another $100 million in our coffers."
While AOL has "plenty of cash" for its business plan, the Tel-Save deal will provide funds for general corporate purposes, though AOL must pay the $100 million back, he said.  
Analysts said that the first $43 million must be paid back over ten quarters, beginning in its fourth quarter. That is when the online company will start marketing the Tel-Save long-distance service to its members, thruogh pop-up screens asking them if they wish to enroll. A sampling will begin this summer.
Tel-Save currently offers long-distance and wireless service to about 500,000 small and medium-sized businesses. Tel-Save said its long-distance service featured lower costs than services offered by AT&amp;T Corp, MCI Communications Inc and Sprint Corp.
"These subscribers are the cream of the crop," said Dan Borislow, chief executive of Tel-Save. "This is a great use of our cash." He declined to estimate how many AOL members may sign up for its long-distance service.
AOL's warrants will let the company buy shares of Tel-Save at strike prices ranging from $14.00 to $15.50, for up to 12 million shares, if the total number of AOL members using Tel-Save reaches 3.5 million subscribers.
"They (AOL) could wind up owning over a third of this company," said Jamie Kiggen, a Cowen &amp; Co analyst.
Tel-Sav's shares jumped 7-3/8 to 20-1/2 on Tuesday.  
To be sure, some analysts cautioned that AOL will have to compete against long-distance companies that spend billions of dollars on marketing.
"This will be the ultimate test of AOL's marketing prowess," said David Simons, managing director of Digital Video Investments. "It's AOL against 'the dime lady,'" he added, referring to Sprint's popular television commercials featuring actress Candice Bergen.
