AT&amp;T Corp. -- a year after the much-hyped launch of its Internet access service had consumers clamouring for software -- said Wednesday it will end its introductory offer of free Internet access to long-distance customers.
The telecommunications giant said that after March 31 a revised pricing plan for its WorldNet Service will go into effect, but that it will continue to offer its flat-rate pricing plan of $19.95 a month for unlimited access.
AT&amp;T also said it began posting statistics about the reliability and performance of WorldNet. It challenged other service providers to match its performance, a jab at America Online Inc., which has experienced major congestion problems when its members swamped the service after it switched to flat-rate pricing in December.
"We always said it would be a one-year promotion," Tom Evslin, vice president of WorldNet, told reporters in a conference call. "It served its purpose of introducing many people to the Internet.
"Things were very different a year ago. Now, you can't turn on a sports event without seeing the URL of each team," he said, referring to World Wide Web site addresses known as uniform resource locators (URLs).
WorldNet has more than 750,000 members and said it is the largest "pure Internet" access provider in the United States. "Pure Internet" services offer Internet access only and little or no proprietary content like that provided by America Online Inc. and CompuServe Corp.
Starting March 31, AT&amp;T will offer long-distance customers who sign up for WorldNet and anticipate lower usage a monthly rate of $4.95 for their first five hours.
Long-distance customers who signed up before March 31 will continue to get their first five hours for free for a year and will be enrolled under the revised pricing after that.
Customers of long-distance carriers other than AT&amp;T can receive the service for $4.95 for the first three hours.
All hourly plan customers pay $2.50 for each additional hour and pay separately for phone access or toll-free 800 number access to reach the service.
When AT&amp;T introduced WorldNet with flat-rate pricing a year ago, it shocked the online services industry, which feared competition from the telecommuniations giant with access to so many long-distance telephone customers.
But still, analysts said that AT&amp;T must be disappointed with its current subscriber count of over 750,000, since its entry into the online services was so feared and analysts estimated it would rapidly gain millions of users.
By contrast, No. 1 online service AOL has over 8 million subscribers.
"It's safe to say they must be disappointed with their subscriber growth," said Gregory Wester, a research director at the Yankee Group. "They have a 60 percent share of the long-distance market and a single-digit share of Internet access mareket." Wester uses 18 million users as the current number of the total Internet access market.
AT&amp;T stock dropped 37.5 cents to $40.75 in consolidated trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
