America Online Inc. signed a hefty marketing pact Tuesday with little-known long-distance provider Tel-Save Holdings Inc., immediately giving the online service a big chunk of cash and Tel-Save access to 8 million America Online subscribers.
The two companies signed a deal to offer America Online members lower-cost long-distance telephone service through Tel-Save, which America Online will promote and sell to its members.
America Online will get an upfront payment of $100 million in cash from Tel-Save, a telecommunications provider based in New Hope, Pa. The online service will also get warrants to buy Tel-Save shares.
The announcement fuelled a rally by Tel-Save stock, which climbed $7.375 to $20.50 on Nasdaq, making it one of the biggest percentage gainers on the exchange.
America Online stock rose $1.125 to $36.625 in consolidated trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
Analysts and America Online said the deal was a boost for the world's No. 1 online service because it showed the company was able to put a big value on its growing subscriber base and that it could derive revenues from sources other than subscriber fees.
"This is a proof of promise," Bob Pittman, chief executive officer of AOL Networks, said in an interview. "This is not a deal a (Web) search engine could do because they don't have the assets. We have put a number on it and we have another $100 million in our coffers."
Pittman said that while Dulles, Va.-based America Online currently has "plenty of cash" for its business plan, this is additional cash for general corporate purposes. But America Online must pay the $100 million back.
Analysts said the first $43 million must be paid back over 10 quarters, beginning in its fourth quarter, when America Online begins to market the Tel-Save long-distance service to its members, through pop-up screens which will ask members if they wish to enroll. A sampling will begin this summer.
Tel-Save currently offers long-distance and wireless service to about 500,000 small and medium-sized businesses. Tel-Save said its long-distance service costs less than that from giants like AT&amp;T Corp., MCI Communications Inc. and Sprint Corp.
"These subscribers are the cream of the crop," said Dan Borislow, chief executive of Tel-Save. "This is a great use of our cash." He declined to estimate how many America Online members may sign up for long-distance service.
America Online's warrants will allow it to buy shares of Tel-Save at prices ranging from $14 to $15.50, for up to 12 million shares, if the total number of America Online members using Tel-Save reaches 3.5 million subscribers. "They (AOL) could wind up owning over a third of this company," said Jamie Kiggen, a Cowen &amp; Co. analyst.
However, some analysts pointed out that America Online will be competing against the long-distance companies, which spend billions of dollars on marketing.
"This will be the ultimate test of AOL's marketing prowess," said David Simons, managing director of Digital Video Investments.
"It's AOL against 'The Dime Lady,'" he added, referring to Sprint's popular television commercials featuring actress Candice Bergen.
