Former NBC executive Brandon Tartikoff Monday was named chairman of the board of America Online Inc.'s original content developer, Greenhouse Networks, as part of a major initiative to create specialized online networks. The company's stock soared.
The world's No. 1 online service also said it was buying LightSpeed Media Inc., a pioneer producer of Internet soap operas and shows. Financial terms were not disclosed.
As part of the deal, Vienna, Va.-based Greenhouse Networks said it would develop an interactive entertainment network, slated for launch this fall on AOL and the Internet.
America Online stock rose $5, or more than 11 percent, to $47 in consolidated trading on the New York Stock Exchange, where it was seventh leading percentage gainer for the day.
AOL's entertainment network will be based in Los Angeles and will capitalize on Lightspeed's and Tartikoff's relationships in the entertainment industry.
America Online's deal with Tartikoff expands a previous arrangement announced last fall for the executive to develop original interactive brands to be launched simultaneously online, on television and as books.
Tartikoff, who was president of NBC Entertainment from 1980 to 1991, currently heads his own television and production company, H. Beale Co., in Los Angeles. During his tenure at NBC, the network made its rise to the No. 1 network with shows such as "Hill Street Blues," "Cheers," "L.A. Law," and "Family Ties."
From 1991 to 1992, he was chairman of Paramount Pictures when that studio released hit movies such as "Wayne's World" and "Patriot Games."
Analysts called the expansion of Tartikoff's role a "major coup" for the online service, as it hopes to move toward developing its own content instead of just investing in companies that develop content for AOL.
The Greenhouse Network's Motley Fool personal finance area is one of the most successful of the over 30 Greenhouse investments. The founders of Motley Fool have authored books, articles and the Motley Fool is now a logo found on baseball hats, T-shirts and other merchandise.
Tartikoff "developed NBC into the powerhouse of the 1980s," said Peter Krasilovsky, an analyst with Arlen Communications Inc. in Bethesda, Md. "He has these concepts and he gets them down. ... They are hoping to get a major hit that is so big they will be able to merchandise it."
Tartikoff's first project with Greenhouse and AOL will be called "Beggars and Choosers," a serial about a struggling TV network, which is being developed to launch simultaneously on AOL and as a made-for-TV movie for the Showtime cable channel.
Tartikoff will continue to head his own production company and act as a consultant and adviser to America Online as chairman of Greenhouse, America Online said.
LightSpeed's founders were behind the first so-called "episodic" show on the Internet, called "The Spot," which it sold to American Cybercast in early 1996. "The Spot," an interactive soap opera about five people sharing a beach house in California, is still on the Web site of American Cybercast, which filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in January.
LightSpeed was founded in May 1996 by the creators of "The Spot," after American Cybercast bought the program. Founder Scott Zakarin will be named president of programming.
Zakarin and his team launched another popular Internet soap -- "GrapeJam" -- last August.
America Online executives said Internet soap operas will be only one small part of its broad entertainment network, which will feature celebrity hosts, live events, news and other information about the entertainment industry.
"The focus (of the network) is on the entertainment industry and the entertainment business," said Greenhouse President Danny Krifcher. He declined to say how many staffers it will have, or what its projected revenues will be.
America Online plans to make money from the entertainment network through advertising revenues, licensing and through transactions, such as selling tickets to entertainment events, selling merchandise and offering premium information at a surcharge. But Krifcher declined to make any forecasts.
The closest competition America Online said it has on the Internet to its entertainment network are sites such as Mr. Showbiz, E! Online and a People magazine site devoted to entertainment. Analysts said AOL's biggest competition is Microsoft Corp.'s MP3 multimedia studio.
"This is a very big opportunity," Krifcher said. "This is the beginning of what we think will be a series of exciting announcements and developments for us."
Greenhouse also plans to launch other programming networks specializing in sports, romance, young adults, health and women. The networks will include content of current Greenhouse properties and new ones, to be distributed over AOL, the Internet and other platforms such as TV and books.
"Greenhouse is no longer just a venture capital company," Krasilovsky said. "They are hoping to develop full media properties in their own right."
