Former NBC executive Brandon Tartikoff was named chairman of the board of America Online Inc.'s original content division, Greenhouse Networks, the online giant announced Monday.
The world's No. 1 online service also said it was buying LightSpeed Media, a pioneer producer of Internet soap operas and shows. Terms of the deal were not disclosed.
As part of the deal, Vienna, Va.-based Greenhouse Networks said it would develop an interactive entertainment network, slated for launch this fall.
The entertainment network will be based in Los Angeles and will capitalise on Lightspeed's and Tartikoff's relationships in the entertainment industry.
America Online's deal with Tartikoff expands a previous arrangement announced last fall for the executive to develop original interactive brands to be launched simultaneously online, on television and as books.
Tartikoff, who was president of NBC Entertainment from 1980 to 1991, currently heads his own television and production company, H. Beale Co., in Los Angeles.
Tartikoff will continue to head his own production company and act as a consultant and adviser to America Online as chairman of Greenhouse, America Online said.
LightSpeed was behind the first so-called "episodic" show on the Internet, called "The Spot," which it sold to American Cybercast early last year. "The Spot," an interactive soap opera about five people sharing a house on a California beach, is still on the Web site of American Cybercast, which filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in January.
LightSpeed was founded in May 1996 by the creators of "The Spot" after American Cybercast bought the programme. Founder Scott Zakarin will be named president of programming.
Zakarin and his team launched another Internet soap -- -- "GrapeJam" -- last August.
America Online executives said Internet soap operas will be only one small part of its broad entertainment network, which will feature celebrity hosts, live events, news and other information about the entertainment industry.
"The focus (of the network) is on the entertainment industry and the entertainment business," said Greenhouse President Danny Krifcher. He declined to say how big the venture will be.
America Online plans to make money from the entertainment network through advertising revenues, licensing and through transactions, such as selling tickets to entertainment events, selling merchandise and offering premium information at a surcharge. But Krifcher declined to make any forecasts.
The closest competition America Online said it has on the Internet to the entertainment network are sites such as Mr. Showbiz, E! Online and a People magazine site devoted to entertainment.
"This is a very big opportunity," Krifcher said. "This is the beginning of what we think will be a series of exciting announcements and developments for us."
America Online stock rose $3 to $45 in consolidated afternoon trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
