International Business Machines Corp.'s $23 billion Global Services business will become a separate IBM group, the company announced Wednesday, acknowledging the significance of the fast-growing business.
In a related development, IBM Chairman Louis Gerstner reiterated in the company's annual report an earlier statement that it planned to hire "thousands more" employees to fuel growth, most of them in Global Services.
IBM told analysts earlier this year it will probably add as many new employees in 1997 as it did in 1996, with a big chunk in Global Services.
In 1996, the Armonk, N.Y.-based computer giant's worldwide head count grew to 241,000, up from 225,000 in 1995, mostly due to the expanding services business, an IBM spokesman said. In 1995, employment grew from 220,000 in 1994, the first time employment grew in 10 years.
"I'd like to add here that I am very happy -- and proud -- that our transformation has created job growth," Gerstner said in his letter to shareholders, in which he described 1996 overall as "a solid year."
When Gerstner first took over the then-struggling computer giant in April 1993, one of his first actions was to take a whopping restructuring charge and cut 25,000 jobs from IBM.
The Global Services unit -- which designs, installs and services computers, including running entire corporate computer systems -- was formerly part of IBM's Sales and Services group.
Sales and Services will be renamed the Sales and Distribution Group, still headed by IBM Senior Vice President Ned Lautenbach.
IBM also said Dennie Welsh, who was general manager of Global Services, will be promoted to a senior vice president and report directly to Gerstner.
Welsh was also named an IBM group executive and will join IBM's executive committee, which makes strategic decisions.
"The time is right for this change," Gerstner said in an IBM memo announcing the reorganization. "He (Welsh) and his colleagues on the services team have done an outstanding job building a great new business for IBM. This change not only reflects a logical adjustment in our organisational structure, but also a recognition of their success."
IBM's services business has been its fastest growing in recent quarters. In the fourth quarter, IBM said services revenues jumped 22 percent to $5 billion. In comparison, IBM's total revenues grew 6 percent in the fourth quarter.
"This is a transformation of the IBM company," said Sam Albert, a Scarsdale, N.Y.-based consultant. "The major revenue stream is not coming from hardware, it will come from software and services ...".
"This has some impact on the way IBM sees its future," Albert added. "Anything this important demands direct oversight by Gerstner."
Wednesday's move follows changes in December when IBM consolidated computer services under the IBM Global Services brand. IBM's services organisation had been operating in some countries outside the United States under different names.
The addition of Global Services now gives IBM five major corporate divisions. The others are the Software Group, the Server Group, which makes the computers that run networks; the Personal Systems Group; and Sales and Distribution.
With Welsh's promotion to IBM senior vice president, the company now has a total of 10 senior vice presidents.
IBM stock fell $1.50 to $137.857 on the New York Stock Exchange.
