IBM shares fell in heavy trading Friday after three Wall Street firms made negative comments about the giant computer maker in the past two days, saying a stronger dollar and a product transition will hurt earnings.
The stock of International Business Machines Corp. fell $4.25 to $132.375 on the New York Stock Exchange, where it was the fourth most-active issue with more than 5.3 million shares traded.
"People are beginning to realise that it's going to be a bleak quarter," said Jay Stevens, analyst at Dean Witter. But he continued to recommend accumulating IBM stock.
Analysts said two main factors were hurting IBM's earnings prospects. Even though the world's largest computer maker will have a lower tax rate and fewer shares outstanding due to its share buyback plan, currency fluctuations and expected weakness in mainframe sales will hurt the first half of 1997, they said.
Morgan Stanley on Friday cut its earnings estimates for IBM, saying that the Armonk, N.Y.-based company will make more money toward the end of the year instead of earlier. It also said results will be affected by currency fluctuations and the transition to a new mainframe model.
"Some users may wait for the new one," said Steve Milunovich, a Morgan Stanley analyst.
Morgan Stanley cut its earnings per share estimate to $2.80 from $2.97 for the second quarter and to $12.30 from $12.50 for all of 1997.
IBM earned $2.02 billion, or $3.93 a share, on revenues of $23.1 billion in the 1996 fourth quarter. For full-year 1996, it reported profits of $5.4 billion, or $10.24 a share, on revenues of $75.95 billion.
Morgan Stanley continued to rate IBM's stock as an outperformer.
Analysts said IBM is expected to upgrade its low-cost mainframes to a processor with speeds that match its older bi-polar line that is being phased out.
"This is a major product transition," Stevens said.
Analysts have been expecting initial shipments of the new processors in the third quarter. Milunovich said he expects a few models will be shipped in June.
Merrill Lynch said on Thursday in a note to clients that it expects demand will be extremely good for the new machines and expects IBM to beat Wall Street's expectations of initial shipments in the third quarter.
But until then, the stronger dollar overseas will continue to weigh on earnings, the brokerage said.
Merrill did not change its current first-quarter estimate of $2.32 a share. But it expects 3 percent revenue growth in the first quarter and a tough comparison vs. a year ago.
Late Thursday, Dean Witter also lowered its 1997 earnings estimates for IBM, saying its operating income was expected to fall by 11 percent in the first quarter.
However, this is expected to be offset by a lower tax rate of 35 percent vs. a previous 39 percent, along with IBM's current stock repurchase plan, it said.
Dean Witter raised its earnings estimate for the second half of the year and kept its 1997 profit estimate at $14.25 per share.
