After two years of hype and euphoria about the Internet and its sweeping impact on the computer industry, a reality check is setting in as investors are asking: Where's the money?
A Tucson, Ariz., industry conference this week called PC Forum -- a "schmooze fest" once populated mostly by the upper echelon of the computer industry -- brought together telecommunications and media company leaders as well as those from computer behemoths and start-ups.
Many attendees said there is more concern now about profits and business models.
"It's now coming to practical terms," said Ed Bennett, former president of the Prodigy Services online service. "Where is the money coming from? ... But the raw potential of the industry hasn't changed, and that's a good thing."
So far, it is still not clear what type of business plan will lead to hefty revenues and profits from the Internet, whether it be advertising-based, subscription-based or some other way of making money.
Recent failures or financial problems at Web-based ventures, such as the Chapter 11 bankruptcy filing of American Cybercast, one of the first Web soap opera sites, are causing concern.
Executives also pointed to the recent Securities and Exchange Commission filing by Amazon.com, which pioneered bookselling on the Internet, for its anticipated initial public offering (IPO).
Seattle-based Amazon.com, known as one of the most successful ventures and best-known examples of Internet commerce, said it lost $5.8 million in 1996, mostly due to increased investments in technology and marketing.
"There is no question that there is an increased focus on the part of analysts and investors on when are they going to make money," said Sheldon Laube, chief technology officer of U.S. Web., a privately held Santa Clara, Calif. company which franchises Web development, training and consulting services.
"It's a healthy part of the evolution of the business," Laube said. "The hype is now evolving into reality and ultimately that is what technology is all about."
While the conference is a forum for discussing industry issues and exchanging ideas -- sometimes lofty and intellectual ones such as the use of metaphors and language to describe this new medium -- a number of small start-up companies come to make their debut before their peers. Industry executives, analysts and investors come to meet and make deals in the hallways.
This year, in the so-called "debutantes" presentations, many venture capitalists, Wall Street analysts and fund managers checked out 12 early start-ups.
The PC Forum, run by industry guru Esther Dyson, is considered such an important part of a start-up company's debut that Fast Company magazine followed around executives of two small companies to chronicle their participation at the conference.
"This is the 'Lollapalooza' of the Internet," Bennett said, who remains on Prodigy's board, referring to the alternative music festival. "Not every band is going to get signed."
This year, questions about business models dominated many start-up presentations more than the technology. During a presentation by a start-up called NetBot Inc., whose Internet "shopping assistant" made its debut, one attendee interrupted to ask about the Seattle-based firm's business model, even before the company demonstrated its software called Jango.
"People are much more pragmatic when they look at these companies," said Bruce Smith, a Merrill Lynch Internet analyst. "You like to look at companies that have thought through their business model and how they will compete with the 800-pound gorilla (Microsoft Corp.)."
And as the stocks of other publicly traded companies such as Internet search engines firms like Yahoo! Inc., Excite Inc., and Lycos Inc. ; Internet access providers; online services and other Internet software companies continue to drop on Wall Street, start-ups compete for fewer and fewer venture capital dollars.
Some promising IPO candidates are also mulling being acquired, such as PointCast Inc.'s much-rumoured discussions two weeks ago to be acquired by Rupert Murdoch's News Corp., the owner of the Fox television network and newspapers such as the New York Post.
PointCast, a pioneer in so-called push technology, said last week its present intention was to remain independent.
"In the venture capital business, you can see the transition from a seller's market to a buyer's market," said Roger McNamee, general partner at Integral Partners in Menlo Park, Calif. "Entrepreneurs are beginning to wonder where their next dollar of capital will come from."
Even in its new-found pragmatism, the industry remains ever optimistic about the future. Conference leader Dyson and many of the speakers gathered together at the end of the conference with the creator of the World Wide Web Tim Berners-Lee, who now heads up the World Wide Web Consortium.
"The competition is what produces the incredible rate of development," Berners-Lee said.
