The stock of International Business Machines Corp. fell in heavy trading on Thursday, hit by renewed fears about its first-quarter earnings after a published report focused on recent analysts' estimate cuts.
The sell-off fuelled the overall stock market's fourth sharp sell-off in five days as investors were already scared that Friday's March employment report, if robust, could prompt the Federal Reserve to raise interest rates again soon.
IBM fell as low as $128.875 before ending down $2.375 at $131.375 on the New York Stock Exchange, where it was the third most-active issue on volume of 4.6 million shares.
IBM shares began their tumble in London, where investors first read a Wall Street Journal article that said analysts may not be through cutting IBM's earnings estimates.
The report talked about a recent spate of analysts' estimate cuts, citing fears that a stronger dollar and a mainframe product transition will hurt IBM's first-quarter earnings, due April 23, and depress the stock even further. A strong dollar makes sales overseas worth less in dollar terms.
As previously reported, two weeks ago three Wall Street firms made negative comments and two lowered their estimates on IBM, fuelling a drop in IBM's shares in late March.
The report, which appeared as a "Heard on the Street" column in Thursday's Journal, also dredged up an almost two-week old rumour that IBM was going to pre-announce that its earnings would come in below analysts' estimates.
"The Wall Street Journal article today is a summation of old news," said John Jones of Salomon Brothers. "We talked to IBM today and they have no plans for a pre-announcement."
One trader said of the newspaper article: "They are a bit late to the party here."
"I heard the rumour but I wouldn't put any credence to it," said another trader.
An IBM spokesman declined to comment on the quarter.
As previously reported, on March 21, Morgan Stanley analyst Steve Milunovich cut IBM's 1997 earnings estimate to $12.30 a share from $12.50. For all of 1996, IBM earned $5.4 billion, or $10.24 a share.
On March 20, Dean Witter Reynolds analyst Jay Stevens lowered his first-half earnings estimates for IBM, saying customers might hold off purchases of mainframes until an anticipated upgrade. Some analysts are expecting initial shipments in June.
Stevens added to his estimates for the second half of the year, however, saying the year would be more back-end loaded, as customers make purchases in the second half of the year.
Also in March, Merrill Lynch analyst Daniel Mandresh said it would be tough for IBM's first-quarter earnings, which it estimated at $2.32 a share, to compare to the year-ago period's. The analysts' consensus estimate is $2.31 a share for the first quarter, according to First Call, which tracks estimates.
For the first quarter of 1996, IBM posted earnings of $1.4 billion, or $2.48 a share, excluding charges associated with software acquisitions and other special items.
Gary Helmig, a SoundView Financial analyst, said he is maintaining his first-quarter earnings estimate of $2.32 a share, which he has had since February.
"It's going to be tough to make that number and I doubt that they can overachieve it," Helmig said. But he added that foreign currency exchange rates have not changed drastically since February, so he sees nothing new to affect his estimates.
The IBM drop caused the Dow Jones industrial average to lose 39.66 points to end at 6,477.35 after an initial plunge of more than 80 points.
