The Ministry of Mines and Energy will investigate drug kingpins' alleged involvement in Colombia's oil industry, a spokeswoman said on Thursday.
State oil company Ecopetrol and a foreign multinational said on Thursday they had awarded multimillion-dollar service contracts to a company now thought to have been headed by suspected drug trafficker Pastor Perafan. But they said the contracts, some dating back to 1991, had been put out to bidding and there were no grounds for suspicion.
In a congressional debate on Wednesday, Margarita Mena, a former minister of Mines and Energy, said the once-powerful Medellin drug cartel had tried to invest in Colombia's oil industry in the late 1980s as a way of laundering profits from international cocaine trafficking. She did not say which companies were involved.
A spokeswoman at the Ministry of Mines and Energy said on Thursday: "An investigation will be organized. The process is likely to be a long one. It will begin with the formation of a special commission."
The current Mines and Energy minister, Rodrigo Villamizar, is likely to launch the inquiry formally when he returns to address Congress on Oct. 22, the spokeswoman said.
Villamizar opened congressional debate on Wednesday on the possible renegotiation of association contracts between foreign oil companies and Ecopetrol.
Mena's remarks, made during the session, took him by surprise. Afterward he told reporters he had not been aware of drug cartel efforts to muscle in on the oil industry but said he was concerned.
Earlier this week, Cromos magazine reported on Ecopetrol's and Occidental's business ties with Inversismica, a seismic surveying company in which it said fugitive businessman Perafan was the majority shareholder.
The prosecutor's office issued an arrest warrant for Perafan at the start of this year. A spokesman at the office was unable to say on Thursday whether Perafan, who is reputedly worth more than $12 billion, was involved with Inversismica. According to a recent report in Colombia's influential news weekly Semana, Perafan's investments include an oil pipeline project in the former Soviet Union.
An Ecopetrol spokesman said the state oil company had awarded seven contracts to Inversismica since 1991, including one to carry out a seismic survey of the Coporo field, a new find on Colombia's eastern plains that may eventually rival the Cusiana and Piedmonte fields.
He was unable to specify the total value of the contracts but said they would have amounted to hundreds of thousands of dollars.
Occidental signed just one contract with Inversismica, worth $1,500,000, between May 1995 and last June.
"When we had doubts about this company and after consultation with the head of police and the chief prosecutor, we canceled the contract. We do not want relations with any company that may be linked to narcotrafficking," the multinational's spokesman said.
An industry insider said he did not think it likely that drug traffickers would have sought to launder money in the oil industry, saying that all transactions were strictly controlled by the government and Ecopetrol.
