When novice torero Ricardo Gomez steps into the arena and faces down a raging bull, only his fast-developing flair and a passion born of poverty lie between him and a gory end.
Art and courage fuse as the 22-year-old swirls his cape and moves with the elegance of a dancer. The rays of the afternoon sun glisten on his Suit of Lights -- the bullfighter's traditional costume. But when the going gets tough, the 120 pound (54 kg), 5 foot 5 inch (1.7 metre) baker's son knows the most important lessons to remember are those he has learned growing up on the tough streets of Bogota, the Colombian capital.
"I've got more passion than a rich person. I've had to put up with things in my life that a rich person would not have to suffer and when I get in front of a bull I have the same attitude. My daily life has given me one of the most important lessons for bullfighting," Gomez explained.
As a hand-me-down from Spanish colonialists, bullfighting -- the so-called fiesta brava -- has the image of a wealthy man's sport in Colombia. But while most of those in the stands at the capital's 15,000-capacity Santamaria bullring are from the nation's elite, the ones at the sharp end come mostly from humble origins.
Gomez is one of the rising stars of Bogota's fledgling school for bullfighters. His training programme, which he began at 16, includes pitting his wit against a contraption that resembles a shopping cart with horns. And for the last four seasons as a novice, he has cut his teeth on fighting the smaller bulls.
Like scores of other youngsters, his dream is to become a top professional -- a major league matador. His performances on two consecutive Sundays in October have drawn rave reviews from critical crowds and the specialist press. If all goes well, he may get his chance at the big time when the main season starts in December.
"I've often thought what would happen if I don't succeed in becoming a matador but I don't worry. It's something that I have to achieve -- it's as simple as that," he said in a short break from training.
Even if he does succeed in following in the footsteps of his idol Cesar Rincon -- reigning king of Colombian bullfighting -- 1,300 pounds (600 kgs) of killing machine will not be the only obstacle between him and living happily ever after. The sport's patrons are a wealthy minority who often value political and social contacts above ability, making it difficult for poorly connected youngsters to rise on merit.
In addition, every time a Colombian steps into the ring, he is fighting to get out of the ghetto that he has been cast into by a sport dominated by Spaniards.
"Colombian bullfighters have always been on unequal terms compared to the Spanish. While the Spanish were going from one big bullring to another the Colombians have to travel by bus along dusty village tracks looking for bulls to fight," said matador Alberto "El Bogotano" Ruiz, the training school's resident instructor.
When young hopefuls between the ages of 13 and 17 arrive at the school, Ruiz watches closely for a rare combination of intelligence, physical fitness, bravery and "the poor man looking for fame and the chance to live a little like the rich man." Fellow instructor Pablo Becerra separates bullfighters into those who are brave and those with great artistry. The brave ones, he says, fill seats and make millions as crowds flock to feel the fear and see if the bull finally gets its own back.
But far from the macho world portrayed in novelist Ernest Hemingway's "Death in the Afternoon" and "The Sun Also Rises," the head of Colombia's only bullfighting school does have his sensitive side. "Of course it's cruel to kill the bull but that's our job," Ruiz said. "But it's not like killing an enemy. We try to do it the best way possible. The fiesta brava is all about courage and death."
