Colombia's main oil workers' union, known for its fiercely nationalistic stance and opposition to multinationals, will merge with smaller labor organizations to form an industry-wide front, its leader Hernando Hernandez said on Friday.
The 5,700-strong USO union, which currently only represents workers of the state oil company Ecopetrol, will approve the decision in a general assembly on Monday in a move that Hernandez believes could eventually pave the way to a 40,000-member "super- union".  
Foreign oil companies fear the move will give the USO a foothold in their fields, mostly operated by non-unionized workers, and that the union will sour labor relations with its aggressive, left-wing stance. They also accuse the USO of ties with leftist guerrilla movements, which frequently target the oil industry -- a charge union leaders deny.  
"This merger will help us maintain union solidarity in the face of detrimental government policies and enable us to present a single platform," Hernandez said. "This will put us in a better position to defend the future of our natural resources....
At Monday's meeting in the oil production center Barrancabermeja, the USO will approve a merger with the Association of Oil Industry Workers (ASOPETROL), which has a small but established presence in a number of multinational oil companies.  
SINTRAOXY, made up of U.S. multinational Occidental Petroleum workers, also seems set to heed the merger call.
Hernandez said the immediate effect would be the creation of a 10,000-strong organization, adding that non-unionized oil companies would be targeted in a drive to create a union 40,000 members to represent the entire industry.
This week the USO flexed its muscles and paralyzed the country's two main oil pipelines for the first time ever.  
The 24-hour strike was to combat government plans to restructure Ecopetrol, which USO fears will lead to the company's eventual privatization, and to protest against British Petroleum's demands to renegotiate an association contract with the state oil company.
A foreign oil company senior representative, who did not wish to be named, described USO's merger plans as an USO ploy to regain control after seeing its influence progressively eroded by the entry of multinationals into exploration and production.
"The merger will complicate relations with our labor force and the prospect of having to deal with a belligerent labor union with close ties to the guerrilla movements is far from stimulating," the representative said.
Hector Penuela, head of ASOPETROL, confirmed the imminent merger with USO.
A Labor Ministry spokesman said there was no bar on the merger but said those unions involved would have to formally inform the ministry to gain legal recognition.
