At least 24 soldiers and leftist rebels died in fierce fighting in three provinces of Colombia over the weekend, military sources said on Sunday.
The bloodiest clashes took place on Saturday in the conflict-torn region of Uraba, a banana-growing area in northwest Colombia where guerrillas and right-wing paramilitary groups have traditionally fought for control of lucrative contraband routes.
An army spokesman said 10 soldiers and eight Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) insurgents died in battles there. Gen. Rito Alejo said intensive counterinsurgency operations continued on Sunday.
Elsewhere, in southwestern Huila province the FARC, Colombia's largest and oldest guerrilla force, dynamited a military convoy, killing four soldiers. And in firefights in northeastern Norte de Santander province, one soldier and one FARC rebel died early on Sunday, military sources said.
In the Caribbean port city of Barranquilla, four suspected rebels were injured when their clandestine bomb-making factory exploded.
The latest wave of deaths comes against the backdrop of what military experts say is the worst guerrilla violence in more than three decades of armed uprising.
The rebels unleashed their new offensive on Aug. 30 when they overran a military base in southern Colombia, killing 27 soldiers and taking at least 60 prisoner.
The FARC is still holding the troops and in its latest communique issued over the weekend repeated accusations that the army was planning to rescue the captives by force, thereby putting their lives at risk.
The rebel force said it has a leaked military document proving its allegations and added the army was planning to try the soldiers for cowardice once they were released -- claims denied by Interior Minister Horacio Serpa on Sunday.
While the current guerrilla offensive has led many defence analysts to suggest the situation has slipped out of control of the military, the government has been buoyed by news of the surrender of 110 fighters from the People's Liberation Army (EPL), Colombia's third-largest guerrilla force.
The Maoist-inspired rebels handed over their weapons to the military on Saturday in a rural zone of northern Cordoba province.
