A leading lawmaker said on Monday that Colombia would continue to be a "paradise for drug traffickers" unless Congress voted to overturn a 5-year-old ban on the extradition of drug lords and other criminals wanted abroad.
"If we don't end the culture of impunity in Colombia then we have no right to ask for international help in the fight against drugs," said Senator Luis Guillermo Giraldo.
Giraldo, a member of the ruling Liberal party but an outspoken opponent of President Ernesto Samper, proposed legislation in August that would reactivate a 1979 extradition treaty with the United States.
The legislation faces a key hurdle in the Senate on Tuesday when a 12-member constitutional committee was set to vote on whether it should be submitted to plenary for approval or thrown out altogether.
"If we don't restore our (extradition) treaty, Colombia will continue to be a paradise for drug traffickers," Giraldo said in a telephone interview with Reuters.
In the run-up to the vote in the Senate, graffiti has appeared in Cali, home to the criminal syndicate that has dominated the world's cocaine trade, threatening those who support sending Colombians to stand trial abroad.
But growing numbers of legislators appear to be increasingly swayed by the United States' argument that extradition is a vital weapon in the drug war. Moreover, some political analysts believe it may be impossible for Colombia to regain U.S. certification as an ally in the fight against drugs, withdrawn in March, unless extradition is reintroduced.
Samper, dogged by accusations that he took drug money to finance his 1994 election campaign, said on Friday he thought Giraldo's bill was poorly timed, arguing that priority should be given to a package of tougher penalties for drug crimes currently going through Congress.
Justice Minister Carlos Medellin has spoken out in favour of renewing extradition, however, and Alfonso Valdivieso, chief prosecutor and a fervent anti-drug crusader, has even called for extradition to be made retroactive -- a proposal unlikely to please those drug traffickers who surrendered to the Colombian authorities in return for lenient treatment.
While politicians, ministers and lawyers argue the merits of the move, more than 60 percent of ordinary Colombians surveyed by RCN radio in September said they opposed extradition.
Political analysts say such opposition reflected a combination of nationalistic pride and fear that renewing extradition could unleash a new campaign of bombings, kidnappings and assassinations like those led by the late drug lord Pablo Escobar in the late 1980s and early 1990s.
