Colombia's main oil workers' union, USO, known for its fierce nationalism and opposition to multinationals, has merged with a smaller labor organization in a bid to create an industry-wide front, one of its leaders said Tuesday.
The new grouping will target workers not currently represented by any union, primarily those employed by foreign companies operating in the country, USO social security secretary Gustavo Triana said.
The merger vote took place late Monday in the oil production center of Barrancabermeja and has set alarm bells ringing in some sectors of the industry, which fear the USO's spreading influence could sour labor relations with the non-unionized workforce.
"The merger was unanimously agreed and this opens a new phase of union organization in the oil industry. We will try to enter into those sectors where there is little or no union presence," Triana said. "The multinationals have already spoken out against this grouping and we think they will show a great deal of resistance and look for ways to keep it out of their fields."
The USO has about 5,700 workers and has until now only been able to recruit within the state oil company Ecopetrol. But the merger with the small ASOPETROL, which already has a foothold in the multinationals, will pave the way to what USO chief Hernando Hernandez believes could be a 40,000-strong "super-union".
Triana said the new union would not only cover production and refinery workers but could also extend to contractors and those involved in transport and distribution operations related to the oil industry.
SINTRAOXY, which represents multinational Occidental Petroleum's workers, is expected to join USO and ASOPETROL, Triana said.
USO, formed in the 1920s, has accused foreign multinationals of undermining national sovereignty through its production and exploration contracts with Ecopetrol. It has also attacked them for exploiting Colombian workers.
For their part, some of the multinationals believe USO has ties with Colombia's leftist guerrilla movements -- a charge its leaders deny.
A foreign oil spokesman said last week: "The prospect of having to deal with a belligerent union with close ties to the guerrilla movements is far from stimulating."
Another contacted Tuesday said his company was analyzing the merger decision, saying: "It may be something we can live with. It's surprising what people who want to earn a dollar will put up with."
Last week, the USO staged a 24-hour strike which paralyzed pumping operations along Colombia's two main oil pipelines.
