Colombian truckers began climbing back behind the wheel early on Friday after their leaders signed a deal with the government to end their crippling 11-day old strike.
Colombian Truck Drivers' Association (ACC) head Javier Suarez said the accord granted an immediate 16 percent raise in cargo freight rates with the promise of another inflation-linked increase at the start of next year -- short of the instant 30 percent hike originally demanded.
The breakthrough in talks between the independent association, the Transport and Interior Ministries and private transport companies came late on Thursday, a day after Interior Minister Horacio Serpa threatened to use police and the military to help smash the nationwide strike by clearing road blocks and forcing truckers back to work.
"This is a partial solution to our problems but I think it will be good for our members. This doesn't mean truckers will now be making any profits but at least we won't be operating at a loss like at present," Suarez told Reuters in a telephone interview. "We have also agreed to set up a joint committee that will look at future transport policies."
Key sectors of the economy, primarily those linked to import and export, had issued stiff criticism of the transport paralysis earlier in the day but heaved a collective sigh of relief with news of the agreement.
But the lifting of the strike seems unlikely to offer an instant fix for the crisis-hit coffee sector, which has seen 250,000 60-kg sacks of coffee -- a quarter of that promised for October delivery -- delayed by the truckers' action.
Earlier in the week, private coffee exporters said many would be forced to default on this month's delivery contracts even if the stoppage ended before the weekend because of the backlog of coffee in port and in warehouses.
In addition to the raise in freight cargo rates, a joint committee of truckers, industry representatives and Transport Ministry officials will be created to look at other concerns highlighted by the drivers' association, Transport Minister Carlos Hernan Lopez said.
These include the cost of highway tolls, the price of operating licenses and associated taxes and maximum load restrictions on cargoes.
Part of Thursday night's agreement means the Transport Ministry will send a communique to transport companies ordering them to lift unilateral bans on contracting the services of drivers operating trucks more than 11 years old where these are currently in force.
Suarez said he did not think the deal hammered out would have an impact on inflation, already running above the 18 percent originally targetted at this point in the year by the government.
"Hopefully we will not see any gains in inflation or the cost of this accord being passed on to the consumers because the intermediaries, the transport companies, will be absorbing the cost of it by taking a cut in their profit margins," he said.
The overall cost of the strike is difficult to calculate but certainly runs into many million dollars. Colombia's main Pacific coast port, Buenaventura, estimated its losses at more than $20 million a day because no cargo was coming in or out.
