Colombia's Foreign Relations Ministry said on Thursday it would give its "fullest attention" to recent accusations that oil giant British Petroleum was linked to political killings, but denied any official investigation was underway.
In a statement, the ministry said: "The allegations made (against BP) merit the government's fullest attention. But in the absence of judicial investigations it is irresponsible to give credit to such claims."
Attempts by the Colombian government to clear BP of the allegations fuelled new controversy on Thursday. Spokesmen at the chief prosecutor's office and for the attorney general said they had opened inquiries into a series of gross human rights abuses in the eastern oil-producing provinces of Casanare and Arauca, documented in a 1995 multi-agency report.
The report, a copy of which was shown to Reuters, blamed the military and paramilitary groups for seven murders since 1991 in Casanare, the centre of BP's Colombia operations, and another 17 in Arauca, Occidental Petroleum's base.
Neither company was mentioned by name but the report blamed oil companies for generating huge social upheaval in the region, stating: "The security forces are frequently operating outside the law and abusing peasants ... Oil exploration and production has generated harmful environmental and socioeconomic impacts and has provoked crime, sales of drugs and an increase in prostitution and begging."
In a statement last week, BP said it paid a "war tax" to the government, which was partly used for the army's counterinsurgency campaign against leftist guerrillas who regularly target foreign oil companies. It also said it provided non-lethal aid to the army and denied any links to irregular, or paramilitary forces.
In recent months British newspapers, based on first-hand accounts, alleged BP was behind the wave of killings carried out by right-wing death squads and the military in Casanare and had provided photos to the army of those community leaders opposed to its oil plans.
The backing for BP, Colombia's biggest single foreign investor, in a report that also praised its social contribution to the country, came the day after the government announced it would not sweeten the terms of its oil contract, which it complained was not profitable.
"We are investigating some of these accusations of extra-judicial killings and massacres contained in the 1995 report. It is certain the chief prosecutor's office is doing the same," said a source at the attorney general's office.
In a speech on Thursday, President Ernesto Samper rejected the European Parliament's recent stiff criticism of Colombia's human rights record.
"It is not true the Colombian security forces have developed an emergency strategy, characterised by aid to paramilitary groups, extra-judicial killings, torture and disappearances," he said at an official event in Bogota.
