Moves toward just-in-time roasting and savage cuts in coffee inventories in consumer countries will force exporters, traders and processors to resort to sophisticated financial mechanisms to offset price volatility, the head of the International Coffee Organization said.
ICO chief Celsius Lodder predicted booming growth in risk management measures such as options, futures and secondary instruments and said they would become key in influencing short and medium term coffee prices.  
They will also replace more traditional methods of building up stocks, and other physical strategies, as a buffer to sudden swings in the market, he said.
Meanwhile, in some producer countries, growers may find themselves bearing an increasing responsibility for storing the crop, thereby seeing their costs pushed up.
"Risk management, similar to an insurance contract, will become an increasingly important instrument for exporters, traders and processors," Lodder said in a speech organized by Bogota's Los Andes University.  
"Growers and growers' cooperatives will have to take on greater responsibilities for storing inventories. This will push up costs, reduce their cash flow and mean much of the stocks will be stored in remote areas, delaying dispatch," the coffee chief said.
Despite the grim message that shifting trends in consumer countries could force their costs up higher, Lodder did offer a ray of hope for Colombian growers, already hard hit by the strengthening peso and the high cost of credit.  
Lodder highlighted the growing opportunity for niche marketing of specialist coffees in traditional markets where consumer palates are becoming more sophisticated even though the overall demand in those areas may have stagnated.
He also talked up prospects of new markets opening in the former Soviet Union and China. Colombia's President Ernesto Samper, and his official delegation, returned from the Far East at the end of last week. His itinerary included China and both he and his Foreign Minister Maria Emma Mejia were upbeat about the chance of selling the Colombian bean to the country's 1.3 billion-strong population.  
During the visit to Beijing and Shanghai, Mejia calculated that if Colombia could sell one cup of coffee a day to every inhabitant of China, the Communist nation would absorb Colombia's entire annual harvest.
National Coffee Growers' Federation chief Jorge Cardenas did his own calculations and worked out that Colombia would have to double its coffee harvest if it was looking to meet Mejia's target.
In his speech, Lodder recognized the ICO's changing role and agreed it was no realistic for it to adopt interventionist strategies in a globalized free market.  
"The patterns of economic and political cooperation seen in the 1960s have been replaced by a new  model, perhaps more realistic and certainly different. There's no consensus for a return to intervention but the ICO is a dynamic organization and it must reflect the current situation and not be constrained by its former role," he said.
"I believe the ICO must remain flexible and look for the broadest possible consensus and build on the foundations of our cooperation with trade experts."
He added that the ICO would concentrate on looking for specific solutions to specific problems as they arose throughout the coffee sector either in production or marketing.
Meanwhile, Colombia's transport system got back to normal this week after a crippling 11-day strike by truckers, which ended with an agreement early last Friday.
There has, nevertheless, been a significant delay in coffee deliveries and Cardenas forecast that about 150,000 60-kg sacks of coffee promised for October delivery would not in fact reach buyers until November.
-- Bogota newsroom 571 610 7944.
