The Colombian government this week may sidestep congressional stalling and use special powers to force through stiffer anti-drug laws, Justice Minister Carlos Medellin said.
In comments to local media over the weekend, he also called for the draft laws -- which include confiscating drug barons' ill-gotten gains -- to be retroactive, applying to traffickers already jailed.
The retroactivity issue has sparked controversy in parallel moves to end Colombia's constitutional ban on extradition, currently under debate in the senate.
Former justice minister Enrique Parejo believes lawmakers may welcome the decree since it would remove them from the line of fire in any violent backlash by drug traffickers.
"If we don't do something soon then it could be too late. If congress does not make headway on the confiscation (of drug traffickers' property) then I will be looking for the faculty to introduce the legal measures," Medellin told the conservative El Nuevo Siglo newspaper.
President Ernesto Samper submitted the tougher anti-drug proposals to congress in July with a firm eye on winning back U.S. certification as an ally in the drugs war, which was withdrawn in March. He has sent repeated requests to legislators to speed up debate, but sessions continue to be dogged by lengthy political wrangling and poor attendance, which has left committees without a quorum.
If the congress fails to pass the measures, the government is expected to announce a decision by Thursday to introduce the new anti-drug laws by decree. But political and legal analysts say the move could raise constitutional issues about whether the government has the right to override congress.
"The government wants to legislate by decree because it fears decertification by the United States again next year, which could spark a fresh crisis which it may not recover from," Parejo said in a telephone interview.
"It may be a relief to many congressmen who have links with drug traffickers because there are real signs that the cartels are once again preparing to unleash a new war."
In the 1980s and early 1990s, the late Pablo Escobar, head of the once-mighty Medellin drug cartel, waged a war of bombings, assassinations and kidnaps against the state in a successful bid to get extradition banned.
The specter of a similar terror campaign is again looming after a series of bombings in recents weeks, including one defused by police which had been planted by the so-called Movement for National Sovereignty in the centre of Cali.
