Colombia moved a step closer to lifting its five-year ban on extradition but backlash from drug traffickers began to be felt on Wednesday as a senator fled abroad to escape death threats.
In the second of eight scheduled congressional votes late on Tuesday, the Senate approved a draft law to overturn the constitutional ban on sending criminals to stand trial in foreign courts. But proposals in Congress to introduce stiffer anti-drug laws at home, including confiscation of drug barons' properties and longer jail terms, have stagnated.
This has led to a warning from the government, eager to win back U.S. certification as an ally in the drug war, that it may bypass Congress and push through some of the measures by decree, which could trigger a constitutional crisis.
Meanwhile, signs were growing that Colombia may be on the verge of a new terror campaign, mirroring the one waged by the late Pablo Escobar, head of the Medellin drug cartel, that forced the original extradition ban in 1991.
Police last week defused a powerful bomb in a vehicle parked outside a chemical plant owned by relatives of Senator Claudia Blum in Colombia's second largest city Cali, home to the cartel said to supply 80 percent of world cocaine. In another incident, a small bomb exploded outside government offices in Bogota.
Blum and other lawmakers in the forefront of efforts to lift the extradition ban and introduce tougher anti-drug laws have received regular death threats since mid-October. In a letter to congress on Tuesday, Blum requested a leave of absence and a spokeswoman at her Bogota office said on Wednesday that she had left for the United States.
"I understand she left because of the threats she has received. Her departure was rather quick and unexpected. She has gone for an indefinite period," the spokeswoman said.
Justice Minister Carlos Medellin welcomed Tuesday's senate vote, describing it as a "clear message that all political institutions are committed to strengthening our legal system".
But chief prosecutor Alfonso Valdivieso, an anti-drug crusader and a favourite of Washington, is deeply dissatisfied with the draft law to renew extradition. Echoing calls by the United States, he believes the law must be retroactive.
Valdivieso has also charged that the extradition law, if approved in its present form, would be virtually meaningless, since it would not allow for criminals to be extradited if they faced stiffer penalties abroad than those in force in Colombia, which the United States complains are too lenient.
The current bill would dash U.S. hopes of winning the extradition of the Rodriguez Orejuela brothers, the kingpins of the Cali cartel captured last year.
