Two Germans, thought to be members of a Colombia leftist guerrilla group, were arrested in the northwest of the country early on Sunday as they tried to smuggle a kidnap victim out of the country, police said.
They were seized at Rionegro international airport, near Medellin, at 1 am local time (0600 GMT) as they tried to bundle a third German, Brigitte Schoene, the wife of a former BASF Chemicals director snatched on Aug. 15, on to a charter plane.
A list of 83 international guerrilla organisations together with a number of false passports were found in the bags of the two detainees -- a 54-year-old man and a 36-year-old woman -- police said.
"I would dare to say that these (German) citizens we captured are the international finance heads and advisers of the National Liberation Army (ELN)," Gen. Alfredo Salgado, head of the anti-kidnap police in nortwest Antioquia province, told reporters.
The ELN is Colombia's second largest rebel group. It is notorious for its attacks on oil infrastructure and on multi- national companies and their employees.
Gen. Salgado said the two Germans in initial questioning claimed they were carrying out an international peace mission and merely mediating the release of Schoene, seized from her home in Prados de Llanogrande, Antioquia, along with her five-year-old son and chauffeur. Both her son and the chauffeur were released hours after being snatched.
Salgado gave no details of the other guerrilla groups named in the documents seized from the couple and was unable to say if either had been linked to the German urban guerrilla groups of the 1970s.
The German Embassy in Bogota declined to comment on the arrests. Names found on the man's forged ID papers were Norbert Schroder, of Munich, and Jurgen Seidel. The woman's papers gave her name as Silvia Schroder and Isabel Seidel.
The man is also believed to have played a prominent role in the kidnap of a British, Danish and German engineer in Antioquia province earlier this year, Gov. Alvaro Uribe said. The release of the three in return for an undisclosed ransom, paid without the knowledge of the Colombian authorities, led to an angry exchange between Uribe and the German and British embassies.
In comments to reporters on Sunday, Uribe said he had spoken to Schone after her release and that she had confirmed she had been held by the ELN and complained of pyschological torture.
Colombia is the kidnap capital of the world with one person abducted every 2-1/2 hours, according to security experts. About half the kidnaps are attributed to the country's rebel armies.
