A former German secret agent and his wife were formally charged with abduction on Wednesday after their bid to smuggle a rebel kidnap victim out of Colombia backfired at the weekend.
The charges, announced by the chief prosecutor's office, brought another twist to a brewing scandal that has set the Colombian government at odds with German diplomats and businessmen over clandestine payments to kidnappers.
Police and Colombian officials accuse Werner Mauss, 56, of being an international member of the country's National Liberation Army (ELN) guerrilla force, or a mercenary negotiating the release of abducted foreigners in return for a cut of the ransom.
In a statement issued in Bonn on Wednesday, German government official Peter Hausmann said the government was "fully informed" of the former state security agent's mission and welcomed such "unconventional methods to rescue Germans from life and death situations."
Mauss and Silvia Schroder, 36, were seized at Rionegro airport near Medellin early on Sunday as they tried to bundle a third German, Brigitte Schoene, the wife of a former BASF Chemicals executive, aboard a private charter plane bound for Venezuela. Schoene was kidnapped in mid-August by the ELN, which had demanded $6 million for her release.
In its press release, the chief prosecutor's office referred to Mauss and his wife as Juergen and Isabel Seidel -- one of their many aliases. The couple were remanded in custody.
An executive secretary of Siemens-Colombia said on Wednesday she had hired the plane that Mauss was to use for his getaway on the orders of a top industrialist formerly based in Bogota.
Security experts say Colombia -- home to Latin America's longest-running guerrilla war -- is swarming with foreign mercenaries carrying out shadowy undercover missions as kidnappings reportedly run at almost one every 2-1/2 hours.
"Many multinationals are hiring so-called security advisers for kidnap, terrorist and extortion situations but these are simply mercenaries and adventurers willing to make pacts with kidnappers and guerrillas," said private security consultant Col. Luis Enrique La Rotta.
Parliamentarian Guillermo Martinez, a retired air force officer, told Reuters he was sure dozens of foreign mercenaries like Mauss had poured into Colombia to carry out hostage rescue missions.
"Regardless of whether the Colombian authorities can or cannot control the (kidnap) situation it is totally unacceptable for foreign companies to fly in mercenaries to do this type of work," he said.
