Colombia denied on Monday that its army was linked to paramilitary death squads and said the world should focus instead on the "cursed alliance" between leftist guerrillas and drug traffickers.
"Narco-guerrilla groups are heading a disinformation campaign throughout the world. ... The United States and the world must wake up to the new threat posed by the cursed alliance between drug traffickers, guerrillas and international mafias," Defence Minister Juan Carlos Esguerra said.
The comments were part of a fiery response to a report issued in Bogota by New York-based Human Rights Watch.
The organisation's report, titled "Colombia's Killer Networks," concluded, "The military has not only created paramilitary groups but allows virtually all of them to carry out political killings when it serves a common purpose, ridding the country of perceived guerrilla support."
The rights group, citing confidential defence documents, said U.S. military advisers fuelled the surge in death squads after helping restructure Colombia's gathering of military intelligence in 1990.
The organisation's legal adviser, Jamie Fellner, alleged that top army commanders Gen. Harold Bedoya and Gen. Manuel Jose Bonett were "accomplices" or tolerated such groups in a systematic "dirty war" on political dissidents.
Human Rights Watch echoed calls by London-based Amnesty International last month demanding the immediate suspension of U.S. and European military aid and arms sales to Colombia until human rights violations were curbed.
Human Rights Watch estimated that much of the $322 million in U.S. military aid to Colombia since 1989 had been handed out to counterinsurgency battalions accused of rights violations.
A U.S. State Department spokesman said in Washington on Monday there were no plans for tighter checks.
The Colombian Army was dramatically humiliated when the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia overran a jungle post in southern Colombia on Aug. 30, killing 27 soldiers and taking 60 prisoners.
"These soldiers are being kept in cells reminiscent of the infamous tiger cages seen in Vietnam. Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch would do well to investigate those abuses instead of inventing new charges," Esguerra said.
