British Petroleum Co Plc gave a lukewarm reception Tuesday to a Colombian proposal that would see it losing almost half the oil-rich Piedemonte field in return for sweeter contract terms on much of the remainder.
The proposal, outlined by Mines and Energy Minister Rodrigo Villamizar to reporters Monday, is the latest twist in a long- running saga that has seen BP trying to boost the profit margins on its Piedemonte operations while Colombia seeks to sidestep criticism that it is allowing multinationals to call the shots.  
Piedemonte, in Colombia's eastern plains is estimated to contain between 600 million and one billion barrels of crude oil and condensates.
But so far BP has only pinpointed three hydrocarbon formations -- Volcanera, Pauto and Florena -- accounting for about 15 percent of the total area, arguing that current overheads do not make it profitable to explore the rest.  
If Villamizar's complex proposal were accepted, a BP spokesman said it would require the company to hand back rights to the 85 percent of the Piedemonte field that is still virtually unexplored, with the guarantee that state oil company Ecopetrol would re-award BP half that area under improved contract terms.
The spokesman for BP's Colombian subsidiary, BP Exploration Co (Colombia) Ltd, told Reuters: "This is an interesting proposal but we regret that this solution would mean losing access to what is a large proportion of the Piedemonte field."  
He conceded it may be a possible way forward but indicated that it represented little more than an opening gambit in the search for a new working formula between BP, Colombia's single largest foreign investor, and Ecopetrol.
Under the so-called "sliding scale" terms of the existing Piedemonte association contract, profits are divided equally between BP and Ecopetrol while production remains below 60 million barrels. Ecopetrol's share rises as production increases, topping out at 76 percent when output hits 150 million barrels.  
BP had been pressing for the entire Piedemonte contract to be renegotiated using the new-style Factor R, which takes account of investment and operating costs in individual fields to ensure adequate profit margins for foreign companies.
But those demands were rejected by Villamizar last month following a congressional debate. Villamizar's new proposal, however, would open the way for a Factor R contract to be drawn up on that area of the Piedemonte field which BP would cede and then win back. Ecopetrol would then operate the rest of field itself or contract it to other private oil companies.  
Gustavo Triana, a senior official of the powerful USO oil workers' union, known for its fierce opposition to multinationals, said the union would not readily welcome any "underhand deal" that granted better terms to BP after the government had said it would not do so.
