Thousands of demonstrators thronged Bogota's streets on Sunday calling for an end to the crime wave that has turned Colombia into the kidnap capital of the world.
A small bomb exploded minutes before the march began about 100 yards (90 metres) from where demonstrators gathered but did not cause any injuries, police said. A spokesman said the device contained just a few ounces (under 100 grams) of explosive and was probably simply intended to sow panic.
At least 1,100 people have been abducted this year -- more than half of those by warring factions in Colombia's simmering internal conflict -- according to march organisers.
National Police chief Rosso Jose Serrano, who took part in the first march of its kind in Colombia, saw it as a direct challenge to leftist guerrillas, who fill their war chests with ransoms. Scores of others clutched photos in silent tribute to their loved ones -- kidnapped by criminals.
"When you're abducted you become like the living dead -- it strips you of your soul. Today's march is a sign that civil society is saying no to kidnap," said Francisco Santos, founder of Pais Libre, an independent foundation that counsels kidnap victims' families and which organised Sunday's march.
Santos, part of the family that runs Colombia's leading newspaper, was kidnapped six years ago as part of a campaign unleashed by the late drug lord Pablo Escobar and his Medellin cartel.
In a move timed to coincide with Sunday's protest, one of Colombia's most-feared right-wing paramilitary leaders released the mothers of two guerrilla chieftains in the northwest.
The women were snatched in a wave of retaliatory kidnappings carried out by Carlos Castano's paramilitary gang in the last six months in a bid to persuade the guerrilla chief to halt its campaign of abductions.
An estimated 15,000 to 20,000 people took part in the march. Organisers put the figure at twice that.
Norberto Garcia, 62, tearfully watched the march and subsequent rally in the historic Plaza Bolivar square. Almost a year ago to the day his 14-year-old daughter Andrea disappeared on her way to school in a working-class district of the capital.
"When your child is kidnapped it is like your own life ends. It's the hardest thing for a parent to suffer," Garcia said.
Only last Wednesday, the country was rocked by the kidnap and murder of seven-year-old schoolboy Victor Alvarez in southwest Colombia. His corpse was dumped on the doorstep of his family home when his parents failed to pay common criminals a $10,000 ransom.
But in a country where even conservative estimates put the number of abductions at three a day, the tragedy of young Victor, of Popayan, was almost forgotten by Sunday.
Anti-kidnap czar Alberto Villamizar was jeered by crowds as he delivered a message from President Ernesto Samper pledging to crack down on kidnapping.
The catcalls were preceeded by chants of "Serrano will save the motherland", in support of the no-nonsense chief of National Police, who heads the fight against kidnapping and drug-trafficking.
