Leaders of Colombia's three largest labour federations said on Monday they would not sign a new wage and price control pact with bosses and the government, and warned 1997 could be a year of serious social unrest.
They condemned the annual social pact, first introduced by President Ernesto Samper in 1995, as a way of forging ahead with neoliberal policies at the expense of workers, and said such a model would fuel political polarisation in 1997.
"The social pact reflects neoliberal logic and aims to pay workers less in order to make industry more competitive. The pact is a corporatist tactic that does not serve the interests of the people," said Luis Eduardo Garzon, chairman of the Unitary Workers' Confederation (CUT), the country's largest labour organisation.
Following internal elections in November, left-wingers led by Communist Party members like Garzon seized overall control of the CUT from Liberal and Conservative Party moderates, who had bowed to previous government demands to sign a pact.
This year's pact agreed to a 19.5 percent wage hike for workers based on an inflation target of 17 percent. But while salaries were kept within strict limits, the cost of goods and services spiralled, pushing inflation to almost 21 percent in the first 11 months of 1996 -- a 1.5 percent drop in real wages in the year to date.
The central bank last week set a 1997 inflation target of 18 percent. The government, employers and union leaders were due to meet on Wednesday for another round of discussions on the 1997 social pact.
"The government has put the economy on a war footing to combat crime and subversion. If that continues I think there's a grave risk of further polarisation of political forces in 1997 and we will be in for a very difficult time," Garzon said.
Cervulo Bautista, of the general secretariat of the Christian Democrat-influenced General Confederation of Democratic Workers (CGTD), also warned of worsening labour relations in 1997.
"We don't want to be accused of trying to bring down Samper's governmment but if the situation doesn't change we could be calling on the working classes for a nationwide stoppage," he said.
The CUT, with 600,000 affiliates, and the CGTD, with about 300,000 members, said they would be looking for minimum wage increases of 27 percent to make up for the real term erosion of salaries this year coupled with a productivity premium.
The 200,000-strong Confederation of Colombian Workers (CTC), normally loyal to Samper's Liberal Party, said it would be looking for wage rises of close to 30 percent.
Labour Minister Orlando Obregon was confident a social pact will be signed by Jan. 1, a spokeswoman said. About 35 percent of the Colombian labour force is unionized.
