At least 23 people were murdered in attacks in central and northern Colombia, including an entire family hacked to death with machetes, police said on Thursday.
Unidentified axe and machete-wielding assailants killed three children, their mother and grandparents early on Thursday in San Miguel de Sema, in central Boyaca province, police chief Col. Humberto Prieto said.
"We're investigating to see if these killings are related to the death of two other relatives several years ago. Early indications suggest they were murdered for personal reasons -- a revenge attack," Prieto said.
Boyoca is known as a stronghold of right-wing paramilitary groups but Prieto said San Miguel was not affected by right-wing or leftist political violence.
In northern Sucre province, the bullet-ridden bodies of 17 peasants were found scattered in four isolated areas near the town of Tolu Viejo on Thursday morning, police said.
"We're still looking at all the facts. The province has been hard hit by subversion," said Benjamin Irragori, regional head of the state security service DAS.
He said two fronts of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) were active in the area.
Sucre has seen a recent rash of attacks by right-wing paramilitary death squads. One television report, which quoted a police source as saying the leading suspects in the massacre were rightists, showed some of the dead with their hands tied behind their backs.
Almost 40 people died in a wave of killings, attributed to paramilitary groups, across northern Colombia two weeks ago. Last month, the country's paramilitary forces held a summit in which they pledged to step up their war against leftist guerrillas and rebel sympathisers.
In a separate attack in the city of Cucuta, in northeast Norte de Santander province, a Roman Catholic priest was gunned down by two unidentified killers on Wednesday evening, police said.
He was the third priest killed in two months -- a sign, some clergymen say, that they are increasingly caught in the crossfire of guerrilla and paramilitary violence, which has surged in recent months.
"The basic problem is not the lack of respect for priests but the total disregard for the value of human life," said Monsignor Juan Francisco Sarasti, vice president of Colombia's Episcopal Conference.
