Another member of Colombia's main oil workers' union was arrested on terrorist charges, a union leader said Sunday on the eve a meeting to set the start date for a strike that could paralyze the industry.
The capture of Edgar Riano in Huila province Saturday came after the arrest of 12 others Thursday -- 10 of them from the USO oil union.
All are accused of carrying out dynamite attacks on the country's oil pipelines and of links to the National Liberation Army (ELN), the country's second largest guerrilla force. The chief prosecutor's office was unavailable for comment on the latest detention.
USO head Hernando Hernandez said last Thursday the union would fix the "zero hour" for the start of an indefinite strike to protest the wave of arrests at an extraordinary assembly Monday. The action is also to oppose government plans for what the union sees as the creeping privatization of state-run oil company Ecopetrol, Hernandez said.
Following a merger between the 5,700-strong USO and smaller oil workers' associations, the strike could spread to the private sector, including foreign multinationals operating in Colombia.
USO leaders were due to meet Colombian Interior Minister Horacio Serpa Sunday evening to discuss the arrest of members and the planned walkout. The government seems likely to declare an oil workers' strike illegal on the grounds that it is affecting a key sector of the economy.
Mines and Energy Minister Rodrigo Villamizar said Friday that Ecopetrol had enough fuel reserves to meet demand for 19 days and said any shortfalls in domestic supply could be made up by increasing imports in the event of a USO strike.
A 24-hour stoppage by USO workers in mid-October paralyzed pumping -- 350,000 barrels a day -- along the country's two main oil pipelines for the first time ever.
In a separate incident in the oil town of Barrancabermeja, two unidentified assailants blasted local USO official Gilberto Carreno at close range with a shotgun and wounded as he left a bar Saturday morning.
USO social services secretary Gustavo Triana the motives for the attack were unclear. Members of USO, known for its fiercely nationalistic stance, have frequently been targeted by right-wing paramilitaries who accuse the union of backing the ELN.
