Colombian lawmakers bowed to intense government pressure on Thursday and put the bite back into a bill to strip drug barons of their ill-gotten gains.
If the legislation survives a congressional plenary vote -- likely to be plain sailing after a stormy passage -- it could go some way to appeasing the United States, which has threatened to slap economic sanctions on Colombia for its perceived failure to crack down on billionaire drug barons.
A conference committee hauled the asset forfeiture bill back from the brink by reversing a decision by the lower house which would have taken the teeth out of the law.
In a narrow vote on Tuesday, the House of Representatives rejected the provision, previously approved in the Senate, that would empower the government to seize drug-related assets accumulated over the last 20 years.  The House ruled the law could only be retroactive to 1991, leaving much of the property amassed by the jailed Cali Cartel kingpins, estimated at more than $50 billion, untouched.
Justice Minister Carlos Medellin, who like a handful of other top ministers spent much of the day lobbying key lawmakers in the halls of Congress, was buoyed by the committee's decision.
"Now we just have to see if the plenary session of the Senate and Chamber of Representatives approves the decision. But I don't think there will be any problem," he said.
Colombia's business community also heaved a sigh of relief. It had campaigned for Congress to approve the 20-year time limit in a series of pleas over the last two days. Key export sectors of the economy are likely to be hardest hit if U.S. sanctions are imposed.
Even though the asset forfeiture law now seems to have reached high ground, the road back into the good books of the United States still promises to be rocky.
Political analysts agree there is little chance of Colombia regaining certification as a U.S. ally in the drug war, which it lost last March, even if it escapes threatened sanctions.
Other anti-drug legislation which the United States has demanded, such as stiffer sentencing and the reintroduction extradition, have been watered down or sunk in Congress in recent weeks.
