British Petroleum Co Plc considers its Piedemonte prospect in eastern Colombia "fundamental" to its worldwide operations despite drilling problems and wrangles over the exploitation contract, a top company official said Thursday.
John Doust, executive director of BP's local subsidiary, British Petroleum Exploration (Colombia) Ltd, predicted the field, still at the test stage, could come on stream by the end of 1999.
He estimated the total cost of developing the field, estimated to contain between 600 million and one billion barrels of crude and condensates, could run to about $2.2 billion, some of which would be shared by state oil company Ecopetrol.
"The oil project currently under way in the Piedemonte is fundamental for the worldwide organisation of the BP group," Doust said in a speech to journalists.
His recognition of the strategic importance of the 287,000 hectare block, in which BP has pinpointed three promising hydrocarbon formations after exploring just 15 percent of the total area, once again raises the question how BP will push the Colombian government for sweeter contract terms.
BP, Colombia's single largest foreign investor, argues that given tough drilling conditions, the terms of its so-called sliding scale association contract with Ecopetrol makes it unprofitable to exploit the field.
Under the existing contract, Ecopetrol's share of the profits rise as production increases from 50 percent to a maximum 76 percent.
BP has been pushing for a so-called R Factor contract -- which the Colombian government has so far denied -- which would take account of investment and operating costs to ensure adequate profit margins.
"We understand the uncertainty of the (Piedemonte) issue and the nature of the debate have caused uneasiness amongst many people... Let us keep in mind that we are truly seeking to achieve a break-even point and a platform of confidence for BP so that we can operate in an internationally competitive economic position," Doust said.
Last month, Colombia's Mines and Energy Minister Rodrigo Villamizar proposed BP should hand back rights to the 85 percent of the block that is virtually unexplored with the guarantee that Ecopetrol would re-award BP half that area under R Factor conditions at a later date and contract out the remainder to other companies.
Doust said BP was "seriously considering" the proposal. It is understood, however, that BP would be loath to surrender the rights to almost 50 percent of a block with huge potential under the current offer on the table.
BP has recently been hit by allegations of indirect links to right-wing paramilitary death squads that have assassinated social leaders close to its operations in eastern Colombia.
Doust blamed the accusations on a campaign to discredit the company and repeated earlier statements that he had invited the country's chief prosecutor to carry out an in-depth investigation into the claims.
