A powerful car bomb exploded in the northwest city of Medellin early on Monday, killing one woman and injuring at least 15 other people, police chief Gen. Alfredo Salgado said.
About 120 pounds (50 kg) of dynamite was packed into a minibus and detonated outside the house of Juan Gomez Martinez, a regional newspaper editor and former provincial governor.
Four unidentified gunmen opened fire on private security guards near Gomez's home before the bomb went off about 5:30 a.m. (1030 GMT), Salgado said.
The dead woman was named as Lucia Bernal, 60, the wife of a civil engineer, who lived close to the site of the blast. Gomez was not home at the time but one of his three sons, Juan Camilo, was injured.
"We don't know the motive for this attack. It is too early to say who was behind it. We don't know if it was leftist guerrillas, drug traffickers or right-wing paramilitaries. We're looking at all the possibilities," Salgado said.
Gomez, a member of the opposition Conservative Party, is head of the regional El Colombiano newspaper, which has its headquarters in the industrial city of Medellin, the main city of Antioquia province.
In recent days it has been serializing an extensive interview with Carlos Castano, leader of the country's most-feared right-wing death squad, whose main target is leftist rebels and their suspected supporters.
A few hours after the bomb blast a hitherto unknown group, calling itself the Special Anti-Paramiltary Commando, issued a communique, a copy of which was obtained by Reuters, declaring war on paramilitary groups in Antioquia.
The organisation, claiming to be made up of ex-guerrillas who had laid down their arms, accused serving state governor Alvaro Uribe, of the Liberal Party's right wing, of sponsoring the paramilitaries. Uribe lives close to the site of Monday's blast but it was not clear whether the communique and the attack on Gomez's house were linked.
Medellin has in the past seen some of the worst violence unleashed by the country's powerful drug cartels. It was the scene of multiple attacks by the notorious drug mafia led by the late Pablo Escobar in the late 1980s and early 1990s. The cocaine kingpin waged war against the state in a successful bid to force Congress to ban the extradition of Colombians to the United States.
Last week Congress approved a tough new law designed to strip drug lords of their illicit billion dollar fortunes. More measures including stiffer jail terms are due to be debated in an extended session of Congress this week.
