A powerful car bomb rocked a residential district of Medellin early on Monday, killing a woman and injuring at least 48 other people, police said.
About 120 pounds (50 kg) of dynamite packed into a minibus blew up outside the house of Juan Gomez Martinez, a regional newspaper editor, politician and former provincial governor.
The Colombian government said it suspected drug cartels were behind the massive blast. President Ernesto Samper vowed not to bow to terrorist violence from drug traffickers.
"We will not allow the specter of narco-terrorism to return to this country and intimidate us," he told reporters. "The state will combat these acts of violnce head-on."
Five unidentified gunmen, one of them a woman, opened fire on private security guards near Gomez's home before the bomb went off, Medellin police chief Gen. Alfredo Salgado said.
He said three houses were virtually destroyed and 15 others seriously damaged by the explosion.
The dead woman was identified as Lucia Cevallos de Bernal, 60, who lived near the site of the blast. Gomez was not home at the time but one of his three sons was injured.
Authorities offered a $150,000 reward for information leading to the capture of those responsible.
"This is a savage act. The first indications point to drug traffickers but I don't want to draw premature conclusions," said Defence Minister Juan Carlos Esguerra.
The attack came three days after the Colombian Congress approved a tough new law to strip Colombia's cocaine barons of their multi-billion dollar fortunes. Another bill to introduce stiffer jail terms for drug traffickers is due to come up for discussion in a special session of Congress later this week.
But it was not clear why Gomez, who is not a congressman, should have been targeted.
Gomez is a member of the opposition Conservative Party and head of the regional El Colombiano newspaper, which has its headquarters in Medellin, once home to the world's most powerful cocaine cartel.
His newspaper recently printed an interview with Carlos Castano, leader of a feared right-wing death squad, whose main target is leftist rebels and their supporters.
A few hours after the blast an unknown group calling itself the Special Anti-Paramilitary Commando issued a communique, a copy of which was obtained by Reuters, declaring war on paramilitary groups. The group claimed to be made up of ex-guerrillas who had previously laid down their arms and accused the state of sponsoring paramilitary groups.
Medellin was scarred by violence in the late 1980s and early 1990s when drug lord Pablo Escobar waged a successful war to force Colombia's Congress to ban the extradition of Colombians to the United States.
In June last year a bomb killed 28 people in the city centre. Nobody claimed responsibility for that blast.
