At least four people were killed and scores more injured on Tuesday afternoon when a powerful bomb ripped through a building in Monteria, the main town of Colombia's northwest Cordoba province, police said.
The blast occurred at 3:15 p.m. (2015 GMT) at the headquarters of the Fondo Ganadero, a fund set up to promote cattle-ranching in the province. Police said they did not know the motive behind the attack.
The explosion came a day after a 120-pound (50-kg) car bomb went off in Medellin, killing a woman and injuring 48 people. Authorities blamed that attack on drug traffickers in league with leftist guerrillas.
Armed left and right-wing groups are waging a fierce battle in northwest Colombia where both blasts occurred.
"I cannot say yet who was responsible for this attack," provincial governor Carlos Buelvas told reporters. "Everybody must be on their guard."
He said an emergency meeting of the provincial security council, which includes the military and the police, would be called to analyse the situation.
The blast in the downtown area of the small town was the second in Monteria in the last two months. An 88 pound (40 kg) bomb, hidden in a street vendor's cart, exploded outside the town's police headquarters on Oct. 21, injuring 10 people in an attack that was blamed on the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC), the largest guerrilla movement.
It is not clear whether Tuesday's bomb was linked to a communique issued Monday by a hitherto unknown group calling itself the Special Anti-paramilitary Commando.
The group, claiming to be made up of ex-rebels who had previously given up armed struggle, declared war on the country's burgeoning right-wing paramilitary gangs. Human rights groups accuse cattle ranchers of backing them.
Defence Minister Juan Carlos Esguerra said, however, that he believed Monday's attack in Medellin was retaliation for approval last week by Congress of a new law to strip drug lords of their billion-dollar fortunes.
Colombia's main cities, and particularly Medellin, were scarred by a drug-fuelled campaign of bombings, assassinations and kidnappings in the late 1980s when cocaine kingpin Pablo Escobar waged war on the state in a successful bid to ban the extradition of Colombians to the United States.
