Four people were killed and at least 33 injured on Tuesday when a powerful bomb ripped through a building in Monteria, the main town of Colombia's northwest Cordoba province, police said.
The blast occurred in the afternoon at the headquarters of the Fondo Ganadero, a fund set up to promote cattle-ranching in the province. Police chief Col. Gabriel Carrero blamed the attack on leftist guerrillas.
The explosion came a day after a 120 pound (50 kg) car bomb went off in Medellin, killing a woman and injuring 48 people. Authorities blamed that attack on drug traffickers in league with leftist guerrillas.
Marxist rebels and right-wing paramilitary groups have been waging a fierce battle for years in northwest Colombia where both blasts occurred.
"Nobody has officially claimed responsibility for this (latest) attack but we know it is the work of subversives, terrorists and vandals," Monteria police chief Carrero said.
The blast in the downtown area of the small provincial town was the second explosion Monteria has suffered in the last two months. An 88 pound (40 kg) bomb, hidden in a street vendor's cart, exploded outside the town's police headquarters on Oct. 21, injuring 10 people in an attack that was  blamed on the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC), the country's largest guerrilla movement.
It is not yet clear whether Tuesday's bomb may be linked to a communique issued on Monday by a hitherto unknown group calling itself the Special Anti-paramilitary Commando.
The group, claiming to be made up of ex-rebels who had previously given up the armed struggle, declared war on the country's burgeoning paramilitary gangs. Human rights groups accuse cattle ranchers of backing the paramilitaries.
Defence Minister Juan Carlos Esguerra said he believed Monday's attack in Medellin was in retaliation for approval last week by Congress of a new law to strip drug lords of their illict billion-dollar fortunes.
Colombia's major cities, and particularly Medellin, was scarred by a drug-fuelled campaign of bombings, assassinations and kidnappings in the late 1980s as the late cocaine kingpin Pablo Escobar waged war on the state in a successful bid to force Congress to ban the extradition of Colombians to the United States.
