A former Colombian rebel leader who masterminded a 61-day takeover of an embassy in Bogota in 1980 on Wednesday urged Peruvian guerrillas holding hostages in the Japanese embassy residence in Lima to keep cool.
Rosemberg Pavon, alias "Comandante Uno" of the now defunct M-19 group, urged the Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement (MRTA) gunmen to avoid bloodshed.
He said the crisis in Lima, where MRTA guerrillas took up to 490 hostages in the residence on Tuesday evening, hung by a thread and one false move by the rebels or security forces could spark a bloodbath.
Pavon headed an occupation of the Dominican embassy in Bogota which began in February 1980. A 15-strong commando of the M-19 held 57 hostages, including 19 diplomats, for 61 days before mediation by Cuban leader Fidel Castro ended the crisis and the guerrillas took refuge in Cuba.
"These situations are moments of high tension, great uncertainty and intense panic. The MRTA must try to keep as calm as possible," Pavon told Reuters in a telephone interview from the southwestern city of Cali.
"At any second there could be a tragedy because the whole rebel operation hangs by a thread between success and failure," he said. "Both sides must work towards a rapid solution and keep a cold head in any negotiations."
Pavon said that the MRTA, like the M-19 which laid down its arms in 1990, was fighting for social justice.
"We shouldn't fall into the trap of generalizing the MRTA as a pro-Cuban force. Like us it is fighting for a Latin American process of democracy," Pavon said.
He said he would be ready to travel to Peru to help negotiate an end to the crisis based on his experiences of 1980.
"I would say to the Peruvians that these situations can only be resolved with patience and with the desire for dialogue," he said in a separate interview with Colombia's Caracol radio.
In 1985, M-19 guerrillas seized the Palace of Justice in Bogota and held more than 200 hostages for two days before the army stormed the building. About 100 people were killed, including rebels and judges.
"The Peruvian government must at all costs avoid any repeat of a Palace of Justice scenario. The Colombian people have still not recovered from the scars of that incident," he said.
