A leading Colombian coffee official on Wednesday played down a potential rift with Brazil over a call to expand the Association of Coffee Producing Countries' (ACPC) export retention plan.
John Naranjo, commercial manager of Colombia's national Coffee Growers' Federation said no decision would be taken on the plan, put forward by African producers earlier this month, until an emergency ACPC meeting in Brazil in January.
So far Brazilian traders have been cool in their reaction to the suggestion. One Brazilian exporter, who did not wish to be named, has even said it may be part of a bluff by Colombia which, he added, "was showing signs of not having the coffee it says it has".
Under the terms of the retention plan -- designed to reduce inventories in consumer countries, thereby increasing the bargaining power of exporters -- ACPC members agreed in May to limit green coffee exports to June 1997 to 53.5 million 60-kg sacks.  
But during their December 11 visit to Colombia, Ivory Coast Commodities Minister Guy-Alain Gauza and Abel Rwendeire of Uganda called for an additional cut of 2.5 million 60-kg sacks in the first half of next year -- a call backed by Colombia.
"I don't think our suggestion is unreasonable. There's a meeting towards the end of January and at that we will take a final decision. This will give the Brazilians a little more time to understand what the Colombian proposal is," Naranjo told Reuters in a telephone interview.
Colombia is forecast to export 11.5 million 60-kg sacks in the 1996-97 coffee year, according to the National Coffee Growers' Federation head Jorge Cardenas.
It is not fully clear what impact an increase in the ACPC export retention plan would have on Colombia's exports in the first half of 1997.
"The retention will not be proportional across ACPC member nations. It is more directed at coffee quality and will affect Robusta most. We cannot say how much Colombia would have to retain until we work out the exact division in January. But of course we would have no difficulty meeting our export commitments whether this measure was finally approved or not," Naranjo said.  
On the home front, meanwhile, 1997 is predicted to be a year of "profound transition and adjustments" in Colombia's embattled coffee sector, according to Armando Montenegro, head of the National Association of Financial Institutions (ANIF).
"There will be many coffee growers who quit the sector, which is in a transition from a large sector to a smaller and more competitive sector which is not easy," Montenegro said.
Throughout 1996, Colombia's coffee growers have been hard hit by the strengthening peso, their continuing battle against the coffee borer bug and high interest rates.
Those problems could worsen in 1997 after the National Coffee Growers' Federation announced on December 5 it would cut immediately the internal coffee price by 14,000 pesos per 125-kg load in a move designed to save the Coffee Fund it administers an estimated $70 million.
The fund, which guarantees to buy all Colombia's coffee crop at a fixed price, is nevertheless expected to rack up deficits of almost $400 million by next September.
The government has accepted that many coffee growers may be forced out of business and labourers will be left without work. It has said it will back a restructuring programme but has not yet announced a budget for the programme.
