Latin America's oldest and largest guerrilla army on Wednesday hailed a Peruvian rebel group's storming of the Japanese ambassador's residence in Lima as a "spectacular and well-planned" attack.
Marco Leon Calarca, the international spokesman, based in Mexico City, of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC), defended the actions of Peru's Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement (MRTA), which launched the raid on Tuesday night.
He said armed struggle was often the only way to break the bonds of poverty imposed by an oligarchic system.
The Colombian authorities say the formerly pro-Soviet FARC numbers about 12,000 fighters. Independent political analysts say it has more than 18,000. The Cuban-inspired MRTA is thought to have no more than about 2,000 insurgents.
"The MRTA attack was spectacular and well-planned, which suggests it does have popular support. The MRTA, like all peoples of the world, has every right to fight by all means for basic rights," Calarca told Reuters in a phone interview from Mexico.
"People cannot be driven into extreme poverty without putting up a fight. They must defend themselves from the aggression of neoliberalism. The oligarchy is not simply going to hand over those rights," he added.
Members of the MRTA travelled to Colombia in the mid-1980s to fight in the so-called America Battalion, which also consisted of Colombia's leftist M-19 rebel group and Ecuador's Alfaro Vive Carajo! The battalion launched a failed attempt to create rebel liberated zones in Colombia, starting with the southwestern city of Cali. The FARC never joined the battalion because of military and political differences.
The FARC was set up in 1964 by Communists who had fought with self-defence forces set up by the Liberal Party during 10 years of virtual civil war that started in 1948. The government now accuses it of living off a vast fortune gleaned from kidnapping, extortion and drug trafficking.
It launched one of its bloodiest offensives in August, when it killed 27 soldiers and captured 60 in an attack on a jungle base in southern Colombia. It still has not released those captives.
