The general who led a bloody assault on Colombia's Supreme Court to quell leftist rebels holding 300 hostages in 1985 said on Friday that an attack was an option to end the Japanese embassy residence siege in Lima.
Gen. Jesus Armando Arias said Peru's President Alberto Fujimori should not cave in to the demands of the Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement (MRTA) to free jailed comrades.
Elite forces from the United States, Israel or Britain could flush out the rebels with a "minimum of bloodshed" if they refused to negotiate, Arias told Reuters.
More than 100 people, mostly hostages and including 11 top judges, died in the 27-hour battle Arias led to dislodge M-19 guerrillas from Bogota's Palace of Justice in Nov. 1985.
"Training techniques have progressed rapidly and there are elite forces that have the ability to seize back the (Japanese embassy residence in Lima) with the minimum of blood and damage," Arias said in a phone interview.
"But given the strong international interests in this case the Peruvian government should try to negotiate and reach an agreement. Bowing to the MRTA's demands on releasing prisoners would, however, set a dangerous legal precedent," he said.
Arias, who now teaches at a military academy, said he still believed the assault he led was the correct tactic. "The M-19 broke in killing people right, left and centre. We could only respond in kind to that type of violence," he said.
Television images showed tanks firing 90mm shells into the courts building before smashing down the steel entrance doors remain vivid. Dynamite and automatic weapons fire reduced the interior of the building to rubble. More than 11 years later it has still not been fully reconstructed.
Another official involved in that incident, former Justice Minister Enrique Parejo, said the Colombian military ignored the government's orders and went ahead with the assault. He said Fujimori must keep a tight control on Peru's military if he wanted to avoid another bloodbath.
Five years before the Palace of Justice attack, the M-19 stormed the Dominican embassy in Bogota. It held 57 hostages, including 19 diplomats, for 61 days before Fidel Castro intervened and negotiated the rebels' safe passage to Cuba.
The M-19 leader who led the Dominican embassy siege, Rosemberg Pavon, called on the MRTA earlier this week to keep its cool and offered to act as go-between in the Lima drama.
