Colombia's military and leftist rebels are oiling their guns for 1997, a year both sides predict will see Latin America's longest-running guerrilla war finally reach boiling point.
Military experts and human rights activists warn that the simmering conflict is ready to explode as the government and the insurgents harden their positions and resort to increasingly violent strikes against each other.
"1997 will be a year of greater struggles to achieve a more dignified motherland for all," the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC), the country's largest guerrilla force, said in a communique obtained by Reuters on Monday.
"We call on all those at odds with this terrorist, despotic regime to hoist high the flags of social justice and the struggle for our rights."
That struggle, blamed for many of Colombia's 25,000 murders in 1996, put more than half the country under emergency rule after the government granted special powers to combat leftist subversion midway through the year.
But the FARC and Colombia's second-largest rebel force, the National Liberation Army (ELN), have demonstrated increasing ease in destroying key infrastructure and launching devastating attacks on military strongholds.
"Preparations are under way for a longer, harder war on all sides. The guerrillas have shown their intention to step up the armed confrontation. The military line seems to be triumphing in the government. There's no desire for peace," said human rights attorney Carlos Rodriguez, member of the Colombian Commission of Jurists.
The guerrillas' growing strength was highlighted by the FARC's Aug. 30 raid on a jungle base at Las Delicias in southern Putumayo province. The guerrilla force killed 27 soldiers and is still holding 60 others prisoner -- one of the most humiliating blows dealt against the army in more than three decades of armed uprising, according to military analysts.
In an effort to regain the upper hand, the government has announced it will spend more than $900 million on defence in 1997, including the purchase of scores of Russian and U.S.-made combat helicopters -- equivalent to its total military expenditure for the last four years.
The military currently estimates the combined force of the FARC, set up as a pro-Soviet guerrilla force in 1964, and the ELN, a pro-Cuban force created by radical Roman Catholic priests in the mid-1960s, at no more than 12,000 fighters. The much smaller Maoist People's Liberation Army (EPL) was virtually decimated by a wave of desertions in the latter half of the year.
But political analyst Antonio Caballero, columnist with the influential weekly political magazine Semana, calculates the rebels' true strength at between 18,000 and 30,000.
The guerrilla forces, he says, have been able to buy ever more sophisticated weapons with money from extortion and their alleged links with the drug trade.
Meanwhile, the army's inefficiency and the crisis sparked by accusations that President Ernesto Samper financed his 1994 election campaign with drug money created a power vacuum that the rebels have stepped in to fill, Caballero said.
One Western defence attache believes at least 40 percent of Colombia is now under the de facto political and economic control of the guerrillas. He argued the conflict was not just a military problem.
"The seedbed of revolution is caused by the great social injustice which prevails. More military equipment will be of no use if there's not better coordination in the armed forces," he said.
