The Colombian authorities hailed Wednesday the U.S. pilot who was killed during an anti-drug mission over guerrilla-infested jungles of southeast Colombia as a "hero fighting the scourge of narco-trafficking."
Robert Martin, 35, of Lubbock, Texas, died when his Turbo Thrush T-65 crop dusting plane crashed in Guaviare province Tuesday. He had been fumigating illicit plantations of coca leaf, the raw material for cocaine.
Colombian Defence Minister Juan Carlos Esguerra, police chief Gen. Rosso Jose Serrano and U.S. ambassador Myles Frechette were among mourners at a religious service in Bogota to honour Martin. A lone bugler played the "Last Post" and the U.S. flag was draped over Martin's coffin.
"We're not here to bid farewell to a pilot or to a U.S. citizen. We're here to say goodbye to a hero who decided to join us in combatting one of the worst scourges known to mankind -- narco-trafficking," Serrano said.
Police said Martin, one of six U.S. civilian pilots working in Colombia under contract with the U.S. State Department, was killed on the first day of his contract. Frechette said he was the first U.S. aviator to die on such a mission.
As police cadets mounted a guard of honour for Martin and three police helicopters flew in formation overhead, Frechette pledged the fatality would not affect U.S.-Colombian cooperation in the drug war.
The question of U.S. personnel taking a direct role in drug or counterinsurgency operations is a traditionally thorny issue because of what Colombian politicians see as the possible infringement of national sovereignty.
Crop-dusting planes come under frequent attack from armed gangs and leftist guerrillas who guard the clandestine drug plantations.
Police chief Gen. Rosso Jose Serrano said Tuesday there was a heavy rebel presence in the area but said there was no indication the aircraft had come under fire. He said a full investigation was under way, adding the most likely cause of the crash was human error or mechanical failure.
