A U.S. pilot flying his first anti-drug mission in Colombia was killed when his plane crashed in a jungle area of southeast Colombia on Tuesday, police said.
The pilot was identified by police chief Gen. Rosso Jose Serrano as Robert Martin, 35. He was flying a U.S.-registered Turbo Thrush T-65 crop-dusting plane and had been fumigating illicit plantations of coca leaf, the raw material for cocaine. His hometown was not released.
U.S. ambassador Myles Frechette confirmed the aviator's death and said he was the first U.S. pilot, sent to the country under the terms of a U.S. State Department contract with the Colombian government, to die on such a mission.
He said Martin's body had been recovered and said the cause of the accident would be fully investigated.
"The most likely cause of the crash was human error or mechanical failure. Leftist guerrillas are present in the zone but this plantation was very remote and I doubt the rebels could have shot down the plane," Serrano said.
Police said it was the first day of the pilot's contract.
The crash occurred in a remote area of Guaviare province, one of Colombia's main coca producing regions. Martin was flying one of four planes on the spraying mission and was one of six U.S. pilots assisting Colombia's drug crop eradication programme.
Illicit plantations are often guarded by heavily armed gangs and sometimes by leftist guerrillas, which the government accuses of being involved in drug trafficking. It was not clear whether the plane had come under fire.
"Unfortunately narco-terrorists frequently fire at these (crop-dusting) planes. They don't know whether Colombians or Americans are flying them," Col. Luis Carlos Ortiz, second-in- command of the Colombian anti-narcotics police, told Reuters.
The U.S. pilots were originally only permitted to train Colombian pilots. But since October the Colombian authorities gave them the green light to fly live missions to eradicate coca leaf and opium poppy plantations.
All the pilots are civilians, employed by Texas-based aviation company Dyncorp, but a State Department spokesman told Reuters that some were former U.S. servicemen. Dyncorp declined to comment on the accident.
Last year Colombia's U.S.-backed drug crop eradication programme destroyed about 14,000 acres (6,500 hectares) of poppy and more than 44,500 acres (18,000 hectares) of coca leaf.
