President Ernesto Samper sent a message of condolences to U.S. President Bill Clinton on Wednesday after a U.S. pilot was killed during an anti-drug mission in southeast Colombia.
Robert Martin, 35, died when his Turbo Thrush T-65 crop-dusting plane crashed into dense jungle in Guaviare province Tuesday while he was fumigating illicit plantations of coca leaf, the raw material for cocaine.
"In the name of the Colombian people and that of my government, I offer sincere condolences for the tragic death of Robert Martin," Samper wrote to Clinton.
"His death is added to all those others that have occurred in recent years during our bitter fight against the poison of drugs. The memory of Martin, and that of our policemen and soldiers, will give us additional motivation to continue the fight," he said.
Police said Martin, one of six civilian pilots working in Colombia under contract with the U.S. State Department, was killed on the first day of his contract.
U.S. ambassador Myles Frechette said he was the first U.S. aviator to die on such a mission.
The question of U.S. personnel taking a direct role in drug or counterinsurgency operations is a thorny issue because of what some Colombian politicians see as the possible infringement of national sovereignty.
Samper said in his letter that Martin had been "training Colombian pilots in illicit crop fumigation."
But since October such "training" functions have extended to frontline operations, including flying live missions to spray coca leaf and opium poppy plantations, State Department officials told Reuters.
Crop-dusting planes come under frequent attack from armed gangs and leftist guerrillas who guard the clandestine drug plantations.
But police chief Gen. Rosso Jose Serrano said Tuesday there was no indication Martin's plane had come under fire despite a heavy rebel presence in the area. He said the most likely cause of the crash was human error or mechanical failure.
An accident investigation was under way and Martin's body was scheduled to be flown back to the United States Wednesday afternoon. He was employed by Texas-based aviation company Dyncorp, but authorities have not said where he was from.
Colombia's U.S.-backed drug crop eradication programme is the most ambitious in Latin America. Last year the Colombians destroyed about 14,000 acres (6,500 hectares) of poppy and more than 44,500 acres (18,000 hectares) of coca leaf.
