Icy relations with Washington appear to be thawing and Colombia has its eyes firmly fixed on overturning its status as an international drug pariah by this spring, diplomats and government officials say.
Colombia spent most of last year smarting at the U.S. decision to "decertify" it -- strike it off its list of allies in the drug war -- citing lax anti-narcotics laws and President Ernesto Samper's alleged ties with drug lords. That led to a cut in U.S. aid and sparked angry protests by Bogota.
But, in an about-turn from his normally hostile stance, U.S. Ambassador Myles Frechette had glowing words of praise for the Colombian government on Wednesday.
"We're very impressed by the teamwork demonstrated by the foreign relations, defence and justice ministers (in anti-drug matters). I have now sent my report and that will have to be reviewed and evaluated in Washington," he said.
His comments, at a funeral service for a U.S. civilian pilot killed on an anti-drug mission in Colombia, contrasted with his criticism of anti-drug legislation in Colombia's Congress late last year, which caused a political storm.
Now Colombian authorities are hoping the appointment of outgoing Defence Minister Juan Carlos Esguerra as ambassador to Washington, a successful drug crop eradication programme and a new law to strip cocaine kingpins of their assets will convince the United States to recertify Colombia.
"We continue showing great political willpower to combat narco-trafficking and contribute to an efficient international struggle. Colombia deserves to be recognised and re-evaluated for the fight it has been waging on drugs," Col. Leonardo Gallego, head of the police anti-narcotics division, said.
Esguerra will take up his diplomatic post on Jan. 20 and has pledged to "hammer on all the relevant doors" in a bid to win back certification and the U.S. aid that would entail.
Former Justice Minister Enrique Parejo, an anti-drug crusader who survived an assassination attempt ordered by the late drug lord Pablo Escobar in the late 1980s, told Reuters on Thursday he thought it was likely Colombia would regain certification in March, but he still questioned Bogota's commitment to fighting the drug cartels head on.
"The jailed kingpins of the Cali drug cartel continue running their criminal empires from behind bars and in the short term I don't see the political will or the operational efficiency to be able to launch a frontal assault on drug trafficking," Parejo said.
"Colombia has been pressured by the United States into toughening its stance but I think Samper is looking to do just the bare minimum to regain certification," he added.
The United States annually certifies about 30 countries based on their cooperation in the international fight against drug production and trafficking. Decertification leads to a cut in most U.S. aid not linked to the fight against drugs.
In practical terms, Colombia has not suffered greatly from the reduction in aid because most of the U.S. financial help it receives is aimed at anti-drug programmes. Colombia is due to take delivery of 18 helicopters from the United States this year, enabling police to step up its drug crop eradication programme, seen as one of the most ambitious in Latin America.
