Colombia's President Ernesto Samper announced Tuesday plans to boost revenues by broadening the tax base, and said the 1997 budget would be cut by over a trillion pesos -- a figure higher than the 900 billion pesos previously approved by Congress.
The measures are part of an emergency plan to rein in the yawning fiscal deficit.
Samper said the overall rates of income tax and the 14 percent value added tax would not be raised, but he pledged to expand the tax base and combat tax evasion.  
Below-inflation wage rises for public sector workers, announced last week as part of a separate austerity law, and the merger or closure of inefficient government offices will help stem public spending, Samper said.
Earlier in the day, Finance Minister Jose Antonio Ocampo said, "Everybody would be affected by draconian measures," but so far many of the proposals put forward have not yet been fleshed out.
The economic emergency has been decreed for an initial period of 20 days and allows the president to rule by decree without consulting Congress.  
"If we go on increasing the levels of public debt, we will be creating elements of instability in our fiscal system. We will be laying landmines in the path of the state's finances," Samper said in a speech at the presidential palace.
The fiscal deficit rose to 4 percent of gross domestic product (GDP) in 1996 from 0.2 percent in 1995. Ocampo said Monday that the effects of the emergency measures, coupled with income from a recent spate of power plant privatizations, could cut that shortfall to 2.5 percent of GDP this year, compared to the 3.4 percent originally forecast.  
Samper said that the Expenditure Rationalization Law, which was approved at the end of last year and which included provision for a weighted 13.5 percent pay rise for public sector workers, would mean budget savings of 900 billion pesos.
He added that under the terms of the economic emergency decree, public officials had been ordered to look for ways to cut an additional 300 billion pesos from the overall national budget. This he said would lead to total savings of about 1.2 trillion pesos on a budget originally set last year at 30.3 trillion pesos.  
Although Samper gave a broad outline of the crisis measures, his speech was short on specifics.
Wilson Borja, head of the main public sector union FENALTRASE, said he feared as many as 19,000 state jobs could be slashed in the cost-cutting drive.
Although Samper talked of closing government departments, he failed to spell out the impact this could have on jobs.
The president spoke of the drain imposed on central government coffers by provincial authorities, raising the specter of funding cuts to the regions, already suffering from chronic lack of resources and social injustice.
He also said he would cut the government's external consultancy services by 50 percent and reduce official trips abroad. He did not, however, give an estimate of what saving that represented.
((-- Bogota newsroom, 571 610 7944))
