Colombian President Ernesto Samper decreed an economic emergency on Monday, warning that the "economic and social stability of the country" was under threat.
In a televised speech to the nation, Samper called for urgent belt-tightening measures to cut the central government's yawning fiscal deficit.
The economic emergency, the first in five years, has been decreed for 20 days but could be extended for a maximum of 90 days, presidential sources said. All measures in that period can be introduced without the approval of Congress.
Further austerity measures are scheduled to be announced on Tuesday, government sources said.
Finance Minister Jose Antonio Ocampo later announced the first series of concrete measures aimed at slashing Colombia's foreign debt by more than $800 million this year.
Wilson Borja, head of the 800,000-strong FENALTRASE public sector union, said he feared the government could use crisis powers to cut as many as 19,000 state jobs in the coming days. The union was protesting against a 13.5 percent weighted pay increase, well below annual inflation, announced last week.
"We had initially been planning to launch a stoppage around mid-February but this decree could force us to bring those plans radically forward. We could start a strike as early as next week," Borja said.
Anticipating the unions' reaction, Samper said in his televised speech: "I want to warn you once and for all. Protests and strikes will lead nowhere -- quite simply because although the government has all the goodwill in the world, it is short of money."
"If the fiscal, exchange rate and unemployment situation continue to deteriorate, the social and economic order will seriously and ostensibly worsen... The economic stability of the country will be severely affected," the decree signed by Samper and his cabinet said.
The crisis measure comes against the backdrop of a sharp economic slowdown in 1996, coupled with a steady strengthening of the country's peso currency, which has undermined export activities. The government fiscal deficit has burgeoned and hit 4.0 percent of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in 1996 up from 0.2 percent in 1995.
In the first of the specific emergency measures, finance chief Ocampo said the planned issuance of $1.8 billion in foreign debt bonds would be reduced by about $800 million.
He announced an overall cut in the national debt programme and unveiled a new tax on private and public companies which looked abroad for fresh loans.
Ocampo said the emergency measures, coupled with income from a recent wave of power plant privatisations, would help to cut the government deficit to 2.5 percent of gross domestic product in 1997, compared to an initial forecast of 3.4 percent.
