Colombian stocks have shaken off three years of stagnation to stage a meteoric rise in 1997, but bourse chiefs warn deep-rooted structural problems cloud the outlook for one of the world's best-performing markets so far this year.
The country's two major indices, Bogota's IBB and Medellin's IBOMED, have gained more than 22 percent in the 10 sessions of the year to Thursday, Jan. 16, grabbing international attention and sending investors reeling with surprise.  
Brokers are convinced that bigger gains are still to come in the course of the year and that Colombian stocks continue to be undervalued by as much as 25 percent.
But the chairmen of the Bogota and Medellin exchanges believe the traditional "marriage" between industrialists and bankers will hamper the transformation of Colombia's markets into sophisticated, modern bourses.
"Market performance has been pretty good in the year so far and we've seen gains that nobody really dared foresee," said Luis Fernando Uribe, head of the Medellin exchange.  
Bogota's IBB has gained about 22.5 percent -- despite small falls on profit-taking Wednesday and Thursday after 18 days straight gains.  It rose just 11.8 percent in peso terms in 1996 -- a real-term loss when set against 21.63 percent inflation.
Medellin's IBOMED index has leapt more than 23 percent after losing 3.68 percent in nominal terms in 1996.
Trading volume is extremely thin, however.  Volume on all three of the country's exchanges, including Cali's tiny Bolsa de Occidente, totalled just $2.3 billon in 1996.  
Market perception that Colombian shares are well below book price, a fall in deposit rates from above 30 percent for most of 1996 to about 27 percent, and optimism that the economy is about to rebound from the sharp slowdown last year are underpinning the rally.  And a new tax on fixed income papers has also put a premium on equities, many brokers say.
"Once the market caught fire everybody piled in. There was not too much differentiation between shares, which shows these are still somewhat immature markets," said market analyst Stephen Edkins.  
"We're bullish about the year and think shares will rise between about 40 percent and 45 percent overall," he added. Inflation is forecast to hit 18 percent this year, which would mean real-term yields of up to 27 percent.
Edkins expected to see downward corrections of between five percent and 10 percent in the coming weeks, with new gains from the start of the second quarter as companies turn in 1996 year-end results, followed by first quarter results.
Domestic political factors, including the country's simmering guerrilla war, which some military experts predict will intensify in 1997, seem unlikely to cause concern.  
"We've got this crazy equilibrium where there's quite a solid macroeconomic management and then this element of chaos," said Edkins.  But amid the optimism, bourse chiefs Caballero and Uribe sounded a warning.
"The main underlying problem is that there are a lack of shares.  That's a structural problem and cannot be resolved overnight," said Caballero.
"There are favorable terms for companies to raise capital in the stock market but the traditional marriage between industry and the financial sector is not going to be easy to break up," said Uribe.
Colombian entrepreneurs still prefer to contract debt with the banks rather than risk losing overall control of their businesses by issuing shares.
Of all the country's major conglomerates only the Sindicato Antioqueno has more than one of its companies quoted on the stock market -- but less than one-third of the shares are in free float, outside the direct control of the companies themselves.
((--Bogota newsroom, 571 610 7944))
