Colombia's cocaine kings, Gilberto and Miguel Rodriguez Orejuela, were sentenced to 21 and 18 years in prison respectively on Friday, but had their terms halved for pleading guilty, bringing a swift rebuke from the United States.
Gilberto Rodriguez, who also was fined $8 million, and his brother -- fined $4.4 million -- will be eligible for extra sentence reductions for working and studying in prison.
The sentences were called "totally unacceptable" by U.S. Ambassador Myles Frechette, whose government unsuccessfully called for the extradition of the Rodriguez brothers in July.
The public prosecutor's office said it would appeal the terms, but under Colombia's lenient anti-drug laws this would add little additional jail time.
"The U.S. government and American public opinion will be shocked by these low sentences," Frechette told reporters. "These sentences are totally unacceptable," he said.
Gilberto, nicknamed the Chess Player for his cunning criminal mind, headed the powerful Cali drug cartel until his capture in June 1995.
Together with his brother Miguel, the pair masterminded a huge drug trafficking empire, supplying an estimated 80 percent of the world's cocaine and building up a multi-billion dollar fortune in the process.
U.S. officials have said repeatedly that the brothers continue to run their criminal empire from behind the walls of Bogota's La Picota prison.
That allegation, coupled with Friday's ruling by a judge in the city of Cali, could strike a fatal blow to Colombia's hopes of averting more U.S. trade sanctions in March when Washington will decide whether it should remain on a list of pariah states that have failed to cooperate in ther global fight against drugs.
A so-called "faceless" judge sentenced Gilberto Rodriguez, 57, to 21 years for drug-trafficking, conspiracy, illicit enrichment, falsification of documents and the illegal possession of weapons.
That term was immediately cut to 10-1/2 years, in return for his plea and prompt confession, and with extra reductions for working and studying in jail he will likely spend about six years in prison. With time already served in custody awaiting trial, Gilberto Rodriguez could be a free in 2002.
His brother Miguel, 53, was sentenced to 18 years, halved for his guilty plea and full confession. He will also be eligible for extra reductions.
The respected Colombian political magazine Semana recently estimated the combined fortune of the Rodriguez Orejuela brothers and two other top traffickers at $50 billion. The brothers may lose part of their fortune under the terms of the new asset forfeiture law passed by Congress in December.
The office of Prosecutor-General Alfonso Valdivieso, an anti-drug crusader and close ally of Washington, said it would use all legal resources to appeal the sentences and see that "just penalties" are eventually imposed on the Cali kingpins.
Under current legislation, the brothers faced a maximum of no more than 24 years imprisonment.
National Police chief Gen. Rosso Jose Serrano, who oversaw the arrests of the Rodriguez brothers in June and August of 1995, called Friday's sentences "a disgrace" and said they might just as well have been left free.
"I'm not going to continue jailing drug traffickers so they can get out in three years. It's a disgrace," he said.
