Police arrested a U.S. pilot carrying a suitcase packed with at least 13.5 pounds (6.2 kg) of high grade heroin at Bogota's international airport on Sunday evening, a prosecutor said.
Bradley Dale Brandt, 40, originally of North Dakota but now living in southern California, was detained as he made his way to board one of the Colombian airline's ACES flights to Panama City, said the prosecutor, who cannot be named for security reasons.
Brandt told Reuters he had been framed and the suitcase was not his. He was to have travelled on the flight to Panama as a passenger but was wearing a commercial aviator's uniform when arrested. He declined to say exactly where in southern California he lived but his passport was issued in Los Angeles.
"I was carrying the suitcase but it was not mine. I was totally surprised when the police opened it up. The clothes inside were mine but nothing else was. I'll kill the person who switched my bag if I ever find them," Brandt said.
"I just wouldn't do a thing like that. This has put my career and my family in jeopardy. I've worked too hard just to blow it on something stupid like this," he added.
Brandt declined to say which airline he worked for. No airline insignia were visible on his uniform or his pilot's overcoat.
A police spokeswoman said the heroin was discovered when the bag Brandt was carrying was put through an x-ray machine -- one of the multiple routine checks that international passengers have to undergo when leaving Bogota.
"Brandt was arrested with a suitcase stuffed with clothes and high quality heroin," the spokeswoman said.
The prosecutor said Brandt would be interviewed further in the presence of a lawyer and an interpreter on Monday.
Earlier in the day airport police seized a Mexican passenger as he tried to board a flight to Mexico City with false-bottomed suitcases packed with 93 pounds (42 kg) of cocaine.
The U.S Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) estimates Colombian drug cartels supply at least 80 percent of the world's cocaine. And in a report late last year, it said Colombia had edged out the Golden Triangle of southeast Asia as the No. 1 supplier of high grade heroin to the United States.
