Plans are being drawn up for new peace talks between the government and leftist rebels in a bid to end Latin America's longest-running conflict, a spokesman for Colombia's Conciliation Commission said on Sunday.
Diego Vargas Uribe, a member of the semi-autonomous body of former ministers and Church representatives, said details would not be released for a few more weeks, but that all sides in the four-decade old war had been consulted about talks.
"The Conciliation Commission has carried out a consultation with different sectors about the basis for a negotiated peace. We are drawing up a document and will present that to the government and the armed groups before making it public," Uribe told Radionet radio network.
Political analysts warn that the prospect of peace is slight. The armed forces said two weeks ago they would step up their counterinsurgency campaign and Marxist rebels have escalated their attacks this year.
Spokesmen for the FARC, Colombia's largest guerrilla army set up as a pro-Soviet group in 1964, were not available for comment on Sunday. But in the latest copy of their magazine Resistencia, FARC leader Manuel Marulanda wrote: "I reiterate the will that the (FARC) has always expressed to find a political solution to the social and armed conflict."
He stressed any peace deal would have to resolve "political, social and economic inequalities" and not simply map out a timetable for the demobilization of rebel forces.
The National Liberation Army (ELN), the second largest rebel force founded by radical Roman Catholic priests in the mid-1960s, began tentative moves last year toward German governmment-brokered peace talks with President Ernesto Samper's administration.
Efforts broke down in November with the much-publicised arrest of Werner Mauss, a German private eye who was acting as a go-between in the talks.
The last peace process between the Colombian government and rebels collapsed without agreement in Mexico in 1992. The FARC accused the authorities of trying to force the guerrillas to surrender unilaterally.
Unlike Colombia's M-19 rebel group, which laid down its arms in the late 1980s, neither the FARC nor the ELN have been defeated militarily.
The FARC still holds prisoner 60 troops it captured in southern Colombia last August. In a statement on Sunday, the FARC confirmed it was holding 10 marines seized in an ambush in western Choco province in mid-January. It said the men would be held with the other 60 soldiers until terms for a handover were agreed with the government.
