Britain's commercial property market may be improving but it has not yet got a clean bill of health, a senior Bank of England official said on Wednesday.
"It would be rash to conclude that the market is now unambiguously healthy in all respects. There are still several factors which will continue to pose challenges to the investment, banking and valuing communities," said Pen Kent, executive director at the Bank of England.
Kent said that while lease lengths had temporarily stabilised, clauses by which tenants could break leases were becoming more common and many would need less space.
"It is clear too that many occupiers will continue over the long-term to reduce their needs for space and to demand greater flexibility," Kent told the Investment Property Forum in a speech.
A combination of factors were making it "less straightforward to form a view of the quality of cashflow likely to stem from a particular building", he added.
There was a sizeable overhang of unlet secondary property. "The pool of such property increases every time that a major user of space moves into new offices and releases its former premises," he said.
Kent called for solutions to the problems of much secondary stock not being suitable for conversion to alternative uses or never being able to be relet. "This will continue to exert a dampening influence on the market and imaginative solutions will be needed."
Kent also outlined his views on the future for the market. While institutional investors were attracted to the sector in the short-term "they could easily resume their longer-term departure from property in a couple of years", he said.
This could occur if the property market's performance waned as the economic cycle progressed and other assets began to look Banks might also become disillusioned with property again "particularly if they relax their lending criteria too far in the current exceptionally competitive lending market".
Kent also warned that while healthy competition between lenders was a good thing, "history suggests that the seeds of tomorrow's losses are sown when lenders relax the basics such as loan to value ratios and income cover; or when they take very bullish views on the likely strength of cashflows".
The BoE had heard some lenders were seeking to pressurise valuers into higher valuations. "This is not a healthy practice and we hope both the lenders and the valuing profession will be strong enough to resist," he said.
On a more positive note, Kent said there had been welcome progress on the development of property derivatives and securitisation as well as improving the quality of market information. He said he supported suggestions that commercial transaction prices should be made public.
