Deutsche Morgan Grenfell's dispute with suspended star fund manager Nicola Horlick highlights a "merry-go-round" hiring system started by investment banks, banking sources said on Wednesday.
"One of the industry's failings is that it doesn't bring people up through the system. When a firm needs someone, it steals people from a competitor. This creates a destructive merry-go-round which can't be in anyone's interests," one banker said.
Newspapers said DMG suspended Horlick on Tuesday because she allegedly tried to lure colleagues at Morgan Grenfell Asset Management, where she was head of UK pension fund business, to join her in a move to Dutch bank ABN AMRO.
ABN AMRO itself denied reports that the 35-year-old Horlick was poised to lure a team with her and DMG has declined to comment on the details of Horlick's suspension, except to say it centred on a potential breach of contract.
While the term "poaching" is widely used to describe the movement of teams from one firm to another, loyal colleagues following a key player to a new employer is nothing new, the banking sources said.
Most moves involve a significant salary and bonus rise and often swiftly follow payment of bonuses by the firm which an individual is leaving.
Banking sources said U.S. investment bank Goldman Sachs, reported to have paid record bonuses last year, had lost a handful of staff since the payments were made.
In suspending Horlick, DMG, the investment banking arm of Germany's Deutsche Bank, has brought back into the open a subject often seen as a normal part of the rough and tumble associated with investment banking -- but which might be relatively new to the more staid world of fund management, the sources said.
"We are surprised to be mentioned in the context of poaching which would, by its nature, imply you are planning to take a whole team, which we are not," ABN AMRO chief spokesman Jules Prast told Reuters.
But he said he preferred not to discuss whether ABN AMRO had talked to or planned to talk to Horlick, who newspaper reports said had earned more than 500,000 pounds ($835,000) a year.
"She (Horlick) had certainly led a number of people in the (MGAM) division to think that she had ABN AMRO lined up," one banking source told Reuters.
But if Horlick was about to take a team of up to 20 fund managers with her to ABN AMRO, which is expanding its fund management activities in London, she might have given DMG a dose of its own medicine.
The investment bank has gained a reputation in recent years for an aggressive hiring spree aimed at top performers at other firms, which led to widespread suggestions that DMG was offering guaranteed bonuses -- some for up to two years -- to ensure that it got the staff it wanted.
This came to a head last July when DMG reached agreement with another Dutch firm, ING Barings, the investment banking division of Internationale Nederlanden Groep, over a separate poaching dispute.
ING Baring's chief executive, Hessel Lindenbergh, said at the time there was "growing resistance and irritation in the industry towards firms which deliberately poach whole teams" and that "poaching teams pushes up pay unduly".
Last year, DMG's global bonds chief Edson Mitchell said the firm had hired around 500 people since he left his previous firm Merrill Lynch. Many of the new staff came from Merrill, while others moved from the then S.G. Warburg arm of SBC Warburg. ($1=.5976 Pound)
