London will defend its share of foreign exchange trading once a single European currency comes into being, according to Judith Mayhew, who became the new head of the Corporation of London on Thursday.
"We must maintain our market share at all costs," Mayhew, who was elected as chairman of the Corporation's policy and resources committee, told Reuters in an interview. The body is the local authority for London's traditional financial hub.
Mayhew, a 48-year-old New Zealander who has lived and worked in the City of London since 1976, said the Corporation faces three main challenges. She sees the first as the body's survival to make sure it continues to represent the views of the City.
Her second challenge is to ensure that "when the euro is introduced the City of London is the primary market (for it)" while the third is to ensure LIFFE, the London International Financial Futures and Options Exchange, dominates the derivatives market for the European single currency.
While Mayhew did not give her view on whether she would rather see the pound in or out of a the single currency, she said it was important for Britain to remain at the negotiating table for as long as possible while deciding its own approach.
And whatever Britain's attitude, the Corporation will work closely with Europe on technical aspects of its introduction.
If the trading of the euro is split more evenly between Europe's main financial centres, the only places to benefit will be New York and Tokyo which will lap up London's business, she said. And one of the Corporation's main aims is to increase the number of global banking headquarters within the Square Mile.
Mayhew said that regardless of the colour of the next British government -- the ruling Conservative party must hold an election by May -- the Corporation will continue to lobby for the right taxation levels and employee costs.
It will also look closely at the outflow of its revenue to the rest of Britain.
"Perhaps the balance is not right," she said. The body keeps only a tenth of its 700 million pound ($1.18 billion) revenue.
She believes London's strength comes from its international business, not from its domestic business and this makes it the ideal site for Europe's financial capital. She would have liked the future European Central Bank to have been here rather than Frankfurt but noted London already has the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD).
Mayhew said the Corporation would continue to support the local authorities in surrounding boroughs, both through charitable work and other projects in deprived areas.
"It is an irony that we have got perhaps the richest part of Europe surrounded by some of the poorest parts," she said.
As long as there remained a threat of bomb attacks on the City of London, Mayhew said the so-called "ring of steel" erected to deter attacks by IRA guerillas would continue.
She described competition for prime investment banking tenants with the Docklands area to the east of the City as a healthy rivalry and welcomed the extra office space provided by the vast modern redevelopment of the former docks site.
"The City would like to remain dominant in keeping the primary markets together," Mayhew said, adding such close proximity was important to the way people worked.
And she welcomed a recent resurgence in London's property market, "It is very good that the cranes are overhead in the City again and there is more development. Modern cities need modern office space," she said.
($1=.5958 Pound)
