"Superwoman" fund manager Nicola Horlick announced her resignation on Thursday from Deutsche Morgan Grenfell (DMG), leaving what she called a feeling of "turmoil" among fund managers at the German-owned bank.
A spokesman for Horlick, who had been head of British pension fund business at DMG's Morgan Grenfell Asset Management (MGAM), told Reuters she had quit and was planning legal action against her former employer over "constructive dismissal".
Horlick had been suspended on Tuesday pending the outcome of an internal investigation into what Deutsche Morgan Grenfell described as "a potential breach of her contract".
The dispute was believed to revolve around allegations Horlick was looking to move and take staff with her. It follows a scandal last year at MGAM over misvaluations in three of its funds and the subsequent sacking of fund manager Peter Young.
The suspension of Horlick, dubbed superwoman in financial circles because of her ability to hold a high-powered job while looking after five children, prompted reports of unease among large pension fund clients at the firm.
The row erupted only days after Horlick received news of a promotion to managing director from MGAM chief executive Robert Smith, a banking source said. "They shook hands on it last Friday," the source said.
Horlick, in an interview with the Financial Times published on Friday, described disquiet at MGAM over the Young affair. She said the promotion came after a group of fund managers who worked under her said they would leave the company unless she be given more authority.
"They demanded that I be given more authority. They felt that things were in turmoil following the Peter Young affair."
Young, currently under investigation by Britain's Serious Fraud Office, has denied any involvement in criminal activity.
The Horlick saga is said to have unsettled pension fund clients at DMG, but the company said earlier on Thursday that it did not expect any exodus of its pension fund clients.
Banking sources also said DMG was confident other fund managers would not follow in Horlick's footsteps and that there was a climate of loyalty to MGAM's Smith.
But DMG has been in the spotlight for months over the Peter Young affair, which has been costly as well as embarassing. In December Deutsche Bank agreed to a compensation package of around 200 million pounds ($335 million) to make good losses suffered by investors. Deutsche also saw its coveted triple-A credit rating from Moody's dropped last month.
In October Deutsche named Rolf Breuer, a 58-year-old investment banker, as its new head. Breuer will take over on May 20 and is expected to fight hard to avoid the criticism and mistrust that dogged his predecessor Hilmar Kopper.
Kopper never managed to shrug off the "peanuts" tag attached to him in 1994 after he used the word to describe losses caused by the collapse of the Schneider property empire, with which Deutsche was closely involved.
Peanuts are just about the last word the British press have been using in connection with Horlick. She was reported to have earned one million pounds ($1.68 million) a year.
In the newspaper interview, she tells of a last attempt to solve things with DMG when she met with Smith on Wednesday. "The meeting ended up with me in tears and Robert Smith very depressed," she was quoted as saying. Horlick said a request to be reinstated was rejected by Smith on Thursday, the FT said.
There has been press speculation Horlick was preparing a move to Dutch bank ABN AMRO with others in her team, but ABN has denied any attempt of poaching a fund manager team. It declined to say whether it had tried to hire Horlick.
In the interview Horlick said, "ABN AMRO is a red herring," adding: "I completely concur with what ABN AMRO have said."
--London Newsroom +44 171 542 6784
