"Superwoman" pension fund manager Nicola Horlick announced her resignation on Thursday from Morgan Grenfell Asset Management (MGAM) only days after she was reported to have been offered a promotion at the firm.
A spokesman for Horlick, who had been head of British pension fund business at Deutsche Morgan Grenfell's MGAM, told Reuters she had quit and was planning legal action against her former employer over "constructive dismissal".
Horlick, dubbed superwoman in financial circles because of her ability to hold a high-powered job while looking after five children, was suspended at MGAM on Tuesday, prompting reports of unease among large pension fund clients at the firm.
The suspension was pending the outcome of an internal investigation into what Deutsche Morgan Grenfell described as "a potential breach of her contract".
"She has resigned," a spokesman for Horlick said. "She will be taking (legal) action against DMG."
The dispute with MGAM was believed to revolve around allegations that Horlick tried to take a number of her MGAM team with her in a move to Dutch bank ABN AMRO.
But the row erupted only days after Horlick received news of a promotion to managing director from MGAM chief executive Robert Smith, a banking source said.
"They shook hands on it last Friday," the source said.
MGAM last year was rocked by revelations of misvaluations in three of its funds and the subsequent sacking of fund manager Peter Young, who is currently under investigation by Britain's Serious Fraud Office. Young has denied any involvement in criminal activity.
Horlick, in an interview with the Financial Times published on Friday, described disquiet at MGAM over the Young affair, She said the promotion came after a group of fund managers who worked under her said they would leave the company unless she be given more authority.
Around six MGAM fund managers and a senior executive met for dinner on Thursday last week, she said in the newspaper interview. "They demanded that I be given more authority. They felt that things were in turmoil following the Peter Young affair."
Pension fund clients of DMG, the investment banking arm of Germany's Deutsche Bank, are said to be unsettled by the Horlick saga. But DMG said on Thursday that it did not expect any exodus of its pension fund clients.
--London Newsroom +44 171 542 6784
