Morgan Grenfell and its former fund manager Nicola Horlick appeared no nearer settling their differences on Monday as more pension fund clients signalled they would be reassessing their relations with the group.
Horlick, who last week resigned her lucrative job after she was suspended by Morgan Grenfell Asset Management (MGAM) for an alleged breach of contract, was locked in an all-day meeting with legal representatives in London's financial heartland.
Earlier her lawyers said she wanted an amicable settlement with her ex-employer but that the 35-year-old mother-of-five, one of the most prominent fund managers in London, was prepared to sue if they could not strike a deal.
"She is still hopeful that there might be an amicable resolution. If she is not able to get a quick and amicable resolution then she is still looking at legal action on the grounds that she was constructively dismissed," said John Farr, a partner at law firm Herbert Smith.
Precise details of what precipitated Horlick's sudden departure from MGAM, depicted by the firm as an attempt by her to lure colleagues with her to a rival, have yet to emerge and former colleagues refused to comment on newspaper reports.
"Basically I just want to get on with my job and look after my clients," one, who declined to be named, told Reuters. Others also appeared to have rallied behind MGAM chief executive Robert Smith, arguing they were getting on with the business of reassuring clients and managing their funds.
MGAM has run an intensive damage-limitation campaign, writing to all clients of its 18 billion pound ($29.89 billion) British pension fund business and set up meetings with some.
But this did not prevent two more from voicing their concerns over events at the firm, still reeling from last year's revelations of irregularities at three of its retail investment funds which led to the sacking of fund manager Peter Young.
Young, who denies any involvement in criminal activity, is now under investigation by Britain's Serious Fraud Office (SFO).
The London Borough of Lewisham, which has 300 million pounds under sole management with MGAM, said it was concerned at recent developments and would decide at a meeting in March whether to continue with MGAM or to put the contract out to tender.
And Norfolk County Council, which has some 390 million pounds with MGAM adopted a similar tone, saying it was "naturally concerned by recent events...and is keeping a close watch upon developments" but it was not taking any action.
Meanwhile Farr said Horlick's first priority was to get her job back as head of British pension fund business at MGAM but if this did not happen she wanted compensation.
Earlier his client said the issue was not about money but about clearing her name. Farr did not quantify the level of compensation Horlick would be seeking but said she was entitled to a year's notice and her bonus was "still open to discussion".
Horlick, who only days before her suspension was promoted to managing director by chief executive Robert Smith, wanted the matter resolved as quickly as possible, Farr said, adding he hoped this could be "within the week or the next few days".
MGAM is owned by Deutsche Morgan Grenfell, the investment banking arm of Germany's powerful Deutsche Bank.
Horlick has strenously denied allegations that she was about to move with her team to a rival firm, widely rumoured to have been Dutch bank ABN AMRO, but said she met a friend from the bank in December at what she insists was a personal lunch.
MGAM declined comment on the latest developments except to repeat that it had no plans for any action of its own as Horlick was no longer one of its employees.
($1=.6021 Pound)
