Deutsche Morgan Grenfell was unlikely to offer Nicola Horlick her job back, despite the former fund manager's continuing call for reinstatement, banking sources said.
"The ball's in her court," a banking source said late on Sunday, adding that Horlick's resignation last week meant that DMG's Morgan Grenfell Asset Management (MGAM) was no longer obliged to discuss reinstatement with her.
Deutsche Morgan Grenfell was preparing to launch an intensive campaign to shore up its pension fund business in the wake of Horlick's resignation at MGAM after she was suspended for allegedly trying to lure staff with her to another firm.
The investment banking arm of Germany's mighty Deutsche Bank was to meet key clients, but DMG spokesman James Murray denied pension firms were considering moving from its 18 billion pound ($30.11 billion) funds.
"We've had absolutely no indication that our institutional pension fund clients have plans at this stage to move their business," he said.
Morgan Grenfell Asset Management (MGAM), the fund management arm of DMG, has already written to all its pension fund clients to limit any fall-out from the suspension and later resignation last week of senior British fund manager Horlick.
Some clients, including London's Westminster City Council, Scotland's Dumfries and Galloway County Council and the Merchant Navy Officers' Pension Fund, have expressed individual concern about recent events at MGAM.
And the Railway Pension Trustee Company, which has 1.25 billion pounds with MGAM, said it had met MGAM officials and would be in close contact with its asset managers.
Meanwhile, Horlick continued to deny the allegations that she had tried to lure staff away from MGAM.
"I think my colleagues know that's not the case," she told BBC television as reporters swarmed around her on Sunday.
Horlick was suspended from the firm only days after she had been promoted to managing director at MGAM.
Her subsequent resignation as head of MGAM's British pension fund business and dramatic dash to Frankfurt on Friday to plead with Deutsche Bank for her reinstatement received widespread coverage in British media.
"These people who I spoke to in Germany were very, very serious about all of this. And I want to give them a chance to sort this out," Horlick said on BBC television.
"What I really want is a proper resolution. And I still think that that means either reinstatement -- and I mean that, I like doing my job. Reinstatement or compensation," she added.
MGAM is still trying to regain an even keel after last year's revelations of irregularities at three of its retail investment funds, the sacking of fund manager Peter Young, a 180 million pound cash injection to bolster the funds and the announcement of a 200 million pound compensation package.
Young, who denies any involvement in criminal activity, is now under investigation by Britain's Serious Fraud Office (SFO).
Much of the media coverage of Horlick's case has focused on the "human interest" angle with pictures of the 35-year-old -- dubbed Superwoman by British newspapers -- with her children at their luxury home in Kensington, west London.
Fund management sources said Horlick, who stated she managed between three-and-a-half and four billion pounds worth of the firm's business, had talked about a management buy-out.
But they said that even if this had been discussed informally it would have had no hope of success as DMG, along with many other firms, was keen to build its strength in this lucrative area and would not dismantle its business.
Horlick, who during a whirlwind campaign on Friday entered MGAM's London headquarters in an attempt to meet management and loudly proclaimed "Justice will be done", has said she wants to settle her differences as quickly as possible and is pinning her hopes on further talks with a Deutsche legal official.
She has said she plans legal action over what she claims was her "constructive dismissal" by the firm. But banking sources said it had not yet been served with any legal papers.
Horlick's spokesman distanced her from reports a December lunch meeting had marked the start of talks with Dutch bank ABN AMRO on a move there. He said it had been a personal engagement and "there was nothing culpable about meeting a friend...for lunch".
ABN AMRO has denied it tried to poach any MGAM staff. ($1=.5979 Pound)
