A high profile dispute between investment bank Deutsche Morgan Grenfell and ousted star fund manager Nicola Horlick has highlighted how crucial the lucrative asset management business has become to banks eyeing a share of the growing market.
"The attraction of asset management is the quality of earnings is far better than virtually any of the other areas of business the banks are involved in," a banking analyst at one major European investment bank said.
Relatively low risk and a growing market are other key factors driving banks' sometimes aggressive interest in building up funds under management, according to John Leonard, banking analyst at Salomon Brothers in London.
"The overall driver seems to be that it's a good growth business for relatively low risk," Leonard told Reuters.
He pointed out that once customer relationships were established, particularly on the retail side, they lasted -- although the institutional market could be more volatile.
Widespread media coverage of 35-year-old Horlick's dramatic resignation last week as head of British pension fund business at MGAM has brought home to the general public -- many of whom have pensions or savings with such firms -- just how much top performing individuals and their employers earn.
Horlick was suspended from the asset management arm of Deutsche Morgan Grenfell, part of the mighty Deutsche Bank group, amid accusations she had tried to lure a group of colleagues to leave with her for rival firm ABN AMRO.
Horlick, who was reported to have earned one million pounds ($1.66 million) a year and was at the top of the industry in London, continues to deny allegations that she was leading a breakaway group.
Dutch bank ABN AMRO has also denied it tried to poach Horlick's team or was planning to back a management buy-out of its British pension fund business but on Tuesday told Reuters it would consider buying a large British fund manager and was keen to make "big steps" in London fund management.
The Horlick saga has demonstrated that banks are willing to match and substantially improve on the pay of such stars if it means they can gain ground in the battle for relationships with major pension funds and the fees they bring with them.
This high-quality fee and commission income promises to grow as the pool of funds in need of management is swelled by demographic changes and an increasing reliance on individuals making their own provision for old age rather than relying on diminishing state resources, analysts said.
Asset management, usually looking after other people's money rather than a firm's own, is not a capital-intensive business and margins remain attractive for those controlling the billions of pounds of pension fund and investment assets now swirling around the mature markets of Britain, the United States and Japan.
The British pension fund market alone is worth around 600 billion pounds, one analyst said, adding that the longer-term opportunities in Europe were good but that both Germany and France would have to persuade people to make their own provisions for their retirement before the market took off.
Compared to an increasingly competitive lending market, where margins are wafer thin and banks have to provide shareholder value while meeting stringent capital requirements on their loans, such business is another indication of banks being cut adrift from their traditional business.
"They are trying to replace revenues they are losing elsewhere. Asset management is seen as a growth business," Martin Cross, banking analyst at UBS said. ($1=.6021 Pound)
