Investment banking giant Merrill Lynch on Wednesday took another step in building up its presence in the European equities markets with the purchase of an equities research and sales boutique in Italy.
The U.S. powerhouse's takeover of the Milan-based Carnegie Italia SpA follows a similar but larger move earlier this year in Spain when it bought FG Inversiones, the country's largest independent brokerage, for 3.7 billion pesetas ($29.5 million).
Merrill, which last year bought British equities specialist Smith New Court, said in a statement that the head of Carnegie Italia's team Tony Morrongiello would "spearhead Merrill Lynch's local institutional equity sales presence in Milan".
This would be in partnership with Merrill's existing Italian equity sales, research and trading teams in London, it added.
Paul Roy, Merril's head of equity sales and trading in Europe, said the move would give the firm "tremendous leverage in this important market" and enable better client service.
"We will also be better placed to offer strategic advice to Italian companies on local and international equity markets," Roy said in a statement.
The chairman of Merrill Lynch Europe, Christopher Reeves, said Italy had been identified as a growth area for the firm in equities, debt markets, private and investment banking.
Swedish stockbroker Carnegie said it had agreed to sell Merrill its Italian operations because it needed capital to expand in the Nordic region. It recently sold its operations in Spain and said it would also pull out of Portugal.
Neither party disclosed what Merrill would pay for the Italian operation, although given the small size of the operation the amount was not believed to be large.
Along with other investment banks, Merrill has until now "parachuted" relevant people in from London and New York when it has needed to wrap-up investment banking deals in European countries where it does not have an equity broking presence.
Analysts said that buying small firms in Europe and building local bases rather than employing a top-down approach from one core centre underlined the need for local relationships, particularly in areas such as corporate finance, mergers and acquisitions and initial public offerings (IPOs). ($1=125.5 Peseta)
