A threatened overhaul of Britain's Securities and Investments Board (SIB) by a future Labour government and news it must find a new chairman will make the next few months uncertain for the top financial watchdog.
The opposition Labour Party has said that if it wins power in elections this year it would streamline London's regulatory bodies, giving the SIB greater responsibility.
But insiders at the SIB, which was set up in 1985 and is charged with ensuring regulatory system works efficiently, said on Friday it was business as usual at the watchdog.
While surprised by chairman Sir Andrew Large's decision on Thursday to give up his post at the end of May, industry sources said they believed his successor would not necessarily be plucked from the ranks of Britain's frontline regulators.
"They will not only have to have the intellect and leadership qualities, but also the gravitas and authority that must accompany the role," one told Reuters.
The SIB supervises the so-called "frontline" regulators which independently authorise firms to conduct investment business in Britain. These self-regulating organisations also monitor firms, handle complaints and punish rule-breakers.
Large said the bulk of the changes he had been charged with overseeing had been completed but pointed out that the main unfinished business was the unsatisfactory rate of progress on a a long-running review of pensions mis-selling.
This saga is likely to bedevil whoever takes over from Large as insurance companies seek to resolve outstanding pensions cases.
Newspapers said the job might go to Phillip Thorpe at the Investment Management Regulatory Organisation (IMRO), Colette Bowe of the Personal Investment Authority (PIA) or former Securities and Futures Authority head Christopher Sharples.
"It (the job) has not gone to professional regulators before," the first source said.
Given the prospect of a new government, and possibly a new ruling political party, regulatory sources agree the appointment of 54-year-old Large's successor will be particularly significant.
The ruling Conservative Party must call an election by May 22 and opinion polls suggest a Labour victory may be the likely outcome.
A new SIB chairman may be named before the election but he or she will take over the reins in early June.
The choice of a new chairman is made jointly by the Treasury and the head of the Bank of England, but because of the timing of the appointment, the Labour party is also expected to be canvassed for its views on the individuals to be short-listed.
But the Treasury declined to comment on any of the names mentioned or how exactly the vacancy would be filled. "We are not detailing the procedure but at this stage no one is ruled in and no one is ruled out," a Treasury spokesman said.
A factor which could limit those wanting to be considered for the role is money, especially when compared with the sort of salaries paid in the private sector.
While top-quality bankers or financiers can expect large pay packets, the money on offer for the SIB job is expected to be relatively little by comparison. During the year 1995-96, Large was paid just over 175,000 pounds.
"The money could turn out to be the sticking point," one regulatory source said, adding that the selectors would not rush to find a replacement for Large. "Its a big job and its important to get the right person," he said.
