Britain lost another independent corporate finance adviser on Tuesday with the sale of Phoenix Group to U.S. investment bank Donaldson Lufkin &amp; Jenrette (DLJ).
Neither party would comment on how much the deal was worth, but there was widespread speculation that "boutique" operation Phoenix had cost around 50 million pounds ($81 million).
This would make multi-millionaires of Phoenix's top directors who are its major shareholders, banking sources said.
"What's 50 million pounds to an American bank," said one corporate finance expert, adding that DLJ was buying Phoenix's British mergers and acquisitions expertise and hoping to use it as a springboard for building up its European business.
Others said this was a big price to pay given Phoenix's relatively slim revenues and profits. "Most people would say it was a pretty racy number," one corporate financier said, adding that DLJ was buying a relatively small number of deal-makers.
Phoenix, whose clients include mutual life insurer Scottish Amicable, was set up in 1981 and was bought by Morgan Grenfell in 1987. But it regained its independence in 1990 through a management buyout led by chairman Martin Smith and the other founders, Philip Seers and David Reid Scott.
The firm has gained a reputation for expertise in financial services. In 1996 it advised on transactions worth around 2.5 billion pounds and in August last year was ranked second by industry magazine Acquisitions Monthly in a league table of British-based independent corporate finance houses.
Philip Healey, editor of the magazine, said the sale last October of Hambro Magan -- which came top of the table -- was the catalyst for the Phoenix sale.
"That was when boutiques like Phoenix decided to put themselves up for sale," he said. Hambro Magan, whose founder George Magan had said it wanted to remain independent, was sold to NatWest Markets for an estimated 80 to 150 million pounds.
Healey said while other boutiques might try to take a similar route, there was nothing of a comparable size to Hambro Magan or Phoenix on offer.
Healey said Phoenix's directors, who own 60 percent of the company, could be seen as getting out at the top of the booming mergers and acquisitions market.
The new firm, to be called DLJ Phoenix, would play a leading role in developing DLJ's investment banking business in Europe and Asia. Smith will be chairman and all of Phoenix's 25 directors and staff will be retained, the two groups said.
Phoenix's three founding directors will be tied in to the new venture for four years, while middle management have signed agreements for a two-year period.
Corporate financiers said this might go some way to ensuring client relationships were maintained, but some pointed out that clients would have opted for Phoenix's independent advice over larger product-led firms and this could be at threat.
New York-based DLJ employs 5,900 people worldwide and describes itself as the leading distributor of U.S. equity securities to institutional investors outside the United States.
DLJ chairman and chief executive John Chalsty said Phoenix could help the group develop high-yield business and target newly emerging companies in eastern Europe and Russia.
He said DLJ had been operating in London for 20 years and was not looking for further acquisitions in the capital. ($1=.6199 Pound)
