Britain's Serious Fraud Office (SFO) was on Thursday drawn closer to the probe into alleged irregularities in three Morgan Grenfell investment funds.
At the same time it emerged the investigation had cast its net overseas, as City regulatory sources confirmed newspaper reports that the inquiry extended beyond Britain.
British newspapers said a number of holding companies listed in Luxembourg were under the microscope of investigators.
A spokeswoman for the SFO said the office was in contact with Britain's investment watchdog the Investment Management Regulatory Organisation (IMRO) which would share any relevant material with the office. The SFO investigates and prosecutes major financial crimes in the City of London.
The Times newspaper said in its Friday edition that a senior SFO lawyer had been briefed officially by IMRO. It added that overseas authorities, in the U.S., Luxembourg and Switzerland, had also been involved in the process.
"We have been in contact with IMRO. IMRO are investigating and will share anything of relevance with us," the SFO spokeswoman told Reuters on Thursday.
And after the 1.4 billion pound funds, which were suspended on Monday, resumed trading, Deutsche Morgan Grenfell, the UK-based investment banking arm of Germany's Deutsche Bank, said nearly eight percent had been redeemed.
The funds, run by Morgan Grenfell Asset Management (MGAM), were suspended due to suspected "irregularities," but resumed trading after Deutsche Bank spent 180 million pounds ($282.4 million) removing certain unlisted securities from the funds.
"This is good news because people were predicting they would be selling lots...but there has been no panic selling," said Deutsche Morgan Grenfell spokesman James Murray.
Industry sources, however, said that redemptions of eight percent in one day was a major reverse.
IMRO's own probe into MGAM has already led to the suspension of two fund managers and briefly saw trading halted in three MGAM funds, which have around 90,000 small investors.
Sources in both the British banking and fund management industries said the probe appeared to be focusing on links between suspended MGAM fund manager Peter Young and a UK-based broker, Fiba Nordic Securities.
Young was not immediately available for comment.
And a spokesman for Fiba Nordic Securities in London said the firm welcomed any investigation and denied any improper relationship with MGAM. Fiba has been a broker and valuer for funds managed by MGAM.
British regulatory sources said the UK's Securities and Futures Authority (SFA) had previously been examining the activities of Fiba over another matter. This had subsequently led to the unofficial investigation by IMRO into MGAM which prompted Young's suspension.
Young, whose personal assets were frozen as a result of a high-court injunction last night, was suspended from MGAM on Monday. MGAM announced on Wednesday evening that a second manager, Stewart Armer, had also been suspended.
DMG said Armer was suspended on Wednesday evening "following the discovery of a suspected breach of personal account dealing rules." A source close to the investigation said Armer's assets would not be frozen and he was not a central focus of the probe. Armer was not available for comment.
In Frankfurt, a spokesman for Deutsche Bank said neither Young nor Armer had committed an obvious breach of regulations. "But both were hovering on the brink of a grey area," spokesman Detlev Rahmsdorf told Reuters.
According to sources close to the investigation, the probe is trying to determine whether the fund's investments in unquoted stocks were valued above their real worth.
The fall-out spread to Sweden where Young had invested substantially in unlisted stocks. Stocks held in his portfolio fell amid concerns from Swedish officials about the impact of the probe on Sweden's alternative stock market.
In Britain the saga is likely to lead to a reappraisal of how funds are managed.
"We will be reviewing our collective investment scheme rules, in particular, the valuation of unquoted securities and the position of prelisted stocks," a spokesman at Britain's Securities and Investments Board (SIB) told Reuters.  
Sources in both the British banking and fund management industries said the probe appeared to be focusing on links between suspended MGAM fund manager Peter Young and a British-based broker, Fiba Nordic Securities.
Young was not immediately available for comment.
A spokesman for Fiba Nordic Securities in London said the firm welcomed any investigation and denied any improper relationship with MGAM. Fiba has been a broker and valuer for funds managed by MGAM.
British regulatory sources said Britain's Securities and Futures Authority (SFA) had previously been examining the activities of Fiba over another matter. This had subsequently led to the unofficial investigation by IMRO into MGAM which prompted Young's suspension.
Young, whose personal assets were frozen as a result of a high-court injunction, was suspended from MGAM on Monday. MGAM announced on Wednesday evening that a second manager, Stewart Armer, had also been suspended.  
DMG said Armer was suspended on Wednesday evening "following the discovery of a suspected breach of personal account dealing rules." A source close to the investigation said Armer's assets would not be frozen and he was not a central focus of the probe. Armer was not available for comment.
In Frankfurt, a spokesman for Deutsche Bank said neither Young nor Armer had committed an obvious breach of regulations. "But both were hovering on the brink of a grey area," spokesman Detlev Rahmsdorf told Reuters.
According to sources close to the investigation, the probe is trying to determine whether the fund's investments in unquoted stocks were valued above their real worth.
In Britain the saga may lead to a reappraisal of how funds are managed, with the Securities and Investments Board promising to review collective investment scheme rules, valuations of unquoted securities and the status of prelisted stocks.
