British banks have developed a greater understanding of the needs of small firms, but much remains to be done to finance the sector, the Bank of England (BoE) said in a report released on Wednesday.
"Relationships between small firms and their banks have improved greatly from a low point four years ago. The question is -- how much of this improvement is due simply to economic recovery, and how much to structural change," Howard Davies, the central bank's deputy governor, said in a statement.
Davies said while there had been genuine changes and banks did now better understand the needs of their small firm customers, there was "a lot more to do".
He said two areas that would receive particular attention were the financing of small exporters and the problems faced by ethnic minority businesses.
The report found that while bank finance continued to be the main form of external finance used by small firms -- described by the bank as small businesses with a turnover up to and including a million pounds a year -- asset-backed finance accounted for "a steadily increasing proportion".
Factors and invoice discounters reported strong growth during 1996 and there was an increase of 19 percent in the number of firms using the services they offer.
Factoring is a credit collection service whereby a company sells its receivables, the outstanding debts due to it, to a factor at a discount. The factor then collects the funds owed and earns a profit via the discount while the company benefits from an improved cash flow.
In the field of bank finance, the report found there was more reliance on the business proposition and less on collateral as well as a rebuilding of relationships between banks and small business customers -- a move from overdrafts to term loans.
Such loans "now account for around two thirds (by value) of the total of 35 billion pounds of bank lending to small firms," the report said.
Despite these changes, the bank's report found that the range of margins paid on small business borrowing did not change significantly during 1996. "Most fell within a range of two to between five and seven percent over base rate," it said, adding that average margins were between three and four percent.
Other changes noted by the report, the fourth in the bank's series of annual surveys, included increased availability of telephone banking, an increase of 23 percent in the number of reported investments by "business angels" and a 38 percent increase in the value of these investments.
Small firms remain concerned by late payment of trade debt despite the introduction of a British standard on payment, although "problems sometimes reflect a lack of attention to credit management by small businesses themselves".
And technology-based firms may have particular difficulty in raising finance "they need at seed, start-up and early stages".
For smaller firms seeking to enter export markets, the most important issue is the availability of focused information and advice, the bank said, adding it intends to further explore this issue during 1997.
