Elizabeth Forsyth, former aide to Polly Peck Plc head Asil Nadir, left court on Friday still awaiting the outcome of her appeal against a money-laundering conviction but enjoying her first taste of freedom in 10 months.
The London Court of Appeal reserved judgment her appeal after a two-day hearing. Forsyth, 60, spent the last 10 months in jail after being found guilty last year on two counts of dishonestly handling a total of 400,000 pounds ($640,000).
She was freed on bail on Thursday when the court quashed her original five-year sentence, which it said was disproportionate, and concluded she had already served long enough in prison.
But after the conclusion of Forsyth's appeal and arguments by the prosecution that the conviction should stand, the court said it could not make an immediate ruling on whether it would also quash the conviction which would clear Forsyth.
"We desire to reserve our judgment in this matter...we will give our decision as soon as we can," Lord Justice Beldam told the court. The three judges said they were unable to give an immediate result as the appeal had raised complex issues.
The prosecution said the money Forsyth was convicted of handling had been stolen by Nadir from fruits-to-electronics firm Polly Peck, which collapsed in 1990 under massive debts.
Nadir still faces fraud and theft charges in Britain after he fled to his native northern Cyprus in 1993, jumping bail of 3.5 million pounds.
Forsyth's barrister, Geoffrey Robertson, argued during the appeal hearing that her conviction was unsafe on a number of grounds, including the fact that Nadir had not been questioned via a video-link from northern Cyprus and the money Forsyth had transferred in Geneva was not in fact stolen.
"It involves so many complex issues of law it was inevitable that judgement should be reserved," Peter Krivinskas, Forsyth's lawyer, told Reuters after the judge's announcement.
Krivinskas said the appeal was a case "which could set legal precendent," adding that it was difficult to gauge how the appeal had been received by the court. "We don't want to tempt providence," he said.
Forsyth, who on Thursday described her period in jail as "an experience," told Reuters she would be returning her mother's home. "I'm going to go home and just relax for the weekend. I enjoy the countryside and will go for a long walk," she added.
Her 90-year-old mother, Margaret Macalpine, was in court to hear the second day of the appeal. She told Reuters outside the courtroom she had been "stunned" when her daughter had been released. "We just couldn't take it in. We were very excited," she said, adding the telephone had not stopped ringing since.
"I've had a quiet time while she was in prison. It's going to be hectic now," she said, adding that Forsyth had many friends who had supported her throughout.
Lawyers said the appeal court's judgement could take as long as a month to be decided.
