Electronic components group Premier Farnell's criticism of BZW over a profits warning has again thrust the investment banking arm of British banking giant Barclays Plc into an unwelcome spotlight.
Premier chief executive Howard Poulson's suggestion that its stockbroker had mishandled a Premier Farnell profits warning on Wednesday is damaging in the short-term. But it may not have longer term implications.
"Who's to say? Everybody has occasional problems with client relationships," a banking analyst at a rival firm told Reuters.
BZW's problems with Premier follow another embarrassing episode for the bank, which is building up its investment banking, over a takeover defence for British regional electricity company Northern Electric.
The Takeover Panel, which polices mergers and acquisitions, is investigating BZW's role in the failed defence against U.S. energy group CE Electric, concentrating on the late disclosure by the firm of a 250,000 pound ($405,000) discretionary fee clause.
Rival corporate financiers said the fee fiasco, which led to an extension of CE's offer for Northern and the loss of the electricity company's independence by the slimmest of margins, would make potential BZW clients think twice and lead others to reassess their relationship.
There does not appear to have been any immediate fall-out, but industry sources point out such moves do not happen overnight. "It has been damaging (to BZW) but it will be even more so if they lose a client as a result," one said.
BZW has made little comment on the Northern affair except to say it acted in good faith and did not break any rules. Earlier this month Barclays's chairman said it would bounce back.
"BZW has a very strong underlying business and I am quite confident it can overcome temporary setbacks of this kind," chairman Andrew Buxton said.
The investment bank has also played down the current troubles with Premier Farnell. In a statement released on Thursday it said it had decided to advise its client to issue a statement only after a brief meeting with its analysts.
They had decided that despite despite a "relatively small percentage profits downgrade for the year 1996-97...the share price might react adversely". A statement had therefore been prepared as quickly as possible with the company, and had been agreed by its board of directors, BZW said.
Premier's Poulson was quoted in British newspapers on Friday as having said the profits warning, which pushed the shares down 25 percent in two days, had been "extremely badly handled". BZW had reversed a view it had given only 10 days before, when it had said a warning was not needed, he said.
Poulson did not say whether the company would end its relationship with its brokers but banking sources said the two sides were still in talks on the matter on Friday.
One financier, who declined to be named, stressed it was premature to blame BZW until it became clear exactly how detailed earlier talks with Premier had been.
"The crucial thing is what was discussed 10 days ago," he said, adding it would have been better off consulting its banking adviser rather than its broker in the first place.
As the first results of the combined Premier Farnell, which merged last year, would be "super-sensitive", even an eight percent fall in forecast profits was something which should have been disclosed, he said.
