Morgan Stanley's surprise merger with Dean Witter Discover will create a more competitive force in the European investment banking market.
"Other banks will look at this and think they have got a stronger competitor than they had before," a banking analyst at one European firm told Reuters on Wednesday.
Earlier the two U.S. firms said they had agreed to form a financial giant called Morgan Stanley, Dean Witter, Discover &amp; Co, with a market capitalisation of $21 billion.
Both U.S. and European investment banks have been pushing for more business in continental Europe and Britain, but analysts pointed out the merger would give Morgan Stanley's European aspirations considerable backing.
Not only would it increase the amount of capital at the firm's disposal for building its European presence, Dean Witter's U.S. retail network could also provide an additional distribution network for Morgan Stanley products.
The firms stressed there would be little overlap as a result of the merger, although they did not specify if there would be any staff cuts. A Morgan Stanley spokesman in London said he could not comment on the implications for the firm in Europe.
A Dean Witter official said it was still early days. "We've only just seen the news. It was kept extremely quiet," Graham Elliot, sales manager at Dean Witter International told Reuters.
Elliot said Dean Witter employs about 120 people in London, with around 35 working in institutional equities sales. This business was, he said, consistently profitable and had been expanding. "We talk to over 300 institutions," he said.
The firm already has significant placing power and its European business is extremely focused, he added.
Dean Witter, founded in 1924, has a presence on London futures and options exchange LIFFE, but it was not immediately clear how its operations there would be merged.
In Eurobonds, there will be no immediately obvious gains to Morgan Stanley. It has led 16 international bond issues deals worth $2.5 billion this year, putting it in 14th place in the league table compiled by Capital DATA Bondware.
Dean Witter is not active in the Eurobond market, while in 1996 Morgan Stanley ranked fifth in the league table.
Banking sources said the merger would be largely complementary in London, adding that the firms would have to search fairly hard to find room for cutting staff.
"But they don't usually look to take people on in this sort of situation," one said.
Morgan Stanley, founded in 1935, employs around 2,000 people in its Canary Wharf headquarters in the docklands area in east London and has just over 2,500 employees in Europe as a whole. Dean Witter's London offices are in the Broadgate development to the north of London's financial heartland.
Some said there could be a fall-out of key personnel if there was a significant change in corporate culture or a management restructuring of the European operation.
But the idea of a merger is not new to Morgan Stanley, which in 1994 engaged in unsuccessful talks with British merchant bank S.G. Warburg. Warburgs was later bought by Swiss Bank Corp.
A joint statement by Morgan Stanley and Dean Witter detailed the new senior management structure but gave no indication of the position of Morgan Stanley's executive chairman in Europe Sir David Walker or other senior European personnel.
Morgan Stanley insiders in London said the first they had heard of the merger was an address by Richard Fisher, the firm's chairman, over the internal communications system.
