Morgan Grenfell Asset Management, part of the giant Deutsche Bank group, has frozen the personal assets of fund manager Peter Young as a probe into suspected irregularities in three of its funds continues.
"We have obtained an injunction against Peter Young in order to freeze his assets," a spokesman for Deutsche Morgan Grenfell, Deutsche's investment banking arm, told Reuters on Thursday.
The injunction was obtained jointly with the Royal Bank of Scotland, trustee for the two funds managed by 38-year-old Young, who has been suspended and was on Wednesday reported to be at his home in Amersham, west of London.
The DMG spokesman confirmed a newspaper report that the injunction also covered the assets of a company called Russ Oil &amp; Technology, but declined to give any further details.
On Monday trading in three European funds -- the 788 million stg ($1.24 billion) MG European Growth Trust, the 134 million stg MG Europa and 445 million stg Dublin-listed MG European Capital Growth -- was suspended pending investigation.  
This is being undertaken unofficially by British investments watchdog IMRO, along with the company, and centres on the valuations of holdings of unquoted and pre-listed (those to be quoted within a year) stocks within the funds.
While few details of the alleged irregularities have emerged, a complex web which includes Swedish crown-denominated warrants in a Canadian mining company and shares in obscure Norwegian firms is beginning to surface.
The Financial Times said on Thursday the investigation into the Morgan Grenfell funds followed a Securities and Futures Authority (SFA) examination in April of a London-based broker.
This led it to look at the funds managed by Young and it had then made contact with IMRO, which had kept a "watching brief" on the funds until last week, the FT added.
The funds are due to resume trading on Thursday after Deutsche Bank said on Tuesday it would meet liabilities related to any irregularities that might be identified. The bank also said the prices at which the funds trade should not be hit.
On Tuesday it emerged Deutsche Bank had injected between 150 and 200 million stg into the funds, buying some of the securities for its own account to protect investors' interests.  
Despite this, fund managers say many of the 90,000 investors are expected to bail out of the funds when the suspension on them is lifted because of a loss of confidence. The full scale of the flight from the funds will not be known until later.
Analysts have already said that despite Deutsche's attempts to move quickly to limit damage at the British fund management subsidiary, its credibility and earnings are likely to be hit.
The impact on the asset management business will only become clear once the extent of investors' reaction is known.
But while the problems are confined to only three funds run by Morgan Grenfell Asset Management, the embarrassing and potentially damaging incident comes at a time when Germany's biggest bank is attempting to stamp its authority on the highly competitive world of global investment banking.
Taking on the tough competition of Wall Street firms in a bid to become a premier global investment house has involved a high-profile, and reportedly costly, recruitment drive to ensure the bank has the top people. At one stage this led to a threat of court action for poaching by rival ING Barings.  
Some banking sources say Deutsche Bank's own reputation should not be tarnished by investigations into the funds, adding its swift action and the bank's top-rating by credit rating firms should ensure there is little long-term damage.
But other firms are unlikely to show the bank any mercy and will do their best to capitalise on its current predicament.  
Stewart Armer, manager of MG Europa Fund was meanwhile suspended from his duties on Wednesday evening following the discovery of a suspected breach of personal account dealing rules. He has been replaced by Julian Johnston, head of the European equities team which includes UK equities.
Trading in the three European funds was suspending on Monday pending an investigation into possible irregularities, which is being undertaken officially by British investments watchdog IMRO. Last night, MGAM won a High Court injunction freezing the personal assets of fund manager Peter Young.
While few details of the alleged irregularities have emerged, a complex web which includes Swedish crown-denominated warrants in a Canadian mining company and shares in minor, unlisted Norwegian firms is beginning to surface.
The Financial Times newspaper said on Thursday that the investigation into the Morgan Grenfell funds followed a Securities and Futures Authority (SFA) examination in April of a London-based broker.
