Members of Britain's third largest building society, the Woolwich, on Tuesday voted overwhelmingly in favour of ditching the mortgage lender's 150-year-old mutual status in favour of becoming a publicly listed bank.
After a special general meeting the proposals, which will give individual members a share windfall worth an average 1,200 pounds ($1,961), were approved by more than 95 percent of both the savers and borrowers who voted.
"...We probably weren't too surprised but it's pleasant that our members feel exactly the same way because quite frankly we've put a lot of thought into trying to get this right," said John Stewart, Woolwich chief executive.
Last month the Woolwich said the handout of at least 450 shares to qualifying members would go to around 2.57 million people, including qualifying members and pensioners.
Around 1,200 members, many unhappy with the conversion, turned up at the meeting but the vote was decided by a large postal vote.
Stewart told Reuters that Woolwich Plc, as it will be known when the 3.0 billion pound flotation goes ahead in July, wanted to offer "a full range of personal financial services" and planned to expand into areas such as pensions.
"That's an area we will either grow into organically or we might make an acquisition..." he said, adding that the group was "a bit light in weight" in other areas such as life assurance and unit trusts.
He did not rule out the possibility of acquisitions to expand the Woolwich's business, but he stressed that if they happened these were likely to be friendly mergers, not hostile takeovers. "The Woolwich's history is as a white knight, most people come to us because someone else is threatening them."
Stewart said the Woolwich, founded in 1847 in south London and set to become a FTSE-100 company and one of Britain's 10 largest banks, would also press ahead with building up relatively high-margin business in France and Italy.
He said the Woolwich would not be looking at other European countries unless "it was the right opportunity" because it was already established and doing very well in France and Italy.
But there are plans to develop so-called "telebanking" and electronic banking, the latter probably starting this year and telephone banking in 1998.
The Woolwich is one of four building societies planning stock market flotations during 1997. The others are Britain's biggest mortgage lender, the Halifax, the Alliance &amp; Leicester and Northern Rock.
Some members protested at the Woolwich's plans to shed its mutual status -- where the building society is owned by its savers and borrowers -- in favour of being a publicly listed company with shareholders who expect dividends.
A number argued that this would reduce the favourable savings rates which building societies have traditionally paid compared with their bank counterparts and increase make loans to house-buyers more expensive.
But Stewart said this would not be the case as Britain's increasingly competitive financial services market and the economies of scale from conversion meant the Woolwich would have to offer not only top quality service but also competitive lending and savings rates.
Stewart told the meeting that Woolwich members should not "get too hung up about being a bank", adding it had no intention of moving into commercial lending, international lending or investment banking but would continue to focus on housing finance and retail savings.
