Britain's opposition Labour party has no plans to revolutionise the regulatory structure governing the financial services industry if it wins the election, which the ruling Conservative government must call by May.
"We are talking about a developmental process - reform rather than revolution," Mike O'Brien, Labour's shadow economic secretary, told Reuters in a telephone interview.
O'Brien said Labour planned a number of changes, the most obvious being a shift in Britain's regulatory structure whereby top regulator the Securities and Investments Board (SIB) would merge with the existing Self-Regulatory Organisations (SROs).
At present the SIB supervises these "frontline regulators" which authorise firms to conduct investment business, monitor them, handle complaints and punish rule-breakers. O'Brien believes this system to be overly bureaucratic and expensive.
"What we have to do is to put in place a system that is flexible enough to adapt the changes in the market. We've got a rapidly changing global market out there and we have to have a regulator in Britain that can respond quickly," he said.
But Labour does not intend setting up an equivalent to the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), which O'Brien said would not be appropriate to Britain. "As soon as the SEC phones, you phone your lawyer -- we want a system where if you have a problem you phone the regulator," he added.
Labour also intends altering the nature of regulation in Britain's all-important financial services sector. "We'd rather have four rules that worked than 400 which tried to catch every eventuality but just succeeded in confusing everyone."
And consultation is king when it comes to Labour's approach to regulation, including the Bank of England's future as a regulator, an unresolved area requiring more industry input.
This process is likely to last more than a year and Labour would state its own view on the issue before it was completed.
Labour is also talking to industry participants about the provision of financial services to people on low pay.
"We have to find a means by which there can be continued sale of financial services products of a good quality to lower income groups," he said. This has to happen without sacrificing quality of advice while reducing the regulatory burden involved.
Discussions have so far been fairly informal but firms have been to him and assisted by giving opinions and advice and O'Brien is confident this approach will prove a success.
"We believe the City has a major contribution to make in terms of our thoughts on how these issues can be resolved. I've been tremendously encouraged by the response so far."
Rather than "firing from the hip", Labour has adopted a cautious approach which will ultimately ensure "a sensible policy which can command support in the City."
O'Brien points out that working with the City -- shorthand for London's financial services sector -- is crucial because the sector produces 18 percent of GDP and employs around three-and-a-half million people.
He denied suggestions that altering the structure that has evolved from the Financial Services Act of 1986 will lead to in-fighting among the SROs and less effective supervision.
For within the new regulatory organisation, likely still to be called the Securities and Investments Board, "there will always be a place for good regulators".
O'Brien said he could not give a timescale for the changes as this would depend on other legislation Labour would enact if it forms a government, but they would come within five years.
A clear distinction will remain between the professional and the retail markets under Labour with a "lighter touch" in the wholesale area, dominated by the principle of "caveat emptor", and a greater degree of openness in the retail area.
O'Brien said under Labour there would be "a much more arm's length approach" with minimum political interference in the work of the regulator and confidence in the watchdog's ability.
