Britain's opposition Labour party said on Monday that it believed problems at Morgan Grenfell Asset Management (MGAM) could have been uncovered earlier and warned other financial institutions to be more vigilant.
"The preliminary indications are the problem was not determined as soon as it should have been," said Alistair Darling, shadow chief secretary to the Treasury.
"Alarm bells ought to be ringing in all major institutions. They should ask themselves if something similar could have happened," Darling said in a telephone interview.
Trading in the three funds, which were worth an estimated 1.4 billion pounds ($2.18 billion), was suspended last week when MGAM, part of the giant Deutsche Bank group, disclosed suspected irregularities in the funds and began a probe.
The problems centre on the valuation of the high proportion of speculative unlisted high-technology stocks held in the funds.
Trading in the three funds resumed last Thursday after a 180 million pound cash injection by Deutsche.
Peter Young, the fund manager of two of the funds, was suspended and an injunction obtained by MGAM and Royal Bank of Scotland, trustee of the funds, to freeze his assets.
An in-depth probe spearheaded by investment watchdog the Investment Management Regulatory Organisation (IMRO) is underway, and it has brought in accountants to work out how much compensation may be due to the 90,000 investors in the funds.
Darling said the problems at MGAM showed the regulatory system was not perfect and there were still problems to be addressed, both by regulators and businesses.
"Good regulatory sense and good business sense go hand-in-hand," Darling said, adding that every large organisation should be asking itself if similar irregularities could occur within their own structures.
While the Labour party stood by its proposals to make the Securities and Investments Board (SIB) directly responsible for regulating Britain's financial community, it would not make any recommendations on the latest episode until IMRO had completed its investigation into the matter.
"The central question which IMRO needs to look at is how was it possible for these problems to arise," Darling said.
The fact that a succession of such problems were blamed on a so-called "rogue trader" or dealer was also a concern, as it raised the question of how those charged with compliance or those in senior management could miss such dealings.
"I'm concerned that when things go wrong the finger is pointed at a rogue activity. Ideally we want a system where it is simply not possible for one or two people to stray off the path," Darling said.
He also said the role of trustees of funds was a matter of concern, adding it was important to find a way of ensuring they are not only independent but constantly vigilant.
The role of a trustee is to represent the interests of investors and to ensure a fund is managed according to its mandate.
"The public needs to be confident that these funds are properly managed," he said.
($1=.6412 Pound)
