Lawyers acting for Peter Young, the fund manager suspended last week by Morgan Grenfell Asset Management (MGAM), said on Monday there were no grounds for allegations of criminality and there had been no such allegation in the proceedings which had been served on him.
"There is no allegation of criminality in the proceedings which have been served on Peter Young and there would be no grounds whatsoever for any such allegation," solicitors Peters &amp; Peters said in a statement.  
Young was suspended when MGAM, a subsidiary of German banking giant Deutsche Bank AG, said it had found "suspected irregularities" in three of its funds, two of which were managed by him.
Young, whose personal assets were frozen after MGAM and fund trustee Royal Bank of Scotland obtained an injunction, has not been available for comment.
Trading in the funds was halted last Monday but resumed on Thursday after a 180 million pounds ($280.7 million) cash injection by Deutsche Bank and reassurances that investors would not lose out.  
The problems centre on the valuation of the high proportion of unlisted high-technology stocks held in the funds. They are being investigated by British investments watchdog the Investment Management Regulatory Organisation (IMRO).
Britain's Serious Fraud Office (SFO), which prosecutes major financial crimes has taken no official action. It has been in contact with IMRO, but has so far only been kept briefed on developments and denies a criminal investigation is underway.  
"Weekend reports that the SFO was about to get involved were wholly speculative. The director must have reasonable grounds to suspect that serious or complex fraud offences have taken place," SFO spokesman James O'Donoghue told Reuters on Monday.
The probe into what took place within MGAM is widely expected to take some time, with a complex web of holdings and companies around the world to be unravelled.
Both MGAM and IMRO have drafted in forensic accountants to look into the fund management business of the three funds, MGAM has enlisted Ernst &amp; Young and IMRO Deloitte Touche.  
MGAM has also appointed law firm Slaughter &amp; May to help untangle a labyrinth of investments. Slaughter &amp; May confirmed its appointment but would not comment on the investigation.
The fall-out of the episode for Deutsche Bank continued on Monday with the news from credit rating agency Moody's that it is looking at the bank's rare and treasured triple-A credit rating in the light of the MGAM situation.
And investment bank Salomon Brothers said the worry that Deutsche Bank might return to its accident prone image of the early 1990s may be the most serious concern stemming from problems at the bank's asset management arm.  
But Deutsche Morgan Grenfell, the bank's investment banking arm, said redemptions from the funds had dropped by over half on Monday compared to the 83 million pounds redeemed last Friday and the 110 million pounds which flooded out last Thursday.
"Just under 39 million pounds was redeemed today," DMG spokesman James Murray told Reuters. "As expected the redemptions have slowed down significantly. There is still enough cash left in the funds."
"What we are seeing is a stabilisation," he added.  
He said there had been just over 300 million pounds in the funds after the Deutshe cash injection and if redemptions continued to drop there would be sufficient cash.
Murray confirmed that investors would be compensated, but that the amount would only be decided after the investigation. "If compensation is found to be due then it will be paid by us," he said, adding that it would be calculated by an independent accountant appointed by IMRO.
He said the preliminary part of MGAM's investigation would take between four and six weeks. ($1=.6412 Pound)
