National Westminster Bank Plc said on Monday it would complete an internal probe into a 50 million pound ($81 million) trading hole as quickly as possible.
"Our internal inquiry is continuing...we are trying to do it as quickly as possible," a NatWest spokeswoman told Reuters.
But the bank, which on Friday revealed mispricing errors in the interest rate options book at its investment banking arm NatWest Markets, is also employing an outside firm.
"We are using internal resources and also external advisors," the NatWest official said, although she declined to say which firm had been appointed to help the bank unravel what went wrong.
The investigation, which will include a thorough review of NatWest's control systems, is expected to take several weeks.
British financial regulator the Securities and Futures Authority (SFA), which licenses options traders, has been informed of the errors. But NatWest would not say whether it had meetings with the watchdog over the weekend.
"We are keeping our regulators informed," the NatWest spokeswoman said. SFA officials were not immediately available for comment but the Bank of England, which regulates banks generally, on Sunday said it would be looking at what happened.
Options are contracts giving buyers the right, but not the obligation, to buy or sell an underlying security at a set price on a set date in the future.
Banking sources said mispricing was a general term which did not necessarily imply there had been any fraudulent intention but could have resulted from pricing errors.
But they added that if such errors occurred on an on-going basis, it would suggest that the trader involved had been aware of a discrepancy between actual and book price of the derivatives in which he was dealing.
Banking sources named the interest rate options trader at the centre of the affair as Kyriacos Papouis, who now works for U.S. securities firm Bear Stearns, but NatWest would not confirm this.
Papouis, who left NatWest Markets last year, could not be reached at Bear Stearns in London and the firm said it was referring all calls to the trader to its press office in New York.
A spokeswoman there was not immediately available for comment.
Bankers questioned why it had taken NatWest several months to uncover the mispricings, which it said had taken place over a period during 1996 but had only come to light in the last few days.
The NatWest spokeswoman said this time lapse was one aspect of the affair it would be addressing in its internal probe. She said the inquiry would also aim to uncover the motivation of whoever was responsible for what had occurred.
In addition to reporting one trader to the SFA, NatWest said it had suspended a senior trader, named by banking sources as Neil Dodgson, for "failure to supervise", pending the conclusion of its probe.
A spokesman for Dodgson said he could not comment on the case but would co-operate fully with any investigations.
While the banking community awaited further details of precisely what precipitated the 50 million pound loss, NatWest's shares were marked lower, dropping 41 pence to 717.5 pence by early afternoon.
Around 24 pence of this fall was attributable to the impact of the shares going ex-dividend while the sector as a whole was weaker following the announcement of HSBC Holdings' results. ($ = 0.615 British Pounds)
