British investment bank Close Brothers said on Monday its enlarged corporate finance business was exceeding expectations and helping strong fee earnings.
"The corporate finance business has gone much better than we ever dreamt," Rod Kent, Close Brothers' managing director, told Reuters.
The group earlier today announced a 30 percent increase in first half pre-tax profits to 28.2 million pounds ($45.8 million), from 21.7 million the previous year.
Close Brothers enlarged its corporate finance division last May when it bought Hill Samuel's corporate finance department from Britain's Lloyds TSB Group Plc.
It said the integration had been very successful, with no material loss of clients or staff and had led to a leap in activity and profits in the corporate finance area. Kent said Close Brothers now had "well over 80 quoted clients", adding it was focusing on giving advice to growth companies.
"It is quite clear from the figures that we have got off to a good start on our corporate finance side," he said, adding the majority of an increase in fees and commissions from 9.0 million stg to 19 million stg had come from this quarter.
Kent was also upbeat about Close Brothers' other main business areas, including other aspects of what it calls "City Merchant Banking".
He said the asset finance division had grown to new records in advances and profits. The division accounted for 41 percent of operating profits during the period, down from 44 percent for the same period a year earlier.
And WINS, the former Winterflood Securities market-making arm, had "a very good half" retaining its position in the market place where it benefited particularly from high levels of activity in smaller company stocks.
Kent said WINS' small retail order gilts business had moved into profitability during the period, adding that worries about an order driven system were unlikely to materialise.
Market-making accounted for 33 percent of operating profits during the period, down from 34 percent, while merchant banking accounted for 26 percent, up from 22 percent. Kent said he was happy with the overall mix of business.
Within the merchant banking arm, Kent said the insurance premium finance division PROMPT was "going like a train" and the group was making steady progress in its other specialist business.
Asked about the likelihood of Close Brothers making acquisitions to grow its business, Kent said the firm would be patient when it came to buying other companies.
"We have clearly signalled our intentions to get something on the investment management side," he said, adding that on the basis of the high valuations of investment management companies at the moment, it would be difficult to buy.
And Kent said he was not worried by the trend for smaller merchant banks such as Close Brothers to be gobbled up by larger expanding foreign investment banks.
"I have never been concerned about it. Our best asset is our performance. Ownership is in the public arena," he said.
Close Brothers said it would continue to see organic growth in its activities but warned the forthcoming election in Britain could cause a temporary slow-down in some of its businesses.
The group announced an increased interim dividend of 3.8 pence, up from 3.2 pence, while earnings per share for the period rose 21 percent to 15.31 pence from 12.64 pence. ($ = 0.615 British Pounds)
