British hotels and betting group Ladbroke Group Plc announced on Tuesday the closure of its property arm and sale of its remaining properties to allow it to concentrate on core areas.
"The closure of the property division will allow us to focus upon our core businesses of hotels and betting and gaming," said Brian Wallace, Ladbroke's group finance director.
Ladbroke said the cost of the closure would be 52.3 million pounds ($84.4 million) and would mainly cover losses arising on the sale of property and a provision "to write down the remaining portfolio to net realisable value upon an accelerated sale".
The firm said its 1996 accounts, due to be released on Thursday, would also include a non-operating exceptional charge of 17.6 million pounds "mainly representing losses on disposals of investment properties previously announced during 1996".
Analysts said that although the cost was larger than expected, the closure and property sales removed one element of uncertainty for the group during 1997.
Dresdner Kleinwort Benson's Greg Freehely said in a research note that Ladbroke's 1996 results would now include exceptional items totalling more than 100 million pounds, including property disposals and closure of the division.
The investment bank said other exceptional items were the settlement of a rent dispute at the Paris Hilton and a settlement to cover an adjustment on the price of DIY retailer Texas Homecare which Ladbroke sold to J. Sainsbury Plc two years ago.
Ladbroke is expected to report a profit rise of around 30 percent for 1996, with analysts forecasting pre-tax, pre-exceptional profits in the 155-165 million pound range, against 121.3 million pounds a year ago. Net dividend is forecast at between 6.0 and 6.2 pence per share, compared with 6.0 pence.
Freehely said the discount on the sale of properties to Britain's Minerva Plc for 25 million pounds was larger than anticipated. But he adde that "the decision to provide for the closure of the division and take further write downs is the correct one...".
The portfolio of around 10 commercial and residential properties sold to Minerva had a book value of about 34.6 million pounds and were mostly in London and southern England.
Ladbroke said its property arm had also sold a stake in a Boston office building to HN Gorin Inc for $23.0 million in cash, about equal to book value.
It also expects to make a further U.S. property disposal this week for about $13 million and use the proceeds from the sales to pay down debt.
Ladbroke said the net book value of commercial property at January 1, 1996 was 373.4 million pounds. A property analyst at one British firm said it was no great surprise that Ladbroke had finally withdrawn from the property market as it had not performed in this sector for some time.
"They used to be good at what they did in property, but they rather lost their way," he said. "They are retrenching into
