Canada's TrizecHahn Corp and German businessman Dieter Bock on Wednesday unveiled a European property alliance which analysts said underlined increasing confidence in the market.
"This shows further faith being expressed in the UK and European property market," a property analyst at one major European investment bank said.
Toronto-based TrizecHahn, which has $6.0 billion in assets and $1.2 billion in uncommitted capital, said it would buy British and German property projects from Bock's Advanta Management AG for around $147 million.
It said it would pay for the acquisitions by issuing subordinate voting shares to Bock, as well as by assuming development liabilities and through construction financing.
Steve Mallen, head of research at property consultants Knight Frank, praised the timing of the move, saying: "This is a wise strategic move, I think their timing is perfect."
Bock will become president of TrizecHahn Europe and a director of the company, with an equity stake of around four percent. At the same time Bock announced he would resign as non-executive deputy chairman of Lonrho Plc and also as a director of the British- based trading and hotels conglomerate.
"The opportunity at TrizecHahn will demand my full attention," Bock said.
Both parties said the partnership represented an important strategic move, reflecting its commitment to expanding outside North America. Under the terms of the deal, which is expected to close in April, TrizecHahn's existing European operations will be merged with its new German and British development projects under Bock's leadership.
Peter Munk, TrizecHahn's chairman and chief executive, told a telephone news conference he was excited by the deal, which would allow the marriage of the firm's asset base and experience with Bock's "experience, presence and credibility" in Europe.
Munk said the deal would widen TrizecHahn's horizons beyond Eastern Europe to the whole of the European market. He said the company's involvement would encompass both development and investment in property in Europe.
He had not done business with Bock before, he said, but the two had become good friends out of a common interest in gold mining.
Bock said he was bringing in expertise built up in Europe and would strengthen the European management capacity.
The projects being taken over by TrizecHahn were a commercial property, Number 1 Poultry in London's City financial district, two commercial developments in Berlin, one in Dresden and a Baltic Sea project.
TrizecHahn, one of North America's largest publicly traded real estate developers, was formed from the merger last November of Horsham Corporation and Trizec Corporation Ltd.
It owns, develops and manages office buildings and regional shopping centres in the U.S., Canada and Central Europe.
