A proposed reform of Britain's state pensions system would revolutionise the financial services industry, market participants said on Thursday.
The ruling Conservative government on Wednesday unveiled proposals which aim to prevent huge burdens falling on future taxpayers by making workers take responsibility for providing for their old age.
Roger Taylor, deputy chairman of composite insurer Royal &amp; Sun Alliance, described the plans as "the biggest shift in financial services in the last 50 years".
Taylor said it would encourage other governments to follow suit, adding that if the proposals were enacted they would start to generate additional business in three to four years time.
"For the industry as a whole it is good news," Tony Baker, deputy director general of the Association of British Insurers (ABI), told Reuters.
Prime Minister John Major must call an election by May and the opposition Labour Party is well ahead in the opinion polls.
Labour wants to retain the basic state pension and develop a new range of second pensions for those not already in occupational pension schemes.
But the banking and life insurance industry is gearing up for change whatever the outcome of the election, arguing that demographic changes mean additional pension provisions are essential for economic and social stability beyond 2000.
Banking analyst John Leonard of U.S. investment bank Salomon Brothers agreed that the British government's decision to address the problem was an opportunity for the industry.
"Anything giving rise to privately managed assets must introduce interesting products for banks and the insurance sector," he said.
He said a large additional pool of privately managed money to fund the pensions was a particularly big opportunity for the "large volume, efficiently managed providers with good distribution networks."
But the shift from state to privately held pensions could also spawn a major marketing war between the firms most likely to win business.
This in itself would be costly, at least at the outset. The start of any such scheme would be particularly important as once individuals had chosen a provider with which to invest their pension contributions, it would be difficult for other companies to persuade them to move.
Baker said there would still be plenty of business for existing players in the market which were not able to sell the new scheme, labelled Basic Pension Plus.
He said there would have to be regulations governing matters such as maximum charges, transferability, reporting and investment returns, while not all insurance companies would necessarily be included on the approved list of providers.
While the desirability of involvement for companies would depend on the rules set out by the government, Baker said the scheme could lead to further consolidation in the industry, where only the big, efficient providers could meet the criteria.
He said the scheme could hit smaller players and other elements of the industry, particularly independent financial advisors (IFAs), who could lose out if individuals chose to top up basic contributions with their main pensions provider rather than other companies.
"The need for a middle man might be much less than at the present time," he said.
Baker added that the government had underlined that it wanted simplicity and lower costs to result from the changes, factors which he said would mean individuals "buying" their pensions rather than being sold them.
The importance of the move was underlined by Royal &amp; Sun Alliance's Taylor, who said self-provision would become the biggest single transaction an individual would make.
Mike Blackburn, chief executive of Britain's Halifax Building Society, said earlier this week that the group would target long-term savings products -- life assurance, pensions and investments -- because of their growth potential.
"With an ageing population and governments unable to look after people as they have historically been able to do in retirement, the requirement on the private individual to provide for the long-term future will be accentuated," Blackburn said.
