British estate agency and financial products group Hambro Countrywide Plc has capitalised on the housing market recovery and is prepared for further growth.
The company said on Thursday it had turned around a pre-tax loss of 3.9 million pounds for 1995 into a pre-tax profit of 30.8 million pounds for 1996 and promised there was more to come.
"I think we are only half way there yet...if we get to anything like the volumes that we anticipate this year...the prospects are obviously very exciting," managing director Harry Hill told Reuters. Hill said the British housing market was improving across the country, although there were still regional differences. He said London and the south east were outpacing other areas, but added he did not believe prices would rise unsustainably.
"I suspect it will find a level," he said. "There's an enormous momentum that will probably sustain the market this year and next before it even starts to draw breath," he added.
All the factors were in place for a long, sustained recovery in Britain and within that context house prices would increase.
Hambro Countrywide, which is 52 percent owned by British merchant bank Hambros Plc, also announced that it had broken with tradition and made a move into the burgeoning London market by buying an estate agency and letting business for 7.45 million pounds.
Faron Sutaria &amp; Co has five existing branches in London and plans to expand in the west, south and north west of the capital. "From the middle of this year we will have nine offices under Faron's banner and we would hope in the next two years to have another seven," Hill said. Hambro Countrywide said the entire management team at Faron wanted to stay with the business, adding that the acquisition offered the opportunity to generate additional revenue by offering mortgages and financial services to new clients. Hill does not see the impending British election slowing Hambro Countrywide's business and said a victory for the opposition Labour party could in fact benefit the firm's clients. "I don't think it will make much difference either way," he said.
He said Hambro Countrywide had sold more mortgages and retail financial services during February than in any other month in its history.
And there was no sign of change to the direct correlation between people buying houses and financial products from the group. "Most people want to do most things if they can, easily and comfortably under one roof," Hill said.
While there are a growing number of competitors in the market-place, Hill said he did not see Hambro Countrywide's margins being pinched as a result.
Asked if Hambro Countrywide planned to make any further acquisitions, Hill said "We aren't talking to anyone today". But the group said it was in discussions with a "number of leading law firms" as part of a move to set up a conveyancing operation.
"We believe this will bring significant benefits to all our clients in smoothing and speeding up the home buying process," the group said, adding it expected to open its first centre in April 1997.
As for Hambro Countrywide's own future, chairman Christopher Sporborg said there was little chance of a change in the current shareholding by Hambros.
Shares in Hambro Countrywide, which also announced a final dividend of 1.5 pence to make a total dividend of 2.0 pence, were down 4.0 pence at 1100 GMT at 123.5 pence.
