A British firm believes it has developed a computer programme which could prevent other financial firms getting into the sort of situation Morgan Grenfell Asset Management (MGAM) is currently trying to resolve.
Numerous risk management systems already exist, but Frasin Limited says its Windows-based SOFWIN is the first to address operational risk management rather than financial risk.
"We believe it will prompt senior management to ask the right questions, which will create a more disciplined and controlled environment," Frasin's chief executive Philip Martin told Reuters on Tuesday.
MGAM is attempting to unscramble a complicated web of investments in three of its funds. These led to the funds being temporarily suspended last week after it revealed "suspected irregularities" in the them.
A fund manager for two of the funds was suspended at the same time and had his assets frozen by a High Court injunction.
Ironically, Martin says he took the product to show Deutsche Morgan Grenfell, the investment banking arm of Deutsche Bank, some months ago with a view to selling it to them.
He says he will still offer it to the firm, freely admitting that his prospects may have been boosted by publicity surrounding MGAM and a recent fine for fund management firms in the Robert Fleming group over so-called "rat-trading" by a fund manager in a Hong Kong joint venture with Jardine Matheson.
"I have to thank Morgan Grenfell and Jardine Fleming because their timing has been impeccable," he says with a grin.
Martin believes the software could also help banks avoid another Barings situation, where so-called "rogue trader" Nick Leeson, was able to run both the front and back offices, effectively monitoring his own trading.
Leeson is currently serving a long jail sentence in Singapore for fraudulent trading which led to losses of around $1.4 billion and culminated in the blue-blooded bank's collapse.
While Martin admits it will never be possible to eradicate rogue individuals, he says closer monitoring by senior management of all an institution's operations is essential.
If a chief executive, chief financial officer or other top official wants to avoid criticism in the event of a problem within the firm, then a programme such as that offered by Frasin, which is part of the HSBC group, should ensure they have adopted every measure possible to avoid such events.
SOFWIN, which costs 12,000 pounds ($18,640) a year and must be signed up to for three years, takes the institution through a detailed questionnaire, with a possible 3,600 different questions.
The collated results, after any subsidiaries or branches have also been through the process, then gives a clear picture of where any potential weaknesses lie, Martin said. It can also compare the standards of different branches and how they each match up with an "ideal" set-up.
Much of the programme is devoted to dealing activities, as this has been found to be a major area of concern.
"The largest part revolves around dealing activities. I have spoken to senior managers who are scared to death about what their traders are up to," he added.
But however thorough the programme, Martin says the buck stops with senior management and they are the main target of his marketing.
"It takes commitment by senior management. If they are not committed to it (assessing the company's organisational risk), then it's a waste of time. But they are opening themselves up to criticism," he said. ($1=.6436 Pound)
