Kyriacos Papouis, the trader allegedly linked to NatWest Markets' 50 million pound ($80 million) options loss, has resigned from U.S. investment bank Bear Stearns.
"We have accepted the resignation of Kyriacos Papouis, an interest rate trader in our derivatives department," a Bear Stearns spokeswoman told Reuters.
"We have conducted a thorough review of his open trading positions and are satisfied that they are all booked and valued properly. We have notified the Securities and Futures Authority (SFA) of his resignation," she added.
The spokeswoman declined to give any further details of Papouis' resignation.
Earlier this week, Bear Stearns said Papouis was "on leave, pending further information".
Papouis could not be contacted for comment on Friday.
Papouis left NatWest Markets, the investment banking arm of Britain's National Westminster Bank, late last year and moved to Bear Stearns.
Last week NatWest disclosed mispricing errors in its interest rate options book and said it had suspended a senior trader, named by banking sources as Neil Dodgson, for alleged "failure to supervise". It also reported a former options trader, allegedly Papouis, to financial markets watchdog the SFA.
Options are contracts which give buyers the right, but not the obligation, to buy or sell an underlying security at a set price on a set date in the future.
The SFA said it had been notified of the NatWest probe into the loss and had opened a file while the Bank of England has said it is cooperating with the SFA.
The episode was especially embarrassing to NatWest coming only days after it announced its 1996 results.
On Thursday, a senior NatWest Markets official said that compared with the size of losses run up from derivatives trading at some other banks, it had got off relatively lightly.
"If that is all it costs us to learn the value of a tight infrastructure, then it could turn out to be a blessing in disguise," Nick Riley was reported by Britain's Press Association agency as saying.
Riley is administrative officer for NatWest Markets' global foreign exchange business. His comments were made during a conversation at a charitable function on Thursday night, banking sources said.
The PA said Riley had pointed out that other banks such as Barings, which crashed in 1995 owing around $1.4 billion as a result of losses run up by Singapore-based trader Nick Leeson, paid far more to find out that their internal controls were inadequate.
But a NatWest spokeswoman distanced the firm from Riley's comments.
"He is not a spokesman for NatWest and his comments are not therefore attributable to the company. This was a personal view," she told Reuters.
