Regent Pacific, the Hong-Kong based fund which last month took a three percent stake in Britain's Hambros, said it was reassured by a meeting with chief executive Sir Chips Keswick that its profits would improve.
"It was useful to sit down and spend a little time with them. I left with the impression that the company's profits will improve," Julian Mayo, director of Regent Pacific Corporate Finance in London told Reuters.
A spokesman for British investment bank Hambros Plc declined to comment on the meeting but Mayo said it was "friendly, business-like and constructive."
Regent, often called a "vulture fund," received widespread attention last month when it made the Hambros buy.
Its chief Jim Mellon was widely quoted as saying the bank, one the last few British independent investment banks, was undervalued and undermanaged. He was also reported to have said the bank's shares had been "diabolical" over the last 10 years.
This attack got a cool response from Hambros, which said it would meet Regent but would not otherwise comment on its new shareholder or its intentions.
Mayo said he had gone into the meeting wanting to hear what Hambros' strategy was going forward, how the bank was planning to coninue its policy of rationalisation and restructuring and when shareholders would see the fruits of it.
Asked if he was happy with the answers he received, Mayo said "Yes, in broad terms."
But he was less clear about Regent Pacific's long term aims in buying into Hambros, which like other British merchant banks has been the subject of takeover speculation in the past.
"Our motives are to make a good return from this investment, whether it is short or long term remains to be seen," Mayo said, adding that the group liked to have good relations with a company in which it invests and this was not a one-off meeting.
"We were left with the impression that the door is always open," Mayo said.
Regent Pacific's action had, he said highlighted what a number of analysts had been saying for some time about Hambros' performance. Undervaluation of the shares and discussions with analysts had prompted the decision to buy into Hambros, he said.
He said some analysts thought the bank's shares could rise to between 300 and 325 pence, closer to its potential value.
Hambros shares closed at 260.5 pence on Tuesday, up a penny. There was speculative buying late in August after Regent Pacific's holding became public with the share price reaching a year high of 280 pence.
But talk of a takeover or a possible break-up of the bank was dismissed by analysts at the time as unlikely in the near term, although some said it had a better break-up value.
Mayo said Regent could not launch a bid for Hambros but said a greater holding in the company was "not out of the question," although it would have to notify both the bank and the stock exchange if it did buy a more significant stake.
"Whether we increase our position is something we will have to decide upon," he said.
In 1995 Hambros' pre-tax profits fell to 20.6 million pounds from 37.1 million the year before. Bad debt provisions grew to 36.2 million from 13.5 million pounds during the period.
