British investment bank Schroders Plc said on Wednesday it was working towards an improvement in returns from its merchant banking business.
"Our objective is to see...returns from that business improve," Schroders' vice-chairman Peter Sedgwick told Reuters.
He said Schroders had been through a year of "very substantial structural changes" and had built up and invested in its securities business.  
Earlier the group reported pre-tax profits for 1996 of 238.7 million stg, at the top of analyst's expectations and an increase on 197.3 million stg in 1995.
Sedgwick said the investment in securities was not the reason for an increase in costs at Schroders. "The increase in costs is not down to securities, it is across the board," he said.
He said there had been some restructuring of the group's corporate finance business in South East Asia and an expansion of its geographical exposure in continental Europe, particularly Spain and Germany.  
"We have been integrating corporate finance with securities throughout the world...we are looking for what has been taking place in the last year to pay off for us to a greater extent over the next year or two," he added.
But he felt the investment and merchant banking side of the business "has performed reasonably well against the changes in strategy that have been taking place here".
Sedgwick said the bulk of the cost of this strategy change had been borne in 1996. "We would not expect to see the same increase in costs this year," he said.  
Schroders said in its results statement that other factors driving up costs had been increased volumes, the cost of regulation and "not least by competitive conditions for staff".
Sedgwick pointed out that staff costs per employee had risen to 93,300 stg from 78,500 stg the previous year. Schroders' cost/income ratio was 75 percent, compared to 75.4 pct in 1995.
He said Schroders' profits, both pre and post tax, were up by over 20 percent but bonuses had risen slightly below this in total.  
Spiralling bonuses in the industry as a whole were, he said, the result of a battle going on between a number of major investment banking players to become one of the five or six global powerhouses.
"Sooner or later the damage that some will suffer (means) they will withdraw and the cycle will change," he said, adding that Schroders did not count itself among this group.
He said many were desperate to get into asset management, where Schroders posted an improved return in 1996, as they did not have the balanced portfolio Schroders did.
Sedgwick said the firm was an "advisory-relationship type investment bank" and was not heavily dependent on proprietory trading, has a strong balance sheet, no borrowing, cash reserves and a good asset management business.
He said Schroders was not aiming to be a Merrill Lynch or a Goldman Sachs. "It is not our strategy to be in that game."
And commenting on long-standing speculation that Schroders could be involved in a merger or a takeover by a larger firm, Sedgwick said "There is absolutely no intention of changing Schroders as is. We are not up for sale, we are not out for merger, we do not want a big brother and we are not in the acquisition stakes."
"We are not in the business of losing our independence," he said, adding that Schroders would grow organically.
-- London newsroom +44 171 542 7719
