Britain's NatWest Bank revealed on Thursday its multi-million pound derivatives losses were nearly twice as large as first thought and that they began in 1994.
A wide-ranging probe into the loss also led to drastic action, including suspension of four senior employees and the withdrawal of millions of pounds in staff bonuses.
NatWest said the total loss was 90 million pounds ($144 million) but that five million had already been provisioned and eight million had been clawed back by not paying the bonuses, making a loss of 77 million pounds in the accounts. And Martin Owen, chief executive of the NatWest Markets investment banking division, will forego 200,000 of his 500,000 pounds 1996 bonus in a gesture to the industry.
"He has waived his bonus in recognition of his overall responsibility for the business. He believes he has made the gesture as an example to the industry," a NatWest spokeswoman told Reuters.
Owen said it was unacceptable that the losses, which had resulted from options being wrongly priced systematically but stemmed from an initial interest rate options loss, had not been unearthed earlier. He said the problem came to light as a result of procedural changes to the way trading positions and valuations are checked. "It has gone on (during) a long period; that is clearly unacceptable against the background of incidents in other firms as well. Fortunately, it does seem to be isolated to this area," Owen said. Although his role has come under scrutiny, NatWest's overall head Derek Wanless told Reuters he had complete confidence in Owen but the loss had been a setback for him in one area. The bank would learn lessons and emerge stronger, he added.
The staff suspensions, which have been notified to Britain's financial watchdog the Securities and Futures Authority (SFA), followed the suspension of global head of options Neil Dodgson when the problem first came to light nearly two weeks ago.
A former NatWest options trader, Kyriacos Papouis, has also been reported to the SFA, which confirmed it was examining the conduct of all six. NatWest said its requests to interview Papouis had so far been ignored.
The initial findings of NatWest's inquiry, carried out by accountants Coopers &amp; Lybrand and law firm Linklaters &amp; Paines, found no flaws in the models used to calculate valuations.
Owen said details of how the mispricings went unnoticed for so long would be examined in the second phase of an internal inquiry.
He could not say if the initial options loss was the result of an individual's actions and could not comment on whether the subsequent mispricings had been intentional. "I don't want to prejudge the second phase of the report because we are really deep into the examination of all the individuals associated with it. The degree to which there was collusion or not is something which is being examined," he said.
But further disciplinary action could follow from the report's second stage, he said.
Those suspended were Ian Gaskell, head of swaps options trading for Britain and Europe, Christophe Lanson, global head of rate risk management, Jean-Francois Nguyen, managing director of debt derivatives and Phil Wise, chief administrative officer and formerly senior managing director of capital markets. NatWest stressed these suspensions were normal practice in such cases and did not imply guilt. Peter Hall, President and Chief Operating Officer of NatWest Markets, will temporarily take on the additional responsibilities of Chief Administrative Officer. Vincent Tomasi currently Senior Vice President and Head of US Debt Capital Markets at NatWest Markets in New York will take over as acting Head of Global Debt Derivatives. The bank said that a new management structure it had intended to put into place following its 1996 acquisition of U.S. bond trading house Greenwich Capital and the creation of a global debt markets division would now be accelerated. NatWest is continuing to keep bank regulator the Bank of England closely informed, and the second phase of the inquiry would take place as quickly as possible, concentrating on the role of individuals, Owen said. ($1= 0.626 British Pounds)
