NatWest Bank admitted on Thursday that its multi-million pound derivatives losses totalled nearly twice the amount initially thought and revealed the problem had begun as long ago as December 1994.
As a result of initial findings of a wide-ranging internal probe into the loss, the bank also took drastic action to restore confidence by suspending four senior members of staff and cutting millions of pounds from bonuses.
NatWest said the total loss was 90 million pounds ($144 million) but that five million had already been provisioned and eight million had been clawed back by not paying the bonuses, making a loss of 77 million pounds in the accounts.
It also said Martin Owen, chief executive of the NatWest Markets investment banking division, would forego 200,000 pounds of his 500,000 pounds 1996 bonus.
"It is extremely regrettable that the losses and the mis-pricing have gone undetected for so long. Although confined to one area this is a significant setback for NatWest Markets," Derek Wanless, NatWest's chief executive, said.
The bank said the losses had started in late 1994 and were confined to its interest rate options area. It said it had suspended four more members of staff, appointed an acting head of global debt derivatives and would not pay bonuses totalling 8.0 million pounds to certain members of staff.
The bank said the initial findings of an inquiry into the losses, which were first revealed nearly two weeks ago, had found no flaws in the models used to calculate valuations of the derivatives in question.
Neil Dodgson, global head of options, has already been suspended and options trader Kyriacos Papouis left the firm in December.
It said the further suspensions were Ian Gaskell, head of swaps options trading for Britain and Europe, Christophe Lanson, global head of rate risk management, Jean-Francois Nguyen, managing director of debt derivatives and Phil Wise, chief administrative officer and formerly senior managing director of capital markets.
Peter Hall, President and Chief Operating Officer of NatWest Markets, will temporarily take on the additional responsibilities of Chief Administrative Officer.
Vincent Tomasi currently Senior Vice President and Head of US Debt Capital Markets at NatWest Markets in New York will take over as acting Head of Global Debt Derivatives.
Owen said he was disappointed by the "serious deficiency revealed in the interest rate options area."
NatWest said the second stage of the review being undertaken by lawyers Linklaters &amp; Paines and accountants Coopers &amp; Lybrand will involve the further investigation of the areas where the losses happened.
It said it would also mount an investigation of the management issues associated with the deficiencies in these areas.
The bank said that a new management structure it had intended to put into place following its 1996 acquisition of U.S. bond trading house Greenwich Capital and the creation of a Global Debt Markets division would now be accelerated.
Britain's markets watchdog the Securities and Futures Authority will investigate the actions of individuals in the affair while bank regulator the Bank of England is likely to have something to say on the wider implications of the losses.
($1= 0.626 British Pounds)
