Martin Owen, chief executive of NatWest Markets, said on Thursday it was unacceptable that the investment bank had lost 77 million stg through the systematic mispricing of interest rate options since 1994.
"It has gone on (during) a long period; that is clearly unacceptable against the background of incidents in other firms as well. Fortunately, it does seem to be isolated to this area," Owen told Reuters in response to a question on why the problem had not been unearthed in the wake of the collapse of Barings in February 1995.  
Owen said details of how the mispricings went unnoticed for so long would be examined in the second phase of an internal inquiry.
The first stage found that a loss initially put at 50 million stg two weeks ago was in fact 90 million stg, although this was before a 5.0 million stg provision and 8.0 million NatWest said it would claw back in bonuses which would not be paid.
Owen said he was adamant NatWest Markets, the investment banking arm of Britain's National Westminster Bank Plc, would learn lessons from it.  
He said the next phase would examine information flows, internal controls and the responses of individuals to internal and external audit reports.
"All of these things will be examined now in some detail. I clearly do not want to have a debate in the public arena about it. These are going to be internal issues," Owen added.
A total of five members of staff have now been suspended as a result of the options loss and one trader has already left the firm.
Owen said he could not say if the initial options loss was the result of an individual's actions and could not comment on whether the subsequent mispricings had been intentional.  
"I don't want to prejudge the second phase of the report because we are really deep into the examination of all the individuals associated with it. The degree to which there was collusion or not is something which is being examined," he said.
But further disciplinary action could follow from the report's second stage, he said.
Owen said the suspensions so far were "a normal process, not intended to imply guilt", adding that they would put people in a position where they were free to cooperate with the inquiry team.
"You can imagine in a business such as NatWest Markets that people hold significant delegations of authority. Therefore we must be absolutely sure of their role before we can restore them," he added.  
Owen said NatWest was continuing to keep the Bank of England closely informed and had received the initial report, adding that the firm was "driving the situation as a management issue".
He said the second phase of the inquiry would take place as quickly as possible. Accounting records and pricing methodology had already been examined in some depth but the motivation of individuals still had to be examined.
Options trader Kyriacos Papouis, who left NatWest Markets last December, had not yet been interviewed by the firm. Papouis left for U.S. investment bank Bear Stearns, but last week resigned from his position there too.
"We have made requests to interview him and have received no response," Owen said, adding that Neil Dodgson, global head of options, had been interviewed as part of the inquiry.  
Owen said the losses, which were first announced only days after NatWest 1996 results but had apparently not been noticed for more than two years, had surfaced as part of ongoing process of examining trading positions and book valuations.
"It was revealed as part of the process of looking at that. There were certain procedural changes that occurred which then this particular issue to our attention. Unfortunately it came to our attention after the group's results were announced," he added.
Asked if NatWest Markets would take action against its auditors, Owen said the role of individuals, both internally and externally, would be examined in the next stage of the probe.
Owen acknowledged the loss was a set-back and that confidence in a proper system of controls was a core competency for a complex investment bank. he said he was committed to learning valuable lessons across the organisation, adding there was no evidence that any NatWest client had suffered losses as a result.
-- London newsroom +44 171 542 7719
