NatWest Markets said on Monday that its senior management did not know about the interest rate options pricing problem until three days before the losses were made public.
"Senior management did not know until February 25 that there was potentially something of significance," a NatWest spokeswoman told Reuters.
She denied a weekend newspaper report suggesting that NatWest, the investment banking arm of Britain's National Westminster Bank Plc knew of the losses some time before they were revealed.
The mispricings, which on Thursday NatWest revealed had totalled 90 million pounds ($144 million), had come to light during the course of normal pricing reviews and it had not been able to put a price on the loss until February 28, when NatWest estimated it at 50 million pounds.
The initial discovery of the loss came to light through a more intensive review across the investment bank's trading areas, but it was a month or so before the extent of the mispricings became clear.
The options losses have been a painful and embarrassing episode for NatWest Markets and its chief executive Martin Owen, who on Thursday said he would forgo 200,000 of a 500,000 pound bonus as a result of the affair.
NatWest confirmed a report that the girlfriend of Kyriacos Papouis, the former NatWest options trader whom NatWest wants to interview about the losses, also worked for the bank but was employed in derivatives marketing and had nothing to do with Papouis's work.
She had been given a holiday period because of the situation, the spokeswoman added.
Papouis, who left NatWest for U.S. investment bank Bear Stearns, has not commented on the losses. Since the affair came to light he has also resigned from Bear Stearns.
He and five others have been reported to British financial watchdog the Securities and Futures Authority (SFA) and the Bank of England is also looking into what went wrong at the bank.
NatWest Markets' global head of options, Neil Dodgson, who was suspended from the firm more than two weeks ago when the losses first came to light, is among those who will come under SFA scrutiny.
The others suspended last week were Ian Gaskell, head of swaps options trading for Britain and Europe, Christophe Lanson, global head of rate risk management, Jean-Francois Nguyen, managing director of debt derivatives, and Phil Wise, chief administrative officer and formerly senior managing director of capital markets.
While the group has maintained that it does not believe any of its clients suffered losses as a result of the options mispricing, which went back as far as 1994, the spokeswoman declined to comment on whether NatWest would try to recoup any gains made by counterparties to any wrongly priced deals.
"We haven't determined that that is an issue," she said.
She dismissed suggestions that morale was low at the bank following last week's revelation that the loss was nearly twice as large as initially thought, the suspension of four senior staff and the cutting of bonuses to a handful of individuals.
"We are doing really good business here, and we continue to do good business. Everybody wants this to be dealt with properly and put behind us," she said.
Britain's Serious Fraud Office (SFO), which investigates and prosecutes major and complex financial crime, has been contacted by NatWest but has not begun an investigation.
($ = 0.624 British Pounds)
