Volatile markets, a scramble for profits and the emergence of new financial tools have all contributed to recent investment banking failures, the head of Britain's financial markets watchdog said on Tuesday.
"We've got a very volatile market, people (are) spending a lot of time on profitability and market share but we are saying you have got to spend as much time also concentrating on control and compliance," Nick Durlacher, chairman of the Securities and Futures Authority (SFA) told Reuters.
Earlier the SFA said it would not publish controversial changes to its rules -- making top executives more responsible for a major failure -- until it was clear they were in line with standards being proposed by the Securities and Investments Board (SIB), the top financial regulator under Britain's complicated system.
Durlacher said the growth of derivatives over the last 10 years had posed new management problems as those now "sitting on top of the pile" had no first-hand experience of these instruments.
"These are without doubt posing control problems," Durlacher said, adding that senior managers were also making "old fashioned mistakes".
A "booming industry" and a very volatile job market compounded these problems. "We're just saying 'don't forget about the controls'," he added.
Bonuses and the problems inherent in the so-called "star system" were also factors which firms needed to think about, Durlacher said.
Durlacher said the SFA's outline proposals, first announced last September, to make senior executive officers take greater responsibility in the event of a "catastrophic failure" in their firm had prompted other regulators to address the issues.
He admitted that Tuesday's announcement that the SFA would wait for the SIB to catch up before pursuing its proposals had slowed the watchdog down but said it had done as much as it could.
"Under normal circumstances we would either have published a rule change, or we might have done this given the weight of comment, had one further and last consultation with a clear indication of when we would publish a rule change.
Durlacher said there had been "an awful lot of comment" on the proposals and it was now happy about how it would like the changes to be made, although there could be a final brief consultation on it.
He said he hoped the proposals would be finalised by the end of April, adding that he was reminded daily of the urgency for changes by newspaper reports indicating "how important it is that management pay attention to control and compliance in their businesses".
Durlacher said the SFA's disciplining of senior executives at Barings, the British merchant bank which collapsed under huge derivatives losses in February 1995, had been "a long and difficult process" and in one case had set a precendent.
It was the SFA's decision not to pursue Barings' chairman Peter Baring and deputy chairman Andrew Tuckey which prompted it to revise its rules on management responsibility.
Durlacher said that regardless of the role of Singapore-based trader Nick Leeson whose unauthorised trades crippled the bank, the demise of Barings was ultimately due to the fact that its executives "had forgotten how to bank".
He said the question of reversing the burden of proof, so that senior executive officers would have to show that they had done everything they could to avoid a disaster, was the hardest thing for the SFA to resolve and had received most criticism.
But he was confident it would ultimately go through. "We believe there remains a requirement that we do concentrate people's minds on the responsibilities they hold in these very important positions," he said.
