The head of Britain's financial markets watchdog the Securities and Futures Authority (SFA) said on Tuesday that former Barings treasury chief Ian Hopkins had broken precendent in refusing to be bound by SFA rules.
Last week the SFA banned Hopkins from being a director in the City for at least three years for his part in the 1995 collapse of the blue-blooded British merchant bank. Nick Leeson, the Singapore-based trader whose unauthorised trading led to losses of nearly $1.4 billion, is currently serving a jail sentence for his role in the affair.
Hopkins was also ordered to pay 10,000 pounds ($15,800) towards the SFA's costs after an independent tribunal found that he was no longer "a fit and proper person" to be a director of an SFA regulated firm.
"Its been difficult for us because it has been without precedent. We've never had to confront this before when someone signed a contract with us to be bound by our rules and then in effect ignored them," Nick Durlacher, the SFA's chairman, told Reuters.
Hopkins, one of nine Barings executives to have been disciplined by the SFA, has always protested that the attempted to "blow the whistle" on irregularities in the Singapore operation but that other managers ignored his warnings.
"I think the tribunal judged that if Mr Hopkins was a whistle blower he didn't have much of a pea in his whistle," Durlacher said, adding that Hopkins "had lived with an unreconciled balance of 100 million pounds for three months".
Durlacher said he was "not vitriolic" about Hopkins although he said it had not been easy. But if anyone adopted the same approach in the future, the SFA "would adopt the same process of being as scrupulously fair as we can".
He strongly denied that Hopkins had been dealt with more harshly than others because of his refusal to recognise the SFA's authority over him. Hopkins told British newspapers after the ruling that it had been vindictive.
Durlacher also denied that he had offered Hopkins a deal as it would not have been up to him to do so anyway. He said he had only had one telephone conversation with him and had been very careful about what he said.
"What I did say to Mr Hopkins was that I encouraged him to argue his case in front of us rather than to ignore us," he said, adding this could either have involved arguing his case at a tribunal or to considering settling with the SFA, as seven of the other Barings executives disciplined by the SFA had done.
Only one Barings case is now outstanding. Ron Baker, who was head of financial products at the firm, is appealing against an SFA tribunal's decision to reprimand him over his monitoring of one part of Barings' proprietory trading activities. ($ = 0.630 British Pounds)
