A small but fast-growing bank which lends only to socially and environmentally-friendly projects said on Wednesday it had more than doubled in size in its first full year in Britain.
Independently-owned Triodos Bank, which was founded in the Netherlands in 1980 and now has offices in Britain and Belgium, lends only to what it describes as projects "with social and environmental objectives".
It said its level of savings in Britain had grown by 111 percent in 1996 to 20.2 million pounds ($32.1 million) from 11.3 million pounds in 1995 and its loan portfolio by 117 percent to 10.2 million pounds from 5.6 million pounds.
"We are delighted with our first year's results in the UK. We are continuing to see substantial interest from both savers and borrowers looking for a positive ethical approach to banking," said Glen Saunders, the bank's managing director in Britain.
While Britain's big six high street banks have reported combined profits of 12.6 billion pounds in 1996, up from 10.8 billion pounds in 1995, Triodos earlier said its net profit for the year was a mere 342,000 pounds, up from 262,000 the previous year.
But Triodos now has 2,598 savings accounts in Britain compared to 1,358 at the end of 1995. It has attracted British media interest after launching new types of savings accounts and funds promoting fair trade during 1996.
The bank, whose British operation was started in Bristol in the west of England in July 1995, said the growth had been secured on a threefold increase in its capital base, following a share issue in the Netherlands.
A significant proportion of the new shareholding came from Dutch and Belgian financial institutions, including Rabobank Nederland and Commercial Union subsidiary Delta Lloyd.
Saunders said this influx of non-voting shareholders had shown "increasing mainstream recognition" of the bank's "experience in lending to the social economy".
The bank has so far lent to projects including a wind farm in Cumbria, north-west England, and organic milk suppliers co-operative, an environmentally-friendly housing development in a Welsh national park and a housing association which provides homes for people with special needs.
Triodos has also become involved in so-called "microcredit" programmes in developing countries, where it lends to impoverished people to develop projects which then generate income, helping them to work their way out of poverty.
"Microcredit is sensitive to the local economy, does not create dependency and is self-sustaining as the money repaid is 'recycled' to other borrowers," Triodos said in a background statement.
The bank, which had only 62 staff at the end of 1996, has also branched out into specialised fund management, including funds managed on behalf of charities and governments.
Its Green Investment Fund, established last year, has raised 8.0 million pounds for investment in recognised "green" enterprises while the Wind Fund has raised around 4.0 million for investment in wind farms and other renewable energy projects.
The bank's combined balance sheet, which includes its Dutch and Belgian operations, grew by 54 percent in 1996 to reach 161.9 million pounds at the end of the year.
($ = 0.628 British Pounds)
