Michael Marks, chairman of British stockbroking firm Smith New Court before it was taken over by Merrill Lynch, was on Thursday elevated to a new European role in a restructuring of the U.S. investment bank.
Marks, who according to recent newspaper reports was paid a bonus of four million pounds ($6.4 million), has been made chief operating officer for Europe, the Middle East and Africa.
He was most recently co-head of global equities and will remain as deputy chairman of Merrill Lynch International. His appointment comes into force on June 16.
Marks told Reuters the "realignment" emphasised the importance of London as a financial centre.
"We run the Europe, Middle East and Africa region from London and the City (of London) is becoming of increasing importance. This move further underlines the importance of London in the region," he said.
Marks said the business has previously been run along global product lines and Merrill was now attempting to run it by global products and regionally.
Merrill Lynch International will still have a co-ordinating role to make sure clients are being well served, he added.
Under the new structure there will now be five chief operating officers for Merrill's international regions. The others are Asia-Pacific, Latin America and Canada, Japan and finally Australia and New Zealand.
Kevin Watts, who was head of investment banking for Europe, the Middle East and Africa, has been made chief operating officer for the Asia-Pacific region.
The changes mean Merrill will now be made up of a U.S. private client group, an international private client group, an asset management group and a corporate and institutional client group.
It was previously divided into two main areas, private client and corporate and institutional client.
Merrill said the "organisational realignment" was designed to "enhance services provided to a diverse global client base and position the company for the substantial worldwide growth opportunities in financial services".
Marks, 55, who began his career in the City of London with Smith Brothers in 1960, became chief executive of Smith New Court in 1987 and chairman early in 1995.
He joined Merrill when it took over Smith New Court in September 1995 and has widely been viewed as central to attempts to integrate the two firms and their differing cultures.
This culture clash has led to staff leaving the firm. Last year Marks said 100 employees had left Merrill's investment banking division over the year. But others have suggested the number of defections was much larger.
Merrill is on the look-out for a new London headquarters to bring together the former Smith New Court operations which are situated northwest of the City and its own which are closer to the capital's traditional financial heartland.
The firm has not confirmed its final choice for a new home but recent reports said it had settled on an imposing former post office building close to St Paul's Cathedral.
Other options which it has considered are a move to Docklands, the former docks to the east of the City, or an expansion of Merrill's existing Ropemaker Place building to an adjacent site. Insiders say senior executives at the firm favour staying in the City.
Marks has been a member of the board of the London Stock Exchange since 1994.
