Chinese police detained leading dissident Liu Xiaobo on Tuesday after searching his home and confiscating documents in the latest sign of a hardening attitude to the few dissidents still at liberty.
About seven or eight plainclothes and uniformed police, equipped with a search warrant, entered Liu's Beijing home at about 8.00 a.m. (0000 GMT), a relative said.
"They turned the whole place upside-down," she said.
After searching the house and taking books, photographs and documents and articles that Liu had written, police took him away, the relative said. "They took everything."
They gave no reason for the detention of Liu, a renowned literary critic who gained fame as a dissident during the 1989 student-led pro-democracy movement that was crushed by the military with heavy loss of life.
Police did not say when Liu might be released. "They gave no reason," the relative said. "They said to wait for notification."
Liu has been active in recent months, sending open letters to the government to demand press freedom and talks with the Dalai Lama on Tibet.
On September 30, Liu and veteran pro-democracy activist Wang Xizhe issued a statement urging China's communist authorities to honour a promise in 1945 to give people religious freedom, freedom of the press and speech and to form political parties and stage demonstrations.
In a bold move, the two demanded Communist Party chief Jiang Zemin be indicted, impeached and step down for violating the constitution for saying the People's Liberation Army was under the "absolute leadership" of the party instead of the state.
Wang Xizhe was still at liberty in southern Guangzhou on Tuesday.
Liu was last detained by police in 1995 after orchestrating several daring petitions to parliament by groups of dissidents and intellectuals in the early months of the year. He was held for more than seven months without formal charges until being released last January.
His detention comes a day after Chinese sources said another dissident, former student leader Wang Dan, faced a second jail term after prosecutors charged him recently with subversion.
Wang, 26, faces up to seven years in jail on charges of counter-revolutionary incitement -- or subversion. A court in Beijing was expected to deliver a verdict on Wang's case as early as this week, said one source.
Wang, who is believed to have worked with Liu on several daring petitions, was detained in May 1995 in the run-up to the sixth anniversary of the June 1989 military crackdown.
A former student of Beijing University, Wang served four years in jail for counter-revolutionary activities for his role as a leader of the 1989 demonstrations.
He had been expected to face charges since the court that sentenced veteran democracy activist Wei Jingsheng last December to 14 years for plotting to overthrow the government also implicated Wang in its verdict.
Liu and Wang are among a very few dissidents who are not serving jail terms or re-education through labour penalties.
A court in central Henan province last month sentenced student leader-turned-dissident Guo Haifeng to seven years in prison for hooliganism. Police had initially accused Guo of fraud but the prosecutor did not file charges against him, a human rights group said.
