Leading Chinese dissident Liu Xiaobo has been ordered to serve three years in a labour camp in a term imposed just hours after police detained him and a second pro-democracy activist was missing, relatives said on Wednesday.
Veteran pro-democracy activist Wang Xizhe, who recently issued a joint statement with Liu, appeared to be missing from his home in southern Guangzhou, his wife said by telephone.
Police had notified Liu Xiaobo's wife early on Wednesday of the administrative three-year sentence, which does not need a court trial, but gave her no reason for the punishment.
"They have still had no formal contact with me or given me a reason," Liu Xia said in a telephone interview late in the day.
"I am very angry. How can they do this?," she said. "He did not do anything illegal. All he did was exercise his freedom of speech... Citizens have freedom of speech..."
She said she had not yet decided whether to appeal on his behalf.
The administrative punishment was passed against Liu just hours after he was taken from his Beijing home early on Tuesday by a group of uniformed and plainclothes police, with a search warrant, who also confiscated books, papers and photographs.
"Re-education through labour is the personal power of the public security bureau, it doesn't have to go through judicial departments," Liu Xia said. "The public security can just do as they wish."
Police officials declined to comment.
The administrative punishment of re-education through labour has been increasingly used against dissidents in recent months as a means of removing activists from circulation while avoiding the more complicated trial process, diplomats say.
Police gave no reason for the detention of Liu, a renowned literary critic who gained fame as a dissident in the 1989 student-led pro-democracy movement that was crushed by the military with heavy loss of life.
Liu has been active in recent months, sending several daring, open letters to the government.
On September 30, Liu and Wang issued a statement urging China's communist authorities to honour a promise in 1945 to give people freedom of the press and speech and to form political parties and stage demonstrations.
In a bold move, the two demanded Communist Party chief Jiang Zemin be indicted, impeached and step down for violating the constitution for saying the People's Liberation Army was under the "absolute leadership" of the party instead of the state.
Wang did not return home on Tuesday and his wife said she was very worried because he had not responded to his pager.
Wang was paroled in 1993 after serving 12 years of a 14-year term for sedition and remains deprived of his political rights. He is one of China's most outspoken proponents of democracy.
Liu was last detained by police in 1995 after orchestrating several daring petitions to parliament by dissidents and intellectuals in the early months of the year. He was held for seven months without charges until being released in January.
His sentence comes shortly after Chinese sources said dissident and former student leader Wang Dan faced a second jail term after prosecutors charged him recently with subversion.
Wang, 26, faces up to seven years in jail on charges of counter-revolutionary incitement -- or subversion.
Wang, who is believed to have worked with Liu on several daring petitions, was detained in May, 1995 in the run-up to the sixth anniversary of the June 1989 military crackdown.
