Leading Chinese dissident Liu Xiaobo has been ordered to serve three years in a labour camp just hours after police detained him in an early morning raid on his Beijing home, his wife said on Wednesday.
Police had notified her early on Wednesday of the administrative sentence, which does not need a court trial, but gave her no reason for the punishment.
"I am very angry. How can they do this?," Liu Xia said in a telephone interview.
"I feel he hasn't done anything (illegal). Citizens have freedom of speech, to write articles and say things."
She said she had not decided whether to appeal.
The administrative punishment was passed against Liu after he was taken from his Beijing home early on Tuesday by a group of uniformed and plainclothes police who also confiscated books, papers and photographs.
"Re-education through labour is the personal power of the public security bureau, it doesn't have to go through judicial departments," Liu Xia said. "The public security can just do as they wish."
Liu Xiaobo might be sent to a labour camp near his hometown of Dalian in the northeast, she said.
Police officials declined to comment.
The administrative punishment of re-education through labour has been increasingly used against dissidents in recent months as a means of removing activists from circulation while avoiding the more complicated trial process, diplomats say.
Police gave no reason for the detention of Liu, a renowned literary critic who gained fame as a dissident in the 1989 student-led pro-democracy movement that was crushed by the military with heavy loss of life.
Liu has been active in recent months, sending several daring, open letters to the government.
On September 30, Liu and veteran pro-democracy activist Wang Xizhe issued a statement urging China's communist authorities to honour a promise in 1945 to give people freedom of the press and speech and to form political parties and stage demonstrations.
In a bold move, the two demanded Communist Party chief Jiang Zemin be indicted, impeached and step down for violating the constitution for saying the People's Liberation Army was under the "absolute leadership" of the party instead of the state.
Wang could not be reached in southern Guangzhou and a human rights group said he did not return home on Tuesday.
Liu was last detained by police in 1995 after orchestrating several petitions to parliament by groups of dissidents and intellectuals in the early months of the year.
He was held for more than seven months without formal charges until being released last January.
His sentence comes shortly after Chinese sources said dissident and former student leader Wang Dan faced a second jail term after prosecutors charged him recently with subversion.
Wang, 26, faces up to seven years in jail on charges of counter-revolutionary incitement -- or subversion.
Wang, who is believed to have worked with Liu on several petitions, was detained in May 1995 in the run-up to the sixth anniversary of the June 1989 military crackdown.
A former student of Beijing University, Wang served four years in jail for counter-revolutionary activities for his role as a leader of the 1989 demonstrations that centred on Beijing's Tiananmen Square.
He had been expected to face charges since the court that sentenced veteran democracy activist Wei Jingsheng last December to 14 years for plotting to overthrow the government also implicated Wang in its verdict.
