Jailed, sentenced to labour camps, cowed or exiled, China's pro-democracy activists have virtually vanished.
The latest dissident to be swallowed by China's gulag was prominent literary critic Liu Xiaobo, sentenced on Tuesday to three years in a labour camp. Veteran democracy activist Wang Xizhe has simply disappeared.
Any hopes among Chinese dissidents of a revival of their beleaguered movement may lie with the Nobel Committee in Oslo and whether it decides on Friday to select Nobel Peace Prize nominee and veteran democracy activist Wei Jingsheng.
However, few in China expect Wei, regarded as the father of China's struggling democracy movement and serving the first year of a 14-year jail term, to win the Nobel Peace Prize and thus halt the slow demise of Chinese dissent.
Members of Wei's family said they did not consider him a serious contender because of the strength of competition from front runners such as Richard Holbrooke, the U.S. architect of Bosnia's peace treaty, and former U.S. president Jimmy Carter.
Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Shen Guofang voiced outrage at the suggestion on Thursday.
"I have already stressed many times that Wei Jingsheng is a criminal who has broken Chinese law. This kind of criminal basically has no qualifications to win any prize," he said.
Wei was jailed for 15 years for his role in the 1979 Democracy Wall movement when he wrote an article that called for democracy as China's "Fifth Modernisation" and attacked paramount leader Deng Xiaoping as a dictator.
He was released on parole in September 1993 after serving 14-1/2 years and re-arrested the following April. He was sentenced to 14 years last December for plotting to subvert the government.
"Would it make a great deal of difference?" said one Western diplomat when asked about the impact if Wei were to win the Nobel Peace Prize. "It wouldn't get him out any quicker. It would turn the international spotlight on China for a little while but that of itself would not be enough to get the (democracy) movement going again."
Diplomats have expressed surprise at the rash of arrests and convictions of dissidents -- many of them sentenced to the administrative punishment of "re-education through labour" that avoids a complicated trial process.
"My feeling had been that the whole business was under control," the diplomat said. "There are a few who pop up and engage in experiments to annoy the authorities but they are nothing serious or threatening to the regime."
He attributed the new crackdown to a secret plenum of the Communist Party, expected to finish later on Thursday with a statement on the importance of "spiritual civilisation" -- or conformity to orthodox Marxist values.
"Everyone will be expected to think properly and so they may need to tidy up a remaining few loose ends," the diplomat said.
Liu Xiaobo, who gained fame during the 1989 student-led pro-democracy movement, was ordered to serve three years in a labour camp, a term imposed just hours after police detained him during a raid on his Beijing home.
Veteran pro-democracy activist Wang Xizhe, who recently joined Liu in a statement calling for the impeachment of President and party chief Jiang Zemin, had disappeared from his home in southern Guangzhou, his wife said.
On Thursday court officials told the family of Wang Dan, a detained dissident and leader of the 1989 student protests, to hire a lawyer on his behalf, his mother said. The Beijing People's Intermediate Court informed her that she had until Friday to find a lawyer, in a sign that his trial was imminent.
"They have had so many crackdowns in the past that most figures are under lock and key or safely out of the way abroad, and in either case pretty harmless," the diplomat said.
