China's private sector has become an important source of jobs for workers laid off by loss-making state enterprises and officials said on Thursday the jobless were able to find work despite fears of rising unemployment.
In 1995, the private sector hired 1.5 million workers made redundant from state- and collectively owned enterprises, an official of the State Administration for Industry and Commerce said in a telephone interview.
The official also noted a shift in the type of staff being employed by private enterprise as China's fastest growing sector expands and modernises.
"Before, employees were mainly peasants and young jobless," the administration official said.
"But in the last two years, the number of those employed after leaving state enterprises has increased," he said. "And there will be a bigger increase in employment of this type of worker in the next couple of years."
The main reason that workers were attracted to the sink-or-swim world of private enterprise from the jobs-for-life system in state firms was high wages, he said.
China's private companies and self-employed accounted for a total of 56 million jobs, or six percent of China's employed workers, at the end of 1995, he said.
China had 654,500 private companies and 25.28 million self-employed workers at the end of 1995 compared with none in 1979, when paramount leader Deng Xiaoping launched his market-oriented economic reforms.
Many had found jobs in Shenyang, at the heart of China's rust-belt and a city groaning with money-losing state firms, the official said. The city had found jobs for 800,000 laid-off workers in the last two years.
In Shanghai, more than 85,000 redundant state workers had created their own businesses or found jobs in private firms.
The administration official said private enterprise had averaged growth of 50 percent to 60 percent a year over the past three years, although that was expected to slow to about 30 percent over the next few years.
An official of the Ministry of Personnel said state enterprises had shed more than 2.0 million workers in recent years, many of them helped to find work by their former employers or through fledgling labour markets.
China's urban unemployment rate was 2.9 percent at the end of June, up by 0.01 percent from the same time last year, official figures show.
However, official media have warned that the actual rate could soar to 7.4 percent by 2000.
Nine out of 10 people entering the job market have found jobs through the new labour markets since 1995, the Xinhua news agency quoted an official of the Ministry of Personnel as saying.
The few who still enjoy the state's "iron rice bowl" in terms of assigning jobs include demobilised soldiers and college graduates.
At the start of 1995, China had more than 29,000 employment service organisations, which offered jobs to more than 12 million people last year, the official said.
