Detained Chinese dissident Wang Dan faces the capital charge of plotting to subvert the government based on evidence such as writings critical of the state and accepting funds from abroad, a human rights group said on Saturday.
Wang Dan's case was expected to come to trial next week, the New York-based Human Rights in China said in a statement.
Relatives said on Friday they had succeeded in finding a lawyer willing to defend Wang, the former leader of the 1989 student demonstrations for more democracy centred in Beijing's Tiananmen Square.
The Beijing People's Intermediate Court on Thursday informed Wang's mother, Wang Lingyun, that she had one day to find her son a lawyer, a signal that the dissident had been indicted and a trial was imminent.
The family on Friday obtained a copy of the court chargesheet, which formally accused the 26-year-old of plotting to subvert the government, a crime that carries a maximum penalty of death.
The indictment cited four major areas of evidence against Wang, Human Rights in China said.
The first was the writing of articles published in overseas magazines and newspapers, including some that criticised the government, in the three years since his release from jail.
Wang served four years in prison for counter-revolutionary crimes, or subversion, for his role in the 1989 demonstrations, which were crushed by the army on June 3-4 with heavy loss of life.
Other evidence against the former student at prestigious Beijing University included taking part in studies at home organised by the University of California, Berkeley, in the United States, Human Rights in China said.
The charges accused Wang and other dissidents of joining forces to collect funds and donations to help other dissidents facing difficulties and the lack of work after their release from prison, the group said.
Wang was also accused of accepting donations and economic aid from overseas organisations, it said.
Wang's lawyer had already visited the court dealing with Wang's case to begin legal formalities, but there was still no news of when the trial of the former student leader, who has been in detention since May 1995, would begin, a close relative said.
"We feel pretty anxious. We are just waiting for new developments," the relative told Reuters.
The outspoken activist attracted the ire of China's communist authorities in 1989 when he shot to prominence as a leader of student protests for more democracy centred on Tiananmen Square in the heart of the Chinese capital.
Wang had been expected to face new charges since last December, when the court that convicted veteran democracy activist Wei Jingsheng -- a nominee for this year's Nobel Peace Prize -- of plotting to overthrow the government also implicated the former student leader.
The court's verdict said Wei, who was jailed for 14 years, had links with people "convicted of counter-revolutionary crimes, including Wang Dan". It also referred to a tape-recorded conversation between Wang and Wei, but gave no details.
Wang had been active since his release from jail, defying persistent police surveillance and harassment to join in a daring appeal to communist leaders for the release of those still in prison for their part in the 1989 protests.
