The watchdogs of China's ruling Communist Party have ordered members to obey a call from party chief Jiang Zemin for ideological orthodoxy -- or face disciplinary punishment, state media said on Saturday.
"The work style of the ruling party is a matter of life and death," the People's Daily quoted a decision by the Central Commission for Discipline Inspection of the Communist Party of China as saying after a meeting this week.
The commission also issued a call for clean government, warning of the threat of corruption to continued party rule.
"Party organisations and members should conscientiously carry on the party's fine traditions and work style," it said.
The statement was issued two days after the party wound up its annual policy-making plenum with a pledge to boost orthodox socialist values that have been eroded by nearly two decades of economic reforms.
"Anyone who violates the sixth plenum's decisions, or who disobeys orders, or engages in harmful activities against socialist ethical and cultural progress, should be strictly disciplined," the discipline commission said.
The party plenum had said spiritual civilisation -- Chinese communist jargon for ideological orthodoxy and toeing the party line -- could not be sacrificed in the name of the economic reforms spearheaded by paramount leader Deng Xiaoping.
The commission echoed the plenum's call for a return to the communist puritanism espoused by the late Chairman Mao Zedong.
"The work style of close links to the masses, criticism and self-criticism, hard work, and building a clean and honest government should also be continued," the commission said.
The ruling party has seen its credibility undermined in recent years after the chaos of the ultra-leftist 1966-76 Cultural Revolution and as loopholes for corruption opened up by economic reform have tempted many senior party officials.
"The crackdown on corruption is one of the important tasks of improving the party's work style and clean government and for promoting ethical and cultural progress," the commission said.
It called on party committees throughout China to intensify their battle against corruption and to severely punish those found guilty of corruption.
Jiang, who is also state president, has warned repeatedly that corruption is a virus that threatens to topple the party.
Jiang had been expected to seize on the plenum as the last chance before a crucial congress in 1997 to underline his role as anointed heir to Deng Xiaoping, who has been fading gradually from the scene, diplomats and Chinese sources said.
He has made clear that he wants to place his stamp on ideology in China.
The party mouthpiece, the People's Daily, has filled its front page for several days with examples of model workers whose socialist values the populace at large should strive to emulate.
Among these is Beijing bus conductress Li Suli, who is said to rise at 4.00 a.m. to make sure she is familiar with major sites along the route so that she can help disoriented passengers. She then washes the bus windows.
Diplomats said Jiang was using the campaign -- coupled with a tough line on the media and ideology -- to boost his position.
