The family of detained Chinese dissident Wang Dan said on Sunday the former student leader could stand trial this week for the capital offence of plotting to overthrow the government. They said the charge was unfounded.
"Not one point in the bill of indictment broke the law, even less to speak of plotting to overthrow the government," his mother Wang Lingyun said in a telephone interview.
The 26-year-old former leader of the 1989 pro-democracy demonstrations has been charged with the capital offence of plotting to subvert the government, based on evidence such as writings critical of the state and accepting funds from abroad.
"All he did was to say a few things," Wang Lingyun said. "He is unjustly accused."
"He has always advocated peace and non-violence," she said. "There must be action or plans to constitute "overthrowing the government'."
She said the family had yet to be notified of when her son's trial would take place, but she said it could come this week.
Relatives said on Friday they had found a lawyer willing to defend Wang. The lawyer had already visited the court dealing with Wang's case to begin legal formalities, they said.
The Beijing People's Intermediate Court had informed Wang Lingyun on Thursday that she had one day in which to find her son a lawyer, a signal that a trial was imminent.
Wang was detained by police in a raid on his home in May 1995 but was not formally arrested or charged until last week.
On Friday the family obtained a copy of the court indictment, which accused Wang Dan of plotting to subvert the government, a crime that carries a maximum penalty of death. The minimum sentence is 10 years, although the court can show leniency if it finds extenuating circumstances.
Wang has already served four years in prison for counter-revolutionary crimes, or subversion, for his role in the 1989 demonstrations centred in Beijing's Tiananmen Square, which were crushed by the army with heavy loss of life..
The indictment cited four major areas of evidence against Wang, the New York-based Human Rights in China said.
The first was the writing of articles published in overseas magazines and newspapers, including some that criticised the government, in the three years since his release from jail.
Other evidence against the former Beijing University student included taking part in studies at home organised by the University of California, Berkeley, in the United States, Human Rights in China said.
The charges accused Wang and other dissidents of joining forces to collect funds and donations to help other dissidents facing difficulties and failure to find work after their release from prison, the group said.
Wang was also accused of accepting donations and economic aid from overseas organisations, it said.
Wang had been expected to face new charges since last December, when the court that convicted veteran democracy activist Wei Jingsheng -- a nominee for this year's Nobel Peace Prize -- of plotting to overthrow the government also implicated the former student leader.
The court's verdict said Wei, who was jailed for 14 years, had links with people "convicted of counter-revolutionary crimes, including Wang Dan". It also referred to a tape-recorded conversation between Wang and Wei, but gave no details.
Wang had been active since his release from jail, defying persistent police surveillance and harassment to join in a daring appeal to communist leaders for the release of all those still in prison for their part in the 1989 protests.
