China's Communist Party, in what it called one of its greatest ever documents, warned on Sunday against hostile Western ideas such as parliamentary democracy and capitalism and vowed to fight back with puritan Marxist values.
The 15,000-character document -- adopted at last week's annual secret plenum of the ruling party elite -- marked the latest volley by party chief Jiang Zemin to boost his position by battling corruption, pornography and worship of money while promoting nationalism and hardline communist ideology.
Diplomats said a strong tone of opposition to the West and particularly the United States, which Beijing fears is pursuing a policy of containment toward China, also suffused the document, unveiled by the official Xinhua news agency.
They said Jiang was striving to placate leftwing party hardliners angered by what they see as an erosion of puritan communist values by nearly two decades of profit-based economic reform.
"The standard of moral conduct has been lowered in some spheres, and the practice of worshipping money, seeking pleasure and individualism has grown," the document said.
It railed against corruption, warning senior party officials not to be tempted by the lures of power, profit and sex.
Jiang has warned repeatedly that corruption is a virus that could topple the party which has ruled China since 1949, and public opinion surveys show graft as the top popular gripe.
In a sign that Jiang needs to consolidate his power base even after amassing China's three most important posts -- general secretary of the party, state president and chairman of the party's powerful Central Military Commission -- the document paid extravagant homage to paramount leader Deng Xiaoping, 92.
The text was littered with 14 mentions of Deng's name, against just three for Jiang and four for the late Chairman Mao Zedong.
Analysts say Jiang remains overshadowed by Deng, architect of the market-oriented reforms and influential even without an official post and despite increasingly fragile health.
However, a recurring theme of the document was a warning to the nation to be on guard against the West, taking up one of the main platforms of Jiang's rule -- the importance of patriotism.
It urged self-sufficiency, saying people should "fear no pressure, safeguard national sovereignty and surmount sanctions imposed by Western countries" -- a clear reference to the United States.
"Because socialism has suffered serious setbacks on a worldwide scale, pressure from the superiority of developed capitalist countries in economy...as well as the infiltrations of Western ideology will remain for a long time," it warned.
It advocated "how to...prevent and eliminate the spread of cultural garbage, resist the conspiracy by hostile forces to westernise and split our country," -- and suggested more flag-raising ceremonies and singing of the national anthem.
However, despite the lip-service to Deng Xiaoping, the document cast doubt over one of his most far-reaching reforms -- the lifting of a ban on private enterprise -- while repeating his opposition to western-style democracy.
"It is necessary to distinguish right from wrong on such major issues as...common development of various economic sectors with socialist public ownership as the mainstay versus privatisation...socialist democracy versus parliamentary democracy practised in Western countries," it said.
"Liberalism will precisely lead China to the capitalist road and undermine the political situation," the document thundered.
