China's new hardline dictum to its people to battle hostile Western influences with puritan Marxist values underlines a poverty of ideas among an ageing leadership with declining credibility in a fast-changing society, analysts said on Monday.
"They don't seem to grasp that people have changed since the days when they had nothing else to do but to listen to lengthy party documents being broadcast on the radio," said one China analyst.
"Nowadays people have so many other activities they may just skim over the headlines and not bother to read something like this," he said, referring to a 15,000-character Communist Party document issued in official newspapers on Monday.
"Do the leaders not realise people can channelsurf because it's not just one television station any more?" he said.
China's ruling Communist Party, in what it hailed as one of its greatest documents ever, warned against hostile Western ideas such as capitalism and parliamentary democracy, urged vigilance against pornography and profit and vowed to fight back with puritan Marxist values.
"If they are seeking to change the average Chinese in the street then this is not the answer," said one Western diplomat, describing the newest demand for ideological conformity as a rehash of communist methods practiced for years.
Chinese political analysts have warned that the inability of the communist leadership to move with the times and experiment with new ideas and methods to stir up popular support in a society rapidly being transformed by market-oriented economic reforms could have dangerous repercussions.
"A lot of people just aren't listening any more," one analyst said, adding that a consequence of this breakdown of communication would create even more distance between the populace and a leadership that is already remote and secretive.
To recapture popular attention, China's leaders might try to use more extreme propaganda tools, such as whipping up a potentially destabilising nationalist and anti-Western campaign, analysts said.
"We are looking at an ageing leadership -- many of the Politburo are in their 70s -- who are set in their ways and don't seem able to accept younger advisers trying to package acceptable ideology in new wrapping paper," one diplomat said.
Paramount leader Deng Xiaoping had missed an opportunity to appoint a younger leadership when he purged the upper echelons after the 1989 student demonstrations for more democracy, analysts and diplomats said.
Analysts said that while the latest communist creed tried to present itself as a balanced dictum, it was clearly intended to achieve the goal of conformity of thought.
"It's pretty much a blueprint for censors to do what they want," said one diplomat.
Even conservative newspaper editors appointed in recent years as replacements to more liberal writers have been purged in recent weeks, a succession of books have been ordered off the shelves and popular author Wang Shuo has been effectively banned.
"Things are only going to get worse," said one analyst.
However, some doubted how effective a new purge would be.
"It's part and parcel of an attempt to take control of the way people think and the kind of cultural afairs that are conducted," the western diplomat said.
"But people don't always take as much notice as they once did," he said. "It may not last much longer than the time it takes to read the thing."
