The U.S. government's top Asia official, Winston Lord, was to hold talks with Chinese Deputy Foreign Minister Liu Huaqiu in Beijing on a range of issues including human rights, diplomats said on Wednesday.
Lord, Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, arrived on Tuesday for the unannounced visit and was keeping a low profile while in Beijing, a U.S. embassy official said.
However he was due to hold talks with Deputy Foreign Minister Liu and a possible meeting with Foreign Minister Qian Qichen was on the agenda before Lord left on Thursday for Japan, diplomats said.
In Washington, State Department spokesman Nicholas Burns said on Tuesday that Lord was preparing for a visit next month by Secretary of State Warren Christopher, but officials said a wide range of other issues would almost certainly be raised.
"Human rights will come up," one diplomat said.
Washington last week sharply criticised the sentencing of dissident Liu Xiaobo to three years in a labour camp, as well as apparent plans to try another pro-democracy activist, Wang Dan, on the capital charge of plotting to subvert the government.
U.S. officials say relations with China have generally improved in recent months, but there have been frictions in the past two weeks over its treatment of dissidents and over fresh reports of Chinese nuclear sales to Pakistan.
"I think all issues are on the table in (Lord's) discussions with the Chinese. It wouldn't surprise me at all if that issue of the alleged sale of items between China and Pakistan came up," Burns said.
Nevertheless, he said Washington continued to maintain that China had not violated past pledges with the sale, which the Washington Times said last week consisted of a special industrial furnace and high-tech diagnostic equipment.
Burns also said human rights issues were likely to be raised.
Diplomats said Beijing would almost certainly be angered by reports that Chinese dissident Wang Xizhe had arrived in San Francisco for asylum in the United States.
A row over human rights scarred Christopher's last visit to China in 1993.
Christopher is due to visit China on November 21-22 on a trip originally announced in July.
The visit would mark the highest point in relations since ties plunged after Taiwan's President Lee Teng-hui paid a private visit to the United States in June, 1995 -- a trip that enraged Beijing.
Both sides have said they are moving towards a possible exchange of presidential visits during 1997.
Among outstanding issues that could spark U.S. anger are the alleged nuclear sales and China's human rights record, while Beijing blames Washington for holding up its application for membership of the World Trade Organisation.
U.S. officials said Lord had considered the possibility of extending his trip beyond South Korea when he left Washington last week, but did not finally decide to do so until he was already in Asia.
Lord came to China after a visit to South Korea to discuss tensions over the beaching of a North Korean submarine on the South Korean coast last month.  
"With more and more (listed) firms involving in such takeovers, regulation and supervision has become a tough task," said one analyst with China Guotai Securities.
"The central government should not wait until there are too many headaches before taking measures to sort things out," he said.
But the analyst said that despite the problems, takeovers would be a focus of the stock market over the next few years because of restrictions in other areas, including a ban on mergers between listed firms and unlisted firms.
In the six-year history of modern China's stock markets, there has been no case of a takeover of one listed firm by another.
