The U.S. government's top Asian official, Winston Lord, left China on Thursday, wrapping up a low-profile visit after talks that focused on human rights in China and problems on the Korean peninsula.
Diplomats described the meetings as frank and cordial overall, even though Lord raised the thorny issue of China's treatment of its dissidents amid signs of a renewed crackdown by Beijing's communist rulers on their critics.
Lord, Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, arrived on Tuesday for the previously unannounced visit and kept a low-profile while in Beijing, a U.S. embassy official said. He left for Japan on Thursday.
Lord held substantive discussions with Deputy Foreign Minister Liu Huaqiu on Wednesday and also had a brief meeting with Foreign Minister Qian Qichen, diplomats said.
"They discussed a wide range of issues," one Western diplomat said.
The issue of Korea was one focus of the talks and although diplomats said there was little sign of concrete progress, the tone of discussion was positive.
"Both sides want to maintain stability on the peninsula," one diplomat said.
South Korea and the United States in April called for four-nation peace talks with North Korea and China to replace a truce that ended the Korean conflict but left Seoul and Pyongyang technically still at war.
Pyongyang has insisted on bilateral talks with Washington to seek an accord, saying Seoul was not a party to the 1953 truce. China has yet to take a clear stance on the four-way talks.
Frosty relations between Seoul and Pyongyang have been in crisis since last month, when 26 North Koreans landed in the South from a stranded submarine.
Diplomats said Lord's talks did not focus on any single issue, and a major aim of his trip was to prepare for a visit next month by Secretary of State Warren Christopher.
"Generally speaking relations are on the upturn," said one diplomat. Christopher is due to visit Beijing on November 21-22 on a trip originally announced in July.
A row over human rights scarred Christopher's last visit to China in 1993.
The visit would mark the highest point in relations since ties plunged after Taiwan President Lee Teng-hui paid a private visit to the United States in June 1995, a trip that enraged Beijing.
In Washington, State Department spokesman Nicholas Burns said Lord had raised Chinese treatment of dissidents.
"Human rights have been on our agenda quite importantly over the last couple of days, because of recent arrests of some of the political dissidents, and the recent travel to the United States of a noted champion of human rights. So, that issue for us is front and centre on our agenda with them."
Washington last week sharply criticised the sentencing of dissident Liu Xiaobo to three years in a labour camp, as well as apparent plans to try another pro-democracy activist, Wang Dan, on the capital charge of plotting to subvert the government.
Diplomats in Beijing said China would almost certainly be angered by the arrival of a third dissident, Wang Xizhe, in San Francisco this week after escaping from China.
Both sides have said they were moving toward a possible exchange of presidential visits during 1997.
Among outstanding issues that could spark U.S. anger are China's alleged nuclear sales and human rights record while Beijing blames Washington for holding up its application for membership in the World Trade Organisation.
