China is dipping its toe into the freedoms of Hong Kong but is finding the water chilly -- and Beijing's latest pronouncement on freedom of expression under Chinese rule may be giving it cold feet, analysts said on Friday.
China's communist rulers are so accustomed to exercising power that is scarcely checked by law, they may be having difficulty curbing their tongues when it comes to the delicate handover of Hong Kong, diplomats said on Friday.
One example came on Thursday when China tried to backtrack from a warning by Foreign Minister Qian Qichen to Hong Kong people on limits to their freedom of expression after the territory reverts to Beijing rule on July 1, 1997.
"Chinese officials seem to be speaking from the heart when it comes to Hong Kong and then realise that they have put their foot in their mouth where the law is concerned," said one Western analyst.
Foreign Ministry spokesman Shen Guofang raced on Thursday to repair damage from his boss's remarks, saying: "Hong Kong people will have full freedom of expression, but all freedoms must be within the limits allowed by law."
His statement followed an interview with Foreign Minister Qian by the Asian Wall Street Journal,in which Qian hinted that Hong Kong would no longer be able to mark the anniversary of Beijing's June 4, 1989, crackdown on student-led protests.
Qian's interview stirred an outcry in Hong Kong, where China has pledged a high degree of political freedoms for 50 years after the handover on July 1, 1997, and not to change its capitalist system.
But Shen's damage control may have been too late.
Western diplomats said Qian's remarks gave great cause for concern and were almost certain to stir anxiety in Hong Kong.
"Ordinary Hong Kong people have fairly mixed feelings," said one Western diplomat. "There is an element of patriotism about their return to the mainland but they don't want their basic freedoms to be put in question."
Chinese officials said Foreign Minister Qian was believed to have shown great interest in the response in Hong Kong to his remarks on the limits on what Hong Kong's people could do after the 1997 handover.
Qian was reported to have showed little surprise at the reaction in Hong Kong, and had paid close attention to the stir in the territory, one official said.
"It looks as if he may have gone a little beyond what he should have said," said another Western diplomat. "But he clearly thought he was safe in saying that and now they are trying to smooth over the rough edges."
Hong Kong newspaper reports that interpreted Qian's remarks as a ban on activities in the territory to commemorate the 1989 crackdown were wrong, Shen said, adding that Beijing had not altered its pledge to maintain Hong Kong's current political and economic system under Chinese sovereignty.
A transcript of Qian's interview showed he was specifically asked what activities would not be allowed and whether the 1989 commemoration was among them. Qian replied that he was referring to just such activities.
"This isn't the first time this kind of faux pas has happened," one diplomat said, referring to similar remarks this year on post-1997 freedom limitations by Lu Ping, director of the Hong Kong and Macau Affairs Office under China's State Council, or cabinet.
"I don't expect that it will be the last."
