One of China's most prominent dissidents, Wang Dan, is expected to receive a harsh sentence on the charge of plotting to overthrow the government, his mother said on Tuesday.
Wang, 27, would plead not guilty to the capital charge when his trial at the Beijing Intermediate People's Court begins on Wednesday, said the dissident's mother, Wang Lingyun.
"The court...giving my son a harsh sentence even though he is innocent is very likely to happen," Wang Lingyun told Reuters. "I dare not rule it out."
She said court officials told her the verdict could be delivered as early as Wednesday or in two days. Family members had been under surveillance for several weeks, she added.
The former student leader, who vanished into detention in May 1995, faces a minimum 10-year sentence and a maximum penalty of death.
The court has refused to give details of Wang's trial except to say he has been charged with plotting to overthrow the government.
The New York-based Human Rights Watch said last week the chances of acquittal were slim because Wang has not had adequate time to prepare a defence.
His family found a lawyer willing to defend the dissident after being given just one day in which to do so.
Wang's mother, a 61-year old museum researcher who has no background in law, would attend the trial as one of two defence lawyers. His father and a sister would be allowed to sit in.
The mother has said the dissident was calm and mentally prepared for a harsh sentence, although she has said his health had deteriorated during his detention.
Human Rights Watch attacked the trial on Tuesday as a sign of the Chinese leadership's increasing intolerance of dissent.
"The fact is that China's urban dissident movement... has in effect been comprehensively smashed," it said in a statement.
"At least where political dissidents are concerned, all the judicial signs thus far point... to intensified repression by the country's state security forces," it said, calling for a freeze on trade missions from the United States, Europe, Japan and Australia.
The human rights group said Chinese criminal trials seldom respect the presumption of innocence, and defence lawyers were generally restricted to arguing mitigating circumstances for a reduced sentence.
Wang's court appearance would likely be held out of the public eye, as was last year's trial of Wei Jingsheng, regarded as the father of China's tiny, struggling democracy movement.
Officials have been silent on a request by the U.S. embassy in Beijing to send observers to Wang's trial, diplomats said.
French senator Robert Badinter, former U.S. attorneys general Nicholas Katzenback and Richard Thornburgh, and former Canadian solicitor-general Warren Allmand have also said they want to observe Wang's trial.
Foreign Ministry spokesman Shen Guofang on Tuesday shrugged off questions from reporters about the status of the requests, saying Wang's trial was China's internal affair.
Beijing has repeatedly come under fire from the West for human rights abuses. It says foreign intervention in China's internal affairs is not welcome.
Wang has already served four years in prison for counter-revolutionary crimes, or subversion, for his role in pro-democracy demonstrations in Beijing's Tiananmen Square that were crushed by the army in June 1989 with heavy loss of life.
He was politically active again after his parole in 1993, defying police surveillance to join a daring appeal to communist leaders for the release of those still jailed for their part in the 1989 protests.
China has recently cracked down on the few remaining dissidents who have not fled into exile or been jailed.
