If foreign governments thought Beijing listened to pleas on human rights, they may have to think of new means of persuasion after a Beijing court jailed one of China's few dissidents still at liberty for 11 years on Wednesday.
In a trial lasting less than four hours, the Beijing Number One Intermediate People's Court ensured that Wang Dan, the pale, thin student leader who topped China's most wanted list after the 1989 demonstrations for more democracy, would spend most of his young adult life behind bars.
The conviction of the 27-year-old democracy activist on the capital charge of plotting to overthrow the government marked the disappearance of one China's few remaining dissidents into the Chinese gulag.
"It's really a slap in the face to those Western governments that have repeatedly asked China to improve its human rights record," said one Western diplomat.
He noted that the sentencing came just a week after a visit by German Foreign Minister Klaus Kinkel and amid preparations for a trip by U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher in late November.
Another Western diplomat said China was not impervious to concerns about its human rights record raised by foreign governments, adding that it was possible that without foreign pressure such jail terms could be even longer.
Western diplomats said the swiftness of the trial and the severity of the sentence were part of a nationwide tightening of controls by the Communist Party.
"They may see deterrent value in a stiff sentence," said one Asian diplomat. "It dissuades other would-be Wang Dans from taking a similar course of action."
Diplomats said the sentence was remarkably light given the severity of the charges, which carried a maximum punishment of death and a minimum of 10 years in jail -- although the penalty was tough if the evidence was taken into consideration.
"This is not seriously heavy by the standards of the charges and the potential that existed," the second Western diplomat said. "But in the light of what we understand him to have done, yes, it's heavy... A sledgehammer to crack a walnut."
The verdict against the former most-wanted leader of the 1989 demonstrations for more democracy charged he received funds from overseas hostile forces, gave financial aid to families of jailed dissidents and tried to set up an "opposition force" by uniting illegal organisations.
"It's sort of difficult to see why they should be so frightened of this," the second Western diplomat said in a reference to China's communist rulers.
However, he said that in recent months Beijing had moved to virtually eradicate any remnants of China's struggling democracy movement.
"In the last few weeks the few remaining (dissidents) have either run away or been dealt with," he said referring to the sentencing of dissident Liu Xiaobo to three years in a labour camp and the escape to the United States of Wang Xizhe, his co-author of a call to impeach President Jiang Zemin.
"There is not very much left. The Chinese do have pretty tight control and they are making sure that they maintain it that way," he said.
"You can see a general sort of tightening up -- dissidents, religion, the Dalai Lama, crime, ideology -- you can just tick them off."
