China hopes for a breakthrough to launch manned space flights early next century and planns to land a spacecraft on the moon in the 21st century, the Xinhua news agency said on Thursday.
Senior Chinese space officials had unveiled an ambitious, multi-million dollar and wide-ranging programme that was aimed at giving the country a competitive edge in international space development, Xinhua said, quoting senior officials.
China is known to be eager to push ahead with its space programme to expand its role in the commercial satellite business while winning international prestige through trumpeting its technological advances, industry analysts have said.
Manned space flights were being given top priority in China's space programme, which includes building a heavy solar satellite in partnership with Germany as well as developing a new generation of lightweight spacecraft to 'bus' satellites into orbit, Xinhua said.
"The country is expected to make a breakthrough in manned space technology at the beginning of the next century," Xinhua said, quoting Wang Liheng, vice-administrator of the China National Space Administration.
Wang gave no more details of the manned space flight programme, which has been rumoured for some time.
However, Li Jianzhong, president of the China Academy of Launch Vehicle Technology, told Xinhua that China was pushing ahead with its goal to boost launch vehicle technology in the 21st century. He said the goal was to build rockets that could carry 20-tonne payloads -- more than twice the current capacity of the nation's most powerful launch vehicles.
China, which put its first satellite into orbit in 1970, has been trying to expand its role in the commercial space market, despite a series of recent setbacks.
In August a Long March 3 rocket, considered one of China's most reliable launch vehicles, failed to put a U.S.-built satellite into orbit. In February, technical flaws had even more disastrous results when a new generation Long March 3B rocket exploded shortly after take-off, killing six people.
Li said China also planned to develop a reuseable space transport system and vehicle re-entry and landing systems.
Cheng Fangyun of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) said a small spacecraft with low operating costs would be designed.
"China has reliable technology for space tracking, telemetry and control to do this," Xinhua quoted Cheng as saying.
In terms of moon exploration, China planned to provide cheap transport systems for lunar-landing spacecraft to explore the moon and developing lunar resources, Xinhua said.
Xu Fuxiang, president of the Chinese Academy of Space Technology, said items under development included a scientific satellite, the Shijian-5, which was light and cheap and would become a 'bus' for small satellites.
In solar observation, China and Germany were cooperating to produce a two-tonne lunar satellite equipped with a solar telescope. The $100 million satellite was expected to be sent into orbit around 2002, said CAS member Ai Guoxiang.
China has also decided to invest 170 million yuan to build the world's most advanced sky survey telescope that could observe at least 100 million galaxies, he said.
China was working on its own space station, Xinhua said.
It is cooperating with the United States and Russia to build a magnetic spectrograph aboard the Alfa station -- scheduled to be launched early next century -- that was expected to detect anti-matter and dark matter in the universe, Xinhua said.
