Wang Dan's name cards describe him as "Free Man" and "World Citizen", but for the next 11 years the democracy activist's world will be a prison.
The disappearance of the 27-year-old into the Chinese gulag on Wednesday signalled a tightening of the Communist Party's grip on all aspects of life -- from religion to crime, from where people may speak to where they may spit.
The sentencing of the former leader of the 1989 Tiananmen Square pro-democracy demonstrations left only a handful of the country's dissidents free.
The Beijing Number One Intermediate People's Court took less than four hours to convict Wang Dan of plotting to subvert the government.
"What do they really think they have to be afraid of from people like me?" said one prominent dissident after learning that Wang Dan had been jailed.
"Of course, they don't really believe that a kid in his 20s poses a threat," said the dissident, who like others interviewed recently, declined to be identified.
"But by putting him in jail they create a hostage who they can release whenever they feel they need to make a gesture on human rights to the West," said the dissident, who spent the day of Wang's trial with a policeman posted in his living room.
The dissident is one of a rapidly dwindling band still at liberty in China.
Most are either sentenced to lengthy jail terms, serving in labour camps, living in voluntary exile or enforced banishment overseas or just keeping their heads down while the security apparatus seeks pretexts to lock them up and remove what it sees as a potential threat to party rule.
"Don't think for a moment that the aim of sending Wang Dan to jail is just to frighten people like me," said the dissident.
"This is a warning to the United States that says 'We can be tough to our own people and we can be tough to you, too'," he said.
This week, a U.S. State Department official underlined the tensions in the Sino-U.S. relationship by describing China's current leadership as the most difficult that Washington has had to deal with in 25 years.
When U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher comes to China in late November he will find few dissidents to add to his cocktail party guest list.
Historian Bao Zunxin, a veteran of the ill-fated 1989 pro-democracy demonstrations who wrote a letter to the government this year calling for a crackdown on corruption, lives quietly in Beijing.
Outspoken environmental champion and author Dai Qing -- who spent months in prison after the June 4, 1989, military crackdown in Tiananmen Square -- writes, campaigns against the huge Three Gorges dam on the Yangtze river and often gives interviews in Beijing to foreign reporters.
Veteran democracy activist Xu Wenli this year completed a 15-year prison term for subversion but has kept silent since a police ban on meeting foreigners and publishing his writings.
Ren Wanding, like Xu a veteran of the 1979 Democracy Wall movement, was released this year from a seven-year term for his role in the 1989 student movement and has kept a low profile, unable to meet foreigners or to vent his opinions.
