China's economic growth is likely to accelerate in 1997 as Beijing pumps up its economy before a crucial Communist Party congress that may tackle nagging reform problems, state media said on Sunday.
Political factors were likely to be a significant factor in a possible renewed boom next year in one of the world's fastest growing economies, the China Daily Business Weekly quoted Xu Hongyuan of the State Information Centre as saying.
However, Xu also warned that the higher growth could see the spin-off of a renewed burst of inflation and warned of rising joblessness, giving one of the most pessimistic unemployment forecasts to be published openly in China.
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in 1997 could reach 8,178 billion yuan ($985.3 billion), growing by 10.5 percent compared with an anticipated 9.6-9.7 percent increase this year, the newspaper quoted Xu as saying.
GDP grew by 10.2 percent in 1995 and Beijing's communist rulers have been trying to cool the rate slightly amid signs the economy was threatening to overheat. China has set a goal of eight percent average growth for the 1996-2000 Ninth Five-Year Plan.
Xu linked his higher growth forecast to the five-yearly Communist Party congress, set for late in 1997, which he said was expected to take some difficult decisions to eradicate the low economic efficiency and operational losses plaguing thousands of lumbering state enterprises.
"These political factors, if the government makes use of them smoothly, will provide strong backing to national economic performance in 1997," the newspaper said, quoting Xu.
Diplomats and western economists have said Beijing may try to revive an economic boom in 1997 in the run-up to the party congress as part of a push to bolster the standing of the current leadership before a meeting when personnel reshuffles are a key issue.
Xu forecast retail price inflation to speed up slightly in 1997 to about eight percent from an expected seven percent this year. Inflation was 14.8 percent last year, down from a communist-era high of 21.7 percent in 1994.
Official media have been rife with speculation that China may again trim interest rates after two cuts already this year but central bank officials insist Beijing has no plans to do anything more than "appropriately" adjust a three-year-old tight monetary policy.
Xu said foreign trade was expected to make a strong recovery after exports slumped in the first few months of this year, especially as the government completes repayment of billions of dollars of export rebates to exporters.
He forecast exports to reach $171.5 billion in 1997, up 14.1 percent from 1996.
Xu urged a further cut in import tariffs next year, a move that Beijing has promised and which could lubricate China's bid to gain entry to the World Trade Organisation.
However, Xu forecast a sharp increase in unemployment.
In 1997, the number of people out of work in the urban area could be as many as eight million, including workers left idle because of suspension of factory production, he said.
The urban jobless rate could reach eight percent next year if both surplus workers at factories and registered unemployed were included, Xu said.
China's official registered urban jobless rate was 2.98 percent at the end of September.
