China is unlikely to concede on its demand to enter the World Trade Organisation as a developing country and has the patience to hunker down for a long wait to win agreement to its terms, a senior Chinese analyst said.
"Both sides need to make concessions, but there is one issue  of principle on which China will not change," Pei Changhong, head of the department of Foreign Economy and Trade under the leading think tank, the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, told Reuters in an interview over the weekend.
"China will only enter as a developing country," Pei said, referring to one stumbling block -- that of Beijing's entry status. The United States insists that the size of China's economy ranks it as a developed country.
"This is a matter of principle," Pei said.
China was deeply disappointed when its application to join the world trade body as a founding member two years ago failed, and talks since in Geneva have proceeded at a snail's pace.
Pei said he expected little progress when ministers of the WTO's 125 member states meet in Singapore this week, with China attending under observer status, but said China would seize the opportunity to explain its stand in meetings on the sidelines.
"After we gain recognition of our status then the talks could more easily proceed," Pei said. "There may be the possibility of concessions (by China) on some concrete issues."
Pei declined to say where China might be prepared to offer concessions in line with a "road map" presented to Beijing by Washington outlining liberalisations it wants before it will support Chinese membership.
He said China's economy was already remarkably open compared with some of its neighbours, such as Japan and South Korea.
"When you go shopping in Beijing, you see goods from all over the world on every shelf," he said. "You don't see nearly so many Chinese products on foreign shelves."
Chinese President Jiang Zemin announced at the Asian-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum last month in the Philippines that China would slash average import tariffs to 15 percent by the year 2000 from the current 23 percent.
Pei said non-tariff barriers still existed in China, citing the service sector as one area to which foreign firms were eager to gain admittance, but insisted Beijing was gradually pulling down these barriers.
"Opening up requires a process," he said. "It is a fact that China is a backward country and must protect some parts of its economy. The demands on us must not be too harsh."
Pei offered a less optimistic view than China's Foreign Minister Qian Qichen, who has said talks with the United States on entry could be wrapped up by mid-1997 as well as WTO chief Renato Ruggiero, who has said next year could see a solution to the exclusion of the world's most populous nation from the world trade body.
Pei said 1997 seemed a rather ambitious target given the distance between the United States and China on many issues, but said he hoped to see entry by 1999.
"There are both advantages and disadvantages to China from entry to the WTO," Pei said, setting off the access to worldwide markets for Chinese goods against the cost and competition its domestic industry would face.
"China's stand now is that it is up to the other side," Pei said.
"China actively wants membership but it can wait. It will be good for China to enter but it won't be a catastrophe if we have to wait," he said.
"It is in no one's interests to keep China out."
