China's long-delayed bid to enter the World Trade Organisation will fall under the spotlight when the world's richest nations meet to discuss its application this week, European and U.S. officials said on Monday.
Delegates of the Quad -- the United States, Japan, Canada and the European Union -- will meet for lunch on Tuesday on the sidelines of the first ministerial conference of the World Trade Organisation (WTO) in Singapore, the officials said.
The European Union (EU) was trying to bring the United States on board regarding its proposal that China enter the world trade body through a phased accession process, one EU official said.
The United States says Beijing must comply with a "road map" to open its markets and eliminate trade and non-trade barriers before it can win U.S. support for its entry.
China had hoped to culminate its decade-long bid to join the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade by becoming a founding member of the WTO at its inception two years ago.
Its application foundered on opposition over entry terms, with Beijing maintaining that the price of the road map was too high. Talks continue at a snail's pace in Geneva.
One aim of Tuesday's Quad meeting would be to try to narrow differences between the United States and Europe over terms for China's entry, terms used by Beijing to play one side off against the other, one EU source said.
Outlining his key objectives for the week-long ministerial conference in Singapore, EU Commissioner for Trade Sir Leon Brittan, stressed the need to relaunch in earnest negotiations toward Chinese membership.
"We have the remarkable changes going on in China, as well as a continuing process of economic renewal elsewhere in Asia and in Latin America...Hence the urgent need for WTO enlargement," Brittan told the conference opening session.
Brittan has visited China several times in recent months and has said he received a warm response from Beijing to the phased accession proposal.
In his opening address to the conference, Singapore Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong also backed China's entry in a reference to pending memberships, although he repeated the United States stand that new applicants must meet the necessary criteria.
"Some of these new entrants are significant economic players, like China and Russia, their entry into the WTO would have a positive impact on the rules-based multilateral trading system," Goh said.
Senior Chinese analyst Pei Changhong said last week China was unlikely to concede on its demand to enter the WTO as a developing country and has the patience to hunker down for a long wait to win accession on its terms.
The United States insists that the size of China's economy ranks it as a developed country.
A goal of 1997 entry seemed an ambitious target given the distance between the United States and China on so many issues, but Pei said he hoped to see entry by 1999.
China's Foreign Minister Qian Qichen said last month that talks with the United States on entry could be wrapped up by mid-1997.
