Intense haggling among the world's trade ministers brought within grasp a lucrative deal to free the global information technology market and some officials saw movement on the contentious issue of labour standards.
Big powers, notably the United States and the European Union (EU), said on Tuesday a flurry of talks throughout the second day of the World Trade Organisation (WTO) ministerial conference had inched toward a global pact to eliminate tariffs on a $600 billion market for information technology.
Storm-clouds over whether to discuss monopolistic business practices began to disperse. Differences appeared to narrow between North and South as well as North and North on standards to regulate cheap labour and child workers.
WTO officials want a final declaration at the close of the first ministerial meeting of the fledgling trade body on Friday that would point the WTO down the free trade path into the 21st century.
The EU, along with the United States, Canada and Japan, were making progress to reach consensus on an Information Technology Agreement (ITA) that would be the crowning achievement of the meeting, EU Trade Commissioner Sir Leon Brittan told reporters.
"We are making a lot of progress," Brittan said after a lunchtime meeting of the four major trading partners to discuss types of products to be covered and timing of tariff reductions.
Acting U.S. Trade Representative Charlene Barshefksy said she concurred with Brittan's comments, but declined to say anything more on the proposed pact to remove tariffs on computer products by 2000.
Late night talks focused on details, officials said.
"There is no question that what the industrialised countries now hope for most here is a deal on information technology products and agreement to work hard for a basic telecommunications pact by February," said one key negotiator.
Signals from negotiators left little doubt the major traders were aiming for agreement as quickly as possible -- perhaps by Wednesday -- to convince Asian trading partners to sign on to the agreement by the end of the meeting on Friday.
Japan's Foreign Minister Yukihiko Ikeda told the conference he hoped "ardently....that we will have an agreement as the most significant achievement of this ministerial conference in the area of trade liberalisation."
However, several Asian nations voiced reservations, with Malaysia saying the goal of free commerce in infotech by the turn of the century was too ambitious.
"We did not come here to discuss the Information Technology Agreement," international trade and industry minister Rafidah Aziz said. "All negotiations should be done in Geneva."
The 128 full delegations from WTO member countries and ministers and officials from nearly 30 others waiting to be admitted heard ringing appeals for progress to a telecoms liberalisation pact with a deadline set for mid-February.
Another late night meeting was called on the "new issue" of labour standards that has emerged as the most divisive in Singapore.
A Japanese foreign ministry official told reporters that some developing countries who had opposed any mention of the labour issue in the final declaration were taking a more positive position.
"A possibility of an agreement has emerged," he said, but addded that some hard-core emerging economies were holding out.
India, Malaysia and Indonesia, for example, have been insisting on no mention at all, arguing that even a neutral phrasing would suggest work conditions were a subject for the WTO.
Accord was also closer on whether to study competition policy.
"No one was totally opposed to taking up the issue," a Japanese official sid. "We are moving towards a compromise."
Aiming to counter lobbying by sceptical Western-based aid groups, the WTO insisted that the poorest nations stood to reap major benefit from the freeing of global commerce.
But WTO officials admitted that Director-General Renato Ruggiero had failed to convince richer members, both industrialised and emerging economies, to remove all tariffs and other barriers affecting goods from the laggard states.
The European Union made little headway in efforts to persuade its main trading partners to jump-start stalled talks on China's bid for WTO admission.
But Russia, another major member-in-waiting, expected to win entry by the end of 1997, Russia's Deputy Prime Minister Oleg Davydov said.
