Days and nights of intense talks on ways to liberalise global trade brought ministers to the brink of agreement on Wednesday although the stormy issue of labour rights cast a shadow on a final deal.
Despite sleepless nights and three days of intense negotiations, World Trade Organisation (WTO) Director-General Renato Ruggiero was buoyant at the inaugural Ministerial Conference of the two-year-old watchdog body.
"I am very encouraged. The sense of achievement is very clear," he told Reuters as he emerged at the half-way stage of the gathering from the latest of several sessions aimed at finalising a declaration for the ministers to sign.
"The road is open to something important, something big," declared Ruggiero, whose horizon has been set on the Singapore meeting since he took up the post 18 months ago just after the body was launched.
"We are deep in negotiation, and I do not want to prejudice anything," he said. "But there have been some very interesting proposals to get over some of the differences. People are ready for compromise to reach agreement."
Haggling in Singapore focuses on a multi-billion dollar Information Technology Agreement (ITA) and wording of the last few contentious clauses in a final declaration to try to include the concerns of all of the organisation's 128 members.
The document is intended as a blueprint consolidating agreements already reached in the 1986-93 Uruguay Round of world trade talks -- in areas ranging from goods tariffs and services to farm produce and textiles.
It will also set the course and the tone for discussions between now and the end of the century on topics not yet fully under the WTO purview such as basic telecommunications, financial and maritime services, and many others.
The big battle has been over whether to include a reference to core labour standards in the document and whether it should include provision for some discussion in the WTO on investment rules, competition policies and the way national authorities award contracts -- or government procurement.
Several countries, mostly Asian, are resisting what they see as a U.S.-driven push to get labour rights on to the WTO agenda and to use the organisation's disputes court to erode the developing world's low-cost labour edge.
When asked if Malaysia would permit a WTO study on labour rights, International Trade and Industry Minister Rafidah Aziz told reporters: "No, no, no way. There is no place for labour issues at the WTO."
The United States, backed by France, Norway and the International Confederation of Free Trades Unions (ICFTU), has been pressing hard for inclusion of the issue in the final text.
Delegates say Washington has insisted the issue be included if it is to back the declaration when the conference ends.
The United States, digging in its heels, says the labour issue involves human rights, eliminating developing world sweat shops, child and forced labour and other forms of worker abuse.
Faster progress was expected on ITA, with delegates scrambling for an accord to free trade in the $600 billion market for computers, software chips and other high-technology products by the year 2000.
Negotiators from the Big Four powers, the United States, Japan, the European Union and Canada haggled in meetings on the sidelines to try to settle differences as early as late on Wednesday on such touchy questions as what products would be covered and the extent of tariff reductions.
"There is not an agreement yet," European Union Trade Commissioner Sir Leon Brittan said after meeting Acting U.S. Trade Representative Charlene Barshefsky.
"There is agreement on many points. There are some outstanding ones. We are trying to resolve those."
A Japanese government source told Reuters earlier that gaps still remained among the Big Four powers, particularly over which products to include.
"We are continuing to work with our Quad (Big Four) partners and with many other delegates to find a formula that will succeed," a U.S. official told reporters.
Washington hopes that in addition to a broad infotech pact by as many countries as possible, the WTO will endorse the ITA deal in its Ministerial Declaration on Friday.
That would allow WTO members unable to sign on now to do so at a later date by presenting revised tariff schedules at the WTO in Geneva, the U.S. official said.
