China charged on Thursday that politics was holding up its application for entry to the world trade body, the World Trade Organisation (WTO), and said it wanted to join as soon as possible,
"The accession of the applicants to the WTO has been slowed down due to political consideration and the excessive demand for immediate commercial benefits," China's Deputy Minister of Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation Long Yongtu told the WTO ministerial meeting in Singapore.
In a thinly veiled attack on the United States, Long accused some members of taking advantage of the negotiation process to resolve bilateral trade disputes not relevant to WTO rules.
"As a result, some accession negotiations have encountered undue delay, which has slowed down the process of economic globalisation," he said.
China was bitterly disappointed when it failed in its decade-long bid to join the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade by becoming a founding member of the WTO at its inception two years ago.
Beijing has met particularly stiff resistance from the United States, which disputes Beijing's demand it join as a developing country and says the size of China's economy means it should enter as a developed nation.
The United States also says Beijing must comply with a "road map" to open its markets and eliminate trade and non-trade barriers before it can win U.S. support for its entry.
Beijing maintains the price of the road map is too high, and talks continue at a snail's pace at WTO headquarters in Geneva.
"The Chinese government has consistently held a positive attitude towards joining the WTO not because we believe the membership will bring out miracles to our economy and foreign trade," he said.
He welcomed an initiative by the European Union to support phased accession for China.
"We...hope the positive attitude will be translated into actions in resolving specific actions in the negotation," Long said.
"On our part, we shall take a flexible, pragmatic and forward-looking attitude and in the hope that other members will do likewise," Long said.
Long said China was keen to join the world trade body as soon as possible and repeated Beijing's official stand that exclusion of the world's fastest-growing economy from the WTO would benefit no one.
Asked when Beijing hoped to see accesion, Long said Beijing had never specified a timetable, but added: "We hope it can be rather quickly."
Senior Chinese analyst Pei Changhong said in an interview last week that China was unlikely to concede on its demand to enter the WTO as a developing country and had the patience to hunker down for a long wait to win accession on its terms.
A goal of 1997 entry seemed an ambitious target given the distance between the United States and China on so many issues, but Pei said he hoped to see entry by 1999.
China's Foreign Minister Qian Qichen said last month that talks with the United States on entry could be wrapped up by mid-1997.
