China announced a major reform of its huge agricultural system on Wednesday, saying it would take the ambitious step of unifying the price the state pays for grain with the market rate to boost output next year.
In a speech outlining some of Beijing's plans for reform in 1997 to drag China's economy away from Stalinist-style central planning and toward stronger market forces, Politburo member Li Tieying cited reform of lumbering state enterprises and agriculture as two primary objectives.
China would unify the grain purchasing price with market prices next year, Li, the minister in charge of the State Commission for Restructuring the Economy, told a national conference on reform in the southern city of Shenzhen.
The system of cotton purchasing would also be reformed.
He gave no more details of how prices would be unified, but the move appeared to herald the effective liberalisation of grain prices.
Since paramount leader Deng Xiaoping launched economic reform in 1978, Beijing's communist leaders have tried -- and failed -- to free grain prices, falling foul of fears that spiralling prices would make food unaffordable for many of China's 1.2 billion people and spark social unrest.
China's central authorities still buy a certain amount of grain from farmers at set prices below the market rates to ensure ample stores in state granaries.
With a record harvest of 480 million tonnes forecast for this year and with market prices falling closer to the state level, analysts said the time was ripe to unify the system.
Officials said last week grain supply was expected to exceed demand in 1997, with planting and weather conditions indicating a good summer crop next year.
Officials have said difficulties in selling grain would sap farmers' incentive to plant, placing in jeopardy China's ability to feed itself without resorting to huge imports.
Li said the state would separate national grain reserves from regional ones and would divide the responsibilities of the central government from local governments, but gave no details.
Next year the government would also separate losses incurred by state grain enterprises in 1996 from those expected next year and thereafter, he said. He did not give further details.
This year China raised by 20 percent the purchase price it pays to farmers for their grain after holding down increases in 1995 because soaring prices the year before had helped to push inflation to a communist-era high.
Li did not say whether the government would also take the opportunity to force urban consumers to pay market prices for grain, thus extricating state coffers from the burden of huge subsidies when plentiful supplies could curb price rises.
On state enterprises, Li said China would reorganise assets of ailing factories and establish a new system of supervision, while pushing social security and housing reforms.
In 1997, the number of pilot cities chosen for experimental reform of capital structure of state firms would be increased to 100 from 58, Li said. Enterprise groups selected as pilots of reform would almost double to 100 from 57.
The number of key enterprises linked with a sponsoring bank, and thus given easier access to loans during a continuing credit squeeze, would rise to 500 from 300, he added.
More than 45 percent of China's 68,800 state industrial firms registered losses in January-September, a rise of 17.6 percent from the same period last year, latest figures show.
The combined deficit of loss-making state firms hit 65.12 billion yuan ($7.8 billion) in the first nine months of this year, a rise of 45.7 percent from a year ago.
