Top Hollywood film stars, including screen idols Harrison Ford and Brad Pitt, have been placed on a blacklist of 50 people barred from visiting the restive region of Tibet, Chinese officials said on Friday.
News that some of Hollywood's biggest box office draws were on a blacklist comes just weeks after Beijing clashed with U.S. entertainment giant Walt Disney Co over its film on the life of Tibet's exiled god-king, the Dalai Lama.
Brad Pitt, Harrison Ford and his wife Melissa Mathison Ford as well as directors Martin Scorsese and Jean-Jaques Annaud were among a group of movie personalities on a blacklist held by the Tibet Tourism Bureau, a tourist official said by telephone from the regional capital, Lhasa.
"Last October, we were verbally informed by the Tibet state security office that those foreigners should not be given an entry permit if they applied to visit Tibet," he said.
"At the end of April or in early May, we received the formal documents," he said, when asked if the Hollywood stars were barred from the Himalayan region that has been rocked by sporadic anti-Chinese unrest in recent years.
"They are banned from coming here for any reason," the official said, adding that none of those named on the list had yet applied to visit.
Brad Pitt stars as an escaped Austrian prisoner of war, who fled India in World War Two and found refuge in Lhasa where he befriended the young Dalai Lama, in the film "Seven Years in Tibet" that is directed by Annaud. China has not formally objected to the film.
However, it has apparently tried to halt production by California-based Walt Disney of the film "Kundun" that tells of the Dalai Lama's early life and is directed by Scorsese. Mathison Ford is a scriptwriter for the movie.
Disney has said it will go ahead with the release of "Kundun" despite China's objections. Beijing has denied putting pressure on Disney to withdraw backing for the film.
Beijing has been reported to have warned Walt Disney last month that its ambitious business plans in China were at risk if it went ahead with the release of the movie.
A Foreign Ministry spokesman said Disney would be wrong to sing the praises of the exiled spiritual leader.
The Dalai Lama fled Tibet to India in 1959 after an abortive uprising against Chinese rule and has since waged a non-violent campaign for autonomy for his homeland.
However, the blacklist did not include actor Richard Gere, who has long backed the Tibetan spiritual movement and is an active supporter of the Dalai Lama, the tourism official said.
Gere was among a group of movie luminaries who this month wrote to China's ambassador in Washington protesting against what they called Beijing's "attempt to impose worldwide censorship".
Officials had begun to compile a blacklist of foreigners barred from visiting the restive area in 1993, and the list had now reached more than 50 names, he said.
All foreign visitors to Tibet are required first to obtain an entry permit issued by local authorities who are anxious to keep out Westerners who may support the underground pro-independence movement spearheaded by the region's monks.
