China will accelerate listings of new firms on its two stock markets next year to meet demand and curb speculation, a senior securities official said.
His remarks, published on Sunday, came a week after an official statement warned investors away from excessive speculation, triggering a steep sell-off on the Shanghai and southern Shenzhen stock exchanges.
However, an official of the top securities watchdog, the China Securities Regulatory Commission, sounded another note of caution, saying that the markets needed even tighter regulation because of insider trading, excessive speculation and trading on margin.
"It will remain at the top of our work agenda for a fairly long period of time to further supervise the stock market, and curb over-speculation and irregularities ... to better protect the interests of the smaller investors," Xinhua quoted the unidentified official as saying.
Since the People's Daily editorial one week ago, Shanghai's domestic A share index has tumbled 20.07 percent, standing at 922.34 points last Friday compared with 1,163.05 at the close a week before.
The foreign currency B index fell 3.84 percent to 63.743 points from 66.291 points a week ago after a roller-coaster five days of trading.
China would move more swiftly to list additional firms on the markets, in line with the recent market upswings, Xinhua quoted Zhang Dongsheng, a deputy director of the Finance and Banking Department of the State Planning Commission, as saying.
"This is part of the nation's effort to balance supply and demand in the stock market and curb excessive speculation," Zhang said.
Last week China announced a share quota of 10 billion yuan ($1.2 billion) for 1996 and to be carried over into 1997, almost double the 5.5 billion yuan approved for the previous year.
Analysts said one aim of the decision to flood the fledgling stock markets with new issues was to soak up excess funds that have fuelled a flurry of speculation in recent months.
At its height just a few days ago, Shanghai's domestic A share index had surged more than 100 percent and its Shenzhen counterpart over 300 percent since April, when Beijing announced that it supported development of the stock markets.
In a sign of soaring interest in securities, official figures show 21 million Chinese have now opened trading accounts, up from just 12 million at the start of the year and rocketing from 14 million in September, Xinhua said.
The rapidly growing number of stock investors had caused the market to overheat on a shortage of supply, resulting in runaway price rises and excessive speculation, Xinhua said.
"The current market size allows some institutional investors to manipulate the stock prices and drive them up to ridiculous highs," it quoted Cao Fengqi, a financial expert at prestigious Beijing University, as saying.
"An accelerated expansion of the Chinese stock market will boost the capital market and help pool more funds for capital-strapped enterprises," he said.
Speculation could be curbed only if the market was big enough to handle demand, he added.
Beijing, which says its stock exchanges and futures markets are experiments, was committed to the markets, Xinhua said.
Current market capitalisation of more than 1.33 trillion yuan, almost triple the 1995 figure, accounts for 18 percent of China's gross domestic product, compared with six percent at the end of last year, Xinhua added. ($1 = 8.3 yuan)
