China hailed on Tuesday its war on bourgeois decadence as the top news event of 1996 along with missile tests off Taiwan, but ignored improved ties with the United States and the jailing of a dozen dissidents.
The line-up of the top 10 news events in China in 1996 as selected by senior editors of the major Communist Party-linked newspapers closely reflected the party line on news -- or propaganda.
The list issued by the Xinhua news agency differed sharply from events in China that have focused international eyes on the world's most populous country in the last 12 months.
Heading the list selected by 12 Beijing editors was the annual plenum of China's ruling Communist Party in October that adopted a 15,000-word document exhorting China's 1.2 billion people to adhere to socialist ethics and abhor bourgeois Western liberalism.
On Christmas Eve, it was unclear how far socialist values extended, but Santa Claus appeared to be exempt as he smiled and waved from dozens of Beijing and Shanghai department stores.
Politics, not only news value, may have coloured the views of many of the editors, who would have remembered that the plenum was trumpeted as one of the major achievements of Communist Party chief, state President and army boss Jiang Zemin -- anointed heir to paramount leader Deng Xiaoping.
Newspaper editors elsewhere in the world would probably have chosen Beijing's campaign to intimidate Taiwan in the run-up the island's first popular elections of a Chinese president on Chinese soil as the top story of 1996.
However, for Chinese editors the decision to conduct missile tests and live-fire war games in waters near the island last March, and which sent U.S. aircraft carriers steaming into neighbouring seas, ranked only fourth in their top 10.
The news item in second place related to China's resumption of sovereignty over the British colony of Hong Kong in mid-1997, or Premier Li Peng's decision to sign off on the appointment of shipping tycoon Tung Chee-hwa as Hong Kong's first post-colonial chief executive.
Other editors might have focused less on the role of a single Chinese leader in Tung's elevation and more on his selection by a Beijing-sponsored committee of his peers.
Four of the top 10 Chinese news stories were linked to economic achievements and one to sports -- the Atlanta Olympic Games in which China ranked fourth overall in the medals' tally. Just two involved international affairs.
President Jiang's visit to the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) forum in the Philippines last month edged into fifth place.
Jiang's APEC meeting with U.S. President Bill Clinton set the seal on a warming of frosty Sino-U.S. ties and resulted in a decision on an exchange of the first presidential state visits in nearly eight years. But for China's news commissars, that merited only a brief aside.
"Chinese President Jiang Zemin... met with leaders of other APEC members, including U.S. President Clinton," Xinhua said.
China's renewed crackdown on dissent, such as its decision to sentence Wang Dan, a former leader of the 1989 student demonstrations for more democracy, to 11 years in jail for conspiring to subvert the government, went unmentioned.
