China has moved a step further from its recent radical past with a decision to scrap the crime of "counter-revolution" and replace it with the offence of jeopardising state security, officials said on Wednesday.
The maximum penalty of death for a charge that is most commonly used against political dissidents accused of subversion would remain unchanged.
The proposal to rename the crime of counter-revolution as jeopardising state security was tabled in a draft amendment to the Criminal Law submitted to the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress, or parliament, on Tuesday.
Following approval by the standing committee, the amendment that reduces the scope of the crime to 10 offences from 15 would be sent to the annual session of parliament next March for final ratification, a parliament official said by telephone.
The proposal to change the name of the crime "was made in consideration of changed circumstances and the overall interests of the country", the Xinhua news agency quoted Wang Hanbin, vice-chairman of the Standing Committee, as telling parliament.
The crime of counter-revolution was placed on China's books after Chairman Mao Zedong swept the communists to power in 1949 and launched three decades of radical rule when to be revolutionary were marks of a correct political attitude.
The crime of counter-revolution has for decades been a catch-all to imprison anyone of whose opinions the state disapproved or whose opinions disapproved of the state.
Its victims have ranged from writers condemned as rightists in the late 1950s and those who criticised Mao during the ultra-leftist 1966-76 Cultural Revolution, to teenage students who took to the streets in 1989 to demand more democracy.
Among the most prominent dissidents serving lengthy jail terms for counter-revolutionary crimes is Wei Jingsheng, regarded as the father of China's struggling pro-democracy movement and sentenced late last year to 14 years for plotting to subvert the state.
Wei was previously sentenced to 15 years in prison for counter-revolutionary crimes after he wrote an essay during the 1979 Democracy Wall movement calling for the Fourth Modernisation -- or democracy.
Parliament's Wang praised the use of counter-revolutionary crime to safeguard state security, but said times had changed.
"Political, economic and social development in recent years has given birth to a series of new problems," Wang said, referring to the shift away from revolution to define political correctness that has been generated by the pragmatic reform policies of paramount leader Deng Xiaoping.
Under the draft amendments, counter-revolutionary activities as now stipulated will remain a crime -- with the exception that offences such as murder, manufacturing firearms and stealing guns will be excluded and handled as ordinary criminal acts.
Activities that aim to overthrow the dictatorship of the proletariat -- or subversion -- remain covered by the new crime of jeopardising state security, the parliament official said.
Under other amendments to the criminal law, an act not specifically covered cannot lead to a criminal conviction. Currently, people can be convicted based on a similar crime.
New offences will be added including organised crime, computer crime and manipulating stock markets.
Police acting in the line of duty will no longer bear criminal responsibility for causing death or injury.
