Draft amendments to China's criminal law have sparked fierce debate among usually tame lawmakers, with controversy surrounding the scope of the death penalty and whether corrupt state managers should be executed.
The Workers Daily newspaper on Saturday published a rare insight into controversies troubling a string of amendments to the Criminal Law, currently under debate by the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress, or parliament, that meets behind closed doors.
"Looking at the last few days of debate by the standing committee of the draft criminal law amendments, argument on specific clauses has been very fierce," the newspaper said in an unusual expose of controversy in the usually rubber-stamp body.
The criminal law amendments along with a new anti-corruption law were two main items on the agenda of a week-long meeting of the standing committee that began on Tuesday to debate bills to be passed by the full annual session of parliament next March.
"Are there too many death penalties?" was one of the top controversies this week, the Workers Daily said.
"Some people think that, with the international tide moving toward eliminating or reducing the use of the death penalty, even though the current amendments do not increase the number of death penalty clauses, however the current criminal law with more than 30 capital crimes should be reduced," it said.
China executes several thousand people each year and international human rights group Amnesty International recorded 3,612 death sentences and 2,535 executions in China in 1995 compared with 2,496 death sentences and 1,791 executions in 1994. Hundreds, if not thousands more, go unreported.
From January 1, when a new criminal procedures law takes effect, China will add lethal injection as well as execution by firing squad as a new means of capital punishment.
The Workers Daily said another body of legislative opinion held that the death penalty should neither be reduced or eliminated because it served as a deterrent and answered a popular demand for harsher punishments to prevent crime.
Debate also swirled around amendments to combat corruption, including more than 60 clauses that would specifically define graft and dereliction of duty, while increasing to 32 from seven the types of officials subject to the law, the newspaper said.
Heated argument surrounded the designation of managers of state firms as government employees, who are subject to a maximum penalty of death for corruption, it said.
One body of opinion held that government factory managers be defined as public servants since 75 percent of all official cases of corruption involved state enterprise managers.
Others argued this was unfair since managers of non-state firms faced a maximum of only 15 years in jail for graft.
"On this issue, the Supreme People's Procuratorate and the Supreme People's Court hold very different opinions," the newspaper said.
All should be equal before the law, the newspaper quoted the criminal law as saying regarding the need to tackle corruption, which is regarded as the chief threat to Communist rule.
It made no mention of a former Beijing city party boss who was sacked in early 1995 after a vice-mayor committed suicide in a $37 million corruption scandal, but has yet to face charges.
Another source of contention among legislators was a proposal that police acting in the line of duty should bear no criminal responsibility for killing or injuring a suspect.
This proposal had won strong support from the Ministry of Public Security, especially after the deaths of 100 police in the first half of this year, it said.
"Those opposed believe that this regulation could be used as an excuse in cases when casualties result from improper use of weapons," the Workers Daily said.
