China on Sunday hailed a brief visit by Premier Li Peng to Russia as 43 hours packed with political and business achievements and trumpeted the growth of a power centre to offset the influence of the United States.
Diplomats said the rapid warming of ties between China and Russia was unlikely to signal a major strategic alliance or a return to the close political and military alliance that existed between Beijing and Moscow in the early 1950s.
China's effusive rhetoric to describe Li's Russia trip was meant as a gesture to the West that Beijing could turn to friends other than the United States, diplomats said.
It did not appear to signal a major new power axis between the former bitter rivals for leadership of the communist world, they said.
"The visit... was brief indeed. However, it scored fruitful achievements and had great significance," the People's Daily, mouthpiece of the Communist Party, said in a front-page editorial.
"It is bitingly cold in Moscow in late December, but Li and his entourage felt the warmth of the Russian leaders and people everywhere," the People's Daily purred.
The achievements of Li's 43-hour visit included an agreement for the prime ministers to meet twice a year to monitor progress on building trade and diplomatic relations and a decision that Chinese President Jiang Zemin visit Moscow in April for talks to set the seal on a new level of relations.
The two sides also signed several deals including the supply of Russian Sukhoi Su-27 warplanes and building a nuclear power plant in China's eastern Jiangsu province.
Officials gave no details of the fighter deal, but sources said it involved sale of a complete production line to be built in northeast China. The deal was held up by financing problems and complications from the break-up of the Soviet Union that left Su-27 engine manufacturing lines in Ukraine, they said.
However, the Chinese commentary focused on the political significance of the visit, and a joint communique on strategic cooperation into the 21st century, as important signs of the global importance of the Sino-Russian partnership.
"The world is moving towards multi-polarisation," the People's Daily said.
"Both Russia and China well deserve to be two important and independent poles in the multi-polar world. The establishment and development of strategic partnership between Russia and China is conducive to the multi-polarisation of the world," it said.
"Leaders of both countries made it clear that they do not favour a world dominated by one power," it said, in a scarcely veiled reference to the United States.
Russia's desire to develop close links with China has followed NATO's plans to expand eastwards by admitting Moscow's Cold War allies in Eastern Europe as members of the alliance.
Li, whose meeting with Boris Yeltsin was the Russian president's first with a foreign leader since returning to work after a heart bypass operation on November 5, stressed that China saw the partnership as long-term and not as expediency.
The strategic partnership was directed at no other parties, the People's Daily stressed.
"May Sino-Russian friendship be passed on from generation to generation," it said.
Moscow and Beijing, once bitter rivals for leadership of the communist world, have been building steadily warmer and closer ties since Soviet communism began to unravel a decade ago.
For Russia, democracy has been accompanied by poverty and Moscow sees China as a huge market for its struggling industry.
