China's senior leader Deng Xiaoping is spending his twilight years as an effective recluse, leaving an opportunity for power-hungry, would-be heirs fighting for his title to use his name to strengthen their hand, analysts said on Thursday.
The most blatant sign of the exploitation of the reputation of the 92-year-old elder statesman was the New Year's Day launch of a 12-hour documentary on Deng's life that showed him larger than life, glowing against a background of golden clouds radiating across the sky.
"This was done, written and arranged by those around him who would benefit from having his image... burnished up a bit," said one Western diplomat.
"All those who owe their fortunes to him want to make him appear in as good a light as possible," he said. "The fact that they are starting the year with this shows that the pro-Deng camp seems to have the upper hand."
The clearest immediate beneficiary was the narrator of the introduction to Wednesday's inaugural episode of the 12-part series -- Deng's own anointed heir-apparent President, Communist Party chief and army commander-in-chief Jiang Zemin.
"Jiang will be better off if Deng is able to linger for about another year and a half -- until about mid-1998," the diplomat said.
"It would be inconvenient for (Jiang) if Deng went now," he said, adding that Jiang needed the clout of the man who succeeded Chairman Mao Zedong as China's most powerful man to consolidate his position at a crucial party meeting this year.
Deng has not been seen in public for nearly three years -- a result of his own desire to retire to a behind-the-scenes role as well as his failing health, analysts say. In his last appearance he looked weak and faltering.
Speculation abounds of Deng's fragility, ranging from rumours of his sudden admission to hospital in recent days to reports that he remains at home with little change in his health but with fading lucidity.
"There is no doubt that the perception is... that he is to all intents and purposes no longer consistently lucid," the diplomat said, adding that the adulatory documentary was proof of Deng's waning control.
"This is the kind of thing he always avoided," he said, quoting from Deng himself who always openly abhorred the cult of personality that deified Mao.
Chinese analysts said the series was reminiscent of the power struggles that gripped the inner ranks of the party in Mao's last years.
"You can see that people are now using Deng just as (Mao's wife) Jiang Qing and the Gang of Four used Mao to boost their position in the years before he died," said one Chinese writer.
Jiang and his opponents were already lining up their pieces in the months before the high-profile handover of Hong Kong to Beijing on July 1 this year and the crucial 15th Party Congress late in the year, diplomats and analysts said.
"The transition is pretty much done now, but Jiang still needs Deng's clout behind him until everything is wrapped up with the congress and the change of government at the 1998 National People's Congress (parliament)," the diplomat said.
The primetime documentary, carefully timed to start the year, is expected to define Deng's legacy to the current party leadership and thus future policies, political analysts said.
The main theme of the first one-hour show was reform, underlining China's commitment to Deng's pragmatic market policies that turned a backward Stalinist state into an economic powerhouse.
