China must tackle the thorny task of state enterprise reform this year, forcing through unpopular layoffs and bankruptcies to halt haemorrhaging losses, economic tsar Vice Premier Zhu Rongji said on Thursday.
Zhu hailed such achievements in 1996 as a high economic growth rate of 9.7 percent, a fall in inflation to 6.0 percent and the swelling of foreign exchange reserves to a record $105 billion at the year-end.
However, he cited two urgent tasks that must be tackled in 1997 -- increasing grain reserves and ensuring incentives to farmers and halting rapidly mounting losses among the state enterprises that form the backbone of China's economy.
About 75 percent of China's more than 100,000 state firms lost money last year and total losses in the government sector soared to 69 billion yuan ($8.3 billion) between January and October, a year-on-year rise of 45 percent.
Zhu blamed the losses on two increases in state prices for farm products, hikes in costs of transport and power, tighter accounting mechanisms, high interest rate payments despite two cuts last year and arbitrary fees by local governments.
However, these were secondary reasons, Zhu told a meeting in Beijing on re-employment in state enterprises.
The three main reasons were duplication of products, the impact of widespread smuggling and the burden of huge numbers of surplus workers employed in state firms, Zhu said.
Many state firms, accustomed to mass-production for a command economy, have struggled to adjust to China's new consumer-led markets and continue to churn out millions of yuan worth of unsaleable goods.
Tackling these problems must be a priority in 1997, he said, if China is to turn around inefficient state enterprises that recorded their first net loss in the first quarter of last year as they struggled in an economy racing to abandon the cushion of central planning in favour of a sink-or-swim marketplace.
Zhu called for reorganising management in state enterprises this year, citing bad management as a major factor in growing losses, and urged active promotion of re-employment projects to help surplus workers or those laid off through streamlining.
He also urged standardisation of the bankruptcy system, which has been used mainly on an experimental basis for the past few years, along with encouragement of mergers.
While proposing the use of mergers rather than bankruptcy to eliminate loss-making state firms, he advised against the sale of an entire company and favoured enterprises taking on a portion of the ailing firm's debt.
The government would write off up to 30 billion yuan ($3.6 billion) of bad debt this year, and this figure could rise gradually in the next few years, Zhu said.
On agriculture, Zhu revealed for the first time the size of China's state grain reserves, which totalled a record 148.5 million tonnes at the end of 1996. That marked an increase of 34.4 million tonnes compared with the end of 1995, he said.
China has estimated its 1996 grain harvest at a record 480 million tonnes, up from a record 466 million tonnes in 1995.
Market prices for grain would not fall and Zhu urged farmers not to sell their grain at low prices to private traders.
Beijing is anxious that farmers continue to grow grain and not turn to more lucrative cash crops and wants to insure that farm incomes do not drop with the record harvests.
