China has placed one of its largest investment trusts, stung by real estate losses, under administrative custody, and officials said on Thursday that more such financial firms may suffer a similar fate.
The People's Bank of China, the central bank, ordered the China Agribusiness Development Trust and Investment Corp (CADTIC) placed under the administration of two state banks in early January, local bank officials said.
CADTIC's domestic business had been taken over by the China Construction Bank while its overseas business had become the responsibility of the Bank of China, a construction bank official said.
Bankers said the financial firm that was China's biggest investment trust company after the China International Trust and Investment Corp (CITIC) had overextended itself due to serious mismanagement.
"CADTIC grew too big, it set up too many local branches and its scope of business was too wide," one banker said.
It had extended its business beyond its officially sanctioned scope -- agriculture -- and suffered large losses from real estate investments and had also invested in securities, a banker in Hong Kong said. The huge investment entity was owned by the Ministry of Agriculture.
"This underlines what we suspect -- that irregularities involving firms supposed to be engaged in agriculture business are fairly widespread," said a Hong Kong banker who declined to be identified.
"They are all fairly overexposed to property," he said.
Bank officials said there were no plans yet to close the trust company, but did not rule out that it might be sold off in the future.
A Construction Bank official declined to say whether the bank had plans to buy any or all of the trust company's assets.
The trust firm was still engaged in business as usual, said one CADTIC official who declined to be identified.
The Construction Bank had taken over management of CADTIC's domestic debts while the Bank of China was handling its overseas commitments.
Officials of the central bank declined to comment.
The ministries of Agriculture and Finance began an investigation into the financial situation of the company a year ago, an official of the investment company said earlier.
"It is not possible to shut down CADTIC immediately because the knock-on effects would be very large, there would be a series of problems," said one local banker. "It should be taken over by the banks."
Unlike China's state-owned banks, which can easily attract deposits but face tight restrictions on loans, the financial institutions can operate without any loan limitations, he said.
China was stepping up supervision of financial institutions, and new, tighter rules and more frequent checks were expected to result in several more such actions against firms engaged in irregular business, he said.
Financial institutions could be taken over, ordered to stop business or to merge, he said. Many that had little business, large debts and large losses were expected to close, he said, but declined to give details of the irregularities.
CADTIC has reported assets of about 30 billion yuan ($3.6 billion) and outstanding loans from such international financial institutions as the World Bank.
The Asian Development Bank just last month arranged a $70 million loan through CADTIC to a $185 million fish protection project in the Bohai and Yellow Seas.
