China defended on Saturday its decision to exercise its veto at the United Nations for the first time in nearly a quarter of a century, killing a U.N. plan to monitor disarmament and a ceasefire in Guatemala.
"We had no choice but to vote against the draft decision on peacekeeping," the Xinhua news agency quoted Foreign Ministry spokesman Shen Guofang as saying.
"Clearly, the government of Guatemala must be wholly responsible," he said and made clear that China had no objection to the dispatch of U.N. peacekeepers to oversee a peace that ended a brutal 36-year-old civil war.
Shen accused Guatemala of forcing China to exercise its veto because the Central American country had maintained ties with Taiwan, which Beijing regards as a renegade province not entitled to international diplomatic links.
At a late Friday night meeting, all Security Council members except China voted in favour of a resolution that would have sent 155 peacekeepers to Guatemala for three months under a U.N.-brokered peace accord signed on December 29 between the government and leftist rebels.
In Beijing, the Foreign Ministry spokesman said Guatemala was to blame not only for recognising Taiwan but for joining a number of other small countries since 1993 to sponsor a General Assembly resolution aimed at securing U.N. membership for the Asian economic powerhouse.
Shen also lashed out at Guatemala's decision to invite Taiwan Foreign Minister John Chang to last month's peace signing ceremony in Guatemala City.
China had offered solutions to the impasse but Guatemala had remained resolute, Shen charged.
"Guatemala cannot expect on the one hand to do something that harms the sovereignty and territorial integrity of China while on the other hand requesting China to cooperate on peacekeeping," Shen said.
The negative vote on Friday by China, which along with the United States, Britain, France and Russia, has veto power in the 15-member council, meant that Council President Hisashi Owada of Japan had to announce that the resolution had failed.
It was China's first U.N. Security Council veto in nearly 24 years.
Taiwan has given generous economic aid to several small, impoverished states around the world in its bid to break out of a diplomatic isolation imposed by China. Taiwan was expelled from the U.N. in 1971 and replaced by Beijing as the rightful representative of China.
Under the peace accord, Guatemala's army would redeploy units to specified locations, after which troops from the rebel Guatemalan National Revolutionary Unit (URNG) would move to eight assembly points and disarm. The U.N. observers were to verify the process.
The drafters of the resolution -- the United States, Mexico, Colombia, Venezuela, Spain and Norway --  decided to push ahead with the vote, despite China's threat of a veto, saying that further talks could not overcome the differences.
China had never spelled out publicly what Guatemala was expected to do. But diplomats said it sought a pledge to refrain from sponsoring further pro-Taiwan U.N. resolutions and to stop receiving high-ranking Taiwanese visitors.
