Officials in a central Chinese region have issued an action plan to stamp out worship by the underground Catholic church loyal to Rome, a U.S.-based church group said on Saturday.
The Communist Party document issued by officials of Chongren county in central Jiangxi province warns against infiltration by overseas religious forces and threats to political stability, said the Cardinal Kung Foundation, which obtained a copy of the document.
The seven-point plan, titled Procedures to Legally Implement the Eradication of Illegal Activities of the Underground Catholic Church, spells out action to be taken from November 25, 1996 to March 31, 1997 to wipe out underground congregations.
Measures include laying good public relations, registering and setting up a file for each religious believer for local and transient Catholics, forcing each undergound Catholic to write a letter denying their faith and to join the official church.
The document blames the growing number of illegal religious believers on "the intensified infiltration of overseas religious enemy and opposition forces, and due to the influence of the illegal activities of the undergound religious force".
Underground believers "used religion to commit criminal activities, seriously disturbing the social order and affecting political stability", it said.
It urges local authorities to employ "resolute, decisive and organised" measures to stamp out the underground church.
A local official reached by telephone in Chongren county refused to comment, saying the issue could arouse widespread international controversy.
China allows Catholics to worship under the auspices of the officially sanctioned, state-sponsored Patriotic Association but forbids allegiance to Rome or the Pope and maintains no diplomatic relations with the Vatican.
Authorities view underground congregations as a threat to party rule.
Aims of what the document called its "glorious assignment" include to "destroy the organisation of the Catholic underground forces" and to "destroy the Church's illegal assembly place".
Teachers engaged in illegal religious studies will be sacked and students are forbidden to carry any religious items.
The document called specifically for large-scale assemblies on Christmas Day to be stopped and exits of villages to be blocked to ensure no one leaves on December 25, 1996.
The plan defined the struggle against underground Catholics as a long-term political goal beyond April 1, 1997.
The Cardinal Kung Foundation is a Roman Catholic group that monitors religious persecution in China and wants recognition of those faithful to Rome.
It listed a string of recent examples of persecution of underground Catholics in China, including the disappearance of Bishop Su Zhimin of Baoding in northern Hebei province, and the jailing of two other bishops.
Bishop Su vanished after some 5,000 troops sealed off the Hebei village of Donglu in May, destroyed a shrine to the Virgin Mary that had drawn tens of thousands of underground Catholics in 1995, and detained two bishops and several priests and lay people, the foundation said.
Bishop Zeng Jingmu, 75, was ordered in March, 1995 to serve three years of re-education through labour after celebrating an undergound mass and a third bishop was jailed after he refused a bribe to join the Patriotic Association, it said.
About 80 underground Catholics were arrested in Chongren county on November 20, it said but gave no more details.
China's Catholic and Protestant churches, both tightly controlled by the state, claim several million believers but many more are believed to worship at underground churches.
