A former U.S. surgeon general will testify in a class-action trial that cigarette makers blunted efforts in the 1970s to warn Americans on the dangers of second-hand smoke, a plaintiffs' lawyer said Monday.
Dr. Jesse Steinfeld and another former surgeon general not yet named will testify on behalf of an estimated 60,000 non-smoking flight attendants claiming damages for illnesses allegedly caused by second-hand smoke on passenger jets, attorney Stanley Rosenblatt said.  Surgeon general is the highest medical post in the federal government.  
A jury trial in Dade County Court is scheduled to begin on June 2 and will be the first class-action suit to come to trial in the United States against the tobacco industry.  It is but one case in a wide courtroom assault on cigarette makers.
In a class-action suit, used in the past against asbestos makers on behalf of victims of lung diseases, a small group seeks damages on behalf of a much larger number of people with like injuries.
A second class-action suit on behalf of all Florida smokers is scheduled for trial in Miami in September.  
"He will testify that the tobacco industry did everything it could to impede the information from getting to the public, from getting to the scientific community," Rosenblatt said, referring to Steinfeld during a pre-trial hearing.
Steinfeld is also scheduled to testify for Mississippi, whose attorney general is suing tobacco companies to recoup the cost of treating sick smokers through its Medicaid program. Twenty-one other states, including Florida, have filed similar suits.  
Rosenblatt accuses Philip Morris Cos Inc and other leading cigarette makers of purposely misleading Americans and conspiring with one another on hiding the medical risks of second-hand smoke to sustain corporate profits.
Rosenblatt gave no details of the promised testimony.  No opposing lawyer representing tobacco companies at the hearing commented on Rosenblatt's statement, which came during a dispute over the exchange of witness lists.
Other spokesmen for the tobacco industry were not immediately available.  
Susan Rosenblatt, the second member of the husband-and-wife legal team bring the class-action suit, said the plaintiffs will also call a former tobacco company employee.  The witness has said under pre-trial questioning that he was instructed to destroy scientific findings pointing to the health risks of second-hand smoke, she said.
The plaintiffs, who include Norma Brion, a non-smoking flight attendant for 13 years diagnosed with lung cancer, also will call an Australian cardiologist who will tesify that his research linking second-hand smoke and heart diseases was blocked by tobacco companies, the Rosenblatts said.  
Circuit Court Judge Robert Kaye said at the hearing he may name an outside lawyer to review some 1,500 industry documents the Rosenblatts want for the trial.  The tobacco lawyers oppose the use of the documents, the great bulk are not public.
Kaye also extended until March 24 a deadline for the Rosenblatts to deliver a list of witnesses to tobacco-industry lawyers.  Hugh Whiting, a tobacco company lawyer, said the delay was harming his industry's defense.
Defendants in the case include the Brown &amp; Williamson unit of B.A.T Industries Plc, RJR Nabisco Holdings Corp and the Lorillard unit of Loews Corp.
((-- Miami newsroom, 305-374-5013))
