In Miami, the cruise-ship capital of the world, business is bright with bountiful bookings but eyes are warily looking up the Florida coast to where The Walt Disney Co. is readying its sea-going debut.
Essentially landlocked until next year, Disney is the 800-pound gorilla of U.S. holiday-making and currently operates hotels and leading theme parks, such as its Disney World in Orlando. To many in cruising, Disney is already a leading rival for vacation dollars.
Disney, adding attractions in Orlando, Fla., and eager to keep its customers staying with Disney for longer vacations, is indeed offering week-long cruises from Port Canaveral, Fla., on its cartoon-themed ships that include stays at its parks and a visit to a Disney island in the Bahamas.
The company is already taking bookings for April, 1998, and many in the industry see Disney aiding all cruise ships -- and not just the Disney Magic and Disney Wonder due next year -- as Disney broadens a market which draws mainly older customers.
"They are great marketers," Royal Caribbean Cruises Ltd. Chief Financial Officer Richard Glasier said before the industry's recent Seatrade Cruise Shipping Convention here. "They'll open up new aspects of the business."
Disney is renowned for family entertainment and leisure, a segment leading cruise operators courting mass markets want to win, too. An existing cruise service under a third-party licensing agreement with Disney has not had a major role in the cruise market, executives said.
"Disney promotion will add more power in marketing than this has ever seen," said Peter Kowal, general manager of the Cruise Holidays travel-agents chain.
On Wall Street, many worry the industry's ship-building spree is getting ahead of itself and that weak fare pricing evident last year will become chronic. Disney's two ships, weighing 85,000 tons and carrying 1,740 passengers each, will aggravate those worries.
But bookings at Carnival Corp., the industry leader with 26.9 percent of the sector's 116,616 berths worldwide, and No. 2-ranked Royal Caribbean have been very strong this year, even with the addition of many new, very large ships.
"The tone of business is terrific," Glasier told investors last week.
Larger ships, including the just christened Carnival Destiny, the world's biggest at 100,000 tons and 2,600 berths, are much more efficient and much more attractive to vacationers, industry executives said.
A Royal Caribbean ship features a decktop golf course and some big ships have multi-deck atriums. The race to be bigger continues, with Royal Caribbean contracting last year to buy two ships capable of carrying 3,100 people and weighing 130,000 tons. Until this decade, few cruise ships carried more than 1,000 passengers or weighed more than 50,000 tons.
Glasier said Royal Caribbean's big ships generate twice or three times the cash flow of older ships, partly because of higher fares and more on-board shops but also because of cheaper operating costs on a per-passenger basis.
Disney's entry also comes as leisure cruising is consolidating and as the industry tiptoes toward globalization from its North American stronghold. Asia, especially, is seen as a promising market.
"There's a lot of interest in the emerging markets in Asia," Carnival Cruise Lines President Bob Dickinson said.
Outside North America, where trips to Caribbean islands out of Florida and to Alaska from the West Coast are most popular, the markets are relatively small. Europe, the most developed market behind the United States and Canada, is only 20 percent the size of the North American one.
Carnival late last year announced a $300 million acquisition of Costa Crociere SpA, Europe's leading cruise operator, and earlier bought a stake in British tour company Airtours. The company has also reached a joint venture with Hyundai Merchant Marine for an Asia cruise offering.
"We are attempting to source passengers outside the United States," Royal Caribbean's Glasier said.
Royal Caribbean is studying the Asian market and may create a separate brand for the market, Glasier said.
"In Asia, the product should be different. We would probably do that with a different brand," Glasier said.
