Leading cruise ship operators looking to repeat their U.S. successes by exporting another bit of American culture will have to tailor their sea-going holidays to local markets and tastes.
Top industry executives at an international trade convention said Europe and Asia could be very promising markets for Carnival Corp, Royal Caribbean Cruises Ltd and others in the flourishing North American leisure cruise business, a sector which barely existed three decades ago.
"The major North American lines are well positioned to grow internationally ... as long as they acknowledge the major cultural and business differences," P&amp;O/Princess Cruises chairman Tim Harris said during a panel discussion.
North American cruise lines, offering trips to the Caribbean and along the west coast of the U.S. to Alaska, are enjoying very strong domestic businesses.  Bookings at Carnival Cruise Lines, the main unit of Carnival Corp, are up 37 percent in the three months through last Monday on a 13 percent rise in shipboard berths, Carnival Cruise Lines President Robert Dickinson said.  
But the customers are overwhelmingly from the U.S. and Canada and the offerings are unmistakably American -- whether aboard mass-marketer Carnival, which describes its increasingly gigantic vessels as fun ships, or the more genteel lines competing with upmarket amenities.
That's not all bad, the executives said, but more offerings tailored to national and regional tastes will likely be required in Asia and Europe.  "The right ships have to go to the right places with the right food," said Celebrity Cruises Inc President Richard Sasso.  Celebrity is an Overseas Shipholding Group Inc affiliate.  
Both Carnival, the industry leader with almost 27 percent of all cruise berths, and number two Royal Caribbean are already active overseas and employ different strategies.
Royal Caribbean competes in Europe already but does little beyond hiring multilingual crews to change the on-board accomodations, food and entertainment from those it offers on seven-day trips from Miami, company chairman Richard Fain said.
"Our ships offer an American experience in Europe, not a European experience," Fain said.  
The European tours are aimed mostly at Americans, he said. "We are carrying more Europeans in the Caribbean than in Europe," Fain said.
Carnival, which expects to carry more than one million passengers in 1997, is taking a multi-pronged approach by acquiring the Italian cruise operator Costa and buying into UK tour group Airtours Plc.Carnival also has a joint venture with Hyundai Group to provide cruise holidays in Asia. "Those three strategies were deployed to offer products in those markets for people in those markets," Dickinson said during the panel discussion.  
In addition, the company dispatches Carnival-branded ships on itineraries beyond its Caribbean stronghold to lure past Carnival passengers looking for different destinations.
Harris of Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navigation Co affiliate P&amp;O/Princess Lines said business arrangements must also be fitted to foreign markets.  He recalled his company, with its long history of ocean-going passenger transport, found it had to cut out its network of company-owned ticket offices and learn to rely on travel agents to sell its leisure-cruise berths.  
Several executives said the early cruise successes in Asia of the Star line, a regional operator, might be an example to the big operators with their current lion's share of the global market who are eyeing that region.
Kirk Lanterman, chairman of Carnival affiliate Holland America Line-Westour, said the overseas cruise markets are very substantial already.  He said some three million people each year take cruises on small lines offering national or "ethnic" foods, entertainment and accomodations and about 500,000 non-Americans traveled on the lines operating from south Florida and elsewhere in North America.
Lanterman also warned his peers against diluting the character of their popular lines.
"It's very difficult to make these ships different for non-Americans without making it unsatisfactory for Americans," Lanterman said.
((-- Miami newsroom, 305-374-5013))
