Leading cruise ship operators looking to repeat their success at home by exporting some of American culture abroad will have to tailor their sea-going holidays to local markets and tastes.
Industry executives at an international trade convention said that Europe and Asia could be promising markets for Carnival Corp., Royal Caribbean Cruises Ltd. and others in the flourishing North American leisure cruise business, which barely existed three decades ago.
"The major North American lines are well positioned to grow internationally, as long as they acknowledge the major cultural and business differences," P&amp;O/Princess Cruises Chairman Tim Harris said during a panel discussion last week.
North American cruises lines, offering trips to the Caribbean and along the West Coast of the United States to Alaska, are enjoying strong domestic business.
Bookings at Carnival Cruise Lines, the main unit of Miami-based Carnival Corp., are up 37 percent in the three months through last Monday while shipboard berths rose only 13 percent, Canrival Cruise Lines President Robert Dickinson said.
Still another sign of the sector's health in the United States is that Walt Disney Co. will next year make its seawater debut by offering cartoon-themed cruises aboard two new ships from Port Canaveral in central Florida.
The industry is on a ship-building spree, with the just-launched Carnival Destiny capable of carrying 2,600 passengers while Royal Caribbean is building new ships that can carry 3,100 apiece.
But the customers are overwhelmingly from the United States and Canada and the offerings are unmistakably American -- whether aboard mass-marketer Carnival, which describes its increasingly gigantic vessels as fun ships, or other lines catering to richer tastes.
That is not all bad, the executives said, but more offerings tailored to national and regional tastes will likely be required in Asia and Europe.
"The right ships have to go to the right places with the right food," said Celebrity Cruises Inc. President Richard Sasso. Celebrity is an Overseas Shipholding Group Inc. affiliate.
Both Carnival, the industry leader with almost 27 percent of all cruise berths, and number two Royal Caribbean are already active overseas and employ different strategies.
Royal Caribbean competes in Europe but does little beyond hiring multilingual crews to adapt the onboard accomodations, food and entertainment from those it offers on seven-day trips from Miami, company chairman Richard Fain said.
"Our ships offer an American experience in Europe, not a European experience," Fain said. The European tours are aimed mostly at Americans.
"We are carrying more Europeans in the Caribbean than in Europe," Fain said.
Carnival, which expects to carry more than 1 million passengers in 1997, is taking a multi-pronged approach by acquiring the Italian cruise operator Costa and buying into British tour group Airtours Plc.
Carnival also has a joint venture with Hyundai Group of Korea to provide cruise holidays in Asia.
"Those three strategies were deployed to offer products in those markets for people in those markets," Dickinson said.
Harris of Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navigation Co. affiliate P&amp;O/Princess Lines said business arrangements must also be fitted to foreign markets.
Kirk Lanterman, chairman of Carnival affiliate Holland America Line-Westour, said the overseas cruise markets were already substantial.
He said about 3 million people each year take cruises on small lines offering national or "ethnic" foods, entertainment and accommodations and about 500,000 non-Americans travelled on the lines operating from south Florida and elsewhere in North America.
Lanterman also warned his peers against diluting the character of their popular lines.
"It's very difficult to make these ships different for non-Americans without making it unsatisfactory for Americans," Lanterman said.
