Fresh from a Supreme Court victory, Florida's anti-tobacco activists were bracing for a legislative assault on the innovative law allowing the state to sue cigarette makers.
Although bloodied by past failures to repeal the 1994 law, which undoes many of the tobacco industry's best legal defences, opponents said Tuesday the campaign to repeal Florida's third-party medical liability act would continue through the current legislative session scheduled to last until May.
"The fight goes on," said Jodi Chase, general counsel for Associated Industries of Florida Inc., a business group prominent in the repeal campaign.
Bills to repeal the medical-liability law have been introduced in both houses of the Florida legislature. A repeal bill was vetoed by Gov. Lawton Chiles two years ago and an effort to override his veto failed in 1996.
On Monday, the Supreme Court refused to take up a tobacco industry challenge to the constitutionality of the law but did not deal with the crux of the challenge and left open the possibility of considering the matter after a trial.
Lawyers for both Florida and cigarette makers said the Supreme Court action makes it even more likely a trial in a billion-dollar lawsuit against the tobacco industry will go ahead as scheduled on August 4 in West Palm Beach, Fla.
"The arena now will be the Florida legislature," said Harold Lewis, chief inspector general for Chiles.
Lewis said the governor and allies inside and outside state government expected tobacco companies and others pushing repeal to launch a full-press media and lobbying offensive, even though some top legislators have said a vote on repeal bills was unlikely this year.
A spokesman for Philip Morris Cos. Inc., the world's biggest cigarette maker and one of the defendants in the West Palm Beach case, said the company rarely discusses its lobbying efforts but that lawyers were preparing for trial.
Lewis said 60 or more lobbyists were working against the bill and that he expected millions of dollars to be spent on the effort.
A group working with Chiles, the Coalition to Clear the Air for Florida Taxpayers, is preparing a media and organising campaign to support the law, according to executive director Beth Labasky.
The group, composed of health organisations and school groups, is calling its campaign, "Tobacco: Florida's Public Enemy Number One", and expects to spend under $1 million on advertising, consultant Ron Sachs said.
Smith Barney tobacco industry analyst Martin Feldman said a constitutional challenge to the Florida law was highly likely to be heard by the Supreme Court if cigarette makers lose in the West Palm Beach trial.
"The Supreme has specifically provided the option of considering the industry's claim at a date in the future, and quite possibly as part of an appeal -- should that prove necessary," Feldman said in a report.
