Pan Am Corp. said Wednesday it was open to acquisitions and other business opporunities with an eye to expanding its four-jet Pan American World Airways, centred in south Florida.
But a spokesman for the start-up airline with the legendary name of a defunct pioneer in commercial aviation declined to comment on a report Pan Am was in acquisition talks with larger regional rival Carnival Air Lines.
Last July, Pan Am agreed to pay about $100 million for Carnival Air. But the transaction was called off after Pan Am examined the carrier's books and sought to rework the terms.
"We have said we will look at opportunities," Pan Am spokesman Jeff Kriendler said.
He declined to discuss any pending transactions, including one reported by the Miami Herald that Pan Am was once again in talks with Carnival Air about a merger.
Gabriel Gabor, a spokesman for privately held Carnival Air, also declined to comment on any contacts between the two companies but said Carnival Air had considered several possible deals.
"Over the course of 18 months, we have various talks about mergers, acquisitions and other business deals," Gabor said. "But nothing is in ink."
A combination of Pan Am and Carnival Air, owned by Micky Arison, chief executive of leading cruise-ship operator Carnival Corp., would create a much larger regional airline with a total of 31 jets and more than 2,200 employees. Annual revenues would be an estimated $400 million, with operations centred in south Florida.
"All these small airlines are trying to fill the void left by Eastern, but no one has done it yet," said airline industry analyst John Pincavage at Dillon Read. Eastern Airlines was long the dominant carrier in Florida until it went out of business in the early 1990s.
Pincavage said all small airlines had been hurt by the ValuJet crash in the Florida Everglades last May 11, in which 110 people died, and had a disappointing third quarter last year. Bigger rivals posted very high profits in that period, one of the strongest for airlines of the year.
Shares of Pan Am, whose namesake once had as many as 160 jets but floundered in 1991, were down $1.375 to $10 on the American Stock Exchange.
