Bloodied in court and so unpopular at home that Hollywood has made the tobacco executive its corporate villain of choice, U.S. cigarette makers remain diversified cash-generating machines with hot overseas markets.
Last year, tobacco exports from the United States were worth $5.24 billion, or roughly 20 percent of the country's total net agriculultural surplus.  
Cigarette export volumes rose 5.5 percent to a record 243.9 billion, with Japan the biggest buyer of American cigarettes, according to an industry group.
"For the big companies, overseas demand is exploding," said Roy Burry, an analyst at Oppenheimer &amp; Co.
And the big cigarette companies, with the exception of No. 5 Liggett Corp, are highly diversified with interests in food and beverages and other sectors.  
"The real problem for these businesses is the uncertainty," said one analyst who assesses the industry's U.S. legal risks as very high. "You have all these wonderful businesses mucked up with cigarettes."
Both Philip Morris Cos Inc and RJR Nabisco Holdings Corp, which together command well over half the U.S. cigarette market, generate half or slightly more of their revenues from snacks, beer, cereals and desserts.
"They are growing at more than 10 percent, and the cash they generate will be used to expand overseas or buy back stock," Burry said.  
Analyst Anton Brenner at UBS Securities said the big U.S. companies were building warehouses and plants overseas, especially in Eastern Europe and Asia, where cigarette sales are growing very quickly
"For better or worse, American cigarettes are better products," Brenner said.
Yet the industry took another shock on Thursday, when Liggett, a unit of Brooke Group Ltd, agreed to cooperate with 22 state attorneys general suing tobacco companies for government spending on health care for smokers.  
Liggett commands only a sliver of the U.S. cigarette market, with Chesterfield and other brands, and has been unprofitable for many years. But the deal prompted one of the attorneys general, who accuses the industry of conspiring to hide the dangers of cigarettes, to liken the event to police turning "the wheelman" of a gang of thieves.
Hundreds of other suits, filed by individuals and lawyers pressing class-action cases, are making their way through the courts.  
Two class-action suits, including one on behalf of flight attendants allegedly injured by second-hand smoke on aircraft, are scheduled to go to trial in Florida this year.
And in Hollywood, writers have taken up depicting tobacco executives as villains.
"The Practice," a legal drama on U.S. television telling a serialized tale of an elderly man suing over the death of his wife, a smoker, is just one of several films and shows in production with anti-tobacco themes.
