Liggett Group's pact breaking away from other cigarette makers has failed to shake the confidence of tabacco growers in North Carolina, where the crop has been king for centuries.
"Tobacco farmers will continue to have a market, regardless of the success or failure of the suits," North Carolina State Attorney General Mike Easley said.
Tobacco is North Carolina's single biggest crop and the plant's broad, brown leaves sustain thousands of manufacturing, financial and other jobs.  
"Tobacco supports 200,000 families in North Carolina," said Sean Walsh, a spokesman for state Gov. Jim Hunt.
North Carolina is America's biggest producer of tobacco. Tennessee, Virgina, South Carolina, Kentucky and Georgia are also major tobacco-growing states.
The maker of Chesterfields and L&amp;M branded cigarettes, Liggett last week rocked the tobacco business and Wall Street by agreeing to settle lawsuits with 22 state attorneys general.  
Liggett promised to pay 25 percent of its pre-tax profits for the next quarter century and label its cigarettes as addictive substances. It also agreed to hand over to the attorneys general internal documents which might bolster multi-billion dollar claims against other cigarette makers.
No cigarette company but Liggett, a unit of Brooke Group, has made such a deal. Other cigarette makers, such as Philip Morris and RJR Nabisco, fiercely condemned the pact.  
"It'll give everybody something to talk about, but I don't think it will cause any adverse effects in the short term," said William Graham, a retired Farm Credit Services loan officer in Proctorville, in southeastern North Carolina.
"I just don't think people are aware of just how much tax money tobacco generates in this country," Graham said.
"What I want to say is not fit to print," said tobacco grower Grady Britt of Broad Ridge, also in southeastern North Carolina, where tobacco has been a mainstay for more than 200 years.  
Other growers worried that the Liggett pact was another sign that tobacco, also a major export accounting last year for about 20 percent of the U.S. net agricultural trade surplus, was headed for hard times.
"The government's going to take tobacco away from us, but they aren't going to give anything back," said Newberry Mitchell, a grower since the early 1960s.
"All this decision is going to do is give the government more ammunition to classify tobacco as a drug and regulate it," said Erskine Floyd, another grower who lives in Barnesville, North Carolina.
Easley, the North Carolina attorney general, has not filed a lawsuit against cigarette makers and said the settlement on Thursday was less important than it appeared.
He described Liggett, the fifth-ranked cigarette maker with only a sliver of the market, as a minor industry player and said the legal grounding for the lawsuits by the attorneys general was shaky.
