WEST PALM BEACH, Fla, March 26, Reuter - A Florida judge on Wednesday ordered Liggett Group to immediately deliver internal industry documents for possible use in the state of Florida's lawsuit against U.S. tobacco companies.
Courts in Texas and Illinois have issued similar orders since Thursday, when Liggett Group, the fifth largest cigarette maker, owned by Brooke Group, struck a sweeping deal with 22 states suing the tobacco industry for an estimated $30 billion spent on medicaid costs for treating sick smokers.  
The Florida judge, Harold Cohen of Palm Beach County Circuit Court, also ordered an accelerated review within 10 days of about 20 Liggett documents which attorneys for the state of Florida claim affect public safety.
Under Florida law, trade-secret protections and client-lawyer privilege ordinarily safeguarding internal documents can be overriden if matters of public safety are at stake.
Florida Attorney General Bob Butterworth in court urged Cohen to review the Liggett papers and afterwards told reporters the 20 documents, which he said he had not seen, would be made public if the judge agrees that public health was at issue.  
"These documents are devastating to the industry," Butterworth said.
Cohen said he would assign William Rutter, a retired judge aiding in the pre-trial screening of contested documents, to review the 20 documents in 10 days and to make a recommendation to him. A hearing on that recommendation will be held April 14, Cohen said.  
Cohen ruled after Murray Granick, an attorney for Philip Morris Cos, said a temporary restraining order on distributing the LIggett documents secured last Thursday in North Carolina did not preclude private review of the papers by other judges in tobacco cases.
Granick said the judge in North Carolina, who had issued the temporary restraint last week, had late yesterday amended his order removing any constraints on other judges looking at the papers in private.  
Granick said, in court, that the tobacco companies fighting the lawsuits wanted to protect the privacy privileges of their clients. He also said that some of the Liggett documents drawn from industry-wide talks over the years would, if released, violate the rights of the tobacco companies.
Cohen has scheduled an August 4 start to a jury trial on the Florida lawsuit, the second after Mississippi's expected to come to trial.
Florida is claiming $1 billion or more for tobacco-related Medicare spending and has won the right to pursue much higher monies if the tobacco companies are found to have operated as racketeers under a state conspiracy law.
The tobacco companies deny any conspiracy and claim the state has itself produced cigarettes for prison inmates and benefitted in many other ways from their businesses.
-- Miami newsroom, 305-374-5013
