Knight-Ridder Inc is playing to its traditional strengths with a $1.65 billion acquisition of four newspapers from Walt Disney Co and an announcement it was putting another electronic unit on the block.
"Knight-Ridder tends to like big city newspapers," said John Morton, an independent industry analyst.  
In recent years Knight-Ridder has sold off a cable-television business for a net gain of almost $150 million and Knight-Ridder Financial, an also-ran in the fiercely competitive real-time news segment, for $275 million.
On Friday, the company, which owns newspapers in Miami, Philadelphia and Detroit, added the Fort Worth Star-Telegram, the Kansas City Star and two others to its existing stable of 38 newspapers.
In 1996, Miami-based Knight-Ridder bought the Contra Costa Times in California and three other newspapers.  
Morton estimated Knight-Ridder, which generates 80 percent of revenues from newspapers, had paid 12 to 13 times cash flow for the properties. "That's the going rate," he said.
Knight-Ridder said it would issue preferred shares to finance the deal. Morton estimated the newspapers annual cash flows would more or less cover interest costs on the properties.
"But they are buying newspapers that are already running (profit) margins that Knight-Ridder is trying to reach at its own papers," Morton said. "Maybe it puts them in position to enlarge their overall margins."  
Knight-Ridder's top managers have pressed for several years to improve financial performances at its newspapers, a campaign yielding labor concessions at its Miami and Philadelphia properties and contributing to a 19-month strike in Detroit.
Once a power in electronic information for professionals, Knight-Ridder said it was going to divest Knight-Ridder Information Inc. It gave no details of when a deal might be secured.
"The information business is very competitive; the newspaper business isn't," Morton said.
Knight-Ridder still saw opportunity in electronic distribution of news and information but at the local consumer level. Its San Jose Mercury paper has an innovative and popular Internet service.
Morton said he expected Wall Street would be put off by the deal when stock trading resumed on Monday. Knight-Ridder shares were not trading after hours on Friday.
((-- Miami newsroom, 305-374-5013))
