Knight-Ridder Inc agreed on Friday to buy the Kansas City Star and three other daily newspapers owned by ABC Inc, a division of Walt Disney Co, for $1.65 billion.
It also said it was going to divest Knight-Ridder Information Inc, its on-line information service for business and professional users, which includes Dialog and DataStar.
The transaction, the latest of several by a company that had once been a power in electronic information for professionals, focuses Knight-Ridder more squarely than ever on newspapers.
Owner of the Miami Herald and Detroit Free Press, Knight-Ridder remains the second-largest newsaper group behind Gannett Co. Inc.
"The information business is very competitive; the newspaper business isn't," said John Morton, an independent newspaper analyst.
The Disney/ABC newspapers include The Kansas City Star, the Fort Worth and Arlington (Texas) Star-Telegrams, the Belleville (Ill.) News-Democrat and The Times Leader in Wilkes-Barre, Pa., it said. Revenue for the group was $500 million in 1996.
Last year, Knight-Ridder sold its Knight-Ridder Financial business news unit for about $275 million to Global Information Corp. It also got out of the cable television business, reporting an after-tax gain earlier in 1997 of $130 million to $150 million.
"Kansas City and Fort Worth are models of locally edited, reader-friendly and marketing savvy publications. Both evidence strong on-line literacy as well. All of these are critical qualities in today's competitive environment," said Chairman Tony Ridder.
He said much of the company's revenus comes from medium and smaller-market newspapers, and the Belleville and Wilkes-Barre papers "will be strong contributors to that group. Both papers have shown steady revenue increases since 1993, with profit growth and strong margins."
ABC was purchased by Disney in 1996 for $19 billion. The company has since said it planned to divest some of its publishing entities, but it has not been specific.
Because of the proposed purchases, Knight-Ridder's earnings during the first 12 months will be diluted by about 10 percent. Minimal dilution will occur during the second year and earnings will show gains during the third year, Knight-Ridder said.
Knight-Ridder said it would finance the deal by issuing $660 million in convertible preferred stock and assuming $990 million of pre-existing debt. It also said it planned to buy back at least 15 million common shares during the next 12 months.
Morton said the Disney/ABC papers were already strong performers financially and that the operating monies from the papers would more or less cover the new interest payments Knight-Ridder will be making.
Wall Street would be put off by the deal when stock trading resumes on Monday, since many institutional investors worry about the long-term outlook for newspapers, Morton said. Knight-Ridder was not trading in after-hours dealings Friday.
Knight-Ridder is an international communications company engaged in newspaper publishing, business news and information services, among other things.
Knight-Ridder said the deal should close within 60 days.
