Cigarette companies fighting lawsuits in Florida are being haunted in courtrooms by best-selling novelist John Grisham's "Runaway Jury," a tale of jury manipulation at a tobacco trial.
In "Runaway Jury," a tobacco industry operative commissions a burglary and other crimes as part of a juror-tampering campaign.
The novel's title has become shorthand for anti-tobacco lawyers who are concerned that life might imitate art -- something that angers the lawyers representing tobacco firms.
"We are up here and having to defend against a fictitious novel, and I don't know why," attorney Ed Moss of Brown &amp; Williamson said on Monday at a Miami hearing before a class-action suit against cigarette makers. "This is ridiculous."
"We have not and will not go out and investigate the jurors," Moss said.
Moss, speaking for Brown, a unit of B.A.T. Industries of Britain, and eight other tobacco companies, pledged to Dade County Circuit Court Judge Robert Kaye that the tobacco companies would not use private investigators, jury experts or researchers in selecting jurors in the class-action suit.
Such techniques, while costly, are legal and are frequently used in high-profile U.S. trials in the belief that the backgrounds of jurors determine likely votes on legal issues. Investigators hunt out information about jurors that might allow them to be barred from hearing a case.
Anti-tobacco lawyers repeatedly assert that tobacco companies, with their deep ranks of lawyers and strong financial resources, can easily outmatch them in jury selection.
There was no evidence of any improper juror investigations by tobacco companies at any time, Moss said.
Potential jurors for an individual lawsuit starting on Monday against RJR Nabisco RJ Reynolds Tobacco in Jacksonville, Florida, were also being asked whether or not they had read "Runaway Jury", published last year by Doubleday and on the best-seller lists for months.
And lawyers pressing a third case, the State of Florida's lawsuit to recover medical spending on sick smokers, have also complained in court hearings about potential pressures by tobacco companies on jurors.
Lawyer Stanley Rosenblatt, pressing the Miami class-action suit on behalf of Norma Broin and an estimated 60,000 other sick, non-smoking flight attendants, said the tobacco companies were capable of shaping a jury through those outside means.
He welcomed Moss's pledge to rely only on a written questionnaire and in-court inquiries to select jurors for the scheduled June 2 trial.
But Rosenblatt also urged Kaye to keep secret the names of all potential jurors and, as an added safeguard, to identify jurors only by number during a trial expected to last eight to 12 weeks.
