The prize in their hands, the question now is whether Ted Turner and Gerald Levin will feud or combine to exploit the golden opportunities being offered by the merger of Time Warner Inc. and Turner Broadcasting System.
The companies, whose merger will create the world's largest media group, won approval on Thursday for their year-old deal from the Federal Trade Commission. The Federal Communications Commission is expected to give its approval soon, and final approval by shareholders of both companies is scheduled for Oct. 10.
While it is already known that Levin, the Time Warner chairman, and Turner, founder and head of Turner Broadcasting, will occupy the top spots at the new Time Warner, analysts wonder about their chemistry.
The low-key Levin will be chairman and chief executive while the flamboyant Turner, who created Cable News Network and other major media properties, will be vice-chairman.
"The management side remains unclear, the division of duties remains unclear," said Smith Barney analyst Jill Krutick.
"They have very different management styles," said analyst Dennis McAlpine of Josephthal Lyon &amp; Ross. "A lot depends on which Ted you get -- Ted the imaginative, creative and dynamic or Ted the meddler," he said.
Both Turner and Levin have pledged to cooperate, but only time will tell if the two strong-willed managers will be able to co-exist at top of the huge company.
In addition, the roles of second-tier executives at Turner Broadcasting have not been announced. Speculation about departures picked up when severance packages worth $29 million for eight Turner officials became public.
Analysts said, however, the business fundamentals of the combination were strong.
Together the companies will control top-tier programming and distribution systems for filmed entertainment and will have real strength with cable operators and advertisers both in the United States and elsewhere.
Aside from being the nation's No. 2 cable-TV operator, Time Warner owns the Warner Bros. movie studios and Time, People, Sports Illustrated and Fortune magazines.
In addition to CNN, Turner Broadcasting also owns film and TV studios, a cartoon cable-TV channel and the Atlanta Braves and Atlanta Hawks sports teams.
Turner has been assigned oversight of the combined company's cable-television programming, services such as The Cartoon Network and TNT.
But whether or not Time Warner's own cable-programming service, Home Box Office, will be placed under Turner is still not known, McAlpine said.
He also said it was unknown whether the film and TV production studios now owned by Turner Broadcasting -- Castle Rock and New Line Cinema -- would be report to Turner or be assigned to the executives running the highly successful Warner Brothers studio operations.
There is also the possibility the two Turner studios could be sold. Krutick said she expected decisions on selling the Turner studios, including Castle Rock, which is being shopped around, to be taken up very quickly after the merger closes.
"If they can unwind an asset, one that's duplicative, and pay down debt, I think they will," said Krutick.
