Top Citicorp managers have testified before a grand jury probing allegations of possible money laundering involving former Mexican President Carlos Salinas de Gortari's brother, Citicorp Chief Executive Officer John Reed said Wednesday.
Reed, answering a shareholder at the giant banking company's annual meeting, neither identified the executives nor said how many had given secret testimony but emphasised that Citicorp was cooperating fully with the grand jury.
Raul Salinas, now jailed in Mexico on murder and illicit enrichment charges, was accused in February by a Swiss prosecutor of receiving huge sums of money from major drug cartels. Some $100 million was found in Raul Salinas' Swiss bank accounts.
Both Raul Salinas and his brother, the former Mexican president now in self-imposed exile in Ireland, deny any connections to illegal drug operators.
Reed told reporters immediately after the meeting that he himself had not been summoned by the grand jury, a panel of citizens which reviews police evidence for the possible filing of criminal charges.
A Citicorp spokesman declined to say how many executives had testified before the grand jury, believed to be meeting in New York. Citicorp is based in New York.
Questioned by shareholders about the offshore transfers, reportedly as high as $120 million, by Citicorp on behalf of Raul Salinas de Gortari, Reed said the global banking group had no apparent financial liability.
"To the best of our knowledge -- and we have looked, looked and looked -- we have no liability," Reed said.
He said Citicorp has not set aside any funds for possible fines, and a representative of Citicorp auditor Peat Marwick said it had not questioned that decision.
Citicorp has so far spent $4 million on legal fees for the Salinas inquiry, Reed said. The fees include a lawyer for Amy Elliott, the banker who handled the Salinas accounts from New York, the spokesman said.
"Her behaviour met with our standards, and she is an employee in good standing," Reed said.
