A Florida judge rejected a request from tobacco companies that the start of the first-ever trial of a class-action lawsuit against cigarette makers be delayed until December.
Dade County Circuit Judge Robert Kaye said in an order dated Friday that the trial of the lawsuit filed on behalf of thousands of flight attendants would begin as scheduled June 2 in Miami.
The lawsuit being pressed by Miami lawyers Stanley and Susan Rosenblatt claims damages on behalf an estimated 60,000 non-smoking flight attendants suffering from lung diseases and other ailments allegedly caused by secondhand smoke on U.S. passenger jets.
Tobacco attorneys warned Kaye in a hearing a week ago that much pretrial examination of witnesses and other work remained to be done by both sides and that the closely watched case would be chaotic without full preparation.
Hugh Whiting, an attorney for RJ Reynolds Tobacco, a unit of RJR Nabisco, told Kaye last week that only one out of five expert witnesses scheduled for the trial had been questioned by tobacco company lawyers. As many as 120 other witnesses needed to be questioned as well before June 2, he said.
He suggested the trial be pushed back to Dec. 15.
"... The court explicitly told all counsel, and parties were put on notice, that the court felt this was ample time to prepare, considering the fact that this case was filed in 1991 ...," Kaye wrote in his order.
Kaye also issued an order formalising the appointment of Florida lawyers Michael Salmon and Irwin Block to review, in private, three batches of industry documents for possible use by the Rosenblatts at trial. The judge said in court last week that he intended to name the two to the task.
Tobacco company lawyers claim that many of the papers are covered by legal privileges.
The  case is formally known as Norma Broin et al vs. Philip Morris Cos. Inc. et al.
Kaye's orders came as a trial in another lawsuit against a tobacco company was taking place in Jacksonville, Fla. The family of Jean Connor, a 49-year-old woman and long-time smoker who died of lung cancer two years ago, sued R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Co.
In addition, more than two dozen state governments have filed lawsuits seeking $30 billion in Medicaid costs of treating smokers.
