Tobacco companies could face a double-digit drop in U.S. sales when they pass on the cost of a possible $300 billion deal to settle massive legal claims.
Analyst Gary Black of Sanford Bernstein said U.S. consumption would drop about 12 percent, based on the experience of past price increases.
But industry analysts also said Thursday the reported $300 billion paid over 25 years was probably on the high side.
"It's much too high. I think it's an opening shot by the anti-tobacco lobby," said Martin Feldman of Smith Barney.  
The talks to end government, individual and class-action suits seeking billions of dollars in damages cover proposals for a $300 billion fund for sick smokers; sharp limits on advertising; and regulation of tobacco by the Food and Drug Administration.
A deal may take weeks or months, but passage by Congress of laws sheltering the industry from lawsuits will probably take a year or two, analysts said. Some anti-tobacco senators in Washington have already questioned the terms.  
A 12 percent drop would cut industry leader Philip Morris' pre-tax profits by about $500 million a year and the profits of RJR Nabisco Holdings Corp -- the second largest U.S. cigarette maker -- by some $170 million, Sanford Bernstein's Black said.
Roy Burry, analyst at Oppenheimer &amp; Co, said the price rises would likely be gradual, costing the industry only $6 billion in the first year after a deal and the effects would vary from company to company.
Shipments at Philip Morris, with its market-dominant Marlboro brand, would fall only about six percent.  
"We would start with a 25 cent initial increase, or 10-15 percent, and a six percent decline in volume," he said of Philip Morris.
Feldman said in a report that cigarette consumption is not necessarily controlled by prices. In many countries, taxes constitute a much greater share of retail prices than in the United States. Taxes on a typical 20 cigarette pack account for 29 percent of the retail price in the U.S., but for 77 percent in Ireland, 74 percent in Australia and 56 percent in Canada.
The analysts said a global settlement, even with a $300 billion price tag, would raise the value of tobacco properties because many legal worries would have been cleared away.
Black expected that, over time, Philip Morris would rise to around 60 from 42-1/4 on Thursday and RJR Nabisco to 48 from 32-3/4.
Feldman agreed, saying: "The businesses will remain very profitable and the legal risks that have been keeping valuations down will have disappeared."
-- Miami newsroom 305-374-5013.
