Cigarette makers bargaining with anti-tobacco activists on settling smoking lawsuits have talked little about money and are dwelling on tighter government regulation of tobacco and eliminating sales pitches to youths, sources said Friday.
"Less than 5 percent of the time in those rooms was spent on money," said one participant in the talks, who spoke on condition of anonymity.
The talks -- which began behind closed doors about two weeks ago between top industry executives and an array of anti-tobacco leaders -- are expected to resume Sunday in Chicago, a source familiar with the negotiations said.
A second session is planned for Monday, with an early break for the Passover holiday. The source said no other talks were planned for next week.
One set of key players in the talks, the state attorneys general suing tobacco companies over Medicaid costs, was struggling to coordinate its approach, according to Ed Cafasso, spokesman for Massachusetts Attorney General Scott Harshbarger.
In the United States, Attorneys general are the top legal officials in the individual states.
Washington politicians and some health groups have objected to some publicized proposals as tepid and a reported $300 billion settlement as too little.
News on Wednesday of the talks, a landmark in the 40 years the tobacco industry has steadfastly fought lawsuits and restrictions on its products, still cheered Wall Street.
Investors Friday again raised tobacco company stock prices on speculation that a comprehensive litigation and regulatory settlment, even with a price tag as high as $300 billion, was imminent.
Stock in Philip Morris Cos. Inc., the biggest U.S. tobacco company, rose $2.625 to $44.25 in consolidated New York Stock Exchange trading. RJR Nabisco Holdings Corp. whose R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Co. is No. 2, rose $1.25, also on NYSE.
The American Stock Exchange Tobacco Index rose 7.68 points, or 2.67 percent, to 295.47.
Also helping tobacco stocks was the news that the federal judge overseeing a tobacco industry challenge to new, strict government curbs on cigarette marketing had postponed his decision for a second time.
A decision from U.S. District Judge William Osteen in Greensboro, N.C., is now expected no sooner than Wednesday.
Attorney Steven Berman, who represents several state governments in the talks, said, "I don't have any feeling for the pace, but we'll keep talking as long as we're making progress."
Published reports have said the industry might pay as much as $300 billion over 25 years into a compensation fund for smokers who fall sick with lung cancer and other diseases.
In return, the tobacco industry would get broad shelter from lawsuits and higher stock market valuations on their thriving tobacco and non-smoking businesses. Industry analysts generally approve of a settlement, although some say the industry is unlikely to pay as much as $300 billion.
Several attorneys involved in the talks said the prime issues for the attorneys general were winning restrictions on selling cigarettes to people under 18, unambiguous declarations by the cigarette companies on smoking's health risks, and a pledge from the industry to develop safer cigarettes.
"The fourth is money," said John Hough, an assistant attorney general in Washington state.
