There will be more smoke than fire when Philip Morris Cos Inc holds its annual meeting with shareholders on Thursday.
Meeting in Richmond, Va. amid rumors tobacco companies are pondering a $300 billion landmark settlement, analysts say it is unlikely Philip Morris will tip its hand.
"No comment. No comment. No comment. I've heard it a hundred times," said Roy Burry, a tobacco-industry analyst at Oppenheimer &amp; Co. "The industry is shut down on this."  
Philip Morris holds 50 percent of the U.S. cigarette market and is a lead negotiator in secret talks with anti-tobacco forces aimed at resolving massive legal claims against the industry.
Geoffrey Bible, chief executive of Philip Morris, and the head of RJR Nabisco, the number two U.S. tobacco group, have participated in the secret talks, sources familiar with the bargaining have said. The latest round of talks, in Chicago, ended on Monday.  
U.S. regulation of cigarette makers and other non-monetary issues have so far dominated the talks, according to sources. But the Wall Street Journal said on Tuesday that rivals of Philip Morris are pushing for lock-step cigarette price increases by all companies to pay for a proposed fund for sick smokers.
RJR Nabisco Holdings Corp, according to the paper, quoting unnamed sources, is particularly worried that the financially thriving Philip Morris might forgo price increases in order to grab market share from smaller rivals such as number two RJ Reynolds Tobacco Co.  
Analysts discounted the likelihood of such a pact, saying mutual pricing would violate U.S. antitrust laws and would go against the widespread retail practice of selling all cigarettes within a category at the same price.
"There are a thousand different ways other than pricing to get customers to buy your cigarettes," said analyst Emanuel Goldman of Paine Webber.
A spokesman for Philip Morris declined to comment on the talks.  
At the Philip Morris annual meeting, scheduled to begin at 0900 EDT (1300 GMT), activist shareholders are expected to present proposals urging the company to eliminate the suspected carcinogen benzo(a)pyrene from its cigarettes and that outside directors doing substantial business with Philip Morris stay out of meetings setting executives salaries.
A third shareholder proposal, sponsored by The Sisters of Charity of New York, urges Philip Morris to adopt in developing countries the same limits on marketing cigarettes to young people it has adopted in the United States.
The company's board opposes all the proposals.  
One activist group supporting the proposals, INFACT of Boston, will also have protestors outside the Philip Morris Manufacturing Center, INFACT executive director Kathryn Mulvey said.
Two INFACT members will be costumed as Marlboro and Virginia Slims cigarettes handing out cash to a third, dressed as Uncle Sam, as the expected hundreds of shareholders arrive, Mulvey said.
INFACT played a leading role during the 1970s and 1980s in the boycott of Nestle over alleged mismarketing of infant formula in poor countries and charges Philip Morris with unfair lobbying of government officials.
INFACT also wants Philip Morris to change its marketing practices in developing countries, she said.
Mulvey said the widely reported and historic talks between cigarette makers and anti-tobacco organizations had had no effect on INFACT's plans to protest.
"There's nothing that we've heard ... that has anything to do with marketing to kids in developing countries or influence peddling," Mulvey said.
-- Miami newsroom - 305-374-5013.
