General Electric Co chief executive Jack Welch successfully defended his $28.2 million in salary, bonuses and incentives for 1996, telling shareholders on Wednesday that market forces determined pay packages for top U.S. executives.
"The issue is the competitive marketplace," Welch told a critic at GE's annual meeting. "The market is willing to play at a certain level ...."
Shareholders at the meeting defeated a proposal to limit Welch's pay to $1 million unless put to a shareholder vote.  
The proposal to limit Welch's pay received nine percent of the votes cast, with 91 percent backing Welch's existing compensation arrangements.
Bill Patterson of the AFL-CIO group of labor unions, a supporter of the Welch pay proposal made by a Teamsters union pension fund, said Welch's compensation was 148 times more than that paid on average to GE's 239,000 employees.
Patterson said the pay, even with Welch's highly acclaimed management successes and the stellar stock market performance of GE's shares since he became chief executive 16 years ago, was a source of bitterness and cynicism for many GE workers.  
Welch said he was well paid and was benefitting from the labor of all GE's employees. He noted that stock options were now distributed to some 22,000 GE employees, as opposed to only 200 as recently as 1988.
Big pay packages, including deferred compensation plans, were needed to retain top performers, Welch said. He said some top GE executives, such as the current head of AlliedSignal Inc had left the company for more pay and broader opportunities.  
Welch, the latest leading U.S. chief executive to be criticized for high compensation, last year received $6.3 million in salary, $15.1 million from a long-term incentive program and $6.2 million by excercising options on GE stock. He was also paid almost $600,000 in benefits, such as life insurance, according to GE's proxy statement.
Walt Disney Co shareholders, including several leading institutional investors, challenged at the company's annual meeting two months ago a 10-year pay package given chairman Michael Eisner worth as much as $771 million. Twelve percent of Disney shares were voted against the Eisner pay package.
One study said CEO pay rose about 20 percent in 1996 and 16 percent in 1995.  
	 -- Miami newsroom - 305-374-5013
