General Electric Co. Chief Executive Jack Welch defended his $28.2 million in salary, bonuses and incentives for 1996, telling shareholders Wednesday that market forces determined pay packages for top U.S. executives.
"The issue is the competitive marketplace," he told a critic at GE's annual meeting. "The market is willing to play at a certain level ..."
Stockholders at the meeting defeated a proposal to limit Welch's pay to $1 million unless put to a shareholder vote.
The proposal to limit Welch's pay received 9 percent of the votes cast, with 91 percent backing Welch's existing compensation arrangements.
Bill Patterson of the AFL-CIO group of labour unions, a supporter of the effort to put a cap on Welch's paycheck, said Welch's compensation was 148 times more than that paid on average to GE's 239,000 employees.
The proposal was made by a Teamsters union pension fund.
Patterson said the pay, even with Welch's highly acclaimed management successes and the stellar stock market performance of GE's shares since he became chief executive 16 years ago, was a source of bitterness and cynicism for many GE workers.
Welch said he was well paid and was benefitting from the labour of all GE's employees. He noted that stock options were now distributed to some 22,000 GE employees, as opposed to only 200 as recently as 1988.
Big pay packages, including deferred compensation plans, were needed to retain top performers, Welch said. He said some top GE executives, such as the current head of AlliedSignal Inc. had left the company for more pay and broader opportunities.
Welch, the latest U.S. chief executive to be criticised for high compensation, last year received $6.3 million in salary, $15.1 million from a long-term incentive programme and $6.2 million by excercising options on GE stock.
He was also paid almost $600,000 in benefits, such as life insurance, according to GE's proxy statement.
Walt Disney Co. stockholders, including several leading institutional investors, two months ago challenged a 10-year pay package given Chairman Michael Eisner worth as much as $771 million. Twelve percent of Disney shares were voted against the Eisner pay package.
One study said CEO pay rose about 20 percent in 1996 and 16 percent in 1995.
