Philip Morris Cos Inc shareholders on Thursday voted down by a margin of more than nine to one a shareholder proposal that the firm adopt the same standards on marketing to youths outside the United States that it put in place domestically two years ago.
The proposal to extend the limitations to overseas markets was opposed by Philip Morris chief executive Geoffrey Bible and the board of directors.  
"It's absolutely hypocritical for Mr Bible to hail the company's youth access program at home ... and at the same time not apply the same standard anywhere else," said shareholder Edward Sweda, an anti-tobacco activist and a lawyer with the Tobacco Control Resource Center in Boston.
Philip Morris' U.S. program -- Action Against Access -- eliminated mail sales of Marlboro, L&amp;M and other Philip Morris cigarettes and give-aways of cigarettes at public gatherings.  
The company also added warnings against youth sales to its cigarette packs and began lobbying for state laws to force shopkeepers to check for proof of age, Philip Morris spokeswoman Karen Daragan said.
"The intent (of the U.S. program) is to keep sales to places were IDs can be checked," she said.
But shareholder activists noted that this action was limited to the United States and the shareholder proposal cited data showing how effective Philip Morris cigarette advertising was outside the United States.  
It quoted one study saying 95 percent of children in Hong Kong recognized the Marlboro brand name and a World Health Organization forecast that seven million youths who take up smoking in the developing world will die from smoking-related diseases by 2025.
Bible did not speak directly to the proposal at the meeting but Philip Morris said in the company's proxy for the annual meeting that the company has long opposed sales of cigarettes to young people and a single style of marketing was wrong for a global company selling food, beer and tobacco products in 180 nations.
"Your management thinks it makes more sense for the company to continue to take action against youth access in a manner that recognizes the diversity of markets in which the company operates," the company said.
Top tobacco companies are secretly bargaining with anti-tobacco forces on a $300 billion or more deal to resolve much U.S. tobacco litigation and likely sharply reduce the marketing of cigarettes in the United States.
--Miami newsroom 305 374-5013
