First Joe Camel won a reprieve and now the Marlboro Man may be getting a longer lease of life -- at least outside the United States.
Philip Morris Cos. Inc. shareholders voted on Thursday by a margin of more than nine-to-one to reject a shareholder proposal that the company limit its marketing to youths outside the United States in the same way that it does domestically.
It was the second time this month the shareholders of a leading U.S. tobacco company have defended an advertising campaign credited with selling billions of cigarettes.
RJR Nabisco Holdings Inc. shareholders on April 16 voted down a shareholder proposal to do away with its Joe Camel cartoon character, which promotes Camel cigarettes around the world. Critics say Joe -- a camel who wears a Bogartesque trenchcoat -- encourages people under 18 to smoke.
Philip Morris, whose Marlboro cigarette ads are spearheaded by the rugged Marlboro Man cowboy figure, is the biggest maker of tobacco products in the world after the Chinese government.
At least one model who appeared as the Marlboro Man in advertising campaigns around the world has died of smoking-related illness.
The proposal to extend the company's limitations on domestic marketing to foreign markets was opposed by Philip Morris chief executive Geoffrey Bible and the board of directors.
The company said it has long opposed sales of cigarettes to young people but that a single style of marketing was wrong for a global company selling food, beer and tobacco products in 180 nations.
"It's absolutely hypocritical for Mr. Bible to hail the company's youth access programme at home ... and at the same time not apply the same standard anywhere else," said shareholder Edward Sweda, an anti-tobacco activist and a lawyer with Tobacco Control Resource Centre in Boston.
Philip Morris's U.S. programme, launched two years ago and called Action Against Access, eliminated mail sales of Marlboro, L&amp;M and other Philip Morris cigarettes and give-aways of cigarettes at public gatherings.
The company also added warnings against youth sales to its cigarette packs and began lobbying for state laws to force shopkeepers to check for proof of age, Philip Morris spokeswoman Karen Daragan said.
Top tobacco companies are privately negotiating with anti-tobacco forces on a $300 billion or more deal to resolve much U.S. tobacco litigation and likely sharply reduce the marketing of cigarettes in the United States.
