Republic Industries, Inc., expanding its nationwide car dealership network, said Wednesday it agreed to acquire two more companies in Florida for a total of $62 million in stock.
The dealerships are Gulf Management Inc., which operates Lexus of Tampa Bay and Lexus of Clearwater, Fla.; and the Steve Moore General Motors automotive group of Palm Beach, Fla., which includes Chevrolet, Cadillac, Pontiac, Oldsmobile, Buick and Geo brands.
The deals include all related real estate, and are subject to manufacturer and government approval.
The dealerships' owners will retain their responsibilities under long-term employment agreements, Republic said.
Republic, led by Florida billionaire Wayne Huizenga, owns the nation's largest chain of new vehicle dealerships and is building a chain of used car megastores it operates under the AutoNation USA brand name.
Republic also owns National Car Rental System Inc., Alamo Rent-A-Car Inc. and has agreed to acquire Spirit Rent-A-Car.
Until last summer, Republic had mainly been a waste management company. Its aggressive strategy of creating a nationwide auto dealership network has sparked lawsuits by Japanese motor giants Toyota Motor Corp. and Honda Motor Co. Ltd. to block Republic's plan to acquire their outlets in major U.S. markets.
Each company wants AutoNation to stop buying retailers which sell its cars. In its suit filed last week, Honda said AutoNation was cheapening its Honda and Acura brands.
Both companies limit the number of dealerships which can be owned by one propietor and have said AutoNation wants to control 20 percent of their U.S. sales.
Huizenga this week shrugged off the lawsuits, saying that AutoNation never aspired to control one of every five Toyota and Honda sales in the United States.
"We never said 20 percent and we never expected to get that much," Huizenga told the annual shareholders meeting of Republic on Tuesday. "We know we will be partners with them."
Huizenga, credited with creating giant video-retailer Blockbuster and Waste Management Corp., said AutoNation can take minority stakes in Toyota and Honda dealerships or use other techniques for tapping into the strong sales flows of highly popular Toyota and Honda vehicles.
"There are ways to accomplish what we want," Huizenga said. Fort Lauderdale, Fla.-based Republic's stock was off 94 cents at $27.375 on Nasdaq in afternoon trading.
