U.S. billionaire Wayne Huizenga shrugged off lawsuits filed by two Japanese motor giants, saying on Tuesday that the AutoNation car-retailing arm of his Republic Industries Inc never aspired to control one of every five Toyota and Honda sales in the United States.
Both Toyota Motor Corp and Honda Motor Co Ltd have filed suits in U.S. courts against AutoNation, one of several buyout companies prowling the tens of thousands of independent car retailers in the United States.
Each company wants AutoNation to stop buying retailers which sell its cars. In its suit filed last week, Honda said AutoNation was cheapening its Honda and Acura brands.
Both companies limit the number of dealerships which can be owned by one proprietor and have said AutoNation wants to control 20 percent of their U.S. sales.
"We never said 20 percent and we never expected to get that much," Huizenga told the annual shareholders meeting of Republic. "We know we will be partners with them."
A renowned businessman credited with creating giant video-retailer Blockbuster and Waste Management Corp, Huizenga said AutoNation could take minority stakes in Toyota and Honda dealerships or use other techniques for tapping into the strong sales flows of highly popular Toyota and Honda vehicles.
"There are ways to accomplish what we want," Huizenga said.
Huizenga is chairman and co-chief executive of Republic, an auto-services, home-security and garbage-hauling conglomerate which has bought dozens of small car dealerships and other businesses in the past 18 months using Republic's high-flying shares in stock-swaps.
But Republic's shares are 25 percent or more off their highs, at least in part to investors worries that rivals are beginning to narrow AutoNation's lead in consolidating used and new car dealerships.
Ford Motor Co executives last week briefed dealers in Indianopolis, Indiana, on a voluntary and highly innovative plan to gather together about 18 Indianapolis-area Ford and Lincoln-Mercury dealerships into five or six giant sales outlets with stand-alone, satellite service facilities for light repairs and warranty work.
The giant centres, similar to the 11 AutoNation superstores now operating, would be owned by Ford and by participating dealers, a Ford spokesman has said.
Ford is looking to test the concept in two or three medium-sized markets in the next two to three years with an eye to a possible public offering.
"We welcome that," Republic president Steve Berrard said. "We think it's a great endorsement."
Besides AutoNation, Circuit City Stores Inc.'s CarMax and others are using many of the customer-friendly techniques pioneered by General Motors Corp's Saturn unit to court the two of every three Americans who hate to haggle.
Both GM and Chrysler Corp have had programmes to reduce their dealership ranks through consolidation and buy-outs, but neither has proposed as radical a restructuring of its distribution system.
-- Miami newsroom, 305-374-5013
