Sterling Software Inc's $165 million purchase of Texas Instruments Inc software unit will close on June 14 and will help Sterling's financials almost immediately, the company's chief executive said on Wednesday.  
"Three or four minutes," Sterling Williams told Reuters when asked how long Sterling Software would spend integrating Texas Instrument's 1,300 staff and 62 facilities around the world. "It will enhance both profits and revenues almost immediately," Williams said.
Williams also said Sterling Software's cash holdings, enlarged greatly by last fall's spinoff of Sterling Commerce Inc, remain largely intact after the Texas Instruments' deal and will be used to pay for more acquisitions.  
Founded in 1981 and with more than two dozen acquisitions to its credit, the company will have some $600 million in cash after the Texas Instruments' check is written, Williams said.
"The biggest opportunities out there are in applications software," Williams said. "Size doesn't attract or repel us."  
Applications software groups, such as the Texas Instruments' business Sterling is buying, help design new software for big organizations and cobble together different computer systems.
Sterling is also interested in companies which produce software for big computer systems, Williams said.  
The Texas Instruments' acquisition announced a month ago will add $250 million in annual revenues to Sterling Software and better than double to half the portion of Sterling Software revenues which come from applications software operations, Williams said.
Sterling had fiscal 1996 revenues of about $440 million.  
Williams said Sterling Software's top executives had spent the past month meeting TI Software's managers around the world and had clear, detailed plans for weaving the unit into Sterling.
He said cost savings would come through cuts in research and administration and that layoffs would likely be minimal. The combined sales forces would allow broader marketing of Sterling Software's products and services, he said.
"Our ramp up basically takes place before the announcement," he said. "But there is a settling-in phase where you make course corrections."  
The combination would stimulate sales growth in Sterling's applications operations, which had been flat in fiscal 1996 after fast growth in the early 1990s, Williams said.
He declined to discuss detailed forecasts.
TI's customers will be largely new ones for Sterling and acceptance of the deal among customers seems to be good, Williams said.
"Not a single customer called and said he was worried," he said.
Sterling Software shares rose 5/8  and closed at 32-1/4.
((--Miami newsroom, 305-374-5013))
