Any sweeping settlement among state governments and tobacco companies would leave standing a great many anti-smoking suits, including a $5 billion claim scheduled for a June 2 trial, plaintiff lawyers said on Friday.
"It's a lousy settlement for my clients and the American people," said Stanley Rosenblatt, one of two lawyers pressing the Broin class-action suit here on behalf of flight attendants claiming injuries from secondhand tobacco smoke.  
Rosenblatt's case goes to trial on June 2 and is a landmark, because it is both the first class-action suit against cigarette makers to survive preliminary legal challenges and the first trial of a claim of damage from second-hand smoke.
Some 1,000 anti-tobacco lawsuits currently exist in U.S. courts against tobacco companies, according to Richard Daynard of the Tobacco Products Litigation Project at Northeastern University.  
Norwood Wilner, another Florida attorney who secured a $750,000 jury judgment against the Brown &amp; Williamson unit of B.A.T Industries Plc in 1996, has no plans to delay his next trial, said his legal aide, Jenny Stieger.
"We have a trial date of August 4, for another lady with lung cancer," Stieger said.
Wilner on May 5 lost a suit on behalf of smoker Jean Connor, who was killed by lung cancer, against RJ Reynolds Tobacco Co, a unit of RJR Nabisco Holdings Corp.  
Reynolds, the maker of Winston and Salem brand cigarettes, will also be the defendant in the August trial on the claim of Joann Karbinyk, Stieger said.
Another anti-tobacco lawyer, Ronald Acosta, has two tentative trial dates scheduled for summer in U.S. District Court in Tampa, Florida. Wilner expects to try still another case in November, Stieger said.  
Other cases expected to come to trial in 1997 include another class-action on behalf of Florida smokers in September and a secondhand smoke case in Mississippi brought by the family of a non-smoking barber who allegedly died of cancer caused by the cigarette smokers awaiting haircuts in his shop.
According to published reports, in part challenged by Mississippi Attorney General Michael Moore, tobacco companies and the 29 state governments suing the industry for billions in healthcare spending on smokers are near a deal limiting the number and type of lawsuits which could be brought by smokers.  
The Wall Street Journal said the proposed terms would make it nearly impossible for future smokers to sue cigarette makers for lung cancer and other common tobacco-related illnesses. "The global settlement is not a done deal," said Stieger. "There is not a whole lot of support for a deal messing with the tort system."
Attorney Rosenblatt said during a pre-trial hearing for the Broin class-action suit that the tobacco industry and the attorneys general would reach a settlement.  Tobacco lawyers would then go to "a friendly court" and ask it to halt the Broin trial.  
"I don't think that's going to be successful, but that's the plan," he said.
Michael Russ, a lawyer for Brown &amp; Williamson, told Reuters as the hearing broke for lunch: "If that is the plan, I don't know about it."
(( -- Miami newsroom - 305-374-5013 ))
