Any sweeping settlement between state governments and tobacco companies will leave standing a great many anti-smoking lawsuits, including a $5 billion claim scheduled for a June 2 trial, plaintiff lawyers said on Friday.
Some 1,000 anti-tobacco lawsuits currently exist in U.S. courts against tobacco companies, according to Richard Daynard of the Tobacco Products Litigation Project at Northeastern University.
The June 2 trial, in a suit filed by attorney Stanley Rosenblatt, is a landmark case because it is both the first class-action suit against cigarette makers to survive preliminary legal challenges and the first trial involving environmental tobacco smoke.
Norwood Wilner, another Florida attorney who secured a $750,000 jury judgment against the Brown &amp; Williamson unit of B.A.T Industries in 1996, has no plans to delay his next trial, an aide said.
"We have a trial date of Aug. 4, for another lady with lung cancer," Jenny Stieger said. Wilner also expects to try another case in November, Stieger said.
Wilner lost a suit this month on behalf of smoker Jean Connor, who died of lung cancer, against RJ Reynolds Tobacco Co., a unit of RJR Nabisco Holdings Corp. The maker of Winston and Salem brand cigarettes will also be the defendant in the August trial on the claim of Joann Karbinyk, Stieger said.
Another anti-tobacco lawyer, Ronald Acosta, has two tentative trial dates scheduled for summer in U.S. District Court in Tampa.
Other cases expected to come to trial this year include another class-action on behalf of Florida smokers in September and a secondhand-smoke case in Mississippi brought by the family of a non-smoking barber who allegedly died of cancer caused by customers smoking in his shop.
Tobacco companies and the 29 state governments suing the industry for billions of dollars in healthcare spending on smokers have been negotiating a potential settlement for weeks.
While there were some reports that the negotiators were making progress in their negotiations, Mississippi Attorney General Mike Moore said Friday that a settlement was not imminent. He said he hoped to know within two weeks whether a deal could be reached.
