Cigarette companies will face one of their biggest legal challenges in four decades Monday when the first ever class-action anti-smoking case goes to trial in a Florida court.
"This is the first of the big ones," Richard Daynard, an anti-smoking activist who heads the Tobacco Products Liability Project at Northeastern University in Boston, said of the case, known as Broin vs. Philip Morris Co., et al.
In addition to being the first class-action lawsuit against the tobacco industry, the case is also being watched very closely because the plaintiffs -- 60,000 airline flight attendants -- are not themselves smokers.
That fact will prevent the cigarette companies from using one of their traditional defences -- that smokers are aware of the possible health risks of smoking and voluntarily chose to smoke.
The $5 billion Broin case was brought by airline flight attendants who claim their lung cancer and other tobacco-related illnesses were caused by passengers' cigarette smoke. Smoking was banned on U.S. airliners in 1988.
"One of the most successful defences for tobacco companies is that the smokers knew of the risks," said Professor Michael Zimmer of the Seton Hall School of Law in New Jersey. "In secondhand smoke, you don't have that."
Lawyers said the ranks of tobacco attorneys representing the 10 companies named in the lawsuit will challenge and probe the testimony of experts called by Stanley and Susan Rosenblatt, the Miami husband-and-wife attorney team pressing the Broin lawsuit. The case is named for Norma Broin, 42 and suffering lung cancer.
Among the witnesses for the flight attendants will be two former U.S. surgeon generals and physicians and scientists drawing on a decade or more of research on secondhand smoke, Stanley Rosenblatt said.
A Harvard University study published last week which found a strong link between heart disease and secondhand smoke is a boon for the flight attendants, Rosenblatt and other attorneys said.
A lawyer for Philip Morris declined to discuss the details of the case, other than to say the tobacco companies expected to prevail.
Zimmer said the Rosenblatt's case may be weakened by the two-stage trial structure, since little of the individual suffering and pain will be telegraphed to the jurors as the attorneys battle over statistics and scientific methodology.
"In class-action suits, juries want a human element and the plaintiffs won't have that," Zimmer said.
"A loss in Broin would make the companies ever more desperate," said Daynard, a pioneer in promoting lawsuits against cigarette companies.
Other multibillion-dollar lawsuits by the states of Mississippi, Florida and Texas, and another class-action lawsuit in Miami, are scheduled for trial in coming months.
All are part of a four-decade legal assault which may be costing the industry as much as $600 million a year to counter.
A loss in the Broin case might also unleash another wave of class-action and other individual lawsuits against U.S. cigarette makers, which already face an estimated 1,000 current claims in the United States, lawyers said.
The Broin case, which wound through Florida courts for six years, comes to trial just as state governments and cigarette companies are negotiating a deal likely to block many types of anti-tobacco suits and settle the 29 lawsuits brought by state attorneys general.
The landmark talks may also yield industry acceptance of stiff U.S. marketing and sales regulations and creation of a $300 billion pool to pay for the medical care of sick smokers.
