The Florida judge in the Broin secondhand-smoke lawsuit on Thursday said he may undo the class-action status of the case, a move that would likely delay the start of a trial, scheduled for Monday.
Dade County Circuit Court Judge Robert Kaye said during a hearing that even if tobacco companies were found liable by a jury for injuries caused by secondhand smoke, the claims of an estimated 60,000 plaintiffs might be too cumbersome for a single trial.  
Kaye said determining the direct linkage of secondhand smoke to individual ailments and setting the amounts due each of the non-smoking flight attendants covered by the Broin suit might be nearly impossible.
"I am very concerned about these issues," Kaye said.
The judge, who is also weighing a tobacco-industry request that fraud and conspiracy allegations be dropped from the suit, gave no indication when he might rule. Another pre-trial hearing was scheduled for Friday.  
Kaye five years ago knocked down the class-action status of the Broin case, first filed in 1991, but was overturned three years ago by a Florida appeals court, which ordered a trial after hearing tobacco company arguments the case was too cumbersome.
In a class-action suit, a few plaintiffs claim damages on behalf of a broader group with similar injuries. All share in damage payments, if there are any.  
The Broin case, named after American Airlines flight attendant Norma Broin, alleges that cigarette smoke aboard U.S. passenger jets caused the lung cancer and other ailments of thousands of non-smoking flight attendants. In-flight smoking in the United States was banned in 1988.
In court on Thursday, tobacco company lawyers asked Kaye to end the class-action status of the Broin suit and said each of the claims needed to be tried individually, since many factors beyond cigarette smoke may have caused the flight attendants' injuries.  
"This cannot proceed as a class action without dissolving into 60,000 individual trials," said Hugh Whiting, an attorney for R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Co, a unit of RJR Nabisco Holdings Corp.
Susan Rosenblatt, an attorney pressing the Broin case, said people with like injuries could be grouped for determining damages if the tobacco companies should be found liable in the first stage of the trial. Such sessions would be "relatively simple," she said.  
She also said a financial settlement might be worked out with the tobacco companies if a jury should rule against them. "They don't like to talk about that but it's a possibility," she said.
Tobacco companies have yet to pay a single dollar in damages, despite four decades of U.S. lawsuits, but they are now in secret talks with government officials that might end some of the court actions against the industry.  
Kaye asked Rosenblatt what would happen if he should end the class-action status of Broin. She said she and her co-counsel and husband, Stanley Rosenblatt, were not now prepared for such a late change.
((--Miami newsroom, 305-374-5013))
