Ordinarily seated at the rear of a courtroom, behind deep ranks of dark-suited corporate lawyers fighting anti-cigarette lawsuits, is the mystified legal defender of Dosal Tobacco Co.
"What am I doing here?" Jose Martinez often asks as he fidgets through yet another courtroom hearing in one of the high-profile tobacco cases heading for trial.
Martinez, of the Miami law firm Martinez, Gutierrez &amp; DeCordoba, puts that question to judges and to plaintiff attorneys pressing lawsuits on behalf of sick smokers, non-smokers claiming injuries from other people's cigarette fumes and the State of Florida, which is seeking tobacco money for Medicaid costs.
"We're just a small manufacturer, a family operation. We shouldn't be here," Martinez insists to anyone who will listen.
Dosal -- now swept up in one of the great legal battles of the century -- is a tiny family-owned company based in Opa-Locka, a poor city north of Miami built by a real estate developer with a fanciful taste for Moorish architecture.
It makes but a few million cigarettes a year -- compared with Philip Morris Cos. Inc., the largest cigarette maker in the world, which last year shipped nearly 231 billion cigarettes in the United States alone.
Still, Dosal's name appears in three anti-tobacco lawsuits in Florida and another in Michigan, along with deep-pocketed giants such as RJR Nabisco Holdings and Philip Morris, which last year had more than $35 billion in tobacco sales.
Dosal's main customer is the Florida prison system, which sells Dosal's DTC brand cigarettes in regular and king-sized lengths to the smokers among the state's 50,000 inmates.
Even so, Dosal is named in the state's lawsuit against tobacco companies.
Dosal also makes a brand or two favored by elderly Cuban emigres in south Florida, including Competidora.
"They buy bulk tobacco and make cigarettes on machines in Opa-Locka. It's a very small operation," Martinez said. "And the customers for the Cuban brands are old and dying."
Good-humored and joking much of the time, Martinez is deadly serious about eliminating the legal threat to Dosal.
In addition to filing formal requests that Dosal be dropped, he presses plaintiff lawyers informally with arguments on the futility of suing a company with limited financial resources.
"I ask every day," Martinez says.
If kept in the lawsuits, including the so-called Broin class-action suit scheduled to go to trial Monday in Miami, Dosal could be made to pay a share of any monetrary judgment. The lawyers pressing the Broin case intend to ask for $5 billion or more in damages.
And while the tobacco industry has yet to pay out a dollar in court damages after four decades of litigation, leaks in the industry's defenses are widely seen on Wall Street and elsewhere.
The Broin case, being brought on behalf of an estimated 60,000 ailing and non-smoking flight attendants by lawyers Susan and Stanley Rosenblatt, is the first of several multibillion-dollar lawsuits coming to trial this year against U.S. cigarette makers.
"It's their fault," Martinez said, pointing to the Rosenblatts during a courtroom interview this week after a hearing in the Broin case, filed more than six years ago.
"All the other suits copied theirs."
Martinez said the Rosenblatts, who have named 10 defendants in the Broin lawsuit, were also responsible for the Michigan anti-tobacco lawsuit which has targeted Dosal and other cigarette makers.
"I don't think we have even sold any cigarettes in Michigan," Martinez said. (
