The judge in the Broin secondhand-smoke trial ruled on Tuesday that prospective jurors be questioned separately out of fear that strongly felt differences over tobacco may unduly influence others and perhaps even influence the outcome of the $5 billion case.
Judge Robert Kaye said that, while he was eager to get a jury in place, he was worried about possible fallout from news stories on the trial and feared that inflammatory opinions expressed in open court might unfairly influence a verdict.
Individual questioning of potential jurors in the case, known as Broin vs. Philip Morris et al, would continue "so as to not infect the rest of the panel with some dangerous remarks," Kaye ruled.
In the historic case -- the first class action and first secondhand-smoke case against the tobacco industry to go to trial -- some 60,000 non-smoking airline flight attendants are suing nine cigarette companies for maladies they claim were caused by smoke from airline passengers' cigarettes.
In the first two days of jury selection prospective jurors expressed widely varying opinions about cigarette smoking.
One said secondhand smoke very likely caused disease in non-smokers while another compared lawsuits against tobacco companies for smoking-related illnesses to suing Kentucky Fried Chicken for Americans' high cholesterol.
Jury selection has been slow, with only five out of 29 individuals examined Monday making an initial cut.
Six jurors and between six and 12 alternate jurors are needed for the trial, which is expected to turn on dense statistical arguments and detailed evidence from scientists and physicians.
Participants in the case do not expect testimony to begin until at least next week.
Lawyers for the two sides clashed Tuesday over procedures for questioning of potential jurors.
Stanley Rosenblatt, an attorney pressing the class-action lawsuit named for lung-cancer survivor Norma Broin, told Kaye he wanted to ask more questions of potential jurors than he can manage in the 20 minutes to 30 minutes he has so far spent on each person.
Rosenblatt said he would be willing to ask the questions of large groups in order to save time.
But David Hardy, an attorney for two tobacco companies, said the questioning of individual potential jurors separated from others was vital.
"There were several comments, which if heard by a group, would have prompted a presumption of a poisioned panel," Hardy said, referring to early questioning of potential jurors.
Rosenblatt argued that the risk of any influence from an individual comment was slight and could be handled with instructions from the judge.
"If someone disagrees with a terrible opinion, we can deal with that," Rosenblatt said.
The judge ruled, however, that individual questioning would continue.
Kaye already had placed limits on attorneys talking to reporters and barred the identification and photography of potential jurors, who are identified only by number.
He also assured lawyers in court that the 200 or more people awaiting questioning were in courthouse rooms with televisions tuned only to non-news programmes.
Kaye later dismissed, at the tobacco companies' request, a retired truck driver who said he had quit smoking after 23 years and believed strongly that secondhand smoke was dangerous.
"When people smoke around you, do you ask them to stop?" Hugh Whiting, another tobacco company attorney, asked the man.
"I move from around them," the man said.
"Because it makes you sick?"
"That's right. I'm very delicate," the man said.
Kaye also excused a college student who said a two-month trial would prevent her from taking a course in sociology.
Other people questioned Tuesday included an organiser of Miami's annual Orange Bowl Parade and a retired police dispatcher who quit smoking when cigarettes rose to 50 cents a pack. "I was too cheap," she said.
Rosenblatt has said he intends to ask for $5 billion or more in damages if tobacco companies are found liable for the lung cancer and other tobacco-related ailments among the flight attendants. Smoking on U.S. passenger jets was banned in 1988.
