Tobacco-industry lawyers in the $5 billion Broin secondhand smoke case on Tuesday touched off a testy outburst from the trial judge, who accused them of muddling the minds of prospective jurors with trick questions.
"We pull them apart," Dade County Circuit Court Judge Robert Kaye told Edward Moss, an attorney for Brown &amp; Williamson, a unit of B.A.T Industries of Britain. "We are playing with their heads."
Kaye, speaking towards the end of a second, slow day of jury selection in the landmark trial, criticised the questions put to jurors by Moss and attorneys for other big tobacco companies such as Philip Morris Cos Inc. and R.J. Reynolds Tobacco as too firmly aimed at uncovering anti-smoking attitudes among the prospective jurors.
"You have been playing with people's heads for two days ...," Kaye said.
Kaye said smoking was a widely controversial practice, making it impossible to find a fully neutral jury of six and as many as a dozen alternative jurors to hear the case. Florida law only required that jurors be able to put aside their prejudices and decide on the evidence presented, he said.
Stanley Rosenblatt, an attorney for the 60,000 sick flight attendants represented in the Broin class-action suit, said, "These are consumate mind games that are being played by very skilful lawyers. Their problem is that they are looking for people that live in a cave ... uninformed people."
The clash came after the questioning of a young musician who said her voice had been harmed from secondhand smoke while singing in nightclubs. But, under follow-up questioning by Kaye, she said she could set aside her belief that cigarettes should be banned in the United States and decide a verdict just on the evidence presented at the trial.
Kaye refused a tobacco lawyers request that the musician be bumped as prejudiced against cigarette makers but she can be dropped later if the tobacco lawyers choose to use one of 27 juror challenges they may make without explanation.
The woman was just one of six prospective jurors who survived some six hours of courtroom questioning on Tuesday. The other five included an organiser of Miami's annual Orange Bowl parade, a retired police dispatcher and a bookings manager for Royal Caribbean Cruise Lines. Eleven people have now made past the initial round of attorney queries.
At least a dozen more people are to be questioned on Wednesday, Kaye said.
Earlier, the judge sided with tobacco lawyers who opposed a Rosenblatt request that prospective jurors be questioned in groups, instead of one by one. Kaye said that, while he was eager to get a jury in place, he was worried about possible fallout from news stories on the trial and feared that inflammatory opinions expressed in open court might unfairly influence a verdict.
Individual questioning of potential jurors in the case, known as Broin vs. Philip Morris et al, would continue "so as to not infect the rest of the panel with some dangerous remarks," Kaye ruled.
In the historic case -- the first class action and first secondhand smoke case against the tobacco industry to go to trial -- non-smoking airline flight attendants are suing nine cigarette companies for maladies they claim were caused by smoke from airline passengers' cigarettes.
In the first two days of jury selection prospective jurors expressed widely varying opinions about cigarette smoking.
One said secondhand smoke very likely caused disease in non-smokers while another compared lawsuits against tobacco companies for smoking-related illnesses to suing Kentucky Fried Chicken for Americans' high cholesterol.
Rosenblatt has said he intends to ask for $5 billion or more in damages if tobacco companies are found liable for the lung cancer and other tobacco-related ailments among the flight attendants. Smoking on U.S. passenger jets was banned in 1988.
