Tobacco industry lawyers Wednesday accused the judge hearing a second-hand smoking suit of failing to reject potential jurors with anti-cigarette prejudices.
Another five people, including a freelance television-news producer opposed by tobacco lawyers, passed initial questioning on Wednesday in the class-action case, bringing to 16 the people in the potential-jurors pool.
Court officials said 80 or more potential jurors will be needed to find the six-member jury and the 12 alternates to decide whether U.S. cigarette makers are liable for lung cancer and other smoking-related ailments among 60,000 non-smoking flight attendants. Jury selection is expected to continue for several weeks.
Jury selection began on Monday, and Dade County Circuit Court Judge Robert Kaye has intermittently asked follow-up questions to potential jurors after rival lawyers finish probing individuals' attitudes toward tobacco use, big tobacco companies and their own smoking habits.
Kaye, who accused tobacco lawyers late Tuesday of muddling the minds of prospective jurors, on Wednesday put questions to a Miami police department payroll clerk after she told Edward Moss, a lawyer for Brown &amp; Williamson, the U.S. cigarette business of B.A.T Industries of Britain, she believed cigarettes should be banned. She also said she was initially more sympathetic to the flight attendants than to the tobacco defendants such as Philip Morris.
Kaye subsequently asked if she could put aside her sympathies and make a fair decision based on evidence presented during the trial and the woman said she could.
Moss protested immediately after the woman left the courtroom.
Moss said the judge's questioning was unfair to the tobacco companies and asked that the woman be eliminated from consideration because she was biased against cigarette companies. "Her responses indicate the defendants have a different burden than the plaintiffs," Moss said.
"That is a matter for the court to decide," Kaye said, refusing to block the woman.
A similar clash occured late Tuesday, when Kaye accused the tobacco lawyers of manipulative questioning of jurors and Moss said the judge should not question the jurors.
Kaye also rejected a tobacco lawyer's request that a freelance television-news producer be blocked. The woman said she had sued a big corporation several years ago and had worked on stories about cigarettes for a Miami station but that she could weigh the evidence fairly.
Other people questioned and allowed to pass into the prospective jurors pool included a Pan American jet dispatcher and an office worker with two young children.
Jury questioning has been slow, with each side spending 20 minutes or more querying each person. Next week, the court will question jurors only on Monday and Tuesday because of a break for a Jewish holiday.
