A Miami television journalist who produced a news report on niche-brand cigarettes was knocked from the pool of standby jurors in Florida's $5 billion secondhand smoke trial on Thursday.
The unidentified female television-news producer was among 15 people questioned by judge and lawyers on Wednesday. She said she had produced a television report for Fox station WSVN Channel 7 on cigarette marketing, scheduled for broadcast that evening. Despite tobacco lawyers objections, she was placed in the pool of potential jurors to sit on the trial, expected to last eight weeks or longer.
Tobacco company lawyers again on Thursday asked Dade County Circuit Court Judge Robert Kaye to remove the freelance news producer, saying her piece negatively portrayed tobacco companies and reflected a bias making her unsuitable to fairly decide whether the defendants are liable for the smoking-related illnesses of 60,000 non-smoking flight attendants.
A tape of the short television report on flashily packaged Black Death, City and other so-called micro-brand cigarettes favored by some young smokers was shown in court and included interviews with shopkeepers, young smokers and a spokeswoman for the American Cancer Society.
Stanley Rosenblatt, an attorney pressing the class-action suit, said the television report had been very likely edited by other journalists and did not necessarily reflect the mindset of the news producer.
But Kaye sided with the tobacco lawyers and removed the woman from the standby jurors pool, saying, "The appearance that it was weighted would make it inappropriate for her to be seated."
After four days of jury selection, the standby jurors pool numbers 18. Some 60 are needed to seat a jury of six. A second round of screening will be required to find between six and 12 alternates before testimony can begin in the landmark trial, a court official said.
A nurse, a college student and an immigrant from Mexico were placed in the standby pool on Thursday. People excused by Kaye include a nun who described smoking as a vice and the sure cause of diseases she has seen firsthand as a nurse and several people with schooling or vacation plans fixed firmly during June and July.
Kaye late on Wednesday said he was reconsidering a Rosenblatt request that prospective jurors be questioned in groups as a way of speeding up jury selection. Tobacco company lawyers objected, saying that since smoking and attitudes about secondhand cigarette smoke were hot-buttom matters people had to be questioned separately.
A court official said Kaye would likely decide on group questioning of prospective jurors on Friday or later. Kaye earlier this week refused a similar request from Rosenblatt.
Jury questioning for the trial, the first on secondhand smoke claims, is likely to run through at least mid-June, in part because the jury selection next week will occur only on Monday and Tuesday because of a break for Jewish holidays.
AMB.N
