Tobacco company lawyers defending against the $5 billion Broin secondhand-smoke lawsuit are ahead in the race to seat favorable jurors, repeatedly knocking out nurses and others who say secondhand smoke probably causes disease, according to trial consultants.
"Tobacco's been really lucky at getting out people with knowledge about smoking and health -- all those nurses," said one Florida trial consultant after five days of jury picking for the Broin trial. "The plaintiffs must be crying."
Thirty-two people, out of more than 75 closely questioned by rival lawyers and the trial judge, passed initial screening last week and may be among the six chosen to decide whether or not cigarette giants such as Philip Morris and RJ Reynolds Tobacco are liable for heart ailments and other smoking-related diseases among 60,000 flight attendants who never smoked.
The flight attendants, including Norma Broin, a 42-year-old employee of American Airlines who had lung cancer, allege that cigarette smoke from passengers aboard U.S. passenger jets caused their illnesses. Smoking on U.S. jets was banned in 1988.
"The tobacco lawyers are maneuvering very well to get jurors excused for cause," said Stanley Rosenblatt, who along with his wife is pressing the landmark flight-attendants lawsuit. "They don't want anyone educated who knows that secondhand smoke causes disease."
The trial consultants monitoring jury-picking agreed, with one saying the perfect juror for the tobacco industry would be a conservative white male smoker with minimal formal education.
"You could hear a groan in the courtroom when that snuff user got bumped," said one consultant, referring to a Caucasian father in his thirties who dismissed the flight attendants' lawsuit as ridiculous. "They really wanted him."
By contrast, the Rosenblatts ideally want mothers in the jury pool with at least a college education, a distaste for smoking and a healthy suspicion of big institutions such as highly profitable tobacco companies, the consultants said.
Tobacco lawyers declined to comment, but the trial consultants, speaking on a promise of anonymity, said, "Anyone in the health industry is good for the Rosenblatts and bad for the tobacco companies."
Several nurses, including a nun who described smoking as a vice since it was harmful to both smokers and non-smokers, were challenged successfully by tobacco lawyers for causes such as an anti-tobacco bias. Like the Rosenblatts, the tobacco lawyers later in the jury-picking can block as many as 27 people from the jury without any explanation.
While many people questioned last week objected to smoking on health grounds, only one person, a bank executive with two small children, said she had a strong bias against "powerful and influential tobacco companies."
A dozen or more prospective jurors said U.S. airlines that employed the flight attendants were responsible for any sicknesses caused by secondhand smoke and not the tobacco companies. The airlines are sheltered from the lawsuits by U.S. workers' compensation laws, passed in the early 1900s, lawyers said.
Among the people chosen as standby jurors were a civil engineer, a newspaper-truck driver, a waiter, a painter and a retired police-department dispatcher. Some were smokers or ex-smokers and many were non-smokers.
Rosenblatt and the trial consultants said they were at this time unconcerned about the jury's eventual composition since another 30 or so standbys had to be chosen and discretionary challenges can always be used. Jury selection is to continue Monday and Tuesday and resume again on June 16.
The consultants said rulings by trial Judge Robert Kaye of Dade County Circuit Court on standby jurors at first seemed to favor the flight attendants, but later tilted toward tobacco companies.
The judge has twice reversed decisions on standby jurors, including knocking out a Miami television-news producer on Thursday whom a day earlier he had let into the standby group over tobacco lawyers' objections. Kaye reversed himself after seeing a two-minute news story she had produced on the marketing of flashily packaged micro-brand cigarettes such as Black Death and City.
Late on Friday, Kaye changed course again and ordered that jury questioning be done in groups of six, instead of by individual examination, as a way of accelerating jury selection.
