Channel tunnel operator Eurotunnel on Monday announced details of a deal giving bank creditors 45.5 percent of the company in return for wiping out 1.0 billion pounds ($1.6 billion) of its massive debts.
The long-awaited but highly complex restructuring of nearly nearly nine billion pounds of debt and unpaid interest throws the company a lifeline which could secure what is still likely to be a difficult future.
The deal, announced simultaneously in Paris and London, brings the company back from the brink of bankruptcy but leaves current shareholders, who have already seen their investment dwindle, owning only 54.5 percent of the company.
"We have fixed and capped the interest payments and arranged only to pay what is available in cash," Eurotunnel co-chairman Alastair Morton told reporters at a news conference. "Avoiding having to do this again is the name of the game."
Morton said the plan provides the Anglo-French company with the medium term financial stability to consolidate its commercial position and develop its operations, adding that the firm was now making a profit before interest.
Although shareholders will see their holdings diluted, they were offered the prospect of a brighter future and urged to be patient after months of uncertainty while Eurotunnel wrestled to reduce the crippling interest payments negotiated during the tunnel's construction.
Eurotunnel, which has taken around half of the market in the busiest cross-Channel route from the European ferry companies, said a strong operating performance could allow it to pay its first dividend within the next 10 years.
French co-chairman Patrick Ponsolle told reporters at a Paris news conference that the dividend could come as early as 2004 if the company performed "very well".
Eurotunnel and the banks have come up with an ingenious formula to help the company get over the early years of the deal when, despite the swaps of debt for equity and bonds, it will still not be able to afford the annual interest bill of 400 million pounds.
If its revenue, after costs and depreciation, is less than 400 million pounds, then the company will issue "Stabilisation notes" to a maximum of 1.85 billion pounds to the banks. Eurotunnel would not pay interest on these notes (which would constitute a debt issue) for ten years.
Analysts said that under the deal, Eurotunnel's ability to finance its debt would become sustainable, at least for a few years.
"If you look at the current cash flow of between 150 and 200 million pounds a year, what they can't find (to meet the bill) they will roll forward into the stabilisation notes, and they can keep that going for seven, eight, nine years," said an analyst at one major investment bank.
"So they are here for that time," he added.
The company said in a statement there was still considerable work to be done to finalise and agree the details of the plan before it can be submitted to shareholders and the bank group for approval, probably early in the Spring of 1997.
Eurotunnel said the debt-for-equity swap would be at 130 pence, or 10.40 francs, per share -- considerably below the level of 160 pence widely reported in the run up to the deal
The company said a further 3.7 billion pounds of debt would be converted into new financial instruments and existing shareholders would be able to participate in this issue.
If they choose not to take up free warrants entitling them to subscribe to this, Eurotunnel said shareholders' interests may be reduced further to just over 39 percent of the company by the end of December 2003.
Eurotunnel's shares, which were suspended last week at 113.5 pence ahead of Monday's announcement, will resume trading on Tuesday.
Shareholders and all 225 creditor banks have to agree the deal. "I'm hopeful but I'm not taking it (approval) for granted," Morton admitted, "Shareholders are pretty angry in France."
Asked what would happen if the banks reject the deal, Morton said, "Nobody wants a collapse, nobody wants a doomsday scenario."
($1=.6393 Pound)
