Britain's Barclays Plc said on Monday it was in talks with U.S. group Morgan Stanley about its global custody business and banking sources confirmed the unit is up for sale.
Barclays and Morgan Stanley were coy in responding to press speculation, saying only that they are "in discussions to explore the potential for future co-operation".
The move would be another step in the consolidation of the global custody business which is becoming dominated by those banks who are willing to make the large front-end investment in systems which are necessary to later rake in fees.
Barclays' custody business has 350 to 400 staff worldwide, with some working in the Far East, but has for some time been treated as not in the bank's core business.
Securities worth some 150 billion pounds ($239.2 billion) have been placed with the unit.
In its interim results, published in August, Barclays included custody in its "Businesses in Transition" category which includes restructuring businesses in France and the United States. The category including custody made a profit of 23 million pounds in the half-year to June 30.
The report said, "Businesses in Transition primarily comprises lendings and other assets that are unlikely to be of long-term interest to the Group or that require significant restructuring."
It was not clear when the deal will be finalised but analysts said it would mark a further step in the consolidation of the global custody market.
"Consolidation is a natural if you look at the economic of the business," said John Leonard, banking analyst at Salomon Brothers. "It's a scale economy buisiness."
Leonard said that some banks had taken the decision not to invest the large sums needed to get computer systems up to scratch to be competitive.
Custody businesses range from traditional safekeeping of securities, which in Britain is dominated by Lloyds TSB and Royal Bank of Scotland, to performance measurement and stock lending.
As such, it has ceased to be the largely risk-free business it once was although risk levels are still relatively low.
"It guarantees a steady income stream but it's not totally insensitive to market volumes," Leonard added.
Analysts said Barclays has presumably decided that without further investment, the business will be too small to compete on the global stage. They expect Morgan Stanley to pay well under 100 million pounds for the business. "It could well be less than fifty million (pounds)," said one.
Finance workers' union BIFU attacked the leak of the discussions, saying staff face an uncertain future if the business was sold.
It called on the bank to "come clean" over its intentions. ($1=.6270 Pound)
