Italian business tycoon Silvio Berlusconi on Wednesday lost an appeal in the London High Court against the transfer of documents to Italian authorities investigating allegations of fraud and false accounting.
Britain's Serious Fraud Office seized 15 bags of documents in April from the office of London lawyer David Mills who represents the interests of former Italian Prime Minister Berlusconi in Britain.
The judges, Lord Justice Simon Brown and Mr Justice Gage, rejected all the grounds of the appeal, but Brown agreed to hear an application by the appellants on Friday morning, which could lead to an appeal to the House of Lords, although legal sources said this was unlikely to succeed.
The hearing stemmed from an appeal by Berlusconi, who was Italian Prime Minister for seven months in 1994 and is on trial in Milan on corruption charges, his company Fininvest and company president Fedele Confalonieri against a court ruling earlier this year that the papers should be sent to Italy.
Brown said the papers were linked to fraud and false accounting allegations amounting to 51 million pounds ($82 million) which had been "surreptitiously removed from Fininvest and used for criminal purposes."
He noted that prosecutions were already underway in Italy against Berlusconi for bribing Revenue inspectors and for making illicit donations to former Prime Minister Bettino Craxi.
Italian investigators suspect Berlusconi who, among other holdings, owns three TV channels and the football club AC Milan, may have used offshore companies to channel payments to politicians.
At the end of his judgement Brown pointed out that, "It is imperative to recognise, however, that none of the applicants has yet been convicted of anything and that nothing I have said should be thought to raise the least presumption of guilt against them."
He rejected all the grounds of the appeal on the basis that the Italian request was not too wide, that it was justified and that the offences in question were not "political".
One of the grounds of appeal had been that the SFO had gone to Berlusconi's lawyer's office on a "fishing expedition" -- an unspecific search -- which is illegal under English law.
Brown described the case as a "wide-ranging, multi-faceted, international fraud involving far-reaching allegations against a large number of individuals in connection with an even larger number of companies."
The SFO said it was "happy" with the ruling.
"The SFO's fight against fraud on an international level has been strengthened by this welcome judgement," it said in a statement.
The SFO said the judges had rejected all of the main arguments put forward by the appellants. "We look forward to the speedy transfer of the documents to Milan so that the investigators can get on with their job," it said.
A hearing on Friday will decide whether Berlusconi can appeal against today's ruling to the British House of Lords.
SFO senior assistant director Chris Dickson said the judges in the current hearing were aware that, if any House of Lords hearing did not take place until next year, this would mean the papers would arrive too late to be used in Italian proceedings.
He said that if the appellants were not given leave to appeal on Friday he expected the papers to be transferred immediately, although this was a decision for the Home Office.
($1=.6260 Pound)
