Banking analysts said on Monday they were positive on implications for Bank of Scotland in its joint venture into supermarket banking with J Sainsbury, with one analyst even upgrading his recommendation.
Others maintained their positive stances on the Scottish bank and played down the negative impact the innovative plan would have on the rest of the retail financial services sector.
"The Sainsbury move is a confirmation of Bank of Scotland's strategy of alternative distribution into England," Goldman Sachs banking analyst David Townshend said.
Goldman Sachs and BZW reiterated their positive stances on the group while SBC Warburg upgraded its recommendation on the stock to "trading buy" from "hold," market sources said.
Bank of Scotland's link with Sainsbury is seen giving the bank a boost in the British market. The move is expected to help the bank enlarge its small retail customer base in England and find a new outlet for its range of financial services, which it can sell through its excellent technological infrastructure.
Bank of Scotland's low-cost operation could mean Sainsbury's Bank could offer a better rate to depositors than customers currently get through retail store group Tesco's link with National Westminster Bank, BZW said in a research note. Tesco currently offers five percent on deposits.
But even so, analysts doubted existing banks will lose many accounts to Sainsbury's Bank, which is due to begin trading in the first half of next year.
"I don't see a material threat of switching," said Nick Collier, banking analyst at Morgan Stanley.
Analysts said there is a certain amount of inertia in the banking market and many consumers already have more than one account so they could easily take on a Sainsbury account without necessarily closing their more conventional one.
Some also noted that British banks, with already large customer bases, were addressing different problems.
A lack of customers is not the problem for Barclays or Lloyds, said Tim Sykes, banking analyst at BZW.
"These banks don't have the same need," Sykes said, "The thing they want to achieve is to sell more of their products to their existing customers."
Most British banks have moved heavily into "bancassurance" style operations in recent years, offering a wide range of lending, investment and insurance products.
Plain banks are also still seen as having an advantage in terms of the "horses for courses" argument. Analysts said many customers prefer a more traditional approach.
While telephone banking has grown quickly in popularity in recent years, for example, the vast majority of bank customers still prefer having a "normal" account although seemingly few visit their branch very regularly.
