Fund management company Mercury Asset Management Plc is expected to post a good rise in pre-tax profits for the first half next Tuesday, having benefited from buoyant exchanges.
On Friday, MAM shares stood near their year highs at 11.32 stg, with analysts expecting pre-tax profits of around 80 million stg, up from 63.6 million stg last time
The market expects a higher interim dividend after six pence last year and some analysts see the company rebalancing the pay-out between the interim and final stage.  
Analysts said Mercury has already proved it can go it alone since it was broken away from former owner S.G. Warburg when the latter was bought by Swiss Bank Corp last year.
At the time, there was talk of Mercury being taken over as banks looked to expand their fund management interests. But, this speculation has evaporated, although the bid premium in MAM's share price may not have, and there is more interest in what Mercury itself might buy.
UBS analyst Martin Cross said any bid premium is unjustified and points out that MAM has a lot of capital, some of which it might want to spend on expansion in the U.S. markets.  
"That could be a worry, however, as there might be a fear that MAM would be buying at the top of the market," Cross said.
Phillip Gibbs, an analyst at BZW, said he expects MAM to follow the trend of recent years in making relatively small strategic acquisitions.
"It's been a pretty helpful period in terms of the markets, especially London where the FTSE index went up from 3,700 to 3,954 in the six months we're looking at," Gibbs added.
Analysts will be looking at Maercury's cost base to make sure there has been no untoward growth. In any case, cost growth is expected to have been comfortably exceeded by revenue growth.  
Gibbs said the key element would be how much new money MAM has been able to attract as this is the main indicator of the fundamental health of the business.
Mercury will also have profited from realisations in its venture capital business but the effects of problems at other fund managers, notably Morgan Grenfell Asset management, are not expected to have had too much impact in the first half.
Mercury may have picked up some business and the effect may be more marked in the second half. -- London Newsroom +44 171 542 8864.
