British fund management group Mercury Asset Management on Tuesday posted a 29 percent jump in first half pretax profits to 81.8 million pounds ($133.9 million), up from 63.6 million in the first half last year.
It also saw its cash pile rise sharply to 261.6 million pounds from 189.9 million at the end of March, raising speculation that the firm might use the surplus to fund expansion in the lucrative U.S. fund management industry.
MAM chairman Hugh Stevenson said the company would consider acquisitions but only if they increased value for shareholders.
Asked if MAM was considering a U.S. acquisition, where MAM already operates, Stevenson said: "The US is obviously an extremely important market, it's the biggest savings market in the world but value for our shareholders is the main aim."
On the cash pile, Stevenson said that the company prefers a conservative balance sheet.
"Cash has risen materially in the last six months," he said. "It's a question of a balance between a prudent balance sheet and returning value in the form of dividends to shareholders. We've had a very progressive dividend policy over recent years."
Mercury, formerly controlled by investment bank S.G. Warburg before Warburg was bought by Swiss Bank Corp last year, raised its interim dividend to 10 pence per share from six pence last time. It said the significant increase was due to a rebalancing between interim and final payouts.
Funds under management rose to 85.9 billion pounds at the end of September after 70.9 billion at the same time last year. The most recent figure includes two billion pounds of net new business, which analysts said follows its recent growth trend.
MAM said it had seen a rise in defined contribution pension scheme business in the last six months and expected this to be a growth area.
Mercury shares were 23.5 lower at 11.19 pounds at 1130 GMT with analysts reporting some profit taking after the stock reached a year's high of 11.50 this week.
The profit figures were just under some expectations but were mostly unsurprising. Some analysts, including Martin Cross of UBS, say the shares are fully valued.
"The price/earnings ratio (at 21.6) is at the top end of the sector," Cross said. "It's near companies like Perpetual and M &amp;G which are much more retail oriented and have better grwoth prospects in my opinion."
Perpetual has a P/E ratio of 25.4 and M &amp; G 22.3.
Stevenson said it was too early to tell what effect problems at Morgan Grenfell Asset Management, where alleged irregularities are being investigated by Britain's Serious Fraud Office, might have on the funds industry in the longer term.
"It's a growth industry," Stevenson said, "and it continues to grow. The UK market is changing and we have been doing more in defined contribution business."
About two thirds of MAM's business is in the institutional pension fund management area, 20 percent for investors overseas and the rest for private investors.
Costs continued to rise but were more than matched by revenue growth.
Stevenson said the rise reflected the consolidation of its Australian subsidiary, large investment in systems and infrastructure, and "higher provision for variable remuneration" -- otherwise known as bonuses. ($1=.6107 Pound)
