Fund management Group Mercury Asset management will make acquisitions if it can enhance shareholder value, its chairman Hugh Stevenson said on Tuesday after announcing bumper profits and a sharp jump in its cash pile.
Profits rose 29 percent to 81.8 million stg from 63.6 million stg in the first half last year while cash rose to 261.6 million stg from 189.9 million at the end of March.  
Asked if MAM was considering a U.S. acquisition, Stevenson said: "The U.S. is obviously an extremely important market, it's the biggest savings market in the world but value for our shareholders is the main aim."
Stevenson said an acquisition which enhanced this value would have to be considered.
On the cash pile, Stevenson said that the company prefers a conservative balance sheet.
"Cash has risen materially in the last six months," Stevenson said.  
"It's a question of a balance between a prudent balance sheet and returning value in the form of dividends to shareholders. We've had a very progressive dividend policy over recent years."
Stevenson said the rise in the interim dividend to 10 pence per share from six pence last time reflected a desire to rebalance the interim and final payout.
He was unsure if this rebalancing was complete given the uncertainty of how the full year will turn out.  
Stevenson refused to comment on the state of world equity markets and thus the company's prospects for the second half, "We tend to reserve comments on the markets for our clients."
But in a statement earlier, he said the firm was determined to create value through profitable expansion notwithstanding short-term market movements.
MAM again showed that it is not missing its tie to former owner S.G. Warburg which was cut when the latter was gobbled up by Swiss Bank Corp last year.  
Stevenson said the first half had been positive with funds under management rising to 85.9 billion stg from 70.9 billion at the same point last year and 81 billion at the end of March.
The current figure included 2.0 billion stg of net new business which was lower than the 2.5 billion stg seen in the second half of last year.
He said it was too early to tell what effect problems at Morgan Grenfell Asset Management, where alleged irregularities are being investigated by the Serious Fraud Office, might have on the industry in the longer term.
"It's a growth industry," Stevenson said, "and it continues to grow. The UK market is changing and we have been doing more in defined contribution business."
About two thirds of MAM's business is in the institutional pension fund management area, 20 percent for investors overseas and the rest for private investors.
Costs continued to rise but were more than matched by revenue growth.
Stevenon said the rise reflected the consolidation of its Australian subsidiary; large investment in systems and infrastructure; and the coyly termed "higher provision for variable remuneration", otherwise known as bonuses. -- London Newsroom +44 171 542 8864.
