Britain's Serious Fraud Office has yet to contact London-based securities houses after a request for help with a French probe into Eurotunnel SA /Plc share dealings, market sources said on Monday.
The SFO said on Sunday it had been asked to lend a hand in an investigation by the French authorities into alleged market manipulation of the debt-laden channel tunnel operator's shares.
The SFO said it would help in the French probe although it had no grounds to launch an investigation of its own into the dealings which form the basis of the latest Paris investigation.
Securities firms contacted by Reuters on Monday said they had received no approach from the SFO and did not expect to do so. They all said they would co-operate fully if they were approached.
The investigation is another chapter in a troubled corporate story littered with incidents, which earlier this year saw two firms -- Salomon Brothers and Swiss Bank Corp (SBC) -- cleared of insider trading.
The two had been among underwriters of a Eurotunnel rights issue in 1994 and, although never named by Paris stock exchange watchdog the Commission de Operations de Bourse (COB), said that they were under investigation in July last year.
The underwriting group also included Banque Indosuez, Morgan Grenfell, now owned by Deutsche Bank AG, Societe de Banque, Banque Nationale de Paris, Banque Paribas, Caisse des Depots, Crdit Agricole, Credit Lyonnais, Robert Fleming, S.G. Warburg (now part of SBC) and Belgian utility Tractebel SA.
About two thirds of Eurotunnel shares are held in France and, as a general rule, more trading in the shares goes on in Paris than in London.
The SFO's usual practise is to issue notices which require a person or institution to be interviewed or hand over documents, although it can also apply for a search warrant if it wants to surprise its target.
On Monday, it remained unclear what period is currently under investigation.
The COB has already investigated the period surrounding the rights issue, though it could be revisiting this highly volatile time.
There have been persistent suggestions that some operators were short-selling at around the time of the rights issue -- forcing the prices down by selling shares they do not own in the hope of buying them back more cheaply later.
Eurotunnel has called on stock exchange authorities on both sides of the Channel to investigate volatile dealings at various times over the years.
Another example was in Agust 1995, when a rogue report that the company had signed a debt rescheduling agreement sent the stock reeling.
The Anglo-French tunnel operator at that time denied it had signed a debt agreement and demanded an inquiry into the trading activity and erroneous reports surrounding its shares and the incident might well be the focus of the French probe.
The incident occurred around three weeks before Eurotunnel announced a payments freeze on its huge debts and entered into negotiations on a rescheduling resulting in a restructuring of the debt announced a year later -- a year which also saw its fair share of leaks and speculation.
