Sir Chippendale "Chips" Keswick who, it was announced on Wednesday, will take over the chair of Hambros, one of the few remaining British independent investment banks, has been regarded by some as an outsider.
The firm has been dominated by the Hambro family but Keswick, 56, has over 30 years under his belt at the bank where he will fill both the chairman's and chief executive roles from July next year. He can hardly be called a complete outsider.
Nevertheless, it will be the first time in the bank's history that a Hambro has not occupied the chair.
That history is a long one, dating back to 1839 in London and back into the 18th century and its Danish origins.
Universally known as "Chips", Keswick is a member of the family which controls the Jardine group of companies in the Far East. He was born in Shanghai in 1940 and attended Eton College completing his studies at a French university.
After a few years with Glynn Williams, Keswick joined Hambros Bank in 1965. He became chairman of the bank in 1986, vice-chairman of the group in the same year and chief executive last year.
Keswick is known as a private person who is much more at home talking about the business than about himself.
Married with three sons, Keswick is a non-executive director of the Bank of England as well as of De Beers Consolidated Mines, Anglo American and British housebuilder Persimmon.
He lists his pastimes as bridge and field sports.
Keswick, who takes over from Charles, Lord Hambro, chairman since 1983, has been involved with the bank during some recently troubled times.
Hambros had appeared to lose its way, not following its peers into the competitive world of modern investment banking but still managing to make losses.
Ironically, along with a few others, it has managed to remain independent while other names such as S.G. Warburg, Kleinwort Benson, Barings and Morgan Grenfell have fallen into the hands of foreign parents.
Some observers would remark that Hambros wasn't worth buying but those people are beginning to feel that Hambros' new strategy of concentrating on its core banking and investment management businesses could be the way forward.
Keswick says he is confident of the strategy and is unlikely to be be aloof from the business.
"Chips will inevitably be a hands-on chairman," one of his senior colleagues said.
