British property giant Land Securities said on Wednesday there were signs of rental growth in some sectors of the British property market and that it expected more to come.
Company chairman Peter Hunt said that while there was a feeling there was more rental growth to come, so far it had been patchy.
Growth in rental rates would be slower than in the 1980s and because it was not across the board it was crucial to be selective in the properties and developments chosen.
Land on Wednesday reported a pre-tax profit of 128.9 million pounds ($213 million) for the first half, including sales of properties, from 118.1 million pounds last time.
The company, which reported an increased interim dividend of 7.35 pence, said it had plans for "major shopping centre schemes" in a number of British towns, including Canterbury, York and Sunderland, as well as "several proposed new leisure developments".
The group said the annual level of expenditure on its current development programme was expected to peak during the second half of the financial year.
It said revenue profit, which was down to 115.5 million pounds from 118.2 million pounds for the period, "is being affected by our prudent policy of not capitalising interest as part of the cost of carrying our substantial programme".
But it was upbeat on its overall prospects. "We believe that our strategy of creating growth assets through development will result in a considerable addition to the rental income and capital value of the portfolio in years to come," Hunt said.
"Yes, they (the developments) are on target, although you can never be totally sure," he added in an interview.
Finance director Jim Murray told Reuters a drop in revenue profit for the half year, to 115.5 million pounds from 118.2 million pounds the previous year, was widely expected and had been flagged in advance.
This reflected the fact that the group was financing a large development programme and was not capitalising interest as part of the cost of carrying this out.
Hunt said property developments continued to be higher yielding business but that most land-owners were holding out on the sale of good land.
"(There is) a much better performance on a development. It is the best growth stock...it's very much in demand. That's why we are concentrating on doing as much development as we can," Hunt added.
The group was also buying investments in the "second-hand" market. "We are pursuing both avenues," he said, pointing out that Land Securities had recently added the Team Valley Retail Park, south of Newcastle-upon-Tyne, to its portfolio.
This would make "a substantial and valuable addition to our 500 million pound retail warehouse portfolio," he said in his chairman's statement.
During the half year the company had bought, or agreed to buy, nearly 80 million pounds of investment properties.
Hunt said he did not think there would be a less favourable environment for the group if Britiain's opposition Labour party won power from the ruling Conservative government at the next general election, due to be held by May 1997.
"I believe the strategies we are pursuing will apply equally within a New Labour environment as in a Conservative (one)."
Hunt said that while he could not comment on possible acquisition targets, the firm looked at "everything from time to time" but would have to "want to own quite a high proportion of the properties" of any target company before making a bid.
