BZW, the investment banking arm of Barclays Plc, has restructured its Global Markets division in another step towards reshaping its business to compete wth global rivals, banking sources said on Thursday.
BZW has been carrying out a top-to-bottom review of the markets business including matching staff profiles and skills against the needs of sustaining a profitable business.
The review resulted in around 30 people leaving this week, including Alex von Ungern-Sternberg, deputy chief executive of Global Markets, and Klaus-Peter Moeritz, head of foreign exchange trading in the UK and Europe.
But not all were at such high levels. Those departing also include seven foreign exchange traders, metals traders, secretaries and telephonists.
In an internal memo, Bob Diamond, who has been Global Markets chief since July, said von Ungern-Sternberg had decided to leave after the new structure was put in place as his role "was substantially narrower."
Since Bill Harrison joined BZW as chief executive from Robert Fleming there have been the usual personnel changes associated with the investment banking business.
There was no room, for example, for Barclays veteran Donald Brydon who had been running BZW after its previous head, David Band, died earlier in the year.
Harrison and Diamond are thought to be working on methods to make profitability more sustainable -- a quandary which is at the centre of the debate on the investment banking industry.
The industry's detractors, among them Lloyds TSB chief Brian Pitman, always point to the fact that the revenue stream cannot be relied upon as it is subject to market volatility.
In the good times, when markets are booming and mergers and acquisitions on a roll, investment banks rake in profits as if there is no tomorrow and the participants get paid huge bonuses.
But in the bad times, the banks can rack up heavy losses in markets which suddenly look very over-populated.
Diamond, in common with the head of the Barclays group, chief executive Martin Taylor, is known to want to intensify the return on capital employed in the business.
He knows that unless BZW's profits are sustained at high levels, he will find it difficult to put together the kind of team needed to succeed in an increasingly competitive and crowded environment.
No aspect of BZW's markets business from gilts to JGBs (Japanese government bond) and dollar/yen to copper will be left out of the in-depth review, banking sources added.
In the meantime BZW, along with other banks, will also continue to react to more short-term events in the markets.
For example the departure of foreign exchange traders follows a period of reduced volatility in the market over the last few months.
Ironically, such periods of volatility are key to both outperformance and underperformance which dictate returns on capital for investment banks.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 8864
