The world's major banks are busy jockeying for position in an emerging super-league that is set to dominate the massive and higly lucrative private banking market in the next decade, a survey showed on Wednesday.
Private banking concentrates on "high net-worth individuals" -- people whose liquid assets, their easily available cash, is a number with a lot of noughts, usually at least $500,000.
The survey, by accountancy and consulting firm Price Waterhouse, estimates the global market for these super-rich people at somewhere between $17 and $20 trillion.
Of this, a sizeable amount, probably between $4 and $6 trillion is estimated to be in Europe, both in domestic markets and offshore.
Ian Woodhouse, head of Price Waterhouse's private banking practice, said the survey sees the emergence of a private banking super-league comprising, perhaps, 25 to 30 banks.
These will have at least $75 billion under management with many in the $100 billion-plus bracket.
They will be banks like Chase/Chemical and Citicorp in the U.S.; Swiss Bank Corp, Credit Suisse, Union Bank of Switzerland, ABN AMRO and Deutsche Bank in Europe; and the HSBC group 00005.HK with its huge Asian franchise plus Midland Bank in Britain.
In comparison, one of Britain's biggest private banking operations, the Coutts Group owned by National Westminster, has around 20 billion pounds ($33.6 billion) under management, putting it in the medium-sized bracket.
Woodhouse says one of the trends to emerge from its latest survey, which received responses from 116 leading names in the industry, is that they all see the environment getting more and more competitive,
"Competitive pressures are building. Clients used to walk through the door, now you have to go out and get them," he said.
The super-rich are becoming more and more demanding and less and less loyal -- they will often use more than one bank or compare what is on offer from a number before making a choice.
They are also demanding ever increasing levels of sophistication in the products they are sold. Complicated cross-border trust structures, for example, which can earn a huge margin for the private bank concerned.
Private banks with healthy investment bank cousins are also looking to make the most of this resource.
Client managers will often work with their investment banking colleagues to think up a product tailored to a client's needs or to beat what they are being offered elsewhere.
Currently, Europe takes the biggest slice of the global private banking cake but the fastest growth is in India and the Far East and this latter region is set to take the lead soon, Woodhouse said.
The survey shows that over half the private banks expect offshore business to grow by between 11 and 15 percent annually over the next five years.
To take advantage of this, given greater client demands and competition, banks will have to manage their cost base as well as their revenue income.
The survey also sees a continuation of the recent restructuring, merging and alliance-forming, which has been going on. New players are also expected as plain retail and investment banking areas become more and more congested. ($1=.5950 Pound)
