British Chancellor of the Exchequer Kenneth Clarke could cut tax credits on dividends in a "robbing Peter to pay Paul" measure which would help fund widely expected cuts in income tax in his budget speech next Tuesday.
Roger Bootle, group chief economist at HSBC Markets, thinks Clarke may well see pension funds as one target to provide him with some resources to distribute elsewhere.
From a tax credit reduction to 15 percent from 20 percent, "the sufferers would be tax-exempt pension funds and higher rate tax payers with dividend income," Bootle said on Thursday.
Accountancy firm Coopers &amp; Lybrand, in its survey of budget options, says such a measure could save the Inland Revenue around 1.0 billion pounds ($1.68 billion) a year, although this would take some time to come through.
But Coopers point out that such a move would act against the Government's long-term objective of encouraging increased private savings provision and might turn out to be a burden on the corporate sector if institutional shareholders press companies to compensate by raising gross dividend payouts.
Bootle raises another negative aspect.
"It would not necessarily be popular either," he says. "It would probably cause the equity market to fall and might well be described in the press as "Mr Clarke raids your pension - to give you an income tax cut'."
Clarke has already removed the tax credit on targeted share buy-backs and special dividends associated with share consolidations and take-overs.
Most economists expect no change in the basic structure of Corporation Tax itself, although Coopers say the Chancellor might introduce some minor measures to aid small business and entrepreneurs.
But they are not so confident that the profit-related pay scheme, first introduced in 1987, will survive the budget unscathed.
Under the scheme, employees get relief at their marginal rate of tax on 20 percent of their salary up to a maximum of 4,000 stg and the benfits are linked to the company reaching profit goals agreed with the Revenue.
Estimates vary on how many employees are in the scheme from 3.5 to 4.5 million, but accountancy firm Ernst &amp; Young says it is costing the Government some 1.5 billion pounds annually in lost revenue and rising.
There also seems to be a measure of agreement on the idea that the scheme does not really link employees' pay to profitability since some companies guarantee no reduction in final salary if profits disappoint.
Outright abolition of PRP is thought unlikely given it is firmly entrenched in many pay structures and would again put pressure on companies to make up the difference and so economists see Clarke possibly limiting the relief to the lower 20 percent rate of income tax.
BZW economists say this could raise some 700 million pounds. ($1=.5950 Pound)
