Three of Britain's largest bulding societies, which plan stock market flotations in 1997, on Thursday said draft legislation relating to protection from takeovers had forced them to examine their float plans closely.
The mutually-owned societies, who specialise in mortgage lending, the Woolwich, Alliance &amp; Leicester and the Northern Rock, all plan to convert to bank status next year and have combined assets of around 70 billion pounds ($117 billion).
But a change in the draft of a new Building Societies Act has thrown their plans into confusion as the government proposes to change the way converted societies will be treated in the crucial area of takeover bids.
The issue is most pressing for the Alliance &amp; Leicester as it seems highly unlikely that the new draft will be ready before Alliance members meet on December 10 to vote on conversion.
Previously, converting societies were protected by a rule which protected them from takeover for five years after flotation, allowing them to make the transition successfully.
Until now, the only one to have gone through the process is the Abbey National, which converted to a bank in 1989.
Draft legislation is now under consideration although it is doubtful whether there will time for it to become law before next year's general election.
The draft proposes that societies lose their immunity from takeover if they merge with another "financial institution" (after flotation) even on an agreed basis.
A Treasury spokeswoman said this did not include the buying of mortgage portfolios from other financial institutions.
The Treasury argues that converting societies should play by the market rules and that the focus of the bill is on those societies who want to remain mutual.
"The loss of the five year protection if any acquisition is undertaken - not just a hostile bid - seems a little unfair," Adam Applegarth, director of Northern Rock told Reuters.
The Teasury said it was considering representations to retain immunity in the case of friendly mergers where a large society might merge with a small local institution.
Applegarth said the Northern Rock and other societies were also very concerned at another proposed clause which would allow shareholders of the new company to waive the five year protection, saying this could allow takeovers by the backdoor.
He said a predator might be able to buy up 10 percent of the stock of the company and announce a bid at the same time, calling an extraordinary general meeting of shareholders which would be asked to waive the protection, bypassing the board.
The societies all said the uncertainty was the biggest problem at the moment -- what the bill will say and also when it will be published and whether it will have time to be passed.
"We think that if there is little chance that the bill will be passed, it would be better not to publish it at all, frankly," said Applegarth.
The societies have a duty to inform members of all possible relevant information so they can make an informed decision.
The Treasury said it hoped to publish its revised proposals next month regardless of whether the bill is likely to pass into law before the election which must be held by May 1997.
A Woolwich spokeswoman said there was no more than a possibility that the draft bill would delay its float. "If the rules are changed, then the board would have a duty to reconsider," she said.
The other societies took a similar view, but the Alliance &amp; Leicester has a particular problem as its members have already been voting on the change by post.
"At the moment we are steaming ahead, we are on schedule," a spokesman for the Alliance said. But he agreed that timing could be affected and confirmed that the Alliance board would discuss the problem at a meeting on Thursday.
The Northern Rock plans to issue its transfer document, to members in early March of next year, but it must be printed in February, leaving little time for the government to produce the finished version of the proposed law ahead of this.
($1=.5956 Pound)
