Royal Bank of Scotland on Thursday reported a 15 percent rise in full year pretax profits to 695 million pounds ($1.2 billion) as strong growth in its UK and U.S. banking operations offset a dip at its insurance unit.
Chief Executive George Mathewson told Reuters the bank is constantly reviewing its options to expand market share, especially in the south east of England.
"It's right to assume we've been talking to a lot of people," Mathewson said in an interview. "People (who are looking for a tie-up) assume they should talk to us because of our lack of penetration in the south east. All I can say is that we are reviewing all the options."
Earlier this year, Royal Bank's arch-rival Bank of Scotland announced a banking joint venture with retailer Sainsburys and other banks are making moves in the same direction including Abbey National, which on Thursday said it would offer financial services in conjunction with supermarket chain Safeway's loyalty card.
It has long been assumed that Royal Bank would boost its distribution by buying an English home loans institution and Mathewson again refused to rule this out.
"That remains a possibility," he said. "Assuming that a building society became available and that the price was not ridiculous."
Mathewson said any such purchase would have to take into account shareholder value and business criteria like the strength of the brand name.
Some analysts have doubted that Royal Bank's capital position would allow a major purchase but Mathewson dismissed such doubts.
Noting that its capital position had strengthened over the past year, Mathewson said Royal Bank would have no trouble raising money if necessary.
"Whatever we have done with our money has been open to market scrutiny unlike some other companies," Mathewson said. "We didn't just pay it down the drain. If we need money, we will make a case and we will get it."
Royal Bank said its U.S. bank Citizens, based in New England, lifted profits by 61 million pounds, or 57 percent, adding that it will continue its strategy of deepening its franchise and expanding its core business.
Profits were also higher in UK Banking, up 97 million pounds or 22 percent, and this part of the business also showed a healthy improvement in cost-to-income ratio.
The latter fell to 59.2 percent from 63.2 percent while the group ratio was down to 50 percent from 51.7 percent.
Direct Line, which sells motor, house and life insurance, saw profits shrink by 86 million pounds to 26 million for the year as premium rates continued under pressure and it saw increased claims.
Mathewson said he was not really disappointed by the Direct Line result -- "But I'd prefer it (profit) to be bigger, don't get me wrong" -- saying that it stemmed from the higher rate of claims and market pressure against higher prices.
"The pressure in the market means we couldn't put up prices to compensate but we are making an awful lot more than any of our competitors," he said.
Mathewson said the outlook was positive for Direct Line.
"But I'm not jumping to any conclusions. Prices are beginning to move (higher), many companies are losing substantial amounts of money and history tells me that can't continue for very long."
