Royal Bank of Scotland is constantly reviewing its options to expand its distribution channels, especially in the south east of England, its chief executive George Mathewson said on Thursday.
"It's right to assume we've been talking to a lot of people," Mathewson told Reuters in an interview. "People (who are looking for a tie-up) assume they should talk to us because of our lack of penetration in the south east. All I can say is that we are reviewing all the options."  
He was speaking after the bank announced a 15 percent rise in pretax profits to 695 million stg, towards the higher end of market expectations, which saw Royal Bank shares rise 8p to 530p.
Earlier this year, Royal Bank's arch-rival Bank of Scotland announced a banking joint venture with retailer Sainsburys and other banks are making moves in the same direction.
It has long been assumed that Royal Bank would boost its distribution by buying an English building society and Mathewson again refused to rule out this possibility.  
"That remains a possibility," he said. "Assuming that a building society became available and that the price was not ridiculous."
Mathewson said any such purchase would have to take into account shareholder value and business criteria like the strength of the brand name.
Some analysts have doubted that Royal Bank's capital position would allow a major purchase but Mathewson dismissed such doubts.  
Noting that its capital ratios had strengthened over the past year (tier one to 6.8 pcercent from 6.3 and total to 11.0 from 10.3), Mathewson said Royal bank would have no trouble raising money if necessary.
"Whatever we have done with our money has been open to market scrutiny -- unlike some other companies," Mathewson said. "We didn't just pay it down the drain. If we need money, we will make a case and we will get it."
The Royal Bank results included a 22 percent gain for the UK banking operations and a 57 percent rise for its New England banking unit Citizens.  
But difficult trading conditions at its insurance unit Direct Line saw profits there collapse by 86 million stg to just 26 million.
Mathewson said he was not really disappointed by the Direct Line result -- "But I'd prefer it (profit) to be bigger, don't get me wrong" -- saying that it stemmed from the higher rate of claims and market pressure against higher prices.
"The pressure in the market means we couldn't put up prices to compensate but we are making an awful lot more than any of our competitors," he said.
Mathewson said the outlook was positive for Direct Line.
"But I'm not jumping to any conclusions. Prices are beginning to move (higher), many companies are losing substantial amounts of money and history tells me that can't continue for very long."
In the UK bank, cost to income ratio dipped to 59.2 percent from 63.2 percent as the effects of the bank's "Operation Columbus" restructuring continue to come through. -- London Newsroom +44 171 542 8864.
