International accountancy and consultancy partnership Ernst &amp; Young said it made a profit of 75.2 million pounds ($125.4 million) in Britain as it revealed financial details of its operations for the first time on Tuesday.
The 21 percent rise in profit in the year to June 30 was made on gross fee income of 456 million pounds and represented a 17 percent rise in average profit per partner of 200,000 pounds.
Ernst &amp; Young's senior partner Nick Land also confirmed that the firm was still planning to become a limited liability partnership registered in the Channel Island of Jersey despite the fact that the government has said it intends to introduce legislation recognising partnerships of this kind in Britain.
Land also said that Ernst &amp; Young's worlwide revenue for the year to September would show a 13 percent rise to $7.8 billion.
Ernst &amp; Young is the world's largest tax accontancy practice and the second largest management comsultancy after Arthur Andersen. It was formed in 1989 from the merger of Ernst &amp; Whinney and Arthur Young.
Ernst &amp; Young's move to limited liablity reflects an industry-wide change whereby accountancy firms feel exposed by their current unlimited liablity status, which puts personal assets in jeopardy if the firm were to become insolvent.
Under an LLP, only the capital subscribed by each partner, which currently totals some 72 million pounds, and the personal assets of those partners shown to be directly responsible for any negligent act leading to a loss would be at risk.
Land said there was too much political uncertainty in Britain ahead of next year's general election to rely on British legislation regarding LLPs emerging any time soon.
The firm's move to LLP status is dependent on Jersey's legislation being finally approved and on the LLP's tax status being agreed with Britain's Inland Revenue.
Land said that Ernst &amp; Young's decision to publish its results had not been taken to gain any advantage.
"We are not doing this for any competitive advantage," Land said. "We just thought it was time that we did it."
He added that Ernst &amp; Young wanted to take a full part in the debate on corporate governance and could hardly do so unless its own financial affairs were transparent.
"Clients are also beginning to ask questions about our financial strength."
Fastest growth in the past year was shown by Ernst &amp; Young's management consultancy which increased gross fees by 40 percent to 77.4 million pounds.
Only its insolvency practice saw a decline in fees during the year, ironically hit by the recovery in the British economy.
($1=.5995 Pound)
