British bank Barclays Tuesday sold its global custody business to investment bank Morgan Stanley for an undisclosed sum thought to be less than 50 million British pounds ($83 million).
The purchase by Morgan Stanley marks another step in the consolidation of custody business, which is increasingly being seen as a banking activity where "big is beautiful."
The custody business includes traditional safekeeping of securities, increasingly electronically, performance measurement and stock lending.
"Barclays believes global custody has become very much a ... business requiring substantial investment in technology," said Chief Executive Martin Taylor.
A Barclays spokeswoman said the investment in technology would be considerable and that Barclays had decided this would not be an effective investment.
Sir David Walker, chairman of Morgan Stanley Europe, said, "This transaction enables us to offer a broader range of products to our clients. It will strengthen Morgan Stanley's global franchise, particularly in Europe, and will increase our fee-based revenues."
Morgan Stanley said the combined custody assets of the two business would amount to some $390 million, taking it up the global custody ladder dominated by large American players.
The list is headed by Chase Manhattan, which has more than $1 trillion in assets in custody, followed by Citibank, Bank of New York, Deutsche Bank, the largest European player, and State Street Boston.
Barclays had Britain's largest custody business, followed by Lloyds TSB and Royal Bank of Scotland.
Barclays Global Custody employs some 488 staff members worldwide, of which only those in sales, relationship management, marketing and client support will be moving to Morgan Stanley -- considerably fewer than half of the total.
Barclays employee union UNIFI said only 67 of the staff would transfer with the business.
Analysts said Morgan Stanley was thought to have paid less than 50 million pounds ($83 million) for the business, but the banks said a final price would not be fixed for some time. The deal is expected to be closed at the beginnning of April 1997.
