British bank Barclays on Tuesday sold its global custody business to U.S. investment bank Morgan Stanley for an undisclosed sum thought to be below 50 million pounds.
The purchase by Morgan Stanley marks another step in the consolidation of custody business which is increasingly being seen as a banking activity where "big is beautiful".
The custody business includes traditional safekeeping of securities, increasingly electronically, performance measurement and stock lending.
"Barclays believes global custody has become very much a scale business requiring substantial investment in technology," said Chief executive Martin Taylor.
A spokeswoman for Barclays said the investment in technology would be considerable and continuing and that Barclays had decided this would not be an effective investment.
Sir David Walker, chairman of Morgan Stanley Europe, said, "This transaction enables us to offer a broader range of products to our clients. It will strengthen Morgan Stanley's global franchise, particularly in Europe, and will increase our fee-based revenues."
Morgan Stanley said the combined custody assets of the two business would amount to some $390 million, taking it up the global custody ladder which is dominated by large American players.
The list is headed by Chase Manhattan which has over $one trillion of assets in custody, followed by Citibank, Bank of New York, Deutsche Bank, the largest European player, and State Street Boston.
Barclays was Britain's largest player followed by Lloyds TSB and Royal Bank of Scotland.
Barclays Global Custody currently employs some 488 staff worldwide of which only those in sales, relationship management, marketing and client support will be moving to Morgan Stanley -- considerably fewer than half of the total.
Barclays staff trade union UNIFI said only 67 of the staff would transfer with the business.
Analysts said Morgan Stanley is expected to have paid under 50 million sterling for the business but the banks said that a final price would not be fixed for some time. The deal is expected to be closed at the beginnning of April 1997.
Barclays had included custody in its "Businesses in Transition" category. These include "lending and other assets that are unlikely to be of long-term interest to the group or that need significant restructuring."
"Barclays was going to have to pump a lot of cash into the business to make it work and obviously has other uses for its money," said one analyst who declined to be named.
