The British government on Wednesday published new draft legislation governing home lending institutions but a lack of parliamentary time might mean it will not reach the statute book before a general election.
The Building Societies Bill, if passed, would remove a society's five-year immunity from takeover once it converts to bank status if it, in turn, took over another financial institution.
Immunity would not be affected by one of the new banks buying mortgage books or by joint ventures, however.
The draft received a mixed reception from the four societies currently planning to convert themselves into banks.
A Treasury spokeswoman admitted that there was currently no slot for the bill in the Parliamentary agenda but added it remained hopeful an opportunity could arise in the New Year.
"The societies converting to banks will go ahead if that is what their members want," said Treasury Minister Angela Knight in a statement. "When converted they will be allowed to establish themselves. But if they want to play the takeover game then they will have to play by the same rules as everyone else."
The Woolwich, which has assets of just under 30 billion pounds ($49.97 billion) and plans to float next July, said it was disappointed the government has not taken into account its "serious concerns" on the timing of the draft.
"Had our board known when it took the decision to convert that this (change in the law) was even a possibility, then we might have chosen to convert in a different way," a spokeswoman for the Woolwich said.
If the bill was enacted, she said the Woolwich board would have a duty to revisit its conversion plans.
In contrast the Northern Rock, also planning a flotation in 1997, welcomed the changes.
"We are delighted with it," said Adam Applegarth, a director of the Northern Rock. "It's a prefectly reasonable compromise and you cant ask for more than that."
The Building Societies Association also welcomed the revised Bill and encouraged its early introduction to Parliament.
BSA chairman Brian Davis, who is also chief executive of the Nationwide Building Society that is not planning to convert, said the BSA fully supported the Treasury's "thoughtful compromise" on the question of takeover protection.
Under current company law, 10 percent of shareholders can call a special general meeting of the company and this will not change for converting societies. But any proposal to waive its five-year immunity to takeover will have to be approved by 75 percent of the voting shareholders.
Some societies had criticised the Treasury's proposals because they did not allow friendly takeovers, such as between one large society and a local smaller one.
"We came to the conclusion that the distinction between friendly and hostile takeovers was too difficult to define and that it would have been unworkable," the Treasury said.
The Halifax, the country's biggest home lender has already waived its right to takeover protection by transferring its business to an existing subsidiary.
The mutually-owned building societies have traditionally been the largest mortgage lenders in Britain although in recent years, commercial banks have taken some market share. ($1=.6003 Pound)
