The British government on Wednesday published proposed new laws governing home lenders which watered down the building societies' immunity from takeover if they converted into banks.
The new legislation provoked a cool response from some home lenders and prompted one leading player to say its plans for conversion may well have been different if it had known what the government was planning.
Under the new draft law, a building society  would forfeit its five-year immunity from takeover after it converted to bank status if it took over another financial institution.
The Woolwich, which has assets of just under 30 billion pounds ($50 billion) and plans to float next July, said it was disappointed the government had not taken account of its "serious concerns" on the timing of the draft.
"Had our board known when it took the decision to convert that this (change in the law) was even a possibility, then we might have chosen to convert in a different way," a spokeswoman for the Woolwich said.
The Treasury acknowledged the new Building Societies Bill might not even make it to the statute book before an election because of a lack of parliamentary time between now and next May, the last date for the polls to be called.
If it went ahead, the Woolwich spokeswoman said the board would have a duty to revisit its conversion plans.
The Alliance &amp; Leicester in a statement also expressed disappointment, and said areas of concern "have still not been fully resolved."
"We will now need to move forward while carefully considering outstanding issues," the Alliance statement said, noting the move came in the middle of "a long and costly conversion process".
In contrast the Northern Rock, a third society which plans a flotation in 1997, welcomed the changes.
"We are delighted with it," said Adam Applegarth, a director of the Northern Rock. "It's a prefectly reasonable compromise and you can't ask for more than that."
A Treasury spokeswoman said it still hoped to find time for the bill in the Parliamentary agenda in the New Year.
"The societies converting to banks will go ahead if that is what their members want," said Treasury Minister Angela Knight in a statement. "When converted they will be allowed to establish themselves. But if they want to play the takeover game then they will have to play by the same rules as everyone else."
The Building Societies Association welcomed the revised Bill and encouraged its early introduction to Parliament.
BSA chairman Brian Davis, who is also chief executive of the Nationwide Building Society that is not planning to convert, said the BSA fully supported the Treasury's "thoughtful compromise" on the question of takeover protection.
Under current company law, 10 percent of shareholders can call a special general meeting of the company and this will not change for converting societies. But any proposal to waive its five-year immunity to takeover will have to be approved by 75 percent of the voting shareholders.
Some societies had criticised the Treasury's proposals because they did not allow friendly takeovers, such as between one large society and a local smaller one.
"We came to the conclusion that the distinction between friendly and hostile takeovers was too difficult to define and that it would have been unworkable," the Treasury said.
The Halifax, the country's biggest home lender has already waived its right to takeover protection by transferring its business to an existing subsidiary. ($1=.6003 Pound)
