Britain's Woolwich Building Society on Monday set the timetable for a three billion pounds ($5.1 billion) stock market flotation in July which will bring an average windfall of over 1,200 pounds to its members.
The mutually-owned building society, the third largest in the country with assets of more than 30 billion pounds, said qualifying customers would receive at least 450 free shares upon its conversion to public limited company (Plc) status.
The Woolwich said it expected a basic distribution of 450 free shares to around 2.57 million people, which includes qualifying employees and qualifying pensioners.
Chief executive John Stewart said the Woolwich would be among Britain's top 10 banks and would be included in the FT-SE 100 index of blue-chip shares.
"(The conversion and flotation) will give the Woolwich a corporate structure which will allow it to meet its strategic objectives by remaining an independent provider of a wide range of personal financial services," Stewart added.
The Woolwich said its financial advisers, investment banks Schroders and BZW, have made an historic valuation that puts its market capitalisation at between 2.96 and 3.38 billion pounds with a mid value of 3.17 billion had the conversion happened on December 20, 1996.
This represents a range of price per share of between 175 and 200 pence with a mid-price of 187.5 pence and is at the top end of market expectations, analysts said.
Rob Thomas, building society analyst at UBS, said the eventual flotation price was likely to use the fairly strong performance of Abbey National Plc, the only other building society to have floated, as a benchmark.
The Woolwich is one of four building societies -- traditionally mainly mortgage lenders but now expanding their role -- which plan stock market flotations in 1997.
They are led by Britain's largest mortgage lender, the Halifax, which is expected to be valued at around 10 billion pounds, the Alliance &amp; Leicester worth around 2.5 billion and the Northern Rock, which is expected to raise around one billion pounds.
The Woolwich will be protected from takeover for five years after flotation but, if proposed legislation goes through this year, it would lose protection if it buys a financial company or if 75 percent of its shareholders vote to waive it.
Banking analysts said the Woolwich would have to weigh up the pros and cons of losing its protected status. But to compete effectively in a congested market it would have to grow, especially in the life assurance and independent financial advice areas.
"The Woolwich may decide that the 75 percent rule still makes it very vulnerable and the best chance for long-term survival is to grow through acquisitions," Thomas said.
Stewart became chief executive last June after his predecessor Peter Robinson, architect of the flotation strategy, left amid allegations that he "misused the facilities" of the group, where he had worked for more than 30 years.
Stewart at once identified life insurance and fund management as gaps in the Woolwich armoury. He has ruled out a move into commercial or investment banking, stressing that the bank will specialise in personal financial services.
The Woolwich said the average distribution to members, including a variable element, would be 1,233 pounds, although the exact distribution would depend on how much people have in their accounts on the qualifying dates.
An additional handout of up to 2,000 free shares will be made to savers who have been with the society for more than two years.
($1=.5899 Pound)
