Ailing Union Plc, formerly a pillar of the London money market scene, could be broken up to release shareholder value after the company said it would not pay a final dividend for 1996, analysts said on Tuesday.
They said a buyer might be found for Union's profitable fees and commission businesses to break them away from the loss making trading division which has been hard-hit by changes in the money market.
"Union has lurched from crisis to crisis in the past few years," said one analyst who declined to be named.
"It could be that they have come to the conclusion that it's time to salvage what they can for shareholders."
Formerly known as Union Discount and with famously palatial offices in Cornhill in London's financial heartland, Union has had limited success in its struggle to diversify away from its traditional role as a discount house in the mysterious and highly cyclical and volatile workings of the money market.
Forays into medical equipment leasing and equities market-making, in the shape of Winterflood Securities, ended in disposals and the years have seen Union shrink to a shadow of its former self with a market value of only 25 million pounds.
Now, Union says the Bank of England's plan to remove the exclusive right of the seven discount houses to deal directly with the Bank in its liquidity operations will "have a significant impact on the group's future."
As a consequence, it said that Advance Corporation Tax (ACT), which it had intended to carry forward on its books, would now have to be written off.
It gave no figures but said this would rule out the payment of a final dividend for 1996.
It also said that it would not receive any profit contribution in the 1996 year from a venture to sell equity index options trading software in Canada.
Analysts said they had expected Union to hold its full year payout at three pence per share, with 1.5 pence coming in the second half.
Union has said that it wants to develop its fee earning businesses and move away from a dangerous dependence on trading.
The fee and commission businesses include the Union CAL futures and foreign exchange broking, liquidity fund manager Union Fund Management and Cornhill Commercial Services, which provides project finance advice and consultancy.
Late last year the two "discount houses", Gerrard &amp; National and King &amp; Shaxon, merged but with them, the money market side of the business takes a back seat compared to private-client stockbroking and fund management.
Union shares closed 12 pence lower at 81-1/2, having collapsed to 73p at one point.
Directors at Union were not immediately available for comment.
