Morgan Grenfell Asset Management, the fund management arm of Germany's Deutsche Bank AG, said on Tuesday trading would resume on Thursday in its three European funds suspended earlier this week.
The three funds -- the 788 million pound ($1.23 billion)  MG European Growth Trust, the 137 million MG Europa and the 444 million Dublin-listed MG European Capital Growth -- were suspended pending investigation into what DMG called "possible irregularities centring on certain unquoted securities."
MGAM said fund managers will meet their liabilities "in respect of any irregularities identified in the course of the investigation into the three funds."
Britain's Investment Management Regulatory Organisation (IMRO) has said it is investigating the management of the funds in conjunction with MGAM.
A spokeswoman for IMRO said it had been working hard with MGAM to remove investors in the three funds from the state of limbo they had been in since Monday when dealings were suspended.
IMRO said it was far too early to tell when the investigation into the funds would be complete.
The investigation is thought to centre on the level of unquoted securities in the fund and their valuation. These include stock in some high-tech Scandinavian companies.
The company said its parent bank, Deutsche, has bought some of the securities in the funds for its own account with a view to protecting investors' interests. It said that after taking this action "the prices at which the funds recommence dealing should not be affected by such irregularities".
Industry sources said Deutsche Bank may have spent around 150 million stg buying securities for its own account and thus removing them from the funds.
The sources said the theory behind the action was that, with the suspect securities removed, the funds should resume dealing at prices close to where they were suspended.
But the 150 million pounds spent by Deutsche may not be lost because the stock will have a certain value which remains to be set.
MGAM said enquiries centre only on the three funds and that dealing in all other Morgan Grenfell investment funds are unaffected.
MGAM confirmed that Peter Young the manager of two of the funds -- MG European Growth Trust and MG European Capital Growth -- has been suspended and said he has been replaced by Stuart Mitchell who until February 1996 was manager of its offshore MG European Profund.
Industry sources said the market will be relieved that MGAM has moved quickly to quell speculation and return the funds to an even keel but said confidence in MGAM may take longer to restore.
