British banks have a made a positive start to 1997.
Share prices are buoyant and analysts on Thursday saw few serious clouds on the horizon to jolt the sector out of its seemingly inexorable rise.
The sctor, which has outperformed the FTSE 100 index by around 20 percent over the past six months, has become more diverse in recent years.
But, for differing reasons, analysts are quietly confident that based on a benign economic environment, the banks should continue to show good profit growth.
There are also positive stories to be told on an individual basis with Barclays and National Westminster, for example, expected to offer further share buybacks and HSBC and Standard Chartered set to continue reaping the benefits of their strong Far East franchise.
"The Far East is still looking attractive and we still have Standard Chartered on an outperform rating," said Nick Collier, banking analyst at Morgan Stanley. "We also like Natwest, it's the cheapest stock in the sector, and looks likely to emerge with a more compelling story in 1997,"
Analysts expect NatWest to consolidate its recent heavy acquisition programme and spend possibly 300 million pounds on buying back shares as its Tier One capital ratio measure rises. Barclays is also expected to continue repurchases on which it has already spent around one billion pounds.
Lloyds TSB could also eventually join the share buy-back club as its capital ratios improve, though most analysts do not see this happening before 1998.
Salomon Brothers banking analyst John Leonard said he expects the British economic outlook to remain favourable.
The strength of sterling, while affecting those banks that report dollar income in sterling, looks set to keep the lid on inflation and interest rates, a scenario the banks should be able to deal with.
If rates were to rise more than expected then that could be a problem for bank share prices if the market thought bad debt provisions were set to rise.
On the other hand, many analysts are not convinced by the link between interest rates and bank share prices.
"It's sometimes dificult to tell what causes prices to fall from the outside," said one analyst who declined to be named. "Bank shares have done very well in recent years and operators may well take profits on any (market) setback to lock them away. But that doesn't mean they have changed their view."
On domestic banking, analysts are happy that banks have been moving more into higher-margin personal sector borrowing at the expense of the lower margins seen in the corporate sector.
But they are less happy about the competitive mortgage market which, despite an upturn, is hardly setting the world alight.
While bad debts remain stable, net bad debt charges could rise as releases of old provisions work their way out of the system.
Other share markets could also have an influence, analysts say.
Some investors compare the British and U.S. bank sectors and last year, the U.S. rather lost out. If this were to turn, then the British banks could come under some pressure, said Salomon's Leonard.
But analysts are already a little nervous given that the banks' good run has continued with such strength.
"Some stocks are definitely looking less compelling given the rush of blood we've seen in the New Year," said one.
