The flotation price of the Halifax Building Society is expected to materialise at the high end of an estimate prepared by the Society's bankers last month, banking analysts said on Friday.
Deutsche Morgan Grenfell, the Halifax's investment banking advisers, set a price range for the June float of between 390 and 450 pence which would produce a market capitalisation of between 10.4 billion and 12 billion stg.
"The valuation of 12 billion (stg) is right in line with our expectations," said Peter Toeman, banking analyst at ABN AMRO Hoare Govett.
Other analysts were in agreement but some expect the price on flotation day to be higher, saying that today's figures look a little conservative.
"Based on a 1997 earnings per share figure of 44 or 45 pence, a share price of around 475 pence or even 490 pence would seem to fit," said John Leonard, banking analyst at Salomon Brothers.
Analysts tend to use a comparison with Abbey National Plc to do their calculations.
Abbey is the only building society to have converted so far, it became a bank in 1989, and still makes 65 percent of its money from its core mortgage and deposit activity, according to Rob Thomas, building societies analyst at UBS.
The Halifax makes about 80 percent of its income from its core activities and looks set to expand vigorously into other areas like life and general insurance, long-term savings and funds management.
"There's a good possibility that the Halifax will be rated higher than the Abbey when it comes to the market but the other societies will probably be lower," Thomas said.
The Woolwich, Alliance &amp; Leicester and Northern Rock will join the Halifax in floating later this year.
Thomas added that the prospective flotation levels of the societies will fluctuate broadly in line with movements in the Abbey's share price between now and the summer.
"Using the Abbey as a pointer is fine because banking sector valuations are pretty close together at around 10 times earnings, except for Lloyds TSB," said David Poutney, analyst at Panmure Gordon. "But there's nothing clever or scientific about it."
Analysts agreed that one cloud on the horizon for potential shareholders may be the possibility of higher interest rates in Britain, especially after the general election which must be held by May 22.
Currently, sterling strength is seen by some economists as keeping a lid on inflationary pressures and consequently rates, but there is a feeling that rates will have to rise.
But analysts say a rise of 100 basis points or more would be needed to seriously dent the banking sector and damage the summer's flotations.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 8864
