Britain's largest mortgage lender, the mutually-owned Halifax Building Society, on Thursday (corrects from Wednesday) said its planned stock market flotation in June could value it at as much as 12 billion pounds ($20 billion).
"This will represent the largest single extension of private share ownership ever witnessed in the UK," said Halifax chief executive Mike Blackburn.
The Halifax, which has assets of over 100 billion pounds, said its investment bank adviser Deutsche Morgan Grenfell had estimated a market price of between 390 and 450 pence per share if the flotation had taken place on December 16, 1996.
This would have meant a company worth between 10.4 and 12 billion pounds and analysts expect the final outcome to be at the top end of this range, given the recent positive performance of the most comparable stock in the market -- former building society Abbey National Plc.
The Halifax said each qualifying member will receive a basic allocation of 200 shares in a flotation of 2.675 billion shares.
The Halifax has 6.7 million investing members and 2.0 million borrowing members. Of these, there is an overlap 700,000 which means that the Society is sending out a total of around 8.0 million voting packs.
Investing members will also get a variable share allocation depending on how much money they have in their accounts on particular dates, this will range from 200 shares to a maximum of 1,181 for those with 50,000 pounds ($84,430) or more.
At its special general meeting on February 24, over 50 percent of the investing members must vote in favour of the proposal or it will fail.
The Halifax is expected to be in the top 20 companies by market capitalisation in the FTSE 100 index of blue-chip firms and is sure to threaten the Abbey's position as Britain's fifth largest publicly quoted bank.
Due to its conversion route -- the Halifax is not setting up a seperate flotation vehicle -- the legal requirement is that over 50 percent of its investing members must vote in favour of the proposal at the special meeting.
"It is a big voting requirement," said Halifax assistant general manager Graham Johnston, "50 percent is a higher hurdle than others have faced...we're very confident we'll get it."
The society has started a huge advertising campaign to encourage members to vote.
The Halifax will also not face the problem of other converting societies in that it has waived the protection from takeover that others will enjoy.
It joins the Woolwich, Alliance &amp; Leicester ALL.CN and Northern Rock who are all coming to the market this year in flotations worth an aggregate of around 18 billion pounds.
Economists have expressed concern recently that a large chunk of the proceeds may be seen as a windfall by beneficiaries and will be spent. This could stoke up inflationary pressures in the British economy later this year. ($1=.5922 Pound)
