Former Morgan Grenfell Asset Management (MGAM) star fund manager Nicola Horlick continued her battle against her ex-employer on Tuesday but, after a meeting with her lawyer, said her chances of being reinstated were slim.
"Reinstatement doesn't seem very likely," she told Reuters.
Horlick is waging a campaign for reinstatement or compensation from the firm from which she resigned in a blaze of publicity last week after allegations that she planned to defect and poach some of her colleagues.
But so far MGAM, and its parent company Deutsche Morgan Grenfell (DMG), have remained deaf to her pleas.
Horlick met her lawyer John Farr of law firm Herbert Smith again on Tuesday and although her advisers hinted it was far too early to talk of legal action against DMG, this has not been ruled out by Horlick's camp.
The advisers indicated an early resolution of the dispute was unlikely and could take several weeks as Deutsche and MGAM had still to complete an internal inquiry into the affair.
"It will take several days, if not weeks, I should think," one adviser said.
Despite indications that discussions took place on Tuesday between Farr and DMG's legal representatives, a DMG spokesman denied there had been further contact.
The bank is sticking firmly to its guns in the row with the 35-year-old mother of five, one of London's most prominent fund managers.
It says Horlick, having been promoted to the rank of managing director, was suspended just days later for "soliciting staff" to join a rival firm and then resigned her position.
The plot has thickened amid unconfirmed allegations that this was a prelude to a takeover of MGAM's pension fund business by Dutch bank ABN AMRO.
ABN AMRO declined to comment on the latest reports but has already denied having tried to poach Horlick and her team.
On Tuesday, however, the Dutch bank acknowledged it would be interested in buying a large British fund manager and its global asset management director Jan Vroegop told Reuters it would like to make "big steps" in London funds management.
Horlick continues to deny allegations that she was leading a breakaway group.
DMG's line is that Horlick will not be reinstated and that there will be no compensation because she had resigned. DMG's parent Deutsche Bank also said late Monday that it did not expect to go to court with Horlick.
Deutsche board member Rolf Breuer, who is poised to take over the helm of Deutsche in May from Hilmar Kopper, said: "The facts are clear. Mrs Horlick inflicted damage on the bank with her attempt to poach staff and then resigned."
Meanwhile, differing versions of what led up to her suspension continued to trickle out.
British newspaper reports said ABN AMRO was involved with Horlick in planning to fund a management buyout of the 18 billion pounds ($30 billion) pension fund business which Horlick headed.
They said ABN ARMO planned to recruit Horlick and her team and then to offer to buy the residue from Morgan Grenfell for a reported 385 million pounds.
Horlick's colleagues were reported to have been unconvinced by the merits of ABN's alleged plan to poach the team, not least because one of the team's key aims had been to have Horlick promoted to a more influential position within MGAM. Once this happened it removed a key complaint against top management.
MGAM has had a troubled time since the sacking of fund manager Peter Young last September after irregularities came to light in three of the group's funds, hitting staff morale and also rattling clients.
Young has denied any criminal activity and is being investigated by Britain's Serious Fraud Office.
So far no clients have withdrawn their business from MGAM as a result of the Horlick affair. However, several major clients have expressed their concern and said they would be reviewing their relationship with the firm. ($1=.6021 Pound)
