Bankers in London say they hope to sign a package restructuring the 8.7 billion pounds ($14 billion) debt of channel tunnel operator Eurotunnel well before a new year-end deadline runs out.
"Just as the previous deadline of April was a bit optimistic, the new one errs on the side of caution," said one banking source. "It'll look good now if they bring it in ahead of time."
Earlier this week, Eurotunnel and its creditor banks agreed a nine-month extension of a debt payment standstill until the end of the year. The debt standstill went into effect in September 1995 and was due to run for 18 months.
Bankers said, despite the fact that the extended standstill would mean interest would continue to accrue, this would have no effect on the debt deal which will continue to be applied to Eurotunnel's debt position as of October 15, 1996.
"The interest and any other charges due since the cut-off date will become payable when the deal goes into effect," the banking source said.
Last October, following marathon negotiations, Eurotunnel and the steering committee of banks agreed a restructuring deal which will have to agreed by a total of 225 creditor banks and the shareholders of the company.
The deal included a 1.0 billion pounds swap of debt for equity at 130p per share, a swap for interest-bearing equity notes, shareholder warrants, loan notes and resettable bonds.
An amount of 4.0 billion pounds would remain as junior debt, paying a fixed interest rate until the end of 2003 and then reverting to 1.25 percent above the London Interbank Offered Rate.
The company also has the right to issue "stabilisation notes" to cover any unpaid interest resulting from the deal. These would be interest-free until the start of 2006 and would then pay 1.25 percent over Libor.
Suspended at 113-1/2p ahead of the debt refinancing announcement last year, Eurotunnel shares quickly fell to below 90p in the days following and have remained relatively stable since then.
On Wednesday, they were quoted up 2-1/2p at 86-1/2.
The lower price means the 130p debt to equity swap price looks even better for shareholders but bankers say this is unlikely to cause a problem for the deal.
"They (the shareholders) are getting a better deal on that portion of the debt but the shares were probably overvalued and I can't see my colleagues ditching the deal because of that," the banking source said. "The deal has to happen, both sides know that." ($1=.6035 Pound)
