Britain's Northern Rock Building Society, due for flotation in the autumn, on Wednesday reported pretax profits of 167.5 million pounds ($270 million) for 1996, up 14 percent from 147 million the previous year.
The home loan provider said it would publish its transfer document giving details of the flotation and a preliminary valuation in the first week of March. Members will meet to vote on plans to convert the institution into a bank in April.
Northern Rock, based in the north-east of England and fiercely independent, said its profit figures excluded a non-recurring cost of 10.3 million pounds related to the conversion to bank status.
Uniquely, the society has said it will create a foundation to which it will covenant five percent of its annual pre-tax profits after flotation. The money will go to worthy causes, mostly local communities in its area of operation.
Northern Rock director Adam Applegarth declined to speculate on the value in shares each member would receive from the flotation. Predictions range between 750 and 1,000 pounds, valuing the floated company at more than one billion pounds.
Applegarth highlighted the fact that business had continued to perform well during the conversion process which he described as "onerous".
"As one of the most cost-efficient lenders, it's important for us to improve those efficiencies and we've done that," he said in an interview.
The society's cost to income ratio dipped to 33.1 percent at the end of 1996 compared with 33.5 percent at the end of 1995.
Applegarth pointed to the society's lending performance as a highlight of last year.
Net lending for the year rose 44 percent to 1.9 billion pounds from 1.3 billion with its share in Britain's net mortgage lending market rising to 10 percent from eight percent. Assets grew 19 percent to 13.7 billion pounds from 11.6 billion. Net receipts from savers rose to 584 million pounds from 560 million in the previous year.
Applegarth said the Northern Rock would not try to compete with Britain's large retail banks after its conversion in terms of the range of products they offer.
"I have no doubt that if we attempted to become an all-singing, all-dancing high street clearing bank we would be too small and we would get eaten up."
Applegarth rejected any charge that in the long-term, the society's members would be worse off because of conversion.
"What matters to customers is not the status of the company but the value of the packages they get."
Applegarth said that "hairshirt" mutuals who are trying to justify the maintanence of that status by effectively paying dividends to their members through deflating their profits will not be able to count on this strategy in the longer term.
"They don't have the profitability to go out and buy new customers," he said.
Applegarth said Northern Rock's cost to assets ratio of 0.72 percent compares with around 1.2 percent for the top 10 building societies. "That means I've got a 50 pence margin to play with. We can use some of it to improve profitability and some of it, frankly, to cherry-pick business." ($1=.6199 Pound)
