Northern Rock Building Society will publish detailed proposals for its stock market flotation, including a preliminary valuation of the company, in the first week in March, director Adam Applegarth said on Wednesday.
Applegarth told Reuters in an interview that the document will be followed by a special meeting of members in April to vote on the approval.
But he declined to speculate on what value in shares each member would receive from the flotation, an amount which has been predicted at between 750 and 1,000 stg.  
Earlier, Northern Rock announced record profits in 1996, making a pre-tax profit of 167.5 million, a rise of 14 percent over the 145 million seen in 1995. This excluded 10.3 million stg of non-recurring costs related to the flotation.
Applegarth highlighted the fact that the business had continued to perform well during the conversion process which he described as "onerous".
"As one of the most cost-efficient lenders, it's important for us to improve those efficiencies and we've done that," Applegarth said. Cost to income ratio dipped to 33.1 percent at the end of 1996 compared with 33.5 percent at the end of 1995.  
Applegarth also pointed to the society's lending performance as a highlight of last year.
Net lending jumped 44 percent 1.9 billion stg, giving the Northern Rock around 10 percent of the UK net mortgage market.
Applegarth said market conditions were improving. "The general summary is that the market is looking slightly better than it did a year ago. With a bit of luck, this will be a sustained rise instead of falling back or a boom."
He said that if British interest rates needed to rise it would be better for the home lending market if this were to happen gradually.  
Applegarth said the Northern Rock will not try and compete with Britain's large retail banks after its conversion in terms of the range of products they offer.
"I have no doubt that if we attempted to become an all-singing, all-dancing high street clearing bank we would be too small and we would get eaten up," he added.
Applegarth rejected any charge that in the long-term, the society's members would be worse off because of conversion.
"What matters to customers is not the status of the company but the value of the packages they get."  
Applegarth said that "hairshirt" mutuals who are trying to justify the maintanence of that status by effectively paying dividends to their members through deflating their profits will not be able to count on this strategy in the longer term.
"They don't have the profitability to go out and buy new customers," he said.
Applegarth said Northern Rock's cost to assets ratio of 0.72 percent compares to around 1.2 percent for the top 10 building societies. "That means I've got a 50 pence margin to play with. We can use some of it to improve profitability and some of it, frankly, to cherry-pick business."
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 8864
