Former Barings treasury and risk chief Ian Hopkins has been banned from being a director in the City, industry sources said on Thursday after a three-day disciplinary hearing.
Britain's Securities and Futures Authority (SFA) said in a statement that the outcome would not be formally announced until after any appeal process had ended.
But the sources said the tribunal had banned Hopkins from being a registered director for three years and ordered him to pay an unspecified amount of costs.
Hopkins, who was not immediately available for comment, did not appear before the tribunal, chaired by Judge Colin Kolbert, and was not legally represented.
After he has been formally given the full written judgment, he will have 10 business days to lodge an appeal.
Hopkins was among a group of former Barings executives against whom the SFA brought disciplinary charges for their part in the downfall of the investment bank. It collapsed nearly two years ago when Singapore-based trader Nick Leeson ran up debts of almost $1.4 billion in unauthorised derivatives trades.
Hopkins, who worked for Barings in London, has always maintained that he tried to warn other Barings executives of the bank's dangerous position but that he was effectively ignored.
He told a parliamentary committee investigation into Barings last year that his attempts to alert more senior Barings staff to potential problems had failed. He painted a picture of culture clashes between the traditional Barings banking activities and its newer securities activities.
In the official Singaporean report into the Barings affair, executives of the bank were criticised for not heeding Hopkins's warnings.
"In our view, the collapse might have been averted if Mr Hopkins's concerns had been taken seriously, and acted upon promptly and effectively," the Singapore inspectors said.
The tribunal heard the SFA case, put by prominent barrister Presiley Baxendale, and questioned seven witnesses. It also took into account evidence given by Hopkins to the Singapore enquiry and to Britain's Board of Banking Supervision.
Earlier this month the SFA reprimanded Barings former head of equity derivatives Mary Walz for her part in the bank's collapse and has already banned several other former Barings executives including former chief executive Peter Norris.
