Lloyds TSB Group kicks off the UK bank reporting seson on February 14 and, despite trading at big premiums to the sector, is still favoured by analysts because of what they see as a well-positioned business mix.
Lloyds is expected to weigh in with over 2.4 billion stg in pre-tax profit and dividend per share of as much as 13p, accompanied by the highest return on equity in the sector at around 32 percent. In 1995, Lloyds TSB made 1.65 billion stg.
The bank's new chief executive Peter Ellwood will give voice to his plans for the group as he takes over from Brian Pitman.  
But with Pitman still at the bank as chairman, analysts are not concerned there will be a radical change of strategy.
David Poutney, banking analyst at Panmure Gordon, says he expects Lloyds TSB to make a pretax profit of 2.45 billion stg and pay a dividend of 12.6p per share. "The key thing is to see how the cost-cutting is coming through," Pountney said.
He estimates that savings from the 1995 merger between Lloyds and TSB will only have been between 75 and 100 million stg in 1996 but these will rise to 350 million stg in 1998 and the bank will be saving a further 50 million stg a year from its buyout of the minority of Lloyds Abbey Life.  
These transactions have taken Lloyds TSB's tier one capital ratio down to an expected six percent or just over and analysts say there will be little scope for the group to return capital until the second half of this year.
Even then, the bank seems to favour returning value through more generous dividends than through share repurchases, said John Leonard, banking analyst at Salomon Brothers.
Leonard expects a pretax profit of 2.456 million stg and a dividend payment of 12.6p per share, and he sees strong earnings growth at least for the next three years.  
Strategically in its core UK retail financial services business, Lloyds TSB wants to expand its life assurance presence, analysts said, and may do this by acquisition.
The current bidding battle for mutually-owned Scottish Amicable will give a pointer as to the price that Lloyds might have to pay for such an expansion.
Increasing its life assurance business would mean that Lloyds TSB continues to follow the strategy of building up the low-risk element of its earnings and an income stream that is both stable and high quality.  
In the figures for the second half of 1996, analysts expect to see evidence of continued growth in consumer lending and a bigger market share in mortgages, although the group is thought to have been less aggressive on the latter front in the second six months. -- London Newsroom +44 171 542 8864.
