A bumper crop of results from the six major British banks which start their reporting season next week should take aggregate pre-tax profit comfortably above 12 billion stg for 1996 from just over 10.8 billion stg in 1995.
Analysts also expect some of them to return surplus capital to shareholders, either in the form of share buybacks or generous dividend payments.
Leading the way on February 14 will be Lloyds TSB Group which, despite trading at a big premium to the sector, is still favoured by analysts because of its business mix.  
The bank's new chief executive Peter Ellwood is expected to give voice to his plans for the group as he takes over from Sir Brian Pitman.
Lloyds is expected to weigh in with over 2.4 billion stg in pretax profit and dividend per share of about 13p, accompanied by the highest return on equity at around 32 percent.
Next on the agenda will be Barclays on February 18, when many analysts are expecting another chapter in its series of share buybacks. The bank has already spent over 1.0 billion stg on these in the last 18 months.  
Profits are expected to rise to a consensus expectation of around 2.39 billion stg compared to 2.08 billion in 1995.
Barclays is expected to show strong growth in businesses like Barclaycard and consumer lending but its investment banking unit BZW, which has had a year of upheavals, could disappoint.
Barclays will be followed by the very different Standard Chartered, the London-based bank with a strong Far East franchise.
Some analysts have cut their earnings estimates slightly but StanChart's pretax profit is still seen rising to around 870 million stg from 661 million last time.  
Growth in consumer banking in Asia will be tempered by the decline in the dollar, a possible small upturn in costs and the sale of its profitable private banking unit last year.
A dividend of 14 or 15p per share is seen after 11p in 1995.
HSBC Holdings, the other London-based bank with huge Far East interests and the most profitable bank in the group, reports on March 3.
HSBC, which brings together Britain's Midland Bank, Hongkong Bank, Hang Seng Bank, and Marine Midland in the U.S., is expected to post pretax profits of some 4.6 billion stg after 3.67 billion in 1995.  
Dividend per share is seen rising to around 40p from 32p the previous year.
HSBC is also expected to have been affected by the recent strength of sterling but will show profit gains in all its regions and units, with analysts bullish for the potential still to be unlocked in Asia.
National Westminster Bank, unlike HSBC, has a much stronger focus on investment banking and has spent a lot of money building up its NatWest Markets unit with several acquisitions and other investment.  
This has led to nervousness among investors and the shares underperformed the rest of the sector last year.
NatWest reports on February 25 and is expected to post pretax profits of 1.1 to 1.2 billion stg -- after disposal losses and exceptional asset write-downs -- and a full year dividend of 29p.
Many analysts also expect a further repurchase of shares.  
Finally, Abbey National, in the news currently because of its bid for mutual life assurance firm Scottish Amicable, reports on February 27 and is expected to show pretax profits of around 1.15 to 1.16 billion stg (after 1.03 billion in 1995) and a dividend of around 26p compared to 21.75p.
The Abbey's capital position has led to talk of a share buyback but the management is against this because of the large number of small shareholders on the register.
A special dividend could be on the cards but most analysts expect the Abbey to continue its relatively generous ordinary dividend policy.  
The figures are likely to have been helped by some growth in the mortgage market and by a good rise in consumer lending. -- London Newsroom +44 171 542 8864.
