China's President Jiang Zemin granted a rare meeting to members of the U.S. House of Representatives on Tuesday in a campaign aimed at boosting ties with the American Congress.
A beaming Jiang was shown on state television receiving the 22 representatives -- the biggest U.S. congressional delegation ever to visit China.
"Improving Sino-U.S. relations and developing them on a healthy basis is in the interests of both countries," he said. "I had very good discussions with President (Bill) Clinton in Manila in November and we reached some important understandings.
"The Chinese side is willing to grasp the present opportunities and, along with the United States, to reduce difficulties between our two countries."
Beijing and Washington have been trying to mend ties that were badly strained by a series of disputes over the past two years ranging from Taiwan to trade and human rights.
In Manila, Jiang and Clinton agreed on an exchange of presidential visits in 1997 and 1998 that would be the first since President George Bush came to China in early 1989.
Analysts said China's communist leadership -- and Jiang in particular -- were eager to boost ties with the Congress, fearing that Beijing had suffered by relying too heavily on its links to the U.S. administration in the past.
They noted that the Beijing believes it was led astray by administration assurances that Taiwan President Lee Teng-hui would not be permitted to visit the United States in 1995.
Congress pushed hard for Lee and the landmark private visit was eventually allowed to proceed, a decision that enraged Beijing.
China turned its anger on the island, which it considers a rebel province, first breaking off a semi-official channel for talks with Taipei and later holding missile tests near the island in March last year.
Jim Kolbe, the Arizona Republican who is leading the congressional delegation, told reporters shortly before his meeting with Jiang on Tuesday that Chinese leaders had recognised the need for contacts with Congress.
"The Chinese are becoming much more skilled and have much more contact" with Congress, he said.
Members of the congressional group told reporters that human rights had come up in discussions with other Chinese officials and would be raised during the meeting with Jiang.
Jiang met a U.S. Senate group led by minority leader Tom Daschle last November.
Jiang, who is known to be fond of Western pop songs, was said to have entertained that group with some of his repertoire. It was unknown if the Kolbe delegation would be treated to the same welcome.
