China vowed on Friday to get tough in its drive to keep banks out of the stock market and accused big financial institutions of fuelling a speculative bubble on the nation's bourses.
State media quoted China's top economic policy maker, Vice Premier Zhu Rongji, as warning bankers that they could go to jail for diverting funds into the stock market.
"We will vigorously seek to uncover any use of funds that are not in company accounts or the use of bank credits for stock market speculation," Zhu told a national banking conference in Beijing on Thursday.
"Those in positions of responsibility will be sacked and in criminal cases we will pursue the offenders under criminal law," he said.
In a commentary alongside the reports of the meeting, the Financial News, a daily published by the central bank, blamed a big rise in share prices last year on institutional speculation.
"Most people believe that a speculative bubble emerged (in the nation's stock markets) at the end of last year," it said.
It blamed this on a diversion of funds from the banking system into the stock market, and added that it was clear this had involved institutional money.
Beijing moved to cool off the heated stock market speculation -- which had pushed one of the main indices up as much as 360 percent -- by warning investors that what goes up must come down, and reminding them that the state would not step in to bail them out.
China also has been trying to keep its state-run banks from fuelling stock market speculation, first by severing their ties to trust companies -- which can put funds in the stock market -- and by making it harder for them to finance stock speculation.
Securities industry officials said the aim was to insulate the banking system from any major setback for the stock market.
"This is aimed at protecting the banking system," said Wang Yun, general manager of the Shanxi Securities Trading Centre in Taiyuan, a regional trading centre for the main bourses in Shanghai and Shenzhen.
"Central government authorities would also prefer to see these funds go to state enterprises," he told the China Securities Bulletin, a Hong Kong-based publication.
But brokers said that while ensuring the health of the banking system was a noble goal, authorities should not drive all institutional money away from the market.
"China now has more individual investors than it had in the past, but the main investors are institutions," said a Beijing-based broker. "If they are driven away, there won't be much turnover left in the market."
