China's major state banks reported profits last year -- some sharply higher than in 1995 -- and analysts said on Monday this showed they were beginning to act like commercial banks elsewhere.
Fees from credit cards and electronic banking services were drawing in new income while loans were being extended with greater care in limiting risk, they said.
However, the results probably disguised the banking system's huge pile of bad debts from past loans, and writeoffs -- either by the banks or the state itself -- were likely in the years ahead, they said.
"The big banks are gradually being turned into real commercial banks and making loans on a commercial basis," said an official at the Industrial and Commercial Bank in Shenzhen.
"There is a gradual reduction in (lending) risk," he said, adding that banks were also cutting costs through electronic payment systems and looking for new sources of income.
That view was shared by other Chinese bankers.
"There are more controls on lending throughout the banking system," said an official with the Everbright Bank.
China's banks once were viewed more as the financial arm of the government, extending loans to enterprises that needed funds regardless of whether they would ever repay.
Banks are now encouraged to make loans that will return a profit while state development banks have been set up to help sectors seen as vital to government interests.
The Industrial and Commercial Bank of China -- the bank with the widest exposure in domestic industry -- said its profits surged to 14.5 billion yuan ($1.7 billion) last year from 4.6 billion yuan in 1995.
The Bank of China earned 8.2 billion yuan and the China Construction Bank made 2.76 billion yuan, although neither gave comparative figures. The Agricultural Bank said it had a sharp rise in rise in profits in percentage terms.
Bankers said the removal of an interest rate subsidy on long-term deposits and two interest rate cuts during the year fuelled bank profits.
The rate cuts not only helped ailing state companies to repay loans that had already been extended but they widened the spread between the cost of funds and the interest earned on loans.
"The spread has widened to about three percentage points from less than one point," said Beijing University economist Xiao Zhuoji.
"This has also helped the state banks."
But foreign financial specialists said there was still a relatively low return on assets and one of the key concerns was the extent of the bad loans of the past.
"No one really knows the extent of the bad debts in the banking system," said a foreign financial specialist in Beijing.
The U.S. based rating agency Moody's Investors Service said in a report at the weekend that the banks would be insolvent if their loan values were written down to reflect repayment problems, but resolution of the issue would require a complete restructuring of state industry and recapitalistion of the banks.
($1 = 8.3 yuan)
