China on Tuesday rejected Hong Kong Governor Chris Patten's criticism of its proposal to abolish a series of laws in the territory after it reverts to Beijing's control, saying it was an internal affair.
Beijing also angrily reminded Britain that China was no longer a weak, pre-revolutionary government, and said it would not tolerate other countries trying to impose their will on it.
"We cannot accept Patten's so-called statement," Foreign Ministry spokesman Shen Guofang said, referring to the governor's criticism of plans to abolish laws on democratic elections and civil liberties in Hong Kong after the transfer of power this year.
"I want to remind the British authorities in Hong Kong that the government of China today is not the pre-1949 government," he told reporters, referring to the year of the Communist revolution.
"We cannot accept any instances of others trying to impose their will on us."
Patten had condemned a move by a China-appointed panel, known as the Preparatory Committee, to draw up a list of 25 laws and articles for repeal or amendment after the transfer of power at midnight on June 30.
After the handover, the territory that has been a British colony for more than 150 years will become a Special Administrative Region of China.
The Foreign Ministry spokesman said the Preparatory Committee had the authority to review existing Hong Kong laws to determine whether they were in conflict with the Basic Law, a mini-constitution drafted by China for the territory.
"This is entirely an internal matter for China," he said.
Shen also tried to play down the impact of the proposals, saying there basically would be no change to existing laws.
He called on the Hong Kong government to avoid making statements that "misled the public or undermined morale in the territory".
Patten had said the proposals, made at a committee meeting in Beijing on Sunday, struck at the heart of Hong Kong's civil liberties and appeared to be politically motivated rather than reflecting real inconsistencies with the Basic Law.
Among the laws to be diluted are Hong Kong's Bill of Rights, a 1992 election law, the Societies Ordinance which permits the formation of political parties and a 1995 Public Order Ordinance which allows peaceful demonstrations.
"Those laws which conflict with the Basic Law cannot continue as laws of the Special Administrative Region," Shen said.
He said that if the Preparatory Committee recommended the revision or abolition of these laws, it was reasonable and in the interests of a smooth transfer of power.
The spokesman also dismissed as groundless concerns over the independence of the judicial system under Chinese rule.
