China has begun shipping corn from key growing areas in the north to other parts of the country, cutting northern stockpiles in a bid to keep weak prices there from falling further.
However, domestic corn prices, already under pressure, were likely to extend their slide, industry officials said on Tuesday.
Officials said last week that permission had been given to ship 1.5 million tonnes of corn from Heilongjiang and Jilin provinces to other parts of the country.
The government hopes to push up prices in growing regions to benefit farmers, analysts said. Farmers usually sell their crop close to where it was grown to a middleman, normally a state company, they said.
Some shipments had already begun, officials said.
"These shipments should not have too much of an effect on prices," said an official at the information centre of the State Grain Reserve Administration.
"Overall there is excess supply and the price of corn is expected to remain under pressure this year," he said, adding that weak demand from the domestic feed industry is also contributing to sluggish prices.
Heilongjiang provincial grain authorities told Reuters by telephone there had been little impact so far on prices in the region.
Domestic corn prices have slid more than 30 percent since early last year.
Two years of bumper harvests and curbs on exports have led to rising stockpiles and falling prices.
China has estimated its corn output at 118.5 million tonnes in 1996, up from 106 million in 1995.
The China Grains, Oils and feeds newsletter has projected corn production at 122.5 million tonnes this year.
China has made public figures of its overall grain reserves but it has not given a breakdown of specific crops.
The domestic media have said stockpiles were forcing the state to look for additional space to store excess grain.
The China Grains, Oils and Feeds newsletter said market prices in Jilin and Heilongjiang were 1,130 yuan ($136) and 1,050 yuan per tonne, though some analysts say that prices have fallen through the 1,000-yuan level.
Prices had been around 1,300 to 1,400 yuan per tonne last spring, they said.
Analysts said that despite the downward pressure on prices, China was unlikely to remove its controls on exports -- which were imposed in December 1994 on fears of domestic shortages and inflationary pressure.
"The main concern is still inflation," an analyst said. Even the potential windfall from large-scale exports would not be enough to justify abandoning checks on inflation, although inflation remained largely under control, he added.
The State Grain Reserve Administration official agreed.
"We are not really looking to make money at this," he said in a reference to exports. "We are just making some small adjustments in the overall picture."
China exported 150,000 tonnes of corn in the first 11 months of last year, up 36.2 percent from the same period of 1995. The 1995 figures were well below the previous year levels.
A farm analyst said China's prices were still substantially above world levels and unlikely to interest buyers, even if Beijing decided to relax its stance on exports.
"We won't see more than one million tonnes out of China this year," he said.
