China issued more tough warnings on curbing risk in the financial sector on Thursday, fresh on the heels of the failure of one of its big trust companies.
It also accused some officials of ignoring past warnings and covering up problems.
"There are all sorts of serious financial crimes now and if these problems are not earnestly addressed, this could greatly weaken the payment system and damage the good reputation of our socialist financial system," said the official Financial News in a front-page commentary.
"The biggest problem is that some officials look but fail to see the problems in their own regions or departments," it said. "When they see the problems they fail to check on them and in some cases they cover up and encourage such actions."
The newspaper, published by the central bank, said failure to tackle the problems would exacerbate the nation's deficit and lead to unwanted growth in the money supply.
The central bank announced this month the closure of the big China Agribusiness Development Trust and Investment Corp (CADTIC), an investment house under the Ministry of Agriculture, because of serious illegal and irregular practices.
CADTIC's management was taken over by the state-run China Construction Bank while its foreign business was handed over to the Bank of China.
China has been trying to separate trust firms from state banks, fearing that trust failures could drag down the banking system and lead to social unrest.
China has no bank deposit insurance system and would probably have to step in to support a bank that went into default, banking officials said.
Its willingness to prop up trust companies is somewhat less certain.
U.S. rating agency Moody's Investors Service issued a report this month saying that central authorities might not rush to support troubled trusts. Repayment of foreign lenders in the event of future closures was not guaranteed, it said.
The Financial News said a planned separation of banks from trust companies -- originally set for completion at the end of last year -- had to be finished in the first half of this year.
Banking industry officials have said that the huge problems of the China Agribusiness Development Trust, while known to regulators for some time, were a "wake-up call" that foreshadowed more problems throughout the financial system.
The latest round of warnings followed a national banking conference that focused on excess financial risk in the banking system.
