In China's headlong rush to develop, first in its fanatical leftwing past and then in the get-rich-quick days of reform, it has hacked or bulldozed away much of its architectural heritage.
Graceful old courtyards of Beijing have fallen victim to the development onslaught in recent years, crumbling alongside one of the earliest casualties -- the once majestic Beijing city wall.
Built to ward off invaders centuries ago, the wall was unable to withstand the inroads of its own people bent on discarding what was considered out of date.
But China's capital is trying to make amends for some of its past excesses by restoring a small portion of the wall that encircled the city until it was dismantled in the years after the communist takeover in 1949.
Residents of Beijing have been answering a public call to return city wall bricks to help rebuild a small section of the structure.
Bricks once buried in courtyards, kept as household ornaments or used as building materials have been handed over to a group restoring the wall under the direction of the Beijing city government.
"We hope to have about 115 metres of the wall restored this year," said Li Yancheng of the Beijing Historical Relics Construction Co of the municipal government.
MING DYNASTY KILNS
Some 30,000 bricks from the old wall have been donated to the project and now sit stacked on a city lot where they will be used in the restoration effort.
Workers chip off hardened soil, revealing the names of Ming dynasty kilns (1368-1644 A.D.) where the bricks were fired.
"As a child I remember helping take down part of the wall," said Li. "Adults were doing it so I joined in. Now I have a chance to put some of the wall back together."
The wall, which stood 12 metres (39 ft) tall and 16 metres wide (52 ft) in some places, was built largely in the Ming dynasty, although some parts dated back to the Yuan dynasty (1279-1368 A.D.), a period of Mongol rule.
CITY WALL CLEARED TO MAKE ROOM FOR TIANANMEN SQUARE
Large chunks of the wall were pulled down in the 1950s when Beijing's communist leaders created Tiananmen Square.
More was torn down in the 1960s and 1970s for the construction of one of the city's main roads and for the subway.
Many of the city gates were left standing, although what had been the Zhonghua Gate is now the site of the mausoleum for late revolutionary leader Mao Zedong in the centre of Tiananmen Square.
In more recent years, market-style economic reforms have sent real estate values soaring, leading to the wholesale clearing of older buildings to make way for sleak new office towers.
One such real estate project has led to the demolition of homes that had been built up against the wall. The outline of those homes is still visible on the section being restored.
The redevelopment has also revealed a bomb shelter, built nearby during tension with the former Soviet Union in the 1960s and using city wall bricks.
RETIRED SHOEMAKER ANSWERS STATE'S CALL FOR HELP
Hai Changhai, a 71-year-old retired shoemaker, is one of the Beijing residents who answered the state's call to bring back bricks taken home when the wall was demolished.
"They were in our yard and weren't doing anyone much good," he said after pedalling his tricycle across town to make a donation. "Now the state can make use of them."
Some Beijing residents point an accusing finger at the state -- and the ruling Communist Party -- for all the destruction of the past.
"None of the communist leaders wanted to protect these things," said Dai Qing, a dissident writer who has been active in preserving historical relics. "None of them spoke up."
One of the few people who did speak out was Liang Sicheng, the head of prestigious Qinghua University's construction department in the early days of communist rule.
"He was very critical of the development plans," said Cheng Zhihua, a professor at the same department at Qinghua today.
"But he had little influence because the official media did not publish his views," said Cheng.
What Liang had to say was dangerous then, and he was persecuted for his views during the Cultural Revolution, a decade of leftist fanaticism that began in 1965.
Beijing officials say there is a growing awareness of the need to preserve the past. Some residents say that may be because so much of the city's heritage has already disappeared.
Some say other factors may also play a role.
A museum may be built near the wall when it is restored and city planners soon will have another tourist attraction.
