China's central bank, stung by the collapse of a major trust company, is looking warily at the nation's financial system, warning of dangers to Beijing's prestige and social stability.
The failure of the China Agribusiness Development Trust and Investment Corp (CADTIC) because of "serious illegal and irregular practices" was deeply embarrassing for China's financial regulators, bankers said.
But it was a vindication of sorts for those who have been trying to make the People's Bank of China more like its Western counterparts, boosting the central bank's ability to detect problems in the financial sector, they said.
That eventually could help to give it more independence from the nation's political decision-makers, bankers said.
Under a three-year, World Bank-sponsored programme, the central bank enlisted the help of big accounting firm Price Waterhouse to strengthen its accounting and supervisory abilities.
"They (central bank officials) recognised they had to improve the quality of the information they had," said J. Thomas Macy, who headed up the Price Waterhouse team working with the central bank.
"You can't make good decisions if you don't have good data," he told Reuters in an interview.
LOANS OFTEN NOT REPAID
The People's Bank of China was once seen as merely the financial arm of the government, ensuring that money allocated for lending went to the right place. Whether borrowers ever repaid was less important.
China's four, main state-run banks have a combined 134,000 branches and each branch reported to the central bank independently. That gave the central bank a huge flow of uncoordinated and often not very useful information.
A Western diplomat who viewed such reports piled up at the central bank said he asked a bank employee several years ago what the central bank did with the data and was told earnestly: "We add the numbers up."
"The data gave no idea of the state of health of the financial system," said Price Waterhouse's Macy.
That is clearly changing.
A computer system was designed for the bank's reporting purposes and a risk-based aproach to financial examination is being introduced.
Macy said an 800-page examination manual would be given to some 10,000 bank examiners.
CENTRAL BANK TIGHTENS GRIP ON SECTOR
Chinese bankers say the central bank is already tightening its grip on the financial system.
"They are checking much more closely now," said a Chinese banker in Shenzhen near Hong Kong. "They are keeping a close eye on the commercial banks."
Many foreign bankers agree there has been a marked change.
"The data collected is getting much better," said a Japanese banker.
"But more work on technical inspections is needed to bring them (central bank operations) up to international levels," he said.
Others argue that such skills are not learned overnight.
Bankers said problems similar to those that forced the closure of CADTIC this month still lurk elsewhere in the financial sector. Smaller trust companies set up by regional or local governments are particularly vulnerable.
CENTRAL BANK SOUNDS ALARM BUT LACKS INDEPENDENCE
Central bankers have been sounding the alarm over financial risk, bringing up the theme repeatedly at a recent national banking conference.
They pushed home the need for a separation of trust companies -- like CADTIC -- from banks so that banks and their depositors would be insulated from problems at trust firms.
They also made their case for keeping bank funds out of the volatile stock and futures markets.
If the central bank can demonstrate that it has taken charge of financial supervision it might find it has more room to manoeuvre in the policy-making area, bankers said.
Economic issues such as money supply targets -- or even the decision to let foreign banks conduct local currency business -- are highly politicised in China. The central bank ultimately must listen to the views of the State Council, or cabinet.
While this may be politically necessary now, bankers said they would like to see the government give the central bank a vote of confidence by granting it more decision-making authority.
