Farmers near Beijing marked the death of Deng Xiaoping quietly on Thursday, putting the hard task of making a living above memorials for the man whose reforms raised rural incomes dramatically.
Some people in this rural county in municipal Beijing offered a private word of thanks to China's paramount leader, who helped steer the nation on a pragmatic course until his death at the age of 92 on Wednesday.
Some shrugged and said they were more concerned with putting food on the family table, while others said they had not even heard the news.
"Is it true?" asked one young man as he unloaded coal from a truck, heaping it beside a small hotel run by farmers who could no longer find work on the land.
"I hadn't heard this. It's a great loss for the nation of course, but for me the main concern is making a living," he said.
Chinese state media announced Deng's death to the nation early on Thursday.
Deng, who told his countrymen that to get rich was glorious, may not have made every farmer wealthy but his policies have clearly made life easier for most.
"We owe him a debt of gratitude," said Shi Huaiqing as he leaned against a tree beside a frozen fishpond and watched his flock graze in a pastoral scene topped by a distant view of the Great Wall.
"My life is much better than it was years ago," said the 45-year-old, who thanks to policies introduced by Deng can now raise and sell his sheep privately without being branded a traitor to communism.
"Before I couldn't sell these sheep on my own," he said. "Now I earn a good living."
Down the road from this village, a 70 year-old retired farmer surnamed Zhao echoed those sentiments.
"We are much better off than before," he said, smiling a toothless grin as he sifted through a road-side rubbish dump looking for scrap plastic.
"In the old days we all ate together and worked together in the production brigades. None of us had any money but now I have enough to get by with a little help from my sons," he said.
The one-time farmer said that in the 1950s Deng had visited a village not far from where he was standing and had expressed his disgust at the harsh conditions of rural life at that time.
"He at least was concerned with our welfare," said Zhao.
But some people said they were disappointed that incomes had not grown faster and expressed disdain for a surge in corruption unleashed by Deng's economic reforms.
"Deng may have been concerned for our welfare, but many local officials still exploit us," said a farmer named Du as he sold fruit at a roadside stall near an apple orchard he tended.
"The police always come along and chase us away and sometimes throw my apples on the ground," Du said.
"I may be better off now than I was but it is still hard to make a living," he said. "We still have a long way to go."
