The death of Deng Xiaoping has deprived China of the architect of reform but it has left his successor in charge of an economic powerhouse in its best shape in years, economists said on Friday.
China has attained a track record that many countries would envy -- strong economic growth, inflation in check, mounting foreign exchange reserves and a stable currency.
"I am optimistic on the economy," said Lin Qingsong, an economist at the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, a government think tank.
"Overall, we are in a very good situation economically."
Foreign economists agreed.
"It sounds awful, but Deng couldn't have died at a better time," said a Western economist.
"They (China's leaders) are in an enviable position."
Deng died on Wednesday aged 92, leaving his hand-picked successor President and Communist Party chief Jiang Zemin in charge of this nation of 1.2 billion people.
It was Deng who helped steer China on its current economic course, wrenching it from purist Marxist policies that had brought the nation to the brink of starvation and industrial collapse in 1960.
The Deng reforms, adopted in 1978, allowed private enterprise and relied on market forces instead of Stalinist central planning.
Eventually, the scope of change became even more sweeping, embracing stock and futures markets and breeding a new generation of "red capitalists" known for their millionaire lifestyles.
China chalked up economic growth of 9.7 percent last year as it held its once troublesome inflation rate to a shade over 6 percent, well below target and down sharply from more than 14 percent in 1995.
The nation has become a magnet for foreign investment, with many of the West's biggest corporations queuing up in the search for a share of this rapidly expanding market. In the process, China has amassed foreign currency reserves of $105 billion.
Economists said remnants of the centrally planned economy still needed overhauling before communist leaders could rest easy.
"There are still many economic issues to be addressed and one of them is the state sector," said Lin of the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences.
"State companies need fundamental change."
While many of China's private and foreign-invested companies are chalking up profits, an inefficient state sector has been unable to match those results.
About 75 percent of China's more than 100,000 state firms lost money last year. Total losses in the state sector were up 45 percent to 69 billion yuan ($8.3 billion) in the first 10 months of last year.
Economists said state enterprises were grossly overstaffed and needed to trim bloated payrolls while some companies would never make money and would have to be shut.
But layoffs and bankruptcies are seen as a threat to stability and Beijing is moving ahead cautiously on this issue.
Before surplus workers can be told to find new jobs there must be a real social safety net in a country that has neither a national pension scheme nor unemployment insurance.
Other economists said reforms were unlikely to gather pace in the months ahead as Jiang Zemin and other communist leaders look ahead to a key party congress scheduled for later this year. The meeting will make top personnel changes and chart policies for the next five years.
But economic analysts said China now has enough of an economic cushion that it can take its time and examine further reform carefully.
"The Chinese have the luxury of being able to go ahead slowly," said an economist.
