China has assembled a virtual "who's who" of its Communist leaders to arrange Deng Xiaoping's funeral next week in what analysts described as a show of unity for his chosen successor.
Diplomats in the capital also said the 459-member group would draw a veil over the Communist Party's internal politics ahead of a key party congress where decisions on top jobs and future policies would be made later this year.
"This is obviously too big a group to make funeral arrangements," said a Western diplomat on Friday. "Not everyone will be making decisions."
Deng died on Wednesday aged 92. China will hold the funeral for its paramount leader next Tuesday in the cavernous Great Hall of the People in Beijing.
The ceremonies -- unlike those for revolutionary leader Mao Zedong in 1976 -- will not include a lying in state with a mourning public allowed to file past.
In accordance with his wishes, Deng's body parts will be donated to science and his ashes will be scattered at sea.
Deng's anointed successor, Commmunist Party chief and state President Jiang Zemin, is chairman of the funeral committee that includes all members of the 18-man Politburo and veterans of the communist revolution such as former president Yang Shangkun, 89, and ex-parliament chairman Peng Zhen, 95.
The list also includes Hua Guofeng, Mao's chosen successor until he was toppled by Deng.
"It is meant to be a sign of great unity and stability," said another foreign envoy.
Diplomats said the inclusion of the elder statesmen in the group aimed to lend legitimacy to the current leadership, providing a link to the party's revolutionary roots.
"This gives them some continuity with the first generation of the leadership," said a European diplomat.
But it also helps conceal the inner workings of the party as key figures jockey for position before the 15th party congress.
Broad decisions on political and economic strategy are likely to be taken at the meeting, held every five years.
Political analysts said the creation of a smaller group to direct the funeral arrangements might give too much information to the public which is normally kept at a safe distance from the party's internal workings.
The tighter the group, the easier to identify the main players, they said.
"They (party leaders) don't want to reveal too much before the congress," said the European diplomat.
