Citizens spilled into public places across China on Saturday to mourn the late leader Deng Xiaoping, acting spontaneously in the face of a lack of official memorial activities.
State television has been running endless official paeans to Deng and showing formal mourning activities organised by Chinese officials in Hong Kong, Washington and other foreign cities.
But in China itself, and especially the capital Beijing, the state has done little to encourage public shows of mourning, leaving the citizenry to do things themselves.
In Deng's home village of Paifang in southwestern Sichuan province, tens of thousands of mourners have thronged to the courtyard of his birth since the community's favourite son died on Wednesday night.
In the Sichuan capital Chengdu, people poured into People's Square on Thursday and by nightfall the crowd swelled past 10,000, many carrying candles, witnesses said by telephone.
In the absence of a Deng portrait, people gathered round a statue of China's revolutionary leader Mao Zedong.
"For us here it's tumultuous," a worker at a hotel on the square told Reuters. "Not only in Chengdu but all across Sichuan province, it's tumultuous."
The crowds thinned on Friday and Saturday, but officials were tolerating the square's use as a centre for mourning and many people were weeping openly over Deng's death. Many came on outings organised by their work units.
"There are several hundred police, traffic police and People's Armed Police to maintain order and prevent people getting hurt," the hotel worker said.
In the southern boomtown of Shenzhen, a special economic zone near Hong Kong that was Deng's earliest reform brainchild, hundreds of people filed past a giant Deng billboard which had been turned into a makeshift shrine.
The billboard stands in a square beside one of Deng's most stunning innovations, the Shenzhen Stock Exchange, which Deng said proved that markets were acceptable not only in capitalist societies but also under socialism.
Mourners placed wreaths of white and yellow chrysanthemums below the billboard, some draped with white streamers bearing Deng's reformist slogans or newspaper clippings about a 1992 visit Deng made to Shenzhen to jumpstart his stalling reforms.
"We wish you heavenly peace," read one streamer. Said another: "Thank you for the reform and opening up."
"There's no public organised mourning of Deng, but I think this is better because people who come to mourn for Deng do it from the bottom of their hearts," said a policeman named Chen.
At Shenzhen's botanical garden, someone had hung a black and white portrait of Deng from a banyan tree that Deng planted in 1992. Scores of people burned incense and bowed three times in the traditional Chinese form of mourning.
"Uncle Deng, we miss you!" wailed a kneeling man surnamed Jin who had brought his year-old child. "Come child, pay your respect to Uncle Deng."
"I was shattered by the news of his death," Jin said later. "He has done simply too much for us. I can find no words to express my grief and can only repay him by working harder."
Deng's legacy of markets was quietly thriving at a nearby private floral shop, whose owner was doing brisk business selling a fresh shipment of flowers.
"Of course I'm happy. I've sold more than 10,000 yuan (US$1,200) worth of chrysanthemums today," she said.
