China will aim to show U.S. Secretary of State Madeleine Albright that improving Sino-American ties will not be harmed by the death of Deng Xiaoping, analysts said on Sunday.
They also said Albright, who arrives in China on Monday for a brief stopover on her nine-nation tour, would likely focus on maintaining momentum in the once-stalled ties, looking ahead to exchanges of senior level visits.
"China will want to make the point that it is stable after Deng's death," said Niu Jun, a specialist in U.S. policy issues at the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, a government think-tank.
"It will want to demonstrate that there is no change in Sino-U.S. relations," he said.
Deng, architect of sweeping economic reforms that have embraced capitalist-style economic policies, died on Wednesday aged 92.
Albright will arrive in Beijing during a six-day mourning period for the nation's paramount leader and one day before the funeral. Chinese leaders have been eager to show that affairs of state will continue as usual.
Deng's hand-picked successor, President and Communist Party chief Jiang Zemin, has vowed to push ahead with Deng's programme and even outdo him.
Jiang has been in power since he was propelled to the top party post in 1989, when Deng abandoned his old ally Zhao Ziyang in a dispute over the use of force against students pushing for But Jiang now must fend off other contenders for power without the helping hand of his benefactor.
Albright, on her first trip overseas since becoming America's top diplomat last month, will meet Jiang as well as Premier Li Peng and Foreign Minister Qian Qichen.
Western analysts said Albright would not shrink from contentious issues like China's human rights record, but would chart a steady course in the vital Sino-U.S. relationship during President Bill Clinton's second term.
"The U.S. wants to ensure that its China relations are no longer scraping along the bottom," said a Western diplomat.
U.S.-China ties had stumbled badly over a range of issues including Taiwan, trade, arms proliferation and human rights.
A long-delayed visit to Beijing in November by Albright's predecessor Warren Christopher paved the way for the renewed push to put differences aside.
That new approach was endorsed at a meeting between Jiang and Clinton at the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum in Manila later that month.
U.S. Vice President Al Gore will travel to China next month and Clinton and Jiang are expected to exchange visits over the next year.
Albright may be compelled to touch on human rights during her talks with Chinese officials as the United States plans to co-sponsor a resolution critical of China at the United Nations Commission on Human Rights in Geneva.
Washington may also be looking to show at least some measure of toughness towards Beijing to allay domestic concerns following allegations of Chinese contributions to Clinton's re-election campaign.
But Albright and other U.S. officials have said no one issue should dominate the relationship.
Analysts said that probably means that as for the more difficult problems, the two sides will have to agree to disagree.
