At least two bombs rocked the western Chinese city of Urumqi on Tuesday, killing one person and injuring at least 60, officials and residents said.
The blasts, on the day that China held memorial rites for its late paramount leader Deng Xiaoping, occurred on city buses in at least two separate incidents in the capital of the mainly Moslem region of Xinjiang at about 6.30 p.m. (1030 GMT).
Deng died last Wednesday aged 92 and Tuesday was the final of six days of mourning for him.
"At least 60 people were killed or injured," a local government official, who declined to be further identified, said.
He did not say how many were killed.
But a resident of the city said a trishaw driver was killed in one incident when a passenger in a bus found a bomb under a seat and threw it out of the window. The number of injuries from that explosion was not known.
There were conflicting reports of a third bomb.
A police officer at a centre handling the incidents declined to give further details, saying only: "The situation is very tense."
An official at the Military Region General Hospital in Urumqi, capital of the restive western region of Xinjiang, said at least 37 injured had been admitted after the bomb blasts. She gave no further details.
At another hospital in Urumqi, an official said two people who had been slightly injured had been treated and released.
A woman working at a hotel near one explosion said the blast ripped apart a bus and sent bits of metal flying through the air.
Police arrived shortly afterwards and cordoned off the area. Soldiers on trucks were later brought into the city, she said.
One explosion occurred on Northwest Road, involving a vehicle believed to be a minibus, a worker at a nearby hotel said.
Asked if anyone was killed, the worker said: "What do you think? With many people on the bus the chance is very high."
Nearby residents contacted by telephone said traffic was snarled along the road for about one hour and that people were being advised to avoid the area.
The explosions were believed to involve time-bombs, possibly set by members of the ethnic Uighur minority, officials said.
"We suspect that these incidents involve splittist elements," said one official, referring to pro-indepenence activists among Xinjiang's native Uighur population.
"These people want to disrupt the atmosphere during the memorial ceremonies for comrade Deng Xiaoping," said another official, referring to final rites held in Beijing on Tuesday morning for China's late paramount leader.
No arrests had yet been made, officials said.
"People have been warned not to go outside," one resident said.
It was the first violence reported in Xinjiang since anti-Chinese riots in the far western region's town of Yining on February 5 and 6 left nine people dead and 198 injured.
Chinese police arrested up to 300 people after that riot in Xinjiang -- a region that Moslem separatists call East Turkestan -- but many have been released after interrogation.
About 1,000 people, mostly Uighur farmers or unemployed young men, rioted in Yining in one of the largest and most violent demonstrations for independence in Xinjiang -- which means New Frontier in Chinese -- since the communist takeover in 1949.
Xinjiang, bordering Afghanistan, Pakistan and three mostly Moslem Central Asian states, was shaken last year by bombings and assassination attempts on officials and Moslem leaders regarded as pro-Beijing.
