China's President Jiang Zemin used his eulogy for Deng Xiaoping on Tuesday to hail the late leader's guidance in the recovery of Hong Kong and pledge peaceful reunification with Taiwan.
Jiang told 10,000 Communist Party luminaries and other guests at the funeral rites for the late leader that Deng's great creation was the "one country, two systems" formula of allowing capitalist and socialist systems to coexist side by side in one country.
"The complete reunification of our motherland is the common aspiration of the entire Chinese nation," said Jiang, Deng's hand-picked successor, in a speech delivered at Beijing's Great Hall of the People and televised around the country.
"Using the formula of 'one country, two systems' to realise peaceful reunification is Comrade Deng Xiaoping's great creation," he said.
Deng guided the negotiations with Britain that eventually led to a 1984 accord under which the colony is to be returned to Chinese rule at midnight next June 30.
Under that agreement, Beijing pledges to allow the colony to retain its capitalist system and a "high degree of autonomy" for 50 years.
The nearby Portuguese enclave of Macau reverts to China in 1999, leaving Nationalist Chinese-ruled Taiwan as the last territory Beijing must recover to achieve its dream of reunification.
Deng died last Wednesday before seeing the recovery of any of these territories but Jiang said the Communist Party should carry out the late leader's mission.
"We must act in accordance with the teachings of Comrade Deng Xiaoping, striving to attain the objective of the motherland's reunification," Jiang said, speaking in front of a huge portrait of Deng draped in black ribbons and surrounded by bouquets of flowers.
"In accordance with the Sino-British and Sino-Portuguese agreements, Hong Kong will return to the embrace of the motherland soon and Macao will return to the embrace of the motherland in 1999," he said.
"The Taiwan question will be settled eventually and the complete reunification of the motherland will certainly be achieved," he said confidently.
Among the invited guests in the cavernous auditorium were supporters of Beijing from Hong Kong and Macau, most of them prominent businessmen, as well as Tung Chee-hwa who has been chosen to take over as Hong Kong's chief executive on July 1.
Despite its pledge of autonomy for Hong Kong, Beijing has already decided to scrap some civil liberties and replace the territory's elected legislature with an appointed one after the transfer of power.
That has raised concerns in Hong Kong as well as the United States and Britain.
Taiwan, which has been separated from China since the end of a civil war in 1949, says it too wants to reunify with the mainland but under very different terms than those offered by Beijing.
