China is expected to unveil a cautious budget this weekend, avoiding bold but risky moves in 1997, the crucial year of the recovery of Hong Kong and a major meeting of the Communist Party elite, economists said on Friday.
The 1997 budget would again show a hefty deficit although it could be smaller than the 61.442 billion yuan ($7.4 billion) estimate for 1996, they said.
"This should be a year for a steady-as-she-goes budget," said a foreign diplomat who follows economic issues.
Finance Minister Liu Zhongli is expected to announce the budget to the National People's Congress, or parliament, on Sunday or Monday.
The recovery of the British colony of Hong Kong at midnight on June 30 and the scheduling of the Communist Party congress for later in the year will most likely ensure cautious fiscal policies, economists said.
Beijing wants to see the Hong Kong handover proceed smoothly and its leaders have little inclination to take risks ahead of the congress which will set policies and decide who gets the top jobs for the next five years. Beijing's leaders also have an added reason for caution as they can no longer rely on the steadying hand of paramount leader Deng Xiaoping, who died this month.
"I am not looking for anything startling in the budget," said another foreign diplomat.
Even if the deficit is not reduced this year, it will still be manageable. Last year's deficit was only 0.99 percent of estimated 1996 gross domestic product.
Economists said they expected to see higher tax revenues this year as China's economy grows at a steady pace and tax collection improves.
China has already forecast economic growth of 10.5 percent for the year, up from 9.7 percent recorded in 1996. Premier Li Peng on Saturday is to set a yet more cautious goal of 8.0 percent growth.
State revenues expanded 18.1 percent in the first 11 months of last year, and economists said more efficient tax collection and better management of state finances were key factors.
Inflation will also be relatively modest this year, limiting upward pressure on government spending. Retail price inflation is forecast at less than the 6.1 percent of 1996.
Despite lower interest rates, Beijing will need to meet increased payments of interest and principal on past debts, said economist Li Yang, of the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences.
"This will mean more bonds will be issued this year," he said.
Economists said, however, this was not a major concern as it was largely in line with China's efforts to issue more tradeable debt to create an active secondary market and strengthen its financial sector.
But a cautious budget will mean China cannot afford to make deep cuts in subsidies to ailing state industry in 1997.
Many overstaffed state companies badly need to shed workers from their payrolls but Beijing's leaders are fearful this could lead to social unrest.
Economists will also be watching the military budget closely, where further increases in spending are expected.
Deng's chosen successor, President and Communist Party chief Jiang Zemin, needs the support of the army to retain his grip on power.
In his eulogy for Deng, Jiang referred to the army as the "pillar of the state".
China has said it wants to reduce the size of its three-million-strong army but it is likely to more than offset savings with stepped up spending on advanced weaponry, analysts said.
