China's state-run steel companies must trim their bloated payrolls but they are nimble enough to survive in the fiercely competitive marketplace, top officials said on Monday.
They also pledged that big steelmakers now preparing to float their shares -- like Anshan Steel and Chongqing Iron and Steel -- would not disappoint shareholders.
"We have confidence in the state enterprises in our industry," said Liu Qi, minister of Metallurgial Industry. "They can adapt to market conditions."
Liu and other senior ministry officials told reporters that many companies in the sector had already begun trimming staff and the trend would continue in the years ahead.
"We have made a good start to restructuring," he said, adding that reforms would continue.
Many of China's big state industries are grossly overstaffed and unable to compete with more efficient foreign competitors.
Senior ministry officials said they wanted to see only about 800,000 workers producing steel by the turn of the century. The industry employs 4.5 million people now, but that includes many workers not directly engaged in production as well as those at associated companies.
Liu said that Anshan Steel, one of three companies cleared late last year to list its shares abroad, had 190,000 employees but only 70,000 were producing steel.
The others were at affiliated companies that were operating independently, he said.
Liu cautioned, however, that many of them would not be out on the street as companies would try to find some form of work for them.
"Restructuring does not mean large numbers of people thrown out of work," he said.
Liu said that while steelmakers tried to streamline their operations they were also incorporating new technology to help cut production costs.
Other officials defended the track record of steel companies that have already offered shares, such as Hong Kong-listed Maanshan Iron and Steel, which has struggled with profits.
"Maanshan is a good company with excellent products and equipment," said vice minister Wang Wanbin.
"Maanshan has had problems but it will achieve better results in future," he said, adding that other steelmakers would also perform well in future.
Other officials said that China's had 107 large and medium-sized steel making companies and that 70 percent of them made were profitable last year.
They earned a net 5.1 billion yuan last year with gross profits of 7.4 billion yuan, partly offset by losses of 2.3 billion from those operating in the red.
They added that nearly half of the smaller companies were losing money though and that economies of scale had to be raised.
Panzhihua, a big steelmaker in Sichuan, is also planning to list shares abroad, while Benxi Steel and Hubei Daye Specialty Steel are among those planning offers for foreigners on the domestic B share market.
