China hit back on Tuesday at U.S. accusations of human rights abuses, saying Washington was distorting facts while turning a blind eye to problems in its own back yard.
In a lengthy riposte to U.S. State Department criticism of China in its annual report on human rights, Beijing described the United States as a land of guns, terrorist bomb attacks and racial discrimination.
China's angry attack, carried by the official Xinhua news agency and titled: "A Look at the U.S. Human Rights Record", also said American-style political democracy was a game of the rich and faulted the U.S. constitution for providing inadequate guarantees.
The U.S. report, released in January, accused Beijing of effectively silencing public dissent in 1996 through jailings, intimidation or exile.
China said the State Department was "once again distorting and attacking at length the state of human rights in China and more than 190 other countries and regions".
"The U.S. government, posing as the 'human rights judge of the world', turned a blind eye yet again to the serious human rights problems in its own country," Xinhua said.
"There are 220 million firearms in private hands, which translates into nearly one gun per person," it said. "Armed criminals are on the rampage, shootings are non-stop and a large number of innocent people have fallen prey to violence."
Xinhua cited the deadly 1993 World Trade Centre bombing in New York, the 1995 bombing in Oklahoma City and the explosion during the Olympic Games in Atlanta last year as symptoms of America's deep-rooted problems.
"It is not accidental that terrorist bomb attacks continuously occur in the United States, an excessively violent country where terrorism is deeply rooted in society."
The news agency said the United States had one of the world's largest police forces relative to its population and the largest prison population.
The report described crowded U.S. prisons as places where "prison guards mounted on horseback keep watch on inmates as though they are herding animals".
"Inmates are sometimes forced to fight among themselves and are whipped".
It condemned pervasive racial discrimination, saying blacks and other ethnic minorities had always been second-class citizens.
The agency went on to say the United States had a less than exemplary record abroad, inflicting human rights violations on other nations through wars and acts of aggression throughout its history.
"We strongly advise the U.S. government to put its own house in order before pointing its finger at other countries," it said.
