China blamed criminal elements on Sunday for a bomb that ripped through a rush-hour bus on a busy Beijing street, and offered a big reward for help in solving the case.
Exiled Uighur separatists claimed responsibility for Friday's deadly blast, and vowed to stage more attacks until they had gained "complete freedom" for China's far western region of Xinjiang.
Local Beijing newspapers said in a brief but prominent announcement that "criminal elements had used a homemade explosive device" in the attack.
The bomb went off on a Number 22 bus as it trundled through Beijing's western Xidan district during the evening rush hour. China's state-controlled media have said no one died but sources said the blast killed at least two people and injured 30.
The semi-official China News Service quoted Beijing Mayor Jia Qingling as saying another smaller bomb went off earlier last week elsewhere in the Chinese capital. No one was hurt in that incident.
The Beijing blasts followed a string of bus bombings in Urumqi, capital of the restive Moslem region of Xinjiang.
Exiled ethnic Uighurs, who want to set up an independent state of "East Turkestan" in Xinjiang, claimed responsibility for those attacks which killed nine people and injured 74.
"The bus explosion in Beijing city ...is the only way for the Xinjiang Uighur people to take revenge against communist China's oppression," Taiwan's state-run Central News Agency said in a report quoting the Turkey-based Organisation for Turkestan Freedom.
China's national media have ignored the bombings in Beijing and Xinjiang.
On Sunday, however, local Beijing newspapers published a police notice calling on the public, and passengers on the Number 22 bus in particular, to come forward with any information that could aid the investigation.
"Those who provide important information will be given a substantial reward," the notice said.
Police were unwilling to go beyond the brief official statements. "We cannot offer any details of progress in the case," said one official.
The media reports made no mention of a motive.
Three bombs blew up within minutes of each other on February 25 in Urumqi in attacks apparently timed to coincide with memorial rites in Beijing for China's paramount leader Deng Xiaoping. Deng died on February 19 aged 92.
Beijing taxi drivers said their employers had warned them last week not to give rides to any suspicious-looking people from Xinjiang and to be especially cautious in areas where many Uighur migrants live.
"They said that if we give a Xinjiang person a ride we should check the cab for bombs after he gets out," said one taxi driver, who declined to be identified.
Other sources said a bomb warning had been telephoned to Beijing police before the explosion, but added that the caller had named another area in the capital.
Those behind the latest bombing may have been trying to make a more dramatic statement with their attack, sources said.
The Beijing bus targeted on Friday snakes its way through the Xidan shopping district, then passes the Zhongnanhai compound of China's ruling elite and the vast Tiananmen Square, both of them symbols of communist rule.
