An unemployed Taiwanese journalist on Monday doused himself with petrol aboard a Taiwan airliner and hijacked the plane to China where he requested political asylum, officials said.
The Boeing 757 airliner, carrying 150 passengers and six crew, was on its way back to Taiwan after landing safely in the southeastern city of Xiamen.
Chinese police said the suspect, identified by Taiwan as Liu Shan-chung, 45, was being held in Xiamen for questioning.
"The hijacker wants political asylum," an airport official said by telephone.
An executive of Far East Air Transport, the operator of the hijacked Taiwanese airliner, told reporters the man who forced Flight 128 to fly to China said he faced political repression in Taiwan.
"The hijacker told the captain 'I am a victim of political repression'," said Lee Yun-ning, general manager of Far East Air Transport, speaking in Taipei.
Taiwan demanded China return the suspect, saying it had the right to put him on trial.
"We have legal jurisdiction," Taiwan Justice Minister Liao Cheng-hao said hours after the plane crossed the Taiwan Strait and touched down in Xiamen. "The mainland authorities should return the hijacker immediately."
Chinese officials did not say how they would deal with the suspect.
Hijacking is a capital offence but commandeering an aircraft from China's arch rival Taiwan would be determined by political considerations as well as legal guidelines, lawyers said.
China and Taiwan have been rivals since the end of the Chinese civil war in 1949 when the Nationalists fled to the island after their defeat on the mainland by the communists.
The Taiwan airliner was on a scheduled flight from the island's southern city of Kaohsiung to Taipei when it changed course and headed for the China mainland.
Liu had doused himself with petrol and forced the pilot to change course, Taiwanese authorities said.
Liu worked briefly as a journalist for the east Taiwan newspaper Lientung Daily after being fired a year ago from Kaohsiung's The Commons Daily for discipline problems, his former employers said.
In Taiwan, Defence Minister Chiang Chung-ling said four Taiwan fighters had scrambled into an escort formation and tailed the plane part of the way across the Taiwan Strait.
Taiwan defence officials decided not to intercept the flight to avoid a military "misunderstanding" with China's People's Liberation Army, a defence official told Reuters.
The last hijacking of a Taiwanese airliner to China was in May 1986, when the pilot of a Boeing 747 cargo plane owned by Taiwan's flag carrier China Airlines commandeered the jet and flew it to Guangzhou.
Beijing returned the plane and two crew members who did not want to stay in China after talks between the two rivals in Hong Kong.
China endured a rash of 12 hijackings in 1993 and 1994 by Chinese who ordered pilots to fly them to Taiwan for political asylum.
Air piracy fell off sharply after Beijing launched a major drive to improve what had been lax security at most airports.
