China moved ahead on Wednesday with plans to host U.S. Vice President Al Gore, the most senior American visitor in eight years, ignoring a flap over alleged Beijing funding for the United States Democratic Party.
A Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman denied the funding allegations and said they would not affect this month's visit which both sides have portrayed as part of efforts to mend damaged ties.
"The Chinese and American sides are actively preparing for the visit," a ministry spokesman told Reuters on Wednesday.
The allegations of Chinese assistance to the Democrats were made by "people with ulterior motives", the spokesman said.
The Washington Post reported on Sunday that the U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation had warned six members of Congress last year that they had been targeted by China to receive illegal campaign contributions from foreign corporations.
U.S. investigators had found what officials called conclusive evidence that Chinese government funds were funnelled into the United States in 1996, the newspaper said.
China and the United States have been hoping to use Gore's visit, scheduled for March 24-28, to help restore ties strained in recent years by a host of issues ranging from Taiwan and trade to arms and human rights.
Gore would become the most senior U.S. official to visit China since then-President George Bush toured Beijing in early 1989. That trip was marred by a flap over a U.S. decision to invite a prominent dissident to a banquet in honour of China's leaders.
Chinese and American officials have given few details of Gore's trip, though an advance team is expected in Beijing this week to make final preparations.
The vice president's visit is expected to pave the way for an exchange of summits between Chinese President Jiang Zemin and U.S. President Bill Clinton.
Beijing has been angered by the allegations that it made illegal contributions to the Democrats, saying it had neither the interest nor the financial ability to make such payments.
"We do not have the money to support U.S. political parties," a ministry spokesman told reporters on Tuesday.
A U.S. congressional committee investigating campaign funding abuses has issued subpoenas to the White House and Justice Department for information on any alleged Chinese government involvement in funnelling money for the 1996 U.S. presidential election.
A senior Chinese foreign ministry official had made serious representations to the U.S. charge d'affairs in Beijing over the accusations of illegal donations, the official Xinhua news agency said on Monday.
Clinton's Democratic Party has already returned $3 million in questionable cash to various donors, most of them with Asian ties.
Gore himself has been tarred with allegations by Republicans that he may have violated the law by pressing for contributions to the Democratic Party during the 1996 election campaign. He has insisted he broke no laws.
Clinton has used the issue to renew an appeal for reform in U.S. campaign financing laws.
The U.S. Senate voted on Tuesday to expand its investigation of campaign fundraising abuses from just illegal actions to illegal and improper activities.
While diplomats say Beijing and Washington are determined to prevent their many differences from outweighing areas of common interest, frosty exchanges have remained a frequent feature of the Sino-U.S. diplomatic dialogue.
In its annual report on human rights, the U.S. State Department accused Beijing of effectively silencing public dissent in 1996 through jailings, intimidation or exile.
On Wednesday, China's official Legal Daily repeated Beijing's response to the U.S. report, saying it had interfered in the internal affairs of other countries and had aroused objections around the world.
