Premier Li Peng said on Friday China wanted a swift end to a crisis surrounding a senior North Korean defector sheltering in South Korea's mission in Beijing.
Li gave little hint as to how the month-long standoff would end, although he said stability on the tense Korean peninsula was a key consideration.
"I can tell you conditions are nearly ripe for solving this problem," Li told reporters when asked about progress in negotiations on the fate of Hwang Jang-yop, who has sought refuge in Seoul's Beijing consulate.
China wanted to "appropriately solve this problem at an early date", he told a news conference at Beijing's cavernous Great Hall of the People.
"On this question, China will exercise caution and we will handle the issue by proceeding from the maintenance of peace on the Korean peninsula," Li said.
"Of course, we will consider the positions of all sides," he said.
Hwang, a senior ideological theoretician and top aide to supreme leader Kim Jong-il, has been stranded in the consular compound since February 12 while China and North and South Korea negotiate his fate.
He is the most senior official to defect from the isolated Stalinist state.
He has said he wants to be allowed to go to South Korea and foreign diplomats have said that he would likely be allowed to leave for a third country first and then travel to Seoul.
The defection on Chinese territory has deeply embarrassed Beijing, forcing it to chose between its old communist ally of North Korea and its new capitalist friend in the South.
China and North Korea fought side by side in the 1950-53 Korean War but Beijing has drawn closer to South Korea as it pushes ahead with rapid development under market-style economic reforms.
Li repeated Beijing's position that it had jurisdiction since Hwang asked for asylum while he was in Beijing.
He said China would follow international practice in solving the dispute but he made the somewhat surprising remark that there was no automatic right to asylum as far as Beijing was concerned.
"China does not recognise the right of diplomatic asylum by foreign embassies or consulates in its territory," he said.
Beijing has, however, allowed asylum seekers to leave foreign embassies on its soil in the past.
Dissident Fang Lizhi sought shelter in the U.S. embassy in Beijing shortly after the army crackdown on dissent in June 1989. He was eventually allowed to leave for the United States.
