The Communist Party boss of China's restive Xinjiang region said on Friday a tiny handful of separatists was behind a series of recent bombings but most had been caught and the region was stable.
He also denied that hundreds of people had been killed in unrest in Xinjiang.
"Only an extremely small number of people were involved in these acts of terrorism," said Xinjiang party chief Wang Lequan in response to a reporter's question on the unrest.
"Most of the criminals have already been caught."
Wang, flanked by the entire leadership of the largely Moslem region, did not give any figures for the number of arrests or deaths.
Wang was speaking at a briefing for reporters and government officials on a trade fair planned for the far northwestern region later this year.
"This does not mean Xinjiang is not stable," he said. "Investors should not be unduly concerned."
Three bombs went off on public buses in the region's capital Urumqi last month in an attack apparently timed to coincide with funeral rites in Beijing for China's late paramount leader Deng Xiaoping.
Nine people were killed and 74 wounded.
Exiled ethnic Uighurs, who want to set up an independent state of "East Turkestan" in Xinjiang, have claimed responsibility for the bombings and vowed to stage more attacks until they had gained complete freedom for their homeland.
The Turkic-speaking Uighurs are Xinjiang's largest Moslem group. Relations with Han Chinese settlers have been uneasy and marked by sporadic outbreaks of violence. China is predominantly Han.
The bus bombings in Urumqi followed an anti-Chinese riot in early February in the city of Yining, about 50 km (30 miles) east of Xinjiang's border with Kazakhstan. Chinese officials said nine people were killed and 198 injured in that incident.
Wang described the Yining unrest as an act of subversion that also stemmed from a small group of people.
"This was quelled very quickly," he said.
Asked to comment on a report that hundreds of people, both Uighur and Han Chinese, had died in the aftermath of that incident, he said: "There is no truth to this."
Other officials said the incidents had not disrupted trade with neighbouring Central Asian states or other areas.
"The roads to Kazakhstan and other areas are open," said Li Donghui, Xinjiang's vice governor.
"Our trade overall was up 80 percent in the first two months of the year. Border trade rose 50 percent."
Officials also said the incidents had not affected stability in other parts of the country.
Two bombs went off in Beijing last week. One of the attacks killed two people and wounded about 30, sources have said.
Police and other officials have said there was no evidence linking those bombings with unrest in Xinjiang.
But taxi drivers in the Chinese capital have said they were asked not to give rides to suspicious looking people from Xinjiang and to be especially cautious in neighbourhoods where many Uighur migrants live.
