U.S. computer software giant Microsoft Corp joined China's top personal computer maker on Tuesday in a licensing pact hailed by Beijing as proof it was serious about protecting intellectual property rights.
Under the agreement, China's Legend Group will be allowed to pre-install the Chinese-language version of Microsoft's Windows 95 software in its personal computers.
"This shows the Chinese government's resolve to protect intellectual property rights," said Yu Zhongyu, chief engineer at the Ministry of Electronics Industry, speaking at the signing ceremony in Beijing.
Other officials at the ceremony described the accord as one of the biggest signed since the United States and China reached an agreement last June on the protection of intellectual property rights, averting a trade war.
Beijing agreed to protect intellectual property rights by moving to stamp out piracy that American firms had alleged was costing them $2.3 billion a year in lost sales.
Computer software piracy figured prominently in last year's often heated Sino-U.S. discussions.
The licensing pact could mean payments of about 100 million yuan ($12 million) by Legend to Microsoft over the next two years, if the Chinese company meets its sales targets, officials of the two companies said.
Legend said it sold 200,000 personal computers last year and it is aiming to double that figure this year.
Chinese government officials have said that about 1.8 million personal computers were sold overall in China last year.
"This is the most significant agreement Microsoft has signed in the People's Republic of China," said Charles Stevens, Microsoft vice president, Far East.
The two companies described their agreement as part of a strategic partnership that pointed to further cooperation in future.
The Windows 95 software to be installed in the Legend computers employs the simplified Chinese characters used in mainland China.
Legend Group controls the Hong Kong-listed Legend. Legend officials said the income from the personal computers sold under the agreement with Microsoft would be largely reflected in the results of the Beijing operations.
