China's offer to return a hijacker to Taiwan has raised hopes of an easing of tension between the two rivals but it is likely to be only a small step in closing their wide gulf, analysts said on Thursday.
They said Beijing has allowed itself flexibility by not saying when it would return the unemployed journalist who is alleged to have commandeered a Taiwan airliner 10 days ago.
Taiwan, which holds the trump cards in this round of their diplomatic game, may also be trying to use the issue to force a resumption of formal talks with China, broken off in mid-1995.
"It's an interesting and encouraging development in that they are still talking to each other on practical matters," said a Western diplomat with long years of China experience.
"But it's no major concession," he said. "There's likely to be more people hijacking in the opposite direction."
China on Thursday gave in to Taiwan's demands to repatriate Liu Shan-chung, but demanded the island send back 16 Chinese hijackers in return.
It did not give a date for the return of Liu, who is suspected of forcing a Taiwanese airliner to fly to China's southeastern city of Xiamen. The plane, crew and all other passengers were returned the same day but China has held the hijacker in custody.
"Liu Shan-chung... will be repatriated to Taiwan after necessary investigations are made," the official Xinhua news agency said, quoting China's Association for Relations Across the Taiwan Straits.
The semi-official association handles bilateral ties in the absence of formal links between Beijing and Taipei, rivals since the communists won the Chinese civil war and drove the defeated Nationalists into exile on Taiwan in 1949.
The association said China was repatriating the hijacker in line with an agreement reached in 1990, but which was never signed.
Taiwan has jailed 16 Chinese for hijacking 12 airliners to the island between April 1993 and June 1994. It has offered to return two of them.
"Beijing is more eager to see an end to hijackings," said another diplomat in Beijing. "That gives Taiwan leverage on this issue."
Taiwan welcomed Beijing's announcement but declined to signal any further response.
"This will be positive for our future talks on hijacker repatriation," said Jonathan Liu, a director of Taiwan's Mainland Affairs Council.
But he said Taiwan would wait for formal notification before it decided on its next move.
Taiwan has banned direct air and shipping with China for almost five decades, and insists such links must go through a third territory, mainly Hong Kong.
China has been pushing for direct trade and transport links though Taiwan has been using these as key bargaining chips on any talks on the future relations of the two rivals.
Taipei wants to see a resumption of semi-official talks, broken off by China after Taiwanese President Lee Teng-hui made a private visit to the United States in 1995. The visit angered China, which views the island as a renegade province that is not entitled to official contacts with other states.
Foreign analysts in Beijing said that the timing of the announcement on Liu's return to Taiwan had some additional political mileage for Beijing.
It was made shortly before the Dalai Lama, Tibet's exiled spiritual leader, starts a visit to the island.
China has warned Taiwan against using the visit to further its political ends.
