China said on Friday it was concerned its trade surplus with the United States might affect ties and released a White Paper in defence of its policies.
Vice Minister of Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation Sun Zhenyu said Beijing was taking steps to trim the surplus but action was also needed by the U.S. government and American industry.
"The issue has become such a general concern to American people from all walks of life that failure to handle the issue properly could hold up the normal development of the economic and trade relations between the two countries," Sun said in a statement given to reporters.
The statement was one of the most visible signs that Beijing policymakers were looking for ways to head off possible U.S. measures to curb China's sales to that market.
Sun expressed hope that the visit next week by U.S. Vice President Al Gore would help develop mutual trust, and he hinted the trip might coincide with the signing of some major contracts.
"I would not exclude the possibility of the signing of some contracts," he told reporters.
He added that a deal for the sale of Boeing aircraft to China was among the possibilities though the companies involved needed to agree on terms.
"We will continue to encourage our enterprises to expand imports from the United States," Sun said.
He made his remarks one day after Washington announced China's trade surplus with the United States rose to $3.72 billion in January from $2.74 billion in January last year.
Washington says China had a surplus of nearly $40 billion with the United States for all of last year while Beijing puts the figure at $10 billion.
China does not count shipments through Hong Kong and the White Paper addressed this issue by saying that both American and Chinese experts agreed those goods had an average of 40 percent added value in Hong Kong.
That meant the U.S. version of the trade imbalance was overstated, according to the White Paper.
The paper pointed out that much of the trade surplus was from China's processing of raw materials from other regions, meaning that other countries were in fact benefiting from the trade as well.
China was also providing low-cost production that had been done in Taiwan, South Korea and Hong Kong in the past, and was not taking jobs away from American workers.
Sun said U.S. companies had lost out on major infrastructure contracts, particularly in the electric power sector, because of a lack of government export financing, and he called for more support from the U.S. Export-Import Bank.
Washington had thwarted its own prospects in the nuclear power sector because of restrictions on nuclear technology exports to China.
"The U.S. export control policies and lingering sanctions against China have greatly restricted U.S. exports to China as well as U.S. investments in high-tech sectors," the White Paper said.
Sun noted that China had reduced its import duties sharply in recent years and that further cuts would bring the average rate to 15 percent by the year 2000 from 23 percent now.
