With just 100 days before China regains its coveted prize of Hong Kong, Beijing has sidestepped the colony's departing British masters and made sure new local leaders know where to take their cue.
China has made clear its intention to mould the territory's politics more in its own image, mapping plans to dismantle the elected legislature and water down civil liberties laws while telling Britain that objections were pointless.
"China is firmly in charge," said a Beijing-based diplomat.
Chinese Premier Li Peng has brushed aside London's hopes of monitoring the 1984 Sino-British agreement on Hong Kong after the handover, proclaiming that Beijing would implement the accord as it saw fit.
"I think this is unrealistic," Li said when asked about British plans to review the pact's implementation after the transfer of power. "After July 1, Hong Kong's sovereignty returns to China."
Under the 1984 accord, China has pledged to give Hong Kong a high degree of autonomy for 50 years after the handover.
Beijing has also ensured that the future administrators of the territory are firmly in its camp.
Since his selection by a group of 400 people vetted by Beijing, Hong Kong's leader-in-waiting Tung Chee-hwa has shown little enthusiasm for staking out positions differing from China's official party line.
BEIJING LIKES WHAT IT HEARS
The shipping tycoon-turned-politician, who has shuttled between Hong Kong and Beijing since he was named chief executive-designate last December, has echoed China's views on issues ranging from the territory's future legislature to civil liberties and textbook revisions.
He has also hurled barbs at Hong Kong democratic activists who have been critical of China.
Beijing has responded by showing its pleasure.
The official media have described Tung in a somewhat more flattering fashion than that reserved for the territory's current and last colonial governor, Chris Patten, who has clashed repeatedly with Beijing over his efforts to expand democratic institutions in the final years of British rule.
In a sign of official favour, cameras of China's national television lingered on Tung when he attended funeral rites last month for late paramount leader Deng Xiaoping, the man credited with directing the strategy that enabled Beijing to recover sovereignty over Hong Kong.
"Mr Tung knows that if he doesn't carry out Beijing's wishes, someone else will," said a Western diplomat in Beijing.
Other analysts in Beijing are willing to wait before making a judgment on Tung.
"He has to establish his credibility with the Chinese," said a foreign diplomat in Beijing who follows Hong Kong affairs.
WILL TUNG STAND UP FOR HONG KONG?
"The question is, will he stand up for Hong Kong's interests in the future?"
Some people are not so sure.
"That is the charitable assessment," said one foreign diplomat in Hong Kong.
He and other analysts suggest that Tung may be more like many of Hong Kong's business leaders who are often reluctant to confront Beijing in public, whatever the issue.
The analysts note opposition can be costly.
Jardine Matheson, one of the colony's oldest trading houses, was publicly vilified by Beijing after its directors supported political reforms proposed by Patten. It has since worked hard to mend its relationship.
Businessman Jimmy Lai printed vitriolic comments about China's premier in his Next magazine in 1994. Lai's Giordano clothing outlets ran into problems with authorities in China and he eventually sold his share in the firm.
Many businessmen would probably prefer to see their names linked to more soothing comments to Beijing's ears, such as those of Hong Kong tycoon Li Ka-shing, on the contribution of China's late leader Deng Xiaoping.
An article by Li that was published prominently in the Communist Party newspaper, the People's Daily, praised the late party patriarch, his chosen successor and the future system for Hong Kong, all making deft use of communist jargon.
But diplomats said that for political leaders such as Tung, there is a considerable risk in being perceived as too willing to speak out on behalf of Beijing.
China wants a popular leader who can rally the territory's 6.4 million people to Beijing's cause, they said.
If its interests clash with those of Hong Kong, and Tung is perceived merely as Beijing's willing tool, the future leader risks losing his still high popular support.
"China chose him because he was acceptable to many people and would do its bidding," said a diplomat. "If he loses popularity in Hong Kong, that complicates matters for Beijing."
