China trumpeted the 100-day mark for the recovery of Hong Kong on Sunday and hailed late leader Deng Xiaoping for his guiding role in bringing more than a century of colonial shame to a close.
Hundreds of people gathered at midnight near Tiananmen Square in the heart of Beijing to watch a huge electronic countdown clock as it flashed only 100 days to go before the British colony reverts to Chinese rule on July 1.
Official newspapers covered their front pages with reports of the impending end of British colonial rule as called for under a Sino-British accord signed in 1984.
"We have endured 100 years of shame, 100 years of resistance and 100 years of waiting," said the Guangming Daily.
"Now in another 100 days, the hopes of generations will be realised."
The Communist Party newspaper, the People's Daily, devoted much of its front page to the historic occasion and the role played in it by the nation's paramount leader Deng Xiaoping, who died last month aged 92 before he could see his dream fulfilled.
Deng guided China's negotiations with Britain and is credited with devising the formula of "one country, two systems" that allows Hong Kong to keep its capitalist system and a "high degree of autonomy" for 50 years.
"At this moment we think even more fondly of Deng Xiaoping," said the party newspaper.
"It was he who proposed the great formula of 'one country, two systems' that allowed us to peacefully resolve a thorny question left over from history and realise the complete reunification of our country..."
That praise was echoed by some of the hundreds of people who braved Beijing's chilly night air to watch the countdown clock mark the last 100 days before the transfer of power in Hong Kong.
"This is Deng's contribution," said a retired office worker surnamed Chang. "I am overjoyed."
A huge roar erupted from the crowd at midnight as students waved banners saying, "China takes the road to strength" and chanted "Hong Kong comes home".
"I'm thrilled," said An Na, a student at the Chemical Industry Institute. "I wish I didn't have to wait 100 days."
China ceded Hong Kong island to Britain in 1842 under the Treaty of Nanjing following the Opium War, and Britain later added to its holdings in the area.
While China hailed the impending recovery of Hong Kong, it had barely a passing word for the British government that decided to hand back the colony peacefully rather than contest its claim to the territory.
The official media also had little to say about China's pledges of a "high degree of autonomy" under the joint accord, though it hinted at concerns in Hong Kong and elsewhere.
The Shenzhen Special Zone Daily, published in the border boom town of Shenzhen near Hong Kong, tried to reassure residents of Hong Kong about a report on the Chinese army garrison that will be stationed in the territory.
"Don't worry, dear compatriots," it advised its readers, without saying what they might have to worry about.
The People's Daily similarly sought to deflect concerns.
"More and more people are coming to the belief that the Chinese government is reliable and capable and will faithfully carry out its promises," it said.
