China gave new details on Wednesday of the failed launch of a satellite aboard its Long March 3B rocket in February, confirming that the cause lay with the new generation launcher.
The report concluded that the failure of the Long March 3B was due to an electrical problem in the power module of the "inertial platform" that operated the rocket's direction controls.
"There was no electric current output from the power module in the servo-loop on the follow-up frame of the inertia platform," a spokesman for the China Great Wall Industrial Corp, which handles China's launches, quoted the report as saying.
"All other systems operated normally," the report said.
The initial report had said briefly that the problem was a failure of the rocket's inertial platform.
The Long March 3B, which was being used in a launch for the first time, veered wildly seconds after lift-off from the Xichang satellite centre in southwestern Sichuan province.
It ended its flight in a spectacular explosion that destroyed the rocket and the U.S.-made Intelsat satellite it was carrying.
The latest report said the rocket smashed into a hillside 1.85 km (1.2 miles) from the launch site.
Official reports said six people were killed and 57 injured, although a video smuggled out by an Israeli scientist showed extensive damage to buildings in the area, suggesting that the number of casualties might have been considerably higher.
The final report said that because of the severity of the explosion, no large pieces of wreckage of the satellite or the rocket remained.
The report's conclusions were drawn largely from film of the launch and data from remote testing.
China's space programme once had a reputation for dependability, but has been marred by a string of recent failures.
It suffered a blow to its hopes to capture a significant share of the commercial satellite launch market when a Long March 3 rocket failed to lift a U.S.-built satellite into proper orbit last month.
The preliminary conclusion blamed the failure on a problem with the third-stage booster of the Long March 3 rocket, which is supposed to be one of China's most reliable launch vehicles.
China has come under pressure from potential foreign customers as well as the insurance industry to disclose more information on the problems with its launches so far.
In January 1995, a Long March rocket blew up, destroying the Apstar 2 satellite and killing six people on the ground.
However, China successfully launched Hong Kong's Apstar 1A telecommunications satellite in July after delaying the launch following last February's Long March 3B explosion.
