U.S. Vice President Al Gore arrived in Beijing on Monday to heal Sino-U.S. ties and pave the way for an exchange of presidential visits amid controversy about possible Chinese efforts to influence U.S. elections.
Gore told reporters before he left Tokyo for Beijing that he would not shy away from issues such as human rights in talks with Chinese leaders during his four-day visit, but had no plans for specific meetings with human rights activists.
Speaking after a 24-hour stay in Tokyo Gore said, however, that he could not rule out talks with activists at U.S. embassy functions while he was in China.
The controversy over U.S. accusations that China may have made illegal contributions to the Democratic Party cast a cloud over the four-day visit aimed at healing ties damaged by disputes ranging from human rights to trade and Taiwan.
The official People's Daily said on Monday the Chinese government had not made any payments to the Democratic Party and that an improvement in Sino-U.S. ties was due to efforts by the two governments and their people.
Asked what U.S. concerns he would raise in Beijing, Gore replied: "I will, of course, discuss human rights in my meetings with the leadership of China, nor will it be a surprise to them to hear these matters raised."
But he added: "I have no specific meeting of that kind (planned with human rights activists)."
Human rights abuses in China have long been a sore spot in Sino-U.S. relations, particularly since China called in the army to crush a student-led democracy movement in Beijing in 1989.
Gore is the most senior U.S. official to visit China since then President George Bush, who toured China just months before the 1989 crackdown that sent Sino-U.S. ties into a tailspin.
In its annual report on human rights, the U.S. State Department accused Beijing of effectively silencing public dissent in 1996 through jailings, intimidation or exile.
Sino-U.S. relations had been strained by disputes ranging from human rights to trade and Taiwan, but Washington and Beijing have worked hard to improve ties in recent months.
Gore's trip to China, part of an Asian tour that includes South Korea, is aimed at paving the way for an exchange of visits by U.S. President Bill Clinton and Chinese President Jiang Zemin over the next year.
The sister of China's most prominent dissident has appealed to Gore to ask Beijing to free him from a 14-year jail term when he meets China's leaders on Tuesday and Wednesday.
The health of veteran dissident Wei Jingsheng was deteriorating in a Chinese jail and his requests for medical care had been ignored by prison authorities, a U.S.-based human rights group quoted his family as saying after a recent visit.
In a letter to Gore, Wei's sister called on the U.S. vice president to use the opportunity of his meetings this week with Chinese leaders to appeal for the release of her brother.
"I ask you to appeal to the Chinese government for my brother's prompt release and, until prior to his release, for his parole for medical treatment," wrote Wei Shanshan in a letter dated March 4, a copy of which was made available by the New York-based group Human Rights in China.
Although U.S. officials were negotiating with their Chinese counterparts to try to hammer out various agreements in time for Gore's trip, no dramatic breakthroughs are expected.
In fact, Gore's advisers had a debate over whether he should even participate in a signing ceremony in which China plans to order new aircraft from Boeing Co, a move that will generate jobs and benefit the U.S. economy.
Although officials said there was no doubt Gore would participate in such an event if a final contract was reached, the fact there was any question underscored the sensitivity of the political funding issue.
