China said on Monday it had not made contributions to the U.S. Democratic Party to influence American policy and the visit by U.S. Vice President Al Gore had no link to improper payments.
The official People's Daily also pointed an accusing finger at Taiwan for stirring up accusations of Chinese involvement to try to shift blame from itself.
"The Chinese government is not involved in the so-called 'political contributions scandal' in the slightest way and is entirely free of guilt," said the newspaper in a signed commentary.
The Washington Post has reported that the Federal Bureau of Investigation warned six members of Congress last year that they had been targeted by China to receive illegal campaign contributions from foreign corporations.
"The development of Sino-U.S. relations is based on principles," the People's Daily said.
Gore is scheduled to arrive in Beijing later on Monday, making him the most senior U.S. official to visit in eight years.
His trip is aimed at healing ties that had been badly strained by disputes ranging from human rights to trade and Taiwan.
It is also intended to pave the way for an exchange of visits by U.S. President Bill Clinton and Chinese President Jiang Zemin.
"The continuation of high level visits, such as the visit of U.S. Vice President Gore and others, is due to the efforts of the two governments and their peoples," the newspaper said.
"To insist that this is linked to the so-called contributions scandal is ridiculous," it said. "It is a complete fabrication to allege that the improvement in Sino-U.S. relations is due to any improper payments by the Chinese government."
The People's Daily commentary condemned Taiwan as well as news organisations from the island for the storm of criticism that has engulfed China.
"It is widely known that the 'political payments case' stems from Taiwan," the newspaper said.
It referred to a report last year by a Hong Kong publication, the Chinese language edition of Asiaweek magazine, that said Liu Tai-ying, head of the business management committee of Taiwan's ruling Nationalist Party, had expressed a willingness to contribute $15 million.
The People's Daily did not mention that Taiwan has denied the allegations and has sued the magazine.
"For some Taiwan politicians it appears that the best way out of their troubles is to put the blame elsewhere," said the newspaper.
Taiwan and China have been rivals since the Nationalists fled to the island after their defeat on the mainland by the communists in 1949.
The United States formally recognises China but maintains trade and other unofficial ties with Taiwan.
Washington sent warships near Taiwan in a show of support when Beijing staged war games and missile tests to intimidate the island early last year.
