China has made a gesture to the United States by ordering Boeing jets but it has left the door open to the aircraft maker's European rival in a thinly veiled mix of politics and commerce, analysts said on Tuesday.
They said improving Sino-U.S. ties, highlighted by the visit of U.S. Vice President Al Gore, had enabled Boeing Co to sign a pact to sell five 777s to Air China for $685 million.
But Beijing was holding back orders for planes it clearly needed, keeping a close eye on the progress of Sino-U.S. ties and squeezing maximum concessions from Washington on a range of trade issues, they said.
"This is a very political game," said a foreign diplomat.
"The Chinese are moving ahead cautiously. The decisions are made by (Premier) Li Peng himself."
Diplomats said new deals for Boeing or rival Airbus Industrie could be linked to China's campaign to join the World Trade Organisation.
The United States has been the most vocal advocate of wresting further concessions from China in liberalising its domestic market before it is allowed to join the trade body.
Beijing may also be hoping to make progress in its bid to persuade Washington to grant it permanent most favoured nation trading status to avoid an annual review.
Boeing officials said they had been looking to sell 10 of their twin-engine 777s to Air China, the main Chinese international carrier.
They insisted the smaller-than-hoped-for order, delayed by more than one year by Sino-U.S. friction, was a commercial decision and they were confident of making more sales for the same type of plane in future.
China often assails the West for mixing trade and diplomacy.
But the political drama behind the Boeing deal was highlighted by the signing ceremony in the Great Hall of the People as both Gore and Premier Li looked on.
Gore is the most senior U.S. official to visit China since then-president George Bush travelled to Beijing in early 1989 -- just months before a crackdown on democracy protests in the Chinese capital's Tiananmen Square.
"Airbus will be disappointed at today's order," said a another Western diplomat.
"They were looking to sell the A330-300," a twin-engine jet that Airbus says it has not yet sold in China.
But Boeing has hardly dealt its key rival a knockout blow.
"This is not a mega-order," said an industry analyst.
The next sign of how political ties translate into contracts could emerge at the forthcoming visit by French President Jacques Chirac.
Analysts said they would watch closely to see whether new plane orders go to Airbus Industrie and how many planes were purchased.
China has said it will put in service some 240 more planes during the current five-year plan ending in the year 2000 to keep up with rising demand for domestic and international air travel. Most of those planes have yet to be ordered.
Boeing officials, quoting Chinese data, said they were well ahead in the China market so far with some 216 planes in service against 29 for Airbus.
But Boeing underwent a dry spell in 1996, notching only a handful of sales in a year in which Sino-U.S. ties were rocked by Beijing's sabre-rattling aimed at Taiwan as well as disputes over trade, arms control and human rights.
Airbus signed a pact for 30 of the Airbus A320 narrow body jets in April last year in a deal worth $1.5 billion.
Those planes compete with Boeing's smaller 737 jets.
Boeing officials said that with some of the political friction out of the way, they expect more market inroads, and note the latest deal brings this year's sales to $1.2 billion.
But analysts cautioned that despite the improvement in Sino-U.S. ties, issues between the two states were unlikely to be resolved soon and would add a political tint to future commercial deals.
