Boeing Co on Tuesday signed a $685 million contract to sell jets to China with Vice President Al Gore on hand, signalling a boost in business relations after Beijing only a year ago had turned to European rival Airbus.
Boeing and Chinese aviation officials inked a contract for five 777-200 jets in a ceremony at the cavernous Great Hall of the People, also attended by Chinese Premier Li Peng.
Under the accord, Chinese state-run international carrier Air China will take delivery of the planes in 1998 and 1999.
"Air China's order is a vote of confidence in the world's best-selling airplane in its market," said Ronald Woodard, president of Boeing Commercial Airplane Group.
Woodard told reporters both sides had reached basic agreement a year ago, but signing faced lengthy delays because of political differences between China and the United States.
"There is no doubt the contract was not executed when it was ready because of tension between the U.S. and China last year and the year before," he told reporters at a news briefing after the ceremony.
"There are times when politics are involved," he said.
A year ago, China and the United States were at odds over a range of issues from trade and human rights to Beijing's sabre-rattling over Taiwan.
Chinese Premier Li Peng was also on hand when Beijing turned to the European consortium Airbus Industrie in April last year, buying 30 airliners in a $1.5 billion deal.
Since then, Sino-U.S. tensions have eased as the two sides have made painstaking efforts to patch up their differences.
The Gore visit is aimed at ensuring that trend continues.
Gore is the most senior U.S. official to visit China since then-president George Bush travelled to Beijing in early 1989 -- just months before a crackdown on democracy protests in the Chinese capital's Tiananmen Square.
Boeing officials tried to play down last minute questions about whether Gore would attend the signing ceremony, saying there never was any doubt.
"I was told he'd be there and he was," said Woodard.
U.S. officials and Boeing were non-committal as late as on Monday about Gore's plans.
The Clinton administration has been on the defensive over accusations of illegal Chinese contributions to the Democratic Party.
China has angrily denounced the allegations, insisting that it did not make any payments and saying that rival Taiwan may be behind its current difficulties.
The Washington Post has said the Federal Bureau of Investigation warned six members of Congress last year that they had been targeted by China to receive illegal campaign contributions from foreign corporations.
Boeing officials said they hoped the United States would take further steps to keep the relationship healthy.
"We strongly and fully support granting China permanent Most Favoured Nation status and China's accession to the World Trade Organisation. Both are critical to achieving normalised world trade," Woodard said.
China has sought permanent preferential trade status from the United States to avoid an annual review.
It has also pushed for entry into the global trade body, but Washington has insisted that Beijing agree to liberalise more of its trade policies first.
Boeing walked away from the latest contract signing ceremony with a bit less than it wanted.
Company officials said they had been hoping to sell 10 of the 777s to China. They said, however, this was a commercial decision and they were hopeful of further orders in the future.
