China's stock regulators are trying to reassert control over what they see as backdoor listings of Chinese companies in Hong Kong, market sources said on Thursday.
They said the new concerns were triggered by the listing this week of GITIC Enterprises, a Hong Kong company that is controlled indirectly by the Guangdong International Trust and Investment Corp (GITIC), based in the south China city of Guangzhou.
They said the problem was particularly sensitive because of the territory's return to Chinese sovereignty on July 1 under a Sino-British accord that promises a high degree of autonomy for 50 years after the transfer of political power.
"The (Chinese) authorities are certainly worried about this issue and we could see some guidelines emerge before too long," said a securities industry executive.
A foreign securities company executive agreed.
"China is worried that a number of good companies will inject mainland assets into Hong Kong companies and then take them public without their approval."
Chinese companies that wish to list shares abroad, usually in Hong Kong, need clearance from a number of central government regulatory bodies, including the watchdog agency, the China Securities Regulatory Commission (CSRC).
Rules for Hong Kong companies controlled by Chinese interests are less clear, but recently many of these firms have first gained approval from Beijing.
GITIC Enterprises did not get prior clearance and regulatory objections are believed to have presented a last-minute hurdle.
The offer was allowed to proceed, however, and was a stunning success. The issue, nearly 900 times subscribed, finished its first day of trading on Wednesday at HK$4.375 compared with its offer price of HK$1.05.
"The company is listed now so there is no need to address the issue of whether the CSRC was involved," said an official of parent company GITIC, speaking by telephone from Guangzhou.
At least two more Hong Kong-registered companies controlled by Chinese firms from Beijing and Tianjin were preparing to offer shares in Hong Kong. They were likely to wait for Chinese regulatory clearance, sources said.
Another Guangdong company has postponed plans for an offer of shares by a Hong Kong company it controls because of the latest developments, said sources in Beijing and Hong Kong.
"The problem is mainly with Guangdong province," said a regulator in Beijing.
Guangdong, far from the reach of authorities in Beijing and backed by considerable financial muscle, has often been at odds with central government directives.
The scope of control over Hong Kong is even more sensitive.
The CSRC and other financial regulators have repeatedly said they would not interfere in supervisory matters in Hong Kong, in keeping with Beijing's promises for the territory after the handover.
An official at the CSRC was unable to clarify the extent of the agency's regulatory powers on this issue.
"I can't comment," said the official. "It is too sensitive."
Securities regulators in Guangdong underscored the problem of reaching agreement on the issue.
"When a company seeks permission from the CSRC we are usually aware of it," said a provincial regulatory official.
"But a Hong Kong-registered company does not necessarily have to go through the CSRC."
