China published on Saturday a list of anti-dumping rules to protect local companies from unfair foreign competition.
Chinese economists said the rules would help domestic companies, many of them targets of similar dumping claims overseas, protect their share of the domestic market.
They also said the move appeared to be aimed at giving a legal framework to protection from unfair competition and clarifying procedures for its use.
"Many Chinese companies are unable to compete in the face of unfair trade practices," economist Cheng Xiusheng of the State Council (cabinet) development research centre told Reuters.
"Many other countries have imposed anti-dumping duties against Chinese products and China needs a system to regulate its own market and protect its companies," he said.
The rules, published in the official People's Daily, give the government the right to determine whether imported goods are aided by official subsidies and impose anti-dumping duties on foreign goods. Cash guarantees can be demanded to ensure payment.
Prices in the exporting country or third countries will be used to determine a fair price for goods in dispute and set a countervailing duty.
The rules also provide guidelines for domestic companies to file complaints about unfair competition and set a maximum length of 12 months for an investigation. Special cases are allowed to take 18 months.
The rules also empower the state to take retaliatory measures against countries that impose "discriminatory" countervailing duties against Chinese goods.
Beijing's official media have said the dumping of foreign goods on the domestic market had cost China some 10 billion yuan ($1.2 billion) a year and had caused the loss of hundreds of thousands of jobs.
Many domestic manufacturers were pressuring the government to take steps to offset these policies, newspapers have said.
Other economists said China was trying to codify the protection of its industries and bring its trade policies more in line with international practice.
They added that as China sought to join the World Trade Organisation it was being forced to make its polices more transparent.
