The United States and China may not be on the verge of a breakthrough in often testy ties, but both sides can claim gains from visits by U.S. Vice President Al Gore and House Speaker Newt Gingrich, analysts said on Monday.
The key objective for the two sides was to ensure they moved closer to the goal of an exchange of presidential visits, putting the final seal on efforts to repair damaged relations.
"Gore's visit took them one step closer to that goal," said a foreign diplomat in Beijing.
Gore reassured the Chinese that Washington remained committed to an exchange of visits by U.S. President Bill Clinton and China's President Jiang Zemin, telling reporters that officials from both countries were working on specific dates.
The United States and China have been moving painstakingly to ease strains over disputes ranging from Taiwan to trade and human rights.
Gore, the most senior U.S. official in Beijing since the 1989 crackdown on student demonstrations in Tiananmen Square, said his talks with Chinese leaders last week touched on the key areas of disagreement but he described China's reaction as milder than in the past.
While the speaker of the House of Representatives had somewhat tougher talk in public for his Chinese hosts, pointedly referring to Beijing's policies on human rights and Taiwan, the content was not unexpected.
"He is a bit less constrained in what he can say," said a Chinese journalist who covers foreign affairs. "China recognises this."
More importantly for China's leaders, the visit by the key Republican and other members of a bipartisan congressional delegation presented an opportunity for Beijing to make a personal pitch on major issues such as Taiwan.
Jiang used his meeting with Gingrich on Friday to note how pleased he was that more congressmen were visiting China to see first hand the importance of the Taiwan issue to Beijing.
China and Taiwan, rivals since the end of the Chinese civil war in 1949, are vying for the sympathies of American policymakers and the public.
The United States recognises China but has strong commercial and other unofficial ties with the island that Beijing views as a renegade province.
Beijing believes it was misled by Washington over the landmark 1995 visit to the U.S. by Taiwan President Lee Teng-hui. The administration assured Beijing that no visit would be permitted but the trip was allowed to proceed under pressure from Congress.
Both Washington and Beijing struggled to ensure that accusations of illegal Chinese funding for the Democratic Party did not overshadow the Gore visit.
Gore reassured Beijing that unless there was firm evidence of illegal payments, the issue would not affect U.S. policy.
The visit also underscored Washington's hopes that no one issue be allowed to dominate the Sino-U.S. relationship.
"Trade issues as well as human rights will all remain on the table for discussion in the future," said another diplomat. If there was any one area where specific progress could be expected soon, perhaps it was trade, another diplomat said.
American figures put the U.S. trade deficit with China at about $40 billion last year, and Washington has been pushing for greater access to the China market to narrow the gap.
Chinese officials have conceded they are concerned over the trade issue.
During the Gore visit, U.S. aircraft maker Boeing nailed down a $685 million jet sale and General Motors gained clearance for a long-stalled car venture.
"We may see more such big contracts in the coming months," said a diplomat. "But a $40 billion (U.S.) trade deficit is not going to go away overnight."
