The Australian stock exchange on Tuesday used the China visit of Prime Minister John Howard to make a high profile sales pitch for Chinese companies to list shares on Australia's stock market.
The Australian prime minister, before meeting China's President Jiang Zemin, found time to open a seminar for China's market regulators and top-level managers of its state-run companies designed to show them why they should look to Australia to raise capital.
Senior officials from the Australian Stock Exchange as well as brokerages and legal firms delivered the message that Australia had much to offer.
"Cross-border equities trading now amounts to around $4 trillion a year, which no stock market can afford to ignore," Australian Stock Exchange chairman Maurice Newman told the seminar.
"I hope that one day we may be able to welcome you to our market."
Most Chinese companies that have listed their shares abroad have chosen Hong Kong where investors have been snapping up China-related stocks.
One recent listing of a China-linked company was nearly 900 times oversubscribed, and Australia may find it difficult to generate that kind of interest.
Newman later told reporters that 19 of 31 Asian-owned companies on the Australian exchange already had a China connection. These companies have often used a corporation not based in China to make the listing, in effect sidestepping regulatory curbs in their home country.
Trading in some of those issues has not been active.
"The liquidity of those companies is mixed," said Newman. "As a group we would prefer that it were greater."
Australia may soon get its first direct Chinese listing.
Taihang Cement, a cement producer based in the northern province of Hebei, has already gained approval from Chinese regulatory authorities for a foreign listing.
Company officials told reporters they hoped to list their shares in Australia by the year-end.
"We chose Australia because we have a foundation there," said Zhang Zhixian, Taihang's manager of investment development, noting that the company exports cement to Australia.
Company officials said the exact size of the offer had not been set but would range between 100 and 200 million yuan ($12-24 million).
Other participants at the seminar said Australia might target its efforts at sectors where Australia is already strong, such as in natural resources.
"Australia would have a natural advantage in infrastructure and resource-based companies," said Tony Greenwood, of law firm Blake Dawson Waldron, noting the heavy weighting of such stocks in Australia.
One area of concern for Chinese companies will be financial transparency, which has posed a problem for them in the past.
Some Chinese companies have had trouble complying with domestic regulations and others have come under criticism in Hong Kong for lack of transparency.
"Our concern must also be the integrity of our market," said Newman.
"It is important that companies are familiar with our listing requirements and they observe them faithfully."
