China marked on Saturday the first "tombsweeping" day since the death of Deng Xiaoping with few outward signs of remembrance for the late paramount leader.
Thousands of Beijing residents streamed through the gates of Babaoshan cemetery for the Qingming festival, traditionally the day for tidying ancestral graves.
But for the most part this was a family occasion, far removed from the political limelight that surrounded Deng during his lifetime.
"I have come here every year since my husband died in 1991," said a Beijing resident, holding the hand of her granddaughter as they left the cemetery.
"This is a family matter. There is no connection with any political leaders."
A group of students from Deng's native province of Sichuan, all of them enrolled at a university in the Chinese capital, gathered at the cemetery gates. They too had a private reason for being there.
"We are helping a friend sweep his father's grave," said one of the students.
Deng died on February 19 aged 92. He was cremated at Babaoshan and his ashes scattered at sea in accordance with his wishes.
That has left the public with no specific place to honour the man who steered China away from the radical policies of Mao Zedong and onto the path of economic development, even if it meant adopting capitalist ways.
Those pragmatic policies raised living standards and turned a backward Stalinist state into an economic powerhouse.
Beijing's central Tiananmen Square has been one such place to honour the nation's fallen heroes but public displays of respect were not encouraged on this day.
Early on Saturday, as a group of secondary students walked towards the shrine to martyrs of the revolution at the centre of the square, they were quickly approached by security men.
After a brief discussion, they were allowed to bow and then told to leave, witnesses said.
China's communist leaders have traditionally planted trees on the Qingming festival and that was how the official media chose to remember Deng.
The People's Daily, the Communist Party newspaper, showed photographs of Deng planting trees over the years since 1979, when he began his programme of reforms that changed China's political landscape.
"Now these trees have grown tall," said the newspaper.
In the spirit of Deng's reforms, vendors of silk flowers were doing brisk business outside the Babaoshan cemetery.
Visitors queued up to buy wreaths similar to those that adorned grave sites inside.
Deng was in the thoughts of other Beijing residents, such as Bai Lansheng, a sculptor who is working on a bronze statue of the late leader.
"We are getting ready to ship the plaster mould to Shanghai now," he said from his Beijing workshop. "There it will be cast in bronze."
In June the six-metre (20-foot) statue will be shipped to the southern city of Shenzhen, which borders the British colony of Hong Kong.
Deng directed negotiations that led to the 1984 Sino-British accord under which the territory reverts to Chinese sovereignty on July 1.
Deng died before the colony's recovery but his statue will gaze across the border and "witness" the historic event.
