The CITIC Industrial Bank, financial arm of China's CITIC conglomerate, said on Monday it expected solid profit growth this year despite mounting competition and a key goal of limiting risk.
"Stable development is more important than a big profit rise," said Zhang Jian, deputy general manager and economist.
The bank has set a target of pre-tax profits of at least 1.8 billion yuan ($217 million) this year compared with 1.58 billion in 1996 and 1.01 billion in 1995.
The bank is a major profit contributor to the China International Trust and Development Corp, or CITIC, which has interests from telecommunications to real estate and manufacturing. The CITIC group announced overall earnings of 2.478 billion yuan last year.
China's economic tsar Vice-Premier Zhu Rongji has pushed for more discipline in the financial sector, particularly following the failure in January of the China Agribusiness Development Trust and Investment Corp. That sent shock waves through the financial community, and Zhu has warned that state banks overall need to cut bad debt by two percent annually over the next five years.
CITIC Industrial Bank has been one of the stronger players in the financial sector, however.
Unlike the main state-run commercial banks, it does not have to make loans to aid government policy, regardless of whether the borrower can repay.
But Zhang said top management at the bank was focusing on tightening risk controls.
"Enhancing (asset) quality and the assessment of risk" were two key goals for the bank this year, he said in an interview.
CITIC's customers for the most part were profitable state industrial companies and government corporations engaged in foreign trade. Most of the bank's loans were short term, usually for less than 180 days, Zhang said.
That has made it difficult for the bank to move into new areas of business such as home mortgages or car financing, two areas where China is likely to see substantial growth in the years ahead.
CITIC is also facing an increasingly crowded banking sector as new domestic banks emerge and more foreign banks enter the local market.
Zhang said CITIC had begun private banking operations at its branch in the southern city of Guangzhou to try to expand business.
It is experimenting with ways to boost service to its big corporate clients, such as extending banking hours and installing computers at customer offices and linking them to its own network to make banking easier.
CITIC had total assets of 108 billion yuan at the end of last year compared with 86 billion at the end of 1995.
Deposits reached 87 billion yuan last year, up from 67 billion in 1995, despite two reductions in domestic interest rates by the central bank last year.
Zhang said he believed further cuts in interest rates would make it difficult for the nation's banks to attract deposits.
"I don't think there can be another interest rate cut this year," he said. "If you want investment, you need savings to support it."
($1 = 8.3 yuan)
