China called on Japan on Thursday to stop encouraging right-wing activities on disputed South China Sea islands or risk an escalation of the diplomatic row.
However, it stopped short of spelling out what action it would take over the islands -- claimed by Beijing, Tokyo and Taipei -- adding that it would exercise restraint.
"Japan should recognise the seriousness of the matter and take actions to stop these...illegal activities," Foreign Ministry spokesman Shen Guofang told a regular news briefing.
"If Japan continues to encourage them the situation will be even more serious," he said of the right-wing activists. "The ball is in Japan's court."
A long-dormant dispute over the islands, called the Diaoyus in Chinese and the Senkakus by Japan, erupted in July after the right-wing Japan Youth Federation erected a lighthouse on one of the islets.
Friction mounted earlier this month after Japanese coast-guard ships barred private Taiwan boats from reaching the area while the rightist group repaired the typhoon-damaged structure.
Beijing and Taipei have assailed Japan's protection of the rightists' activities and ordered Tokyo to keep people away from the islands that lie east of China's southeastern Fujian coast, west of Japan's Okinawa island and northeast of Taiwan.
Chinese in the British colony of Hong Kong have also closed ranks, ignoring other political disputes and voicing support for Beijing's claim to the islands.
On Tuesday, Beijing lodged a strong protest with Tokyo and called in the charge d'affaires in Beijing, warning of serious damage to ties if Japan failed to stop right-wingers from setting foot on the islands.
Asked by reporters whether Beijing would consider stronger measures, Shen said: "We hope this issue will be handled with restraint."
Japan on Thursday urged China, Taiwan and Hong Kong to deal calmly with the territorial dispute.
A group of more than 100 Chinese nationalists on Wednesday urged China's top military brass to send warships to the disputed Diaoyu islands to tear down structures built by Japanese rightists.
The response of China's military commission, which is headed by Communist Party chief and state president Jiang Zemin, was not immediately available.
Hong Kong activists, members of the pro-democracy Association for Democracy and People's Livelihood, were in Beijing to present to Chinese authorities a petition signed by 17,000 people urging the government to get tough on Japan's claim to the islands.
In Taiwan on Thursday, fishermen hurled rotten fish at Japan's Taipei visa office in protest over Tokyo's actions in the dispute.
