China has scored new successes in its fight against inflation and economists said on Friday that price rises this year could be well below target.
Some economists say inflation has been squeezed out of the economy with only a modest impact on growth as economic expansion continued at a fairly rapid pace.
"This is better than expected," said Chen Dezun, head of the price research institute of the State Planning Commission.
"We could see inflation of between three and four percent this year," he told Reuters. The benchmark retail price index rose a meagre 1.7 percent in March and 2.6 percent for the first quarter of the year, the State Statistical Bureau said on Thursday.
China forecast a 6.0 percent rise in retail prices this year after a 6.1 percent increase last year. That was already well below the 14.8 percent recorded in 1995 and a communist-era high of 21.7 percent in 1994.
China's economic growth is expected to top 10 percent this year after a solid 9.7 percent in 1996.
The inflation figure for the first quarter was also below an estimate by Premier Li Peng this week that retail price inflation would average 3.0 percent in the January-March period.
Chen said good weather had been a factor, ensuring steady supplies of agricultural goods and keeping prices down.
What China officially refers to as "appropriately tight" monetary policies had also been a crucial factor, he said.
"The appropriately tight monetary policies are now showing results," he said.
China has kept controls on fixed asset investment, keeping government spending down, and that has kept a cap on the demand for goods such as construction materials.
After adjusting for inflation, the real rise in fixed asset investment last year was a fairly modest 11.5 percent.
"The key has been control over fixed asset investment," said Zhong Jiyun, an economist at the state think tank, the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences.
Some economists have argued that with the battle against inflation proceeding favourably, China can now afford to ease its monetary policies.
Many inefficient state-run enterprises are swimming in red ink and saddled with debt they cannot repay.
Managers of these companies and their local government officials have called for easier credit to help to reduce their heavy financial burden.
But Zhong is among the economists who believe that China is not yet able to declare the war on inflation over.
"I believe we still need to keep the controls on," he said.
