China may need to adjust the mix of its treasury debt next year to ensure an active response from domestic institutions, analysts said on Friday.
Finance ministry officials were meeting in Beijing on Friday to discuss bond market trends and the issue of China's debt mix could be a focus of the talks, the analysts said.
"There is too much of the non-tradeable type of debt," said a Shenzhen analyst. "It is not really attractive to institutions or individual investors."
China is issuing about 250 billion yuan ($30.1 billion) of state debt this year -- most of it domestic. More than half of the total is for non-tradeable voucher or certificate type treasury debt.
In return for their funds, investors receive a certificate that can be redeemed before maturity. But this type of debt is not listed on either of the nation's stock exchanges in Shanghai or Shenzhen and no active secondary trading exists.
Last year, this non-tradeable type of debt accounted for only about one-tenth of total government debt issued, bond traders said.
"Last year the focus was on the secondary market," said a trader with J&amp;A Securities in Shenzhen. "Most of the debt was tradeable on the nation's exchanges."
Other securities firms agreed the response so far this year had been less than enthusiastic.
"There is not that much interest in the (non-tradeable) offer this year," said an official at China Southern Securities. "I am not very optimistic about the outcome."
A Finance Ministry official denied there were problems with the sales, which began on March 1.
"I am satisfied with the outcome so far," the official told Reuters. "We have until October to complete the sales."
The bonds are offered through bank underwriting syndicates, and analysts said that if the banks have to keep too much of the debt on their own books, they are unlikely to be enthusiastic about next year's issue.
The trend was particularly marked in southern China where economic development has outpaced the rest of the country, giving investors more types of investment vehicles to choose from.
An official at the state-run Industrial and Commercial Bank of China's Shenzhen branch described the response to the offer in the special economic zone bordering Hong Kong as poor.
Some analysts said the problem lay elsewhere. "The interest rate is the real problem," said Zhao Xiaoyun, an analyst at China Securities Co.
Zhao said bond interest rates were unable to match the returns available on the stock market. Domestic A shares in Shanghai have gained 40 percent since the start of the year.
The 1997 state offer includes two-, three- and five-year debt carrying interest of 8.64 percent, 9.18 percent and 10.17 percent. This is 0.72, 0.92 and 1.17 percentage points higher than the interest paid on bank time deposits of corresponding periods.
In the recent past, interest on bonds has been 1.5 to two percentage points higher than equivalent bank rates. But analysts said China may not want to widen the spread between time deposits and bonds too much. The banks may underwrite the debt but they are not eager to see their deposits drawn away by higher interest bonds.
That could mean the best option for the state is to issue debt that can be traded and attracts institutional investors.
