A Chinese ideologue known for his strictly orthodox Marxist views denied on Tuesday that he was the author of two essays critical of China's reforms.
Deng Liqun, 81, a former Communist Party propaganda chief and secretary to Chairman Mao Zedong, said the author of two articles that have become known as "The 10,000 Word Essay" was Li Yanming.
"I didn't write the essay, it was Li Yanming," Deng told reporters. He did not further identify Li Yanming and gave no Asked whether he supported Li's views in "The 10,000 Word Essay" that has sparked widespread behind-the-scenes debate, he smiled and shrugged and said: "He wrote what was on his mind."
Deng was attending an economic summit in Beijing that was assessing the business climate in China, with a heavy emphasis on the successes of the reform programme launched in 1979 by Deng Xiaoping to eliminate stultifying Stalinist-style planning in favour of market forces.
Asked if he agreed with issues under debate at the conference, Deng adopted the officially-sanctioned public party line: "Of course. China is a very big country, it has a lot of potential but it also has a lot of problems to be solved."
Several of the speakers at the conference called for tougher efforts to reform China's ailing state-owned enterprises, which "The 10,000 Word Essay" warns are suffering at the expense of private enterprise.
China's propaganda tsars recently suspended a magazine and banned articles by a leading bankruptcy expert after a lengthy behind-doors debate on the essay erupted into the public eye.
The ban prompted an open letter by a writer in Beijing questioning whether China's propaganda officials were opposed to economic reform and whether they backed the leadership of state president and Communist Party chief Jiang Zemin.
The Press and Publications Administration, under the party's powerful Propaganda Department, suspended publication of the Economic Work Monthly, based in southwestern Guizhou province, in August, said sources familiar with the magazine.
The suspension followed the magazine's publication of an article critical of the privately circulated 10,000-word essay, which also urges a return to the class struggle espoused by Mao.
Western diplomats and Chinese analysts have described a literary and cultural freeze in recent months amid a crackdown by propaganda tsars on publications and authors that dare to break away from a stultifying diet of state-approved fare.
The president of the outspoken Beijing Youth Daily is to be replaced soon by a more conservative editor.
The clampdown has been fuelled by a call for "spiritual civilisation" -- a communist watchword for orthodox Marxist values -- as the theme for a party plenum scheduled for later this month, the analysts said.
Party chief Jiang is said to have distanced himself from the essay at the annual session of the National People's Congress, or parliament, last March, when he reportedly said: "Some people say I support the 10,000-word essay, isn't that underestimating me too much?"
