Debt reduction, largely through rejigging its vast cable holdings, is the central task of top managers at Time Warner Inc after the $7.5 billion Turner deal, senior executives said on Wednesday.
The company, which last week took control of Turner Broadcasting System Inc, is in active discussions aimed at restructuring its troubled cable-television partnership with U S West Media Group, the executives said.
One Time Warner executive said the talks with U S West are likely to quicken and could yield a deal within months.  
"We want to delever the company, lighten up on cable, and simplify the corporate capital structure," said one executive, speaking on a promise of anonymity.
The executives echoed Ted Turner, founder of Turner Broadcasting and now vice chairman of the combined company as well as its biggest individual shareholder. He has said he wants Time Warner's $17.5 billion debt halved.
Partners since 1992, when regional phone group U S West bought 25 percent of most of Time Warner's cable systems, its film studios and the HBO pay-TV service, the two companies have recently been preoccupied with major acquisitions.  
Time Warner last week completed its takeover of Turner, a deal unsuccessfully opposed in court by U S West. And U S West is expected to close next month its $5.3 billion acqusition of Continental Cablevision, the third-ranked U.S. cable operator.
Time Warner now sees itself with the acquisition of Turner, producer of Cable News Network, The Cartoon Network and two studios, as primarily a programming group, the executives said.
Capital-intensive cable operations are less important and ripe for partial divestment, the executives said. Investment capital can be better used outside cable, the executives said.  
"We look at the opportunities and, hey, we can't do everything," one executive said.
Time Warner earlier reported very strong operational earnings from its cable operations, largely on rate increases, but the company has also committed to spending at least $4 billion to improve its systems through 2000.
The executives declined to discuss possible terms of a U S West agreement but analysts have speculated Time Warner might swap selected cable properties for U S West's equity in HBO and the studios. A key question in such a deal would be how much debt would be taken off Time Warner's books.  
Spin-off of properties is also possible, analysts have said. Time Warner is also said to be considering the sale of Castle Rock, one of the studios owned by Turner Broadcasting.
The executives said a deal with U S West was very important but failure to reach one would not stop the debt-reduction campaign.
A little-noticed deal earlier this year, in which Time Warner swapped some cable properties for a minority interest in a joint venture with Fanch Cablevision of Indiana and the Blackstone Group, could be a model for other cable transactions, the executives said.
"The objective of deleveraging is larger than U S West. The objective of lightening up on cable is larger than U S West," one of the Time Warner executives said.
Shares of Time Warner closed up 1-1/8 at 42.
-- New York Newsdesk 212-859-1713
