Riding rising U.S. cable TV fees, Time Warner Inc said on Wednesday its earnings before heavy debt payments shot up 32 percent in the third quarter, compared with the same three months last year.
Covering the quarter before last Thursday's completion of its $7.5 billion acquisition of Turner Broadcasting System, the entertainment group said three hit movies, strong magazine advertising sales helped by the Olympic Games, and good HBO results lifted cash flow to $964 million.
Revenues for the three months ended Sept. 30 were $4.877 billion, up from $4.344 billion a year ago.
Last year's third-quarter cash flow, defined as earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, or EBITDA, was $729 million, the company said.
Time Warner, many of whose cable TV and other businesses are co-owned with 25 percent partner U S West Inc. , reported a net loss of $167 million, or 43 cents a share, for the quarter.
Net losses in last year's quarter were $160 million, or 41 cents a share, on 1.5 million more shares outstanding.
Net interest costs were $276 million, up from $259 million in last year's third quarter. Preferred dividends rose to $76 million in the third quarter from $16 million.
Time Warner's stock showed no gain after the results but rose smartly later in the day after top executives told institutional investors that debt reduction was centre stage at the company.
The executives said Time Warner is in active discussions aimed at restructuring its troubled cable-television partnership with U S West Media Group.
One Time Warner executive said the talks with regional phone group U S West, 25 percent owner of most of Time Warner's cable systems, studios and the HBO pay-TV service, are likely to quicken and could yield a deal within months.
"We want to delever the company, lighten up on cable, and simplify the corporate capital structure," said the executive, speaking on a promise of anonymity.
The executives echoed Ted Turner, founder of Turner Broadcasting and now vice chairman of the combined company as well as its biggest individual shareholder. He has said he wants Time Warner's $17.5 billion debt halved.
Time Warner now sees itself with the acquisition of Turner, producer of Cable News Network, The Cartoon Network and two studios, as primarily a programming group, the executives said.
Capital-intensive cable operations are less important and ripe for partial divestment, the executives said. Investment capital can be better used outside cable, the executives said.
EBITDA at Time Warner's cable operations, including those shared with with U S West, rose 14 percent to $512 million, the company said in its earnings report.
Basic cable revenues rose sharply and advertising sales in cable also increased, the company said. With some 12.1 million customers, Time Warner is the nation's second-largest cable operator.
Time Warner also had three summer movies grossing more than $100 million in U.S. ticket sales -- "Twister," "Eraser" and "A Time To Kill" -- and its filmed entertainment unit had an EBITDA rise of 13 percent to $146 million.
HBO's EBITDA rose 23 percent to $91 million. Sales to subscribers to satellite-television services led HBO's strong growth, senior executives said.
The publishing unit's EBITDA was $99 million, or 15 percent more than the $86 million posted in the year-ago quarter. Sports Illustrated, which produced a daily, limited-circulation version of its weekly magazine during the Atlanta Olympics, had particularly strong advertising sales.
The recorded music unit's EBITDA rose $1 million to $143 million from last year's quarter, when the division took an $85 million charge. Small gains in foreign sales were offset by drops in U.S. music sales, the company said.
Time Warner shares rose $1.125 to $42 in New York Stock Exchange Trading.
