BellSouth Corp will expand by a third its network of wireless-telephony shops in a campaign to cut the nearly $400 it spends acquiring each new customer, chief financial officer Ronald Dykes said on Thursday.
The company operates 200 or more of its own outlets selling BellSouth Mobility cellular-telephone services and finds it saves about $100 on each customer signed up by its own representatives.
"I wouldn't be surprised if the number grew by a third," Dykes told Reuters.  
BellSouth has 3.3 million U.S. cellular customers, a total rising at the rate of 31 percent a year. It also has more than one million cellular customers in 11 other nations.
Dykes said BellSouth, a leading regional telephone group, expects the share of wireless customers secured through its directly owned shops to rise but never to replace its direct-sales force or third-party vendors.
"We want to have a very broad distribution system and drive the costs down," he said.  
BellSouth also sells in select markets personal communications services (PCS), a new generation of wireless telephony which uses spectra other than the 800 megahertz reserved for cellular, but intends to keep the BellSouth Mobility brand for both PCS and cellular.
"The customer doesn't care," he said. "We are using PCS to fill out our footprint", or areas in its region where it does not have cellular rights.  
Marketing, he said, also played an important role in the 43 percent spurt in quarterly revenues from convenience telephone features BellSouth sells to traditional wired telephone customers.
Quarterly revenues for such services rose to $281 million in the third quarter, when net income rose 12.9 percent to $631 million.
Selling such services as Call Waiting, a feature which signals a customer using a telephone that a second caller is ringing, in discounted bundles or on a per-use basis had lifted sales mightily.
"Those two methods are very strong drivers of our success," Dykes said.
Per-use sales of such services totalled $53 million in the first nine months of 1996, he said.
-- New York Newsdesk 212-859-1713
