Silver King Communications Inc. agreed Monday to buy the Home Shopping Network (HSN) for about $1.3 billion in stock, feeding speculation that Barry Diller was getting set to launch another major television network.
Diller, who is chairman of both Silver King and Home Shopping, could be positioning his companies to compete head on with ABC, NBC, CBS and Fox, whose launch Diller spearheaded in the 1980s, industry analysts said.
The deal would reunite Silver King, which owns 12 TV stations spun off in 1992 by HSN, with its old parent.
Diller, widely known in Hollywood for leading the launch of Fox, which is owned by Rupert Murdoch's News Corp., had already announced plans to drop HSN programming from Silver King's stations and replace it with a traditional mix of locally oriented news, sports and other shows.
"We have a long agenda," Diller said in an interview. "By putting these companies under a common roof, we will get there quicker."
Diller said speculation that he would start a new national network was premature but he said cash generated by HSN would help Silver King pay for programming and other costs in developing its stations.
Diller declined to discuss details of Silver King's programming, saying plans will be unveiled in November or December. A Silver King spokesman said the programming would emphasise local news and sports and would appear in some markets starting in about a year.
Some executives have said Silver King, with stations in New York, Los Angeles, Miami and other leading markets, would initially target late-night and daytime slots with its own programmes. Start-up networks usually start building their programming with evening fare.
HSN, which pays fees to Silver King to broadcast its retailing shows, will seek to win more slots on cable systems as Silver King's stations convert to traditional television programming, an HSN spokesman said.
Silver King said the stock-swap merger was worth about $1.27 billion based on Friday's closing stock prices. The deal calls for each HSN shareholder to receive 0.45 of a share of Silver King common for each share of HSN stock owned.
"I think it's a very viable deal," said analyst Alvin Mirman of Commonwealth Associates. "Diller reduces Home Shopping's distribution costs immediately. That could be a much as $40 million a year."
Mirman said he expects Diller to establish another network once he has overhauled the Silver King stations, which together comprise the sixth largest TV company in the United States.
Diller is also buying Savoy Pictures, a money-losing studio that owns other television stations, for about $117 million in stock.
Although HSN, based in St. Petersburg, Fla., invented television shopping in the early 1980s and was once a favourite on Wall Street, it has fallen to number two behind QVC Inc. as its sales have stagnated at about $1 billion annually.
Still, its 24-hour programming reaches some 69 million households via cable television, broadcast station affiliates and satellite dish receivers.
Diller, a highly successful television programmer credited with the Fox network's racy and successful shows, is also expected to revive Home Shopping Network's fortunes, analysts said.
Under the terms of the deal, each share of HSN Class B stock, which has 10 votes per share and is held solely by Liberty Media Corp., will be converted into 0.54 of a share of Silver King Class B Stock.
Silver King said Liberty Media, in order to stay within rules on television-station ownership, will retain a 19.9 percent stake in HSN, under the 21 percent allowed by regulators. Liberty Media already owns a stake in Silver King.
Home Shopping Network stock rose 12.5 cents to $11.375 on the New York Stock Exchange and Silver King fell $1.50 to $28 on Nasdaq.
