Silver King Communications Inc chairman Barry Diller said on Monday that the $1.27 billion stock-swap acqusition of Home Shopping Network would help fund Silver King's ambitious broadcasting plans.
"We have a long agenda and this helps certainly in developing the stations. We will get there quicker by combining the two companies," Diller told Reuters in a telephone interview.
Silver King agreed earlier to acquire HSN, a limping number two in U.S. TV retailing, for $1.27 billion in stock.  
The deal reunites Silver King, owner of 12 U.S. television stations spun off in 1992 by HSN, with its old parent and feeds speculation that Diller is close to launching a seventh U.S. television network.
Diller described as premature the speculation he would start a new national network, but said the cash flow from HSN would help Silver King pay for programming and other costs in developing its stations.  
Diller, a celebrated Hollywood executive credited with leading the 1980s launch of the FOX network, had already announced plans to drop HSN programming now carried on Silver King's stations in order to replace it with a traditional mix of locally oriented news, sports and other shows.
The stations in major markets such as Miami, New York and Los Angeles could attract significant audiences eagerly sought by advertisers, become much more valuable and form the nucleus of a national television network, industry analysts said.
"Silver King will use Home Shopping's cash flow. That will be the start of the benefits," Diller said.
"For Home Shopping, it adds businesses it is not now in," he said, adding the combined companies would be financially vigorous and poised to exploit new forms of electronic retailing.
"I am thrilled with the combination," Diller said.
"As to its more expansive possibilities, I believe the combination will allow the companies the very best way to pursue their very aggressive individual agendas with clarity and without conflict."
-- New York Newsdesk 212-859-1713.
