Silver King Communication's $1.27 billion stock-swap acquistion of Home Shopping Network hastens Silver King's plans to become a conventional broadcast-TV powerhouse, Silver King said on Monday.
The deal re-uniting Silver King, spun off by Home Shopping five years ago, with its former parent also feeds speculation that Silver King chairman Barry Diller is closer to launching a seventh U.S. television network.
Veteran entertainment-industry executive Diller led the 1980s launch of News Corp Ltd's Fox network.  
Silver King spokesman Jason Stewart said Diller had no firm plans to launch a network and intended for now to reprogram Silver King's 12 stations carrying Home Shopping Network with conventional, locally oriented shows.
"With most stations emphasizing national and syndicated programs, there's room for local," Stewart said.
Stewart said some Silver King stations, located in top markets such as New York, Los Angeles and Miami, would be converted in about a year and others would follow.  
He declined to detail Diller's programming plans but said the stations would cover local news and sports with a format common on all Silver King stations. Some entertainment executives have speculated the Silver King stations would program daytime and late-night slots initially.
Silver King, which is paid by Home Shopping Network to broadcast its television retailing service, intends to seek cable-system carriage of Home Shopping as its stations convert to traditional television programming.
A Home Shopping spokesman declined to say whether or not the company had reached carriage deals with any cable systems.  
Diller said last spring that Silver King, which is partly owned by Tele-Communications Inc subsidiary Liberty Media, as is Home Shopping Network, intended to break away from Home Shopping but that the conversion would take two or three years.
Diller also has a stake in SF Broadcasting, owner of four stations, that could be woven into a new U.S. network.
"I think it's a very viable deal," said analyst Alvin Mirman of Commonwealth Associates. "Diller reduces Home Shopping's distribution costs immediately. That could be a much as $40 million a year."
Diller, a highly successful television programmer credited with the FOX network's racy and successful shows, is also expected to revive Home Shopping Network's fortunes. Home Shopping's sales have been flat for several years.
Home Shopping Network's shares were up 1/4 to 11-1/2, while Silver King's shares were down 1-7/8 to 27-5/8.
-- New York Newsdesk 212-859-1713.
