Two leading international satellite-television groups said on Wednesday they will overcome regulatory hurdles and enter Argentina, a country already heavily penetrated by pay-television and whose satellite-TV rights are held by a smaller rival.
"We intend to be there; it's key to our strategy," said Mark Goldman, a vice president of News Corp Ltd, at a Latin American investors conference sponsored by Kagan Seminars International.  
Kagan analyst Jimena Urquijo said Nahuelsat, a smaller direct-to-home (DTH) service owned in part by Argentine investors and Daimler-Benz AG of Germany, already sells satellite-TV services in Argentina and holds exclusive satellite-TV rights for the country.
"Both will have to deal with Nahuelsat," Urquijo said, referring to Galaxy Latin America and Sky Entertainment Latin America.  
Galaxy, owned by Hughes Electronics Corp of the United States, the Cisneros Group of Venezuela, Multivision of Mexico and TVA Abril of Brazil, and Sky Entertainment have satellite-TV services in other parts of Latin America and plan to expand.  Sky Entertainment is owned by multi-national News Corp, Tele-Communications Inc of the United States, Mexico's Grupo Televisa SA de CV and TV Globo of Brazil.
Erik Moe, vice president of Galaxy Latin America, said he expected his company would eventually enter Argentina.  
"We recognize that there's a regulatory environment which does not encourage DTH," Goldman said. "We are lobbying the (Argentine) government."  Neither executive gave a target date for entering Argentina, and Nauhelsat chief executive Eckart Schober declined to answer when asked if he expected DTH rivals to appear in Argentina.
Nahuelsat already sells a stripped-down, relatively low-cost DTH service in rural areas of Argentina outside Buenos Aires, a metropolitan area with more than one-quarter of the country's pay-television subscribers and served by such cable-television giants as Tele-Communications.  
Nahuelsat tailors its services to national and regional tastes, Schober said at the Kagan conference.
Urquijo said business fundamentals in the country are also daunting for the two big DTH groups, given that 52 percent, or more than four million, of Argentina's television homes already subscribe to pay television.  Nahuelsat itself is primarily targeting Argentine regions without cable or microwave television services.
"I'm not sure there's room for three competitors," Urquijo said.
By contrast, other parts of Latin America are much more open to DTH.   Only some 13.3 percent of Latin America's 80
million television homes now take any type of pay television, a much smaller share than in western Europe or the United States, according to the Kagan organization.
Satellite-television in the United States, the most heavily penetrated pay-television market in the world, with some two thirds of homes subscribing to cable, has been a huge success in just two years.  Millions of subscribers in both cities and areas without cable have paid $500 or more for receivers during the past two years.
-- 212-859-1713
