"Chainsaw Al" Albert Dunlap, the chief executive of Sunbeam Corp aiming to halve his workforce and add $1 billion in sales, ran into Wall Street skepticism.
The company's shares have been riding high, up more than 100 percent since Dunlap's appointment as Sunbeam CEO last summer, but dropped 1/2 to 25-1/4 on Tuesday after Dunlap said he would cut 6,000 jobs in restructuring the appliance group.
"He's pulled off some amazing turnarounds," said Chapman Co analyst Daniel Noll. "But I'm a little skeptical."  
"I think the stock's a little ahead of itself," Noll said.
Dunlap, author of a current best-selling book, "Mean Business: How I Save Bad Companies And Make Good Companies Great", is credited with turning around Scott Paper Co and Lily-Tulip Co. He fiercely cuts staff and lifts stock values.
In addition to the "Chainsaw Al" moniker, the 59-year-old executive has also been dubbed "Darth Vader".
On Tuesday, Dunlap said he would halve to 6,000 the worldwide staff of Sunbeam, eliminate dozens of factories, regional adminstrative offices and warehouses, and stop making more than 85 percent of Sunbeam's 11,500 products.  
He also promised to sell Sunbeam's furniture business, open fresh sales avenues such as outlet stores, strike overseas marketing alliances, and eliminate all debt by next year. The company might launch share buybacks or make acquisitions once debt is paid off, he said.
Sales will double by 1999 to $2 billion, he said.
"It will be vintage Dunlap," Dunlap said in a conference call with institutional investors and analysts.
Analysts pressed Dunlap on specifics for doubling sales and when and with whom Sunbeam would align itself.  
Dunlap declined to identify potential deal partners but said new products, including many designed for non-U.S. markets, would along with other steps yield 20 percent or better year-over-year revenue growth.
"It takes some length of faith from us," analyst Scott Grant of Oppenheimer said during the conference call.
Other analysts questioned whether Dunlap's reliance on outsourcing -- hiring other manufacturers to make Sunbeam and Oster products -- was feasible as the company will have only eight factories to make its 1,500 remaining products.
The restructuring was very ambitious, involving deeper staff cuts, consolidation and tougher goals than had been expected since Dunlap began firing Sunbeam executives last July, analysts said.
"'Chainsaw Al' is a pussycat name for you," analyst Andrew Shore of Paine Webber told Dunlap. "If you pull this off, you should be called 'Nuclear Al'."
-- New York Newsdesk 212-859-1713
