Born as the world's first airborne crop-dusting service, Delta Air Lines Inc. may be on the verge of an alliance that would make it the industry's top gun.
The New York Times and Wall Street Journal, both quoting sources familiar with the discussions, reported that Delta and Continental Airlines have been talking about a merger for several months. The Times said a deal was not imminent.
Should Atlanta-based Delta merge with Continental, the new company would be the world's largest carrier.
The newspaper reports contained few financial details, but Standard and Poor's Corp. said it may change its ratings on Continental and Delta debt based on the reports of the talks.
A merger would fill gaps in each carrier's routes and create a powerhouse that would be certain to draw attention of regulators in Washington.
Both companies declined to comment on the reported talks.
Delta, the nation's No. 3 carrier, had a historic summer. Atlanta, where Delta has a major hub, hosted the Summer Olympics attended by tens of thousands who flew on the airline, which posted its best earnings for a quarter, $238 million, on revenues of $3.43 billion.
But Delta, which moved to Atlanta in 1941 and helped transform the sleepy Southern city into a business center after World War II, still faces stiff competition.
In addition to its traditional rivals such as United Airlines, the nation's largest carrier, and No. 2 American Airlines, it also faces newer, low-cost rivals such as ValuJet Inc..
In the talks with Houston-based Continental, Delta may be trying to get a headstart on another possible round of mergers in the industry. Carriers flush with cash from two years of solid earnings could seek mergers in a slow-growth business.
Delta itself has long been a buyer of rivals.
Started 72 years ago as Huff-Daland Dusters to combat the boll weevil, the company bought Chicago and Southern Airlines in 1952 and spread its routes into the South, Midwest, Texas and the Caribbean.
Nearly two decades later, in 1961, Delta moved into New England and Canada by acquiring Northeast Airlines. Its first trans-Atlantic flights, to London, began in 1978. It bought Western Air Lines in 1986.
By the late 1980s, international routes accounted for more than 10 percent of Delta's revenues and the company formed alliances with Swissair and Singapore Airlines.
In 1990, it launched a computer-reservation service, Worldspan, in a venture with Trans World Airlines and Northwest Airlines, to compete with Sabre, the dominant reservations system 84-percent owned by American Airlines parent AMR Corp. .
The following year Delta cherry-picked planes, airport gates, routes and other properties from troubled Eastern Airlines and Pan American World Airways as the economy weakened, concluding a troubled $1.2 billion purchase of Pan Am in 1991.
Like most of the industry, Delta posted losses in the four years through 1994.
