VTR Galaxy Chile SA won government permission to offer direct-to-home (DTH) television and will start selling the DIRECTV service in Chile by March 31, the head of DIRECTV's Latin American operations said on Wednesday.
The approval by the Transportation and Telecommunications Ministry gives DIRECTV, a consortium of a Hughes Electronics unit and three Latin American companies, a lead over rival DTH services in Chile, Galaxy Latin America chief executive Jose Antonio Rios said.  
"We will begin with advertising about the middle of December, telling people about the number of channels. From then we won't let up," Rios said.
Billboards, newspaper advertising and television will all be used to promote the multi-channel TV service. In addition, the campaign will rely heavily on in-store demonstrations, Rios said.
VTR, a partnership of Luksic and Southwestern Bell Corp and DIRECTV will spend the next months training retail clerks in presenting the receivers, he said. Full availability in Chile will come by March 31, he said.  
DIRECTV is sold in Latin America and the Caribbean by Galaxy Latin America, a venture of Hughes, The Cisneros Group of Venezuela, Televisao Abril of Brazil and MVS Multivision of Mexico. It offers subscribers who buy a receiver about 100 channels of video, music and extra-fee film channels. Several companies, including the Sky venture involving News Corp, are offering satellite television in Latin America, a fast-growing region lightly penetrated by cable television.  
DIRECTV has been a huge hit in the United States, hailed as the fastest selling consumer electronics item ever since its 1994 launch and credited by some industry analysts with eating into the dominant cable industry's audiences.
Rios said DIRECTV has some 16,000 vendors throughout the region selling its receivers and expects that number to nearly double to 30,000 by the end  of 1997.
The company expects soon to launch in Trinidad and Barbados and in Ecuador, Colombia, Guatemala, Costa Rico, Panama and Argentina by June 30.
Rios said DIRECTV would be available in 23 nations in Latin America and the Caribbean by the end of 1997.
The service is now available in Mexico, Brazil and Venezuela.
-- Miami newsroom, 305-374-5013
