Florida is set to challenge the tobacco industry on Friday using a tough anti-racketeering law that could mean bigger damages against cigarette makers if the state prevails.
The new claim under the state's Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organisations Act, tacked onto Florida's existing lawsuit that seeks at least $1 billion for treating smokers' illnesses, could mean more losses for the tobacco makers, tobacco-litigation expert Christopher Mueller of the University of Colorado School of Law said.
"Florida has a good law (for winning damage claims) but it only goes back to 1994. Using RICO may give the state a deeper reach," Mueller said.
The state's RICO law, similar to a federal statute and laws on the books in other states, would allow Florida officials to seek damages from before 1994, when a state law was passed that opened the way for Florida to try to recoup money spent on treating poor smokers.
Florida is one of 16 states and several big cities, including New York, San Francisco and Los Angeles, that have sued tobacco companies to recoup costs of health care for poor smokers.
Texas and now Florida are among a handful of states that are also using RICO laws to bolster their claims against Philip Morris Cos. Inc., the world's biggest cigarette maker, and other tobacco companies. Florida filed the added claims under RICO laws on Nov 4.
Mueller said use of RICO could add to the industry's potential financial losses by allowing Florida to make claims to recoup costs of treating smokers from before 1994.
Florida Attorney General Bob Butterworth is set to appear on Friday in county court in West Palm Beach, a spokesman said. He and attorneys for tobacco companies will argue over the industry's request that the RICO claim be dismissed.
It was unclear when a ruling would be made, a court official said.
Presiding Palm Beach County Circuit Judge Harold Cohen recently dismissed 15 counts of the state's 18-count lawsuit that claims the industry was liable for state-paid hospital costs from lung cancer and other smoking-related diseases. The full case is expected to come to trial next year.
A Jacksonville, Fla., jury last summer handed the tobacco industry its biggest loss in a court case yet when it awarded $750,000 to a lung cancer sufferer who had smoked for half a century. The defendant was the Brown &amp; Williamson unit of Britain's B.A.T Industries Plc.
In Washington, anti-smoking groups said divesting tobacco investments was being actively considered by a growing number of institutional investors concerned by both the ethics and the financial outlook for the industry.
