Anti-tobacco lawsuits brought by Florida and other state governments under anti-racketeering laws are meant to demonize cigarette manufacturers and turn Americans against a legitimate industry, a tobacco-industry lawyer said on Friday.
At a pre-trial hearing of a high-stakes tobacco lawsuit, attorney Irvin Nathan held up a newspaper article quoting Florida state government lawyers and said such publicity was meant solely "to demonize the industry."  
The article, published in the Tampa Tribune of Florida, quoted state lawyers as saying they want to show that cigarette makers had misled Americans for decades about the health risks of smoking and prove the industry was liable for potentially billions of dollars in medical procedures covered by a Florida insurance program.
Nathan spoke on behalf of Philip Morris Cos Inc, one of several big tobacco companies that asked the judge to throw out a Florida claim that they were liable under Florida's Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act (RICO).  
He argued the law did not apply to the tobacco companies, which are also being sued in Florida under a separate 1994 law that may leave them liable to penalties of $1.0 billion or more.
In claims under RICO -- a type of law also on the federal books and those of many other U.S. states -- Philip Morris and the other tobacco defendents would be liable to triple damages. RICO laws are usually used to prosecute organized criminals.  
Robert Blakey, a law professor at Notre Dame University, said on behalf of Florida that the RICO claim against the tobacco companies fell easily within the scope of the law. In the 1970s, Blakey was an author of several RICO laws, including the federal legislation.
"This, your honor, is a good RICO case," Blakey said.
Presiding Judge Harold Cohen of the Palm Beach County Circuit Court is not expected to rule for weeks on the tobacco defendents' request that the RICO claims be dismissed.  
Still, in opening remarks before lawyers for both sides presented their arguments, he said he was inclined to allow the Florida state lawyers to go ahead with the RICO-based claims.
A jury trial of the suit is tentatively scheduled for August 1997, the judge said.
Florida Attorney General Bob Butterworth said in an interview that Florida's RICO claims, if successful, could open a new battle front against the tobacco industry. Attorney generals from two other states that are pressing similar lawsuits agreed with that view.  
Mississippi Attorney General Mike Moore, who accompanied Butterworth to the hearing along with Arizona Attorney General Grant Woods, said the lawsuits filed by 19 states and several cities concerned more than just monetary damages. The lawsuits were needed to alert people to the dangers of smoking and help curb smoking among teenagers.
"That helps me sell the litigation more than the money," Moore said.
Moore said Florida, Arizona, Mississippi and several other state governments had allied themselves to press their tobacco cases. With several cases coming to trial next year, 1997 could prove crucial in determining whether the tobacco industry is liable for some of the hundreds of billions of dollars in health-care costs arising from smoking-related diseases.
A trial on Moore's suit begins in March in Mississippi, with Florida's set for the summer and a Texas lawsuit expected to go to trial in the fall.
"I think we will know the answer in 1997," Moore said.
-- Miami Newsroom 1-305-374-5013
