A Florida judge said Friday that he was inclined to let stand civil claims filed under state anti-racketeering laws against the tobacco industry.
Speaking from the bench at the start of a preliminary hearing, Palm Beach County Circuit Judge Harold Cohen said he was inclined to let stand claims filed by the state using Florida's Racketeer Influenced and Corrupts Organisations Act, which could mean more losses for cigarette makers.
"It would seem that the state can maintain the RICO actions," Cohen said.
The claims under state RICO laws were added last month to the state's existing lawsuit that seeks at least $1 billion compensation for treating smokers' illnesses.
The judge said he would not make up his mind until the end of oral arguments on Friday.
He gave no timetable for making public his decision on a request by Philip Morris Cos. and other cigarette makers that the claims made by the state under RICO laws be thrown out.
Florida State Attorney General Bob Butterworth said before the hearing that a victory against tobacco companies using the RICO law would allow the court to triple the more than $1 billion dollars in damages claimed by the state.
He also said a victory in Florida using its RICO law would widen the war against the tobbaco industry by possibly allowing other states to sue under their own RICO laws.
Lawyer Irving Nathan, representing the tobacco industry, said that lawsuits brought by state governments under anti-racketeering laws were meant to demonise cigarette manufacturers and turn Americans against a legitimate industry.
Nathan argued that the RICO laws did not apply to the tobacco companies that are also being sued in Florida.
The state of Florida in 1995 filed a lawsuit against the tobacco industry, seeking $1 billion or more for health care costs paid for poor people afflicted with smoking-related ailments.
Last month the state amended the suit using the RICO law and claiming that the tobacco companies had conspired with one another to confuse Americans about the dangers of smoking.
Cohen is not expected to rule for weeks on the tobacco defendents' request that the RICO claims be dismissed but he said in opening remarks that he was inclined to allow the Florida state lawyers to go ahead with the RICO-based claims.
A jury trial of the suit is tentatively scheduled for August 1997, the judge said.
Mississippi Attorney General Mike Moore, who accompanied Butterworth to the hearing along with Arizona Attorney General Grant Woods, said the lawsuits filed by 19 states and several cities were about much more than mere money. The lawsuits were needed to alert people to the dangers of smoking and help curb smoking among teenagers.
"That helps me sell the litigation more than the money," Moore said.
