Carnival Corp is shopping around Europe and elsewhere for acquisitions and partners to boost the number of passengers on its cruise ships, industry analysts said on Tuesday.
The company -- the leader of the pleasure cruise market with 28 percent -- is said to be in talks to acquire Italy's Costa Crociere Spa.
Trading in Costa Corciere shares was suspended on Monday by Italian regulators until detailed information on the reported talks between the companies was revealed.  
"The Carnival people are the most natural buyers," said industry analyst Edward Tavlin of Fahnestock &amp; Co. "They are willing go worldwide."
A spokesman for Miami-based Carnival declined to comment.
Last month, Carnival Chairman Micky Arison said in a Reuters interview that he saw industry consolidation continuing and that markets outside North America warranted attention.  
Arison did not comment directly on the possibility of acquiring Costa Crociere, a relatively small and heavily indebted line, which had been in meger talks with Royal Caribbean Cruises Ltd.
Carnival has formed a joint venture with Hyundai Corp of South Korea to provide Asian cruises and bought a stake in British travel group Airtours Plc as part of its global expansion.
"They are trying to better exploit overseas markets," analyst Jill Krutick of Smith Barney said. "The North American market has lots of capacity and pricing pressure."  
Carnival, which runs three cruise lines, is profitable in a sector burdened with a declining customer base and the prospect of expanded capacity. The company has said it expects to post record profits for the fiscal year ended November 30.
To be sure, Carnival, founded 24 years ago, has miscalculated in overseas ventures in the past. The company two years ago shut down its start-up FiestaMarina line aimed at Latin Americans and exited a Bermuda hotel operation with substanial losses, Tavlin said.
"The overseas markets are not as developed, but they have different dynamics," Krutick said. "Each has its own features and characteristics.
-- Miami newsroom, 305-374-5013.
