International businessman Tony O'Reilly said on Friday acquisitions by his Independent Newspapers Plc will slow considerably next year after the takeover of New Zealand's leading newspaper and other deals.
"I consider next year a year of consolidation," Independent Newspapers Chairman O'Reilly told Reuters in a telephone interview.  
But O'Reilly's name came up just this week in London markets as the rumored buyer of Mirror Group Newspapers Plc's 46 percent stake in Britain's Independent Newspapers Plc.
Both Mirror Group and O'Reilly, whose separate, Dublin-based firm also owns a 46 percent stake in the British title, denied a deal was in the works.
O'Reilly, best known in the United States as chairman of H.J. Heinz Co, also acknowledged his company was keeping a close eye on Australian media group John Fairfax Holdings Ltd.  
Conrad Black, the Canadian media tycoon who runs Hollinger International Inc, sold a 20 percent stake in Fairfax this week after complaining about Australian limits on foreign ownership of newspaper companies.
Some press reports suggest Fairfax might sell a top newspaper or become an acquisition target.
"The situation there is fluid, very interesting," O'Reilly said. "You can just say the O'Reillys are looking on with interest."  
News Corp Ltd chairman Rupert Murdoch last month sold his five percent stake in Fairfax and on Wednesday said he had lost interest in the company because of the foreign ownership ceilings. A native Australian, Murdoch is now a U.S. citizen.
Independent Newspapers owns a 25 percent stake in the Australian regional newspaper company APN, and this year acquired a controlling 85 percent stake in Wilson &amp; Horton in a deal valuing the leading New Zealand newspaper company at NZ$1.32 billion.  
"Wilson &amp; Horton will be an important springboard for us," O'Reilly said.
The executive said the New Zealand company would help Independent expand its commercial printing and educational businesses in the region.
O'Reilly said his executives next year would be working primarily on increasing results and efficiencies in Independent properties. Deals, in part because his family wishes to maintain its 28 percent equity stake in Independent, would be secondary.
Company results should be strong in 1997, he said.  
The company's South African properties will have to produce better than normal profit gains to offset currency losses expected from a drop in the South African rand, he said.
Independent's newspapers in Ireland, Britain, Australia, New Zealand, South Africa and elsewhere will benefit from a sharp drop in newsprint. Costs for the raw material of newspapers has dropped from an average $520 a ton within the past year to around $400 currently, he said.  
O'Reilly described as reasonable profit forecasts by Dublin's Davey Stockbrokers that Independent would post a 15 percent profit rise to 18.6 pence per share in 1997 and an 18 percent rise to 21.4 pence per share in 1998.
-- Miami newsroom, 305-374-5013.
