Tony O'Reilly, best known in America as H.J. Heinz chairman, has the U.S. food group slimming down while beefing up his family's Independent Newspapers Plc of Ireland.
Independent, an acquisitive, fast-growing company that is 28 percent owned by O'Reilly and his family, competes in deals and markets with such international media figures as Rupert Murdoch of News Corp. Ltd.
O'Reilly's name came up just this week in London markets as the rumoured buyer of Mirror Group Newspapers Plc's 46 percent stake in Britain's Independent Newspapers Plc for $100 million.
While O'Reilly knocked down deal speculation on the Independent, a leading British daily in which his firm already has a 46 percent holding, he hinted in an interview that he has an eye on buying into leading Australian publisher John Fairfax Holdings Ltd.
"The situation there is fluid, very interesting," O'Reilly said. "You can just say the O'Reillys are looking on with interest."
Since the early 1970s, when the former rugby star and food industry executive bought into Independent, the company has steadily expanded and sells 80 percent of Ireland's nationally distributed newspapers.
Independent also has radio partnerships and controlling shares of leading newspaper businesses in New Zealand and South Africa and a French billboard company.
Financial performance has been very strong, with the stock market value of Independent rising a heady sixfold in five years.
In Pittsburgh, the headquarters of Heinz, the drill is largely different.
O'Reilly, in the telephone interview from Dublin, said the food company he has run since 1979 was in deal talks with prospective buyers and would sell substantial businesses by April 30.
"By the end of the fiscal year, the businesses will have a leaner focus," he said.
O'Reilly declined to identify the businesses on the auction block or estimate how much cash the properties would bring Heinz, which dominates in canned tuna, ketchup and other segments.
"If I tell you, that's where the bargaining will start," O'Reilly said. He said Heinz was in contact with four or five potential buyers.
The executive said Heinz will trim down to six business clusters: food-service products, pet food, infant formula outside the United States, condiments, ketchup, and weight-loss services and products.
One-third to one-quarter of Heinz businesses covering thousands of products are estimated to be outside those areas.
"The buzz word now is focus," O'Reilly said.
Acquisitions at Heinz, known for its Weight Watchers services and brands such as 9 Lives pet food, are not ruled out. The company, in fact, just broke off talks aimed at acquiring some assets of Bumble Bee, a competitor to its StarKist line of canned tuna. Heinz is also digesting a large pet-food acquisition it made from Quaker Oats.
Beyond being known as a newspaper baron outside North America, O'Reilly has interests in other Irish firms. Another he leads as chairman, Irish crystal and china firm Waterford Wedgwood, Thursday agreed to buy 9.1 percent of a German porcelain group Rosenthal AG.
O'Reilly, 60, is widely regarded as Ireland's richest man and appears close to being, if not already, Ireland's only billionaire, associates said.
