RJR Tobacco, a unit of RJR Nabisco Holdings, said on Friday that documents it turned over to Minnesota in a lawsuit may suggest its executives considered using additives to enhance the nicotine kick of its cigarettes.
The company also said in a brief summary of some of the papers delivered to Minnesota state lawyers that its executives also considered beefing up marketing in 1980 to reverse a loss in market share among U.S. teenagers to rival Philip Morris Cos.  
RJR, along with other tobacco companies, is being sued by Minnesota and 17 other states to recover billions of dollars spent treating smoking-related illnesses of people through governmental medical programs. Trials in state lawsuits are scheduled this year in Mississippi, Florida and Texas.
RJR said it expected anti-tobacco information to be leaked selectively to news organizations by opposing lawyers and was releasing three potentially damaging short excerpts from the 4.5 million pages of documents with its own explantions.
The company said it would not release the full documents.  
RJR said two documents it turned over to Minnesota lawyers under court order suggested the company studied during the 1970s adding ammonia compounds to increase the effects of nicotine from cigarette smoking.
If ammonia, RJR quoted from one 1973 company document, were "found to make desirable contributions to the physiological satisfactions derived from smoking, we will want to optimize this effect in existing and/or new products."
RJR said research was carried out in an era when industry and popular thinking held low-tar cigarettes with heightened nicotine kicks would be less harmful to smokers.  
RJR deputy general counsel Daniel Donohue expects the Minnesota lawyers to use the documents to bolster claims the company was manipulating nicotine to hook smokers.
Anti-tobacco activists have repeatedly accused the industry of tarting up nicotine levels. Philip Morris won a large settlement and an on-air apology from the ABC television network owned by Walt Disney Co for a news story suggesting it manipulated nicotine content in its cigarettes. RJR also quoted from a 1980 memo sent by a marketing executive to the company chairman saying RJR's market share among smokers 14-17 was falling, but Philip Morris's was growing.  
"Hopefully our various planned activities that will be implemented this fall will aid in some way in reducing or correcting those trends," RJR's then-head of marketing wrote.
Donohue described the memorandum as shorthand and said it in no way suggested RJR worked to sell cigarettes to teenagers.
He also said company data on underage smokers was collected as a by-product of market research among adults.
The company said it was releasing the excerpts because it expected the memos and studies to be leaked and reported by rushed journalists without full context.  
"Cherry picked, leaked documents do not reflect the totality of our company's positions, strategies and marketplace efforts," RJR spokeswoman Peggy Carter said in a news release. But Minnesota Attorney General Hubert Humphrey III said RJR was misleading the public by complaining of selective leaks by anti-tobacco lawyers.
"The vast majority of documents cannot be made public due to a protective order demanded by the tobacco industry," Humprhey said in a news release. "If the tobacco industry truly wanted the public to know the whole truth, it would waive this protective order...I challenge them to do so."
A trial in the Minnesota lawsuit is set for 1998, Humphrey spokesman Joe Loveland said.
-- Miami newsroom, 305-374-5013.
