R.J. Reynolds executives considered using additives to enhance the nicotine kick of cigarettes and also considered beefing up marketing to teenagers, according to a summary of documents that the company's parent turned over in a Minnesota lawsuit.
R.J. Reynolds, a unit of RJR Nabisco Holdings Corp., said Friday it turned over the documents to Minnesota state lawyers in connection with a lawsuit the state has filed against tobacco companies to recover state money spent on treating smoking-related illnesses.
Along with other tobacco companies, R.J. Reynolds is being sued by Minnesota and 17 other states to recover billions of dollars spent treating smoking-related illnesses. Trials those lawsuits are scheduled this year in Mississippi, Florida and Texas.
R.J. Reynolds said it expected anti-tobacco information to be leaked selectively to news organisations by opposing lawyers and was releasing three potentially damaging short excerpts from the 4.5 million pages of documents with its own explantions.
The company said it would not release the full documents.
It said two documents it turned over to Minnesota lawyers under court order suggested that the company in the 1970s studied adding ammonia compounds to increase the effects of nicotine from cigarette smoking.
If ammonia were "found to make desirable contributions to the physiological satisfactions derived from smoking, we will want to optimize this effect in existing and/or new products," the company quoted one 1973 company document as saying.
Cigarette makers have long denied that they tried to manipulate the nicotine effects from their products.
R.J. Reynolds said the research was carried out when the industry and others thought low-tar cigarettes with heightened nicotine kicks would be less harmful to smokers.
R.J. Reynolds deputy general counsel Daniel Donohue said he expected the Minnesota lawyers to use the documents to try to bolster claims that the company was manipulating nicotine to hook smokers.
Anti-tobacco activists have repeatedly accused the industry of manipulating nicotine levels.
Philip Morris Cos. Inc., the world's biggest cigarette maker and producer of Marlboro and other brands, won a large settlement and an on-air apology from the ABC television network for a news story suggesting it manipulated nicotine content in its cigarettes.
R.J. Reynolds also quoted from a 1980 memo sent by a marketing executive to the chairman stating that market share among smokers aged 14 to 17 was falling while Philip Morris' share was growing.
"Hopefully our various planned activities that will be implemented this fall will aid in some way in reducing or correcting those trends," the official wrote.
Donohue described the memo as shorthand and said it in no way suggested Reynolds worked to sell cigarettes to teenagers. He said company data on young smokers was collected as a by-product of market research on adults.
The Food and Drug Administration issued new rules last summer meant to curb sales to underage smokers, but the industry is challenging the rules.
R.J. Reynolds said it was releasing the excerpts because it expected the memos and studies to be leaked and reported by journalists without full context.
"Cherry picked, leaked documents do not reflect the totality of our company's positions, strategies and marketplace efforts," Peggy Carter, a spokeswoman for RJR Nabisco Holdings Corp., said in a statement.
Minnesota Attorney General Hubert Humphrey III said the company was misleading the public by complaining of alleged selective leaks by anti-tobacco lawyers.
"The vast majority of documents cannot be made public due to a protective order demanded by the tobacco industry," he said in a news release.
"If the tobacco industry truly wanted the public to know the whole truth, it would waive this protective order .... I challenge them to do so."
A trial in the Minnesota lawsuit is set for 1998, Humphrey spokesman Joe Loveland said.
