Republic Industries Inc. Monday agreed to buy National Car Rental System Inc. for about $600 million in stock, another step into auto rentals that will also feed its growing used car business.
Republic, a diversified, Fort Lauderdale, Fla.-based company controlled by Florida billionaire Wayne Huizenga, said it would offer stock for Minneapolis-based National, owned by an investor group led by the former chief executive of Thrifty Car Rental.
Republic, which also owns waste management, electronic security and media assets, bought Alamo Rent-a-Car in November for $625 million in stock. The acquisitions would give it car-rental agencies with 230,000 cars in their fleets.
Industry analysts said the National deal would bolster Republic in the competitive car rental business and provide its AutoNation chain a steady supply of used cars for sale.
"The deals give Republic steady inventory," said analyst Jordan Hymowitz at Montgomery Securities in San Francisco.
The fledgling AutoNation chain and its rivals in the growing business for used cars just a few years old need big supplies of second-hand cars. AutoNation aims to have 80 outlets in place by 2000.
But the main source for used cars is the rental market, analysts said. Leased cars coming back from consumers for resale are usually streered by automakers' financing arms to dealers the automakers do business with.
National will also give Republic another avenue for growth in car rentals, analysts said. While Alamo rents mostly to vacationers and other consumers, National's target market is business customers.
National is owned by an investor group led by William Lobeck, the former chief executive officer of Thrifty Car Rental, who along with other National executives will sign employment agreements with Republic and manage National's daily operations, the companies said.
National has about 800 locations in North America with a fleet of about 100,000 vehicles in the United States.
Huizenga, who also owns the Florida Marlins baseball team and the Miami Dolphins football team, is seeking to build yet another fortune.
He is one of the few executives to have built two giant corporations -- he was a co-founder of Waste Management, now known as WMX Technologies Inc., and Blockbuster Video, which was sold to Viacom in 1994.
Meanwhile, transactions for rental car companies have picked up in recent months. Before Republic bought Alamo, HFS Inc. bought Avis for about $800 million.
Analysts said few big independent car-rental agencies remained, adding that neither Drivers Mart nor Car Max appeared interested in buying a rent-a-car business for their used-car outlets.
While the National deal would help ensure car supplies for AutoNation, the fledgling chain would not get much more muscle in dealings with Detroit automakers, analysts said.
"There's no such thing as a volume discount," said analyst Maryann Keller at Furman Selz in New York. "It makes no difference whether you're buying 1 million cars or 20."
Keller said Detroit automakers give discounts to big buyers such as car rental agencies but that the terms have grown more stringent. Agreements by automakers to buy back rental cars have also been drying up, she said.
"The fleet market is lower profit" for automakers, she said.
Republic stock jumped $1.875 to $32.75 on the New York Stock Exchange.
