Florida Attorney General Bob Butterworth said on Friday U.S. cigarette makers had delayed harsh revelations about the industry with a surprising decision to end pre-trial opposition to punitive damages in the state's multi-billion dollar anti-tobacco lawsuit.
Butterworth told Reuters a court hearing set for January 24 on the punitive claims to be added to any other jury awards would have made public information he alleged would have been highly damaging about the industry's marketing and medical research, contained in 27,000 pages of court-sealed documents.  
"I liken it to a criminal trial in which the defendant tries to suppress evidence that would prove him guilty," Butterworth said.  "They want to delay.  It's their best short-term ploy."
Florida is one of 18 states suing U.S. cigarette companies to recoup billions of dollars spent through government healthcare programs on treating people made ill by smoking.  A trial in the Florida lawsuit filed by Butterworth is set for August 4.  
Philip Morris Cos Inc and other cigarette companies, complaining of likely bad publicity, earlier dropped pre-trial opposition to punitive claims by the State of Florida.  The state is seeking to recoup $1 billion or more for treating Medicaid costs from 1994.
Philip Morris Cos Inc lawyer Gregory Little said in a news release that the industry's decision had no legal effect and that the industry had never paid punitive damages in any lawsuit.  
Little said a key reason for the industry's decision was a worry that the state's lawyers would present evidence against cigarette makers during a public, pre-trial hearing.  Tobacco lawyers would be severly restricted in defending against the evidence during the hearing, he said.
"The lawyers for the state of Florida have demonstrated a remarkable propensity for trying their case in the media," Little said.
He accused anti-tobacco lawyers in Florida of leaking documents to reporters.  
"... The January 24 hearing -- which was already window dressed for media consumption with a 442-page brief and 12 boxes of documents -- would have done nothing other than provide a platform for the plaintiffs' lawyers to once again trumpet their case making it difficult for all parties to seat an unbiased jury," Little said.
Other tobacco companies, including RJR Nabisco Holdings Corp, have accused anti-tobacco lawyers of selective and unfair leaks to the media.  
Butterworth said he was forbidden by court order from detailing the damaging information in the documents but said 90 percent of the material came from industry internal documents. Much of the material was gathered by other attorneys general, many of whom are cooperating in their anti-tobacco lawsuits.
"It's nearly all their documents, all about their marketing practices, their science ... and they are giving up everything to avoid publicity," Butterworth said.
"This is a 100 percent victory for the state," he said of the industry's decision.
"The only downside is that disclosure of the documents is delayed."
A trial in the lawsuit is scheduled to begin on August 4 in West Palm Beach, Florida.
-- Miami bureau, 305-373-5014
