Cigarette companies, complaining of likely bad publicity, Friday dropped pre-trial opposition to punitive claims by the state of Florida in a multi-billion dollar anti-tobacco lawsuit.
Florida is seeking $1 billion or more from U.S. cigarette makers for actual costs incurred in its Medicaid healthcare programme for treating people afflicted with smoking-related ailments. Punitive damages, assuming a victory for the state, raise the potential losses to the industry substantially.
The state last month won the right to claim even further damages under Florida's anti-racketeering laws, a legal precedent in the spreading courtroom battle against tobacco companies. State lawyers have said the racketeering claims could cost cigarette makers tens of billions of dollars.
A lawyer for Philip Morris Cos Inc., one of the defending tobacco companies, said in a news release that ending pre-trial opposition had no legal effect and that the industry had never paid punitive damages in any lawsuit.
Florida Attorney General Bob Butterworth hailed the action as victory and said the industry had made a major legal concession to delay harsh disclosures during a scheduled Jan. 24 hearing about industry marketing and medical research practices.
"I liken it to a criminal trial in which the defendant tries to suppress evidence that would prove him guilty," Butterworth said in an interview. "They want to delay. It's their best short-term ploy."
Butterworth said he was forbidden by court order from detailing the damaging information in 27,000 pages of documents to have been presented on Jan. 24 but said 90 percent of the material came from industry internal documents. Much of the material was gathered by other attorneys general, many of whom are cooperating in anti-tobacco lawsuits filed by 18 states.
"It's nearly all their documents, all about their marketing practices, their science ... and they are giving up everything to avoid publicity," Butterworth said.
Philip Morris lawyer Gregory Little said a key reason for the industry's decision was a worry that the state lawyers would present evidence against cigarette makers during the hearing open to journalists. Tobacco lawyers would be severly restricted in defending against the evidence during the hearing, he said.
"... The January 24 hearing -- which was already window dressed for media consumption with a 442-page brief and 12 boxes of documents -- would have done nothing other than provide a platform for the plaintiffs lawyers to once again trumpet their case ...," Little said.
He accused anti-tobacco lawyers in Florida of leaking documents to reporters and polluting the pool of unbiased potential jurors needed for a fair trial.
The judge in the Florida trial, which is scheduled to begin Aug. 4 in West Palm Beach, Florida, last fall threw out 15 of the state government's original 18 claims.
Defendants in the case, one of several such lawsuits brought by state governments scheduled to go to trial this year, include RJR Nabisco Holdings and the Brown &amp; Williamson unit of B.A.T Industries of Britain.
The industry may receive another legal blow if a reported campaign by Brooke Group, parent of cigarette maker Ligget Group Inc., to settle Medicaid claims in a deal that could involve the exchange of confidential documents.
Liggett was last year the first tobacco company to ever settle cigarette lawsuits in an accord with five states which had sued the industry to recoup health-care costs of smokers.
