Billionaire Wayne Huizenga's Republic Industries Inc. added another sales outlet to its mushrooming auto-retailing business with the $200 million acquisition Tuesday of a leading Florida car dealer.
Republic said in a news release it was issuing stock to acquire Maroone Automotive Group, the owner and operator of seven new and used car dealerships, six in southern Florida. It also operates a showroom in Buffalo, N.Y.
Republic just last week agreed to pay $600 million for the National Car Rental Agency, the fourth largest rental car group in the United States, and this week is scheduled to complete acquisition of AutoNation USA.
AutoNation is a private company owned by Huizenga and is pioneering, with other competitors, the consolidation of the highly fragmented second-hand car business in the United States. AutoNation is building sprawling superstores of lightly used cars with set prices and warranties.
Both the acquisition of National and the takeover last November of Alamo Rent-A-Car, the fifth largest car-rental company, are meant to feed AutoNation. Republic has said it wants to open between 80 and 100 AutoNation stores by 2000.
"We plan to have new vehicle stores in markets where we are developing AutoNation USA. Maroone Automotive will enable us to add more major automotive brands as a complement to our used car megastores in south Florida," Huizenga said.
Maroone, now run by the son of the founder, owns the fourth largest Chevrolet store, third largest Dodge location and largest Isuzu franchise in the United States. The group also owns Ford and Oldsmobile franchises.
Michael Maroone, who heads the chain, will become president of Republic's new-car division.
In a continuing buying spree, Republic and Huizenga have acquired Mullinax Inc., the largest Ford dealer in the United States, Magic Ford and Magic Lincoln-Mercury in southern California, and leading southwestern Dodge dealer Bell Dodge.
Tuesday's deal came just a day after Republic said it would pay about $100 million to acquire Grubb Automotive Inc., which owns and operates six new and used vehicle dealerships in Arizona and Texas.
"Republic is now one of the largest purchasers of new vehicles ...," Montgomery Securities analyst Jordan Hymowitz said in a recent report. "As such, we believe they have an increased ability to request vehicles (makes, models, etc.), as well as rental terms to meet its retailing terms."
Other participants in the consolidating auto-retailing business are the CarMax superstore chain of electronics merchant Circuit City and United Auto Group of New York, which has grown to be the fourth largest new-car dealer in the country since 1992.
In still another deal reflecting auto-retailing consolidation, the largest single franchisee of Budget Rent a Car Corp., Team Rental Group Inc. of Daytona Beach, Fla., agreed Tuesday to acquire Ford Motor Co.'s interest in Budget in a deal valued at around $350 million. Ford does not own Budget outright, but controls it through a stock purchase option.
Republic Industries, based in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., also operates in the solid waste and electronic security services industries.
Republic's stock gained $1.125 to $37 in afternoon trading on the Nasdaq market.
