Lawyers battling cigarette companies on behalf of flight attendants exposed for decades to second-hand smoke on Wednesday began notifying potential claimants of a historic tobacco trial set to begin in June.
A mass mailing to some 120,000 former and current flight attendants on U.S. airlines seeks to identify non-smokers who suffer ailments such as lung cancer.  
Print advertisements in union and trade magazines, an Internet site and follow-up mailings seeking claimaints are to follow during the next two months.
The class-action suit claims that the illnesses were caused by second-hand smoke from cigarettes aboard airliners and seeks unspecificed damages likely to total billions of dollars.
It accuses Philip Morris Cos Inc and other leading tobacco companies of hiding the dangers of second-hand, or environmental, smoke from Americans.  
"This is clearly a milestone," said Richard Daynard, chairman of the Tobacco Liability Law Project at Northeastern University in Boston. "This is the first time a class-action case has gotten to notificiation," he said, referring to actions taken in the tobacco industry.
A separate suit in Louisiana seeking to represent as many as 50 million ill smokers was thrown out last year. Daynard said two other class-action suits, another in Miami and the second in Pennsylvania, were also scheduled to go to trial this year.
"This is a significant stage," said University of Colorado School of Law professor Christopher Mueller.  
Flight attendants lawyer Stanley Rosenblatt of Miami said 25,000 to 60,000 flight attendants would likely be included in the suit out of an estimated 300,000 who worked for U.S. airlines before in-flight smoking was banned.
The suit alleges that second-hand smoke causes cardiac conditions, cancer and 21 other ailments. Rosenblatt and Daynard said scientific findings had established links between those ailments and second-hand smoke that were strong enough to stand up in a jury trial.  
"That's a very big if," said Michael York, an attorney for the tobacco industry. "If he were successful in that, he has to come back and prove that second-hand smoke caused individual injuries."
Rosenblatt said damages, if any, would be set in follow-up trials after the completion of the June 2 trial, which he estimated would run two to three months in Dade County Court. Categories of claims, such as those of people suffering with emphysma, would likely be determined separately, he said.  
Tobacco attorneys had in recent months pressed Rosenblatt to spend heavily on a national media campaign, using television and popular magazines, but Dade County Circuit Judge Robert Kaye ruled that mail notification was sufficient.
Daynard and Mueller said the tobacco industry, in expectations it would beat Rosenblatt, wanted as many potential claimaints involved in the class-action suit since those people then would not be able to sue independently.
"We think the entire case is meritless," York said.
Rosenblatt said any claimants who did not write and ask to be excluded from the class-action lawsuit would be included. Typically, no more than five to 10 percent of class-action claimants drop out, legal experts said.
((-- Miami newsroom, 305-374-5013))
