Taking mortgage-backed securities as a model, trucking giant Ryder System Inc is bargaining with a half dozen banks on possibly creating securitized financial offerings on as many as 15,000 leased trucks a year.
A first offering of securitized truck leases could come as early as March and all offerings could total as much as $700 million by year-end 1997, Ryder chief financial officer Ed Huston told Reuters.  
"We're thinking of taking a package of leases and selling them," Huston said. "It's a variation of mortgage-backed securities."
Huston said no deal, which would be an innovation among trucking services groups, had been agreed and warned an unforseeen issue could block the plan.
"We've talked to a number of banks and we are on the verge of selecting one," he said.
He declined to identify which banks Ryder was considering. Citicorp is currently a leading finance source for Ryder, Huston said.  
Ryder late Monday announced it would take a $215 million pre-tax charge against fourth-quarter and full-1996 results to pay for a restructuring, early-retirment and layoffs. The moves affect some 2,100 people and should yield savings in 1997 of $75 million for Ryder and $150 million annually afterwards, Huston said.
The charge was bigger than Wall Street expected, Merrill Lynch analyst Jeff Kauffman said.
"It reflects a conviction by management to change things .... Shareholders really want to see some changes and some of them are losing faith in the story. The onus has been put on management to deliver results," he said.
"We are encouraged by their conviction. They seem to be in earnest," Kauffman said.  
Ryder, which last year agreed to sell its consumer-truck rental operations, now buys about 25,000 each year. Some 15,000 of those would be suitable for lease-backed securitization, Huston said.
Ryder, he said, may be able to free equity by the lease-backed offerings and get lower costs because lease-backed offerings typically get better ratings than company debt instruments.
Ryder now has single A and A- ratings on its debt and might secure a triple A rating on its lease-back offerings, Huston said.
Shares of Ryder were up 3/4 to 29-1/8.
-- Miami newsroom, 305-374-5013.
