Quick &amp; Reilly Group Inc sees revenues possibly doubling to as much as $120 million by early 1998 at the OTC market-maker, Nash, Weiss &amp; Co, the pioneering discount broker is buying, top Quick executives said on Wednesday.
The firm also plans to move Nash, Weiss, now largely a market maker for retail brokerages, into the institutional side of the business by adding 1,000 or more issues to its current 2,500 roster, Quick President Thomas Quick told Reuters.  
"This gives us another major leg," said Leslie Quick III, the president's brother and head of the discount-brokerage's U.S. Clearing Corp subsidiary. "We expect this Nasdaq market maker business to be a fourth leg for us."
Best known as a retail broker, Quick &amp; Reilly is also a significant force in backroom processing of Wall Street trading and owner of the JCC Specialist Corp, the second largest market-maker, or specialist firm, on the New York Stock Exchange.
Earlier, the firm agreed to acquire Nash Weiss, a market maker of 2,500 Nasdaq issues, for an undisclosed amount.  
"That number will probably go to 3,500 to 4,000," Leslie Quick III said.
The brothers, whose father, chairman Leslie Quick Jr, co-founded the firm in the early 1970s, said the mightily improved  capitalization of Nash, Weiss after the merger with Quick &amp; Reilly will make it much more attractive to large institutional clients.
"Right now, they are on the retail side," said Leslie Quick III. "They are probably the fifth or sixth largest. We think we can take the business into the top three. With our balance sheet, we can go after institutions."  
Thomas Quick said the leading market-maker for institutional clients had capitalization of about $80 million, or 20 times or more that of Nash Weiss.
The brothers said they expect revenues at Nash, Weiss, to rise dramatically as long as stock trading remains robust and may even double by the end of fiscal year 1998. The company's fiscal year ends on the last day of February.
Nash, Weiss will be run as a separate subsidiary remaining in Jersey City, New Jersey, and no job cuts or restructurings were planned, the brothers said.
Shares of Quick &amp; Reilly were up 1/8 to 331/4.
-- Miami newsroom, 305-374-5013.
