In a move to end "shock at the dock," six top cruise-ship lines agreed Wednesday to include all fees in the advertised price, and make booking a cruise as simple as buying an airline ticket.
Add-on fees as high as $150 a person will be included in advertised prices so consumers will not be surprised when the final tally is made.
"You won't have any more shock at the dock," Florida Attorney General Bob Butterworth said in an interview.
Separately negotiated deals with Butterworth's staff, including one with industry-leader Carnival Corp., cover only lines operating out of Florida ports but should be felt all over the United States, Butterworth said.
Florida has two million cruise passengers each year, or about 60 percent of the North American market, and shapes national television ad campaigns by an industry courting customers throughout the continent.
Two other lines, Princess and Holland America, operating mainly out of California, Washington state and Alaska, are also likely to adopt the full-price policies, Butterworth said. Smaller lines are also likely to take up full-price advertising, he said.
"Combining port charges with the cruise fare will not change the total price paid by the consumer," said Adam Goldstein, marketing chief for Royal Caribbean Cruises Ltd another of the lines adopting the full-price policy.
Butterworth said cruise lines had over the years begun adding many operating costs to port fees, which most passengers believed were government taxes. The fees can add as much as 30 percent to a basic trip price. Now, only minor fees such as head taxes and port pilot fees actually paid to governments can be added.
Some lines, Butterworth said, were charging as port fees the salaries of cruise crew while their ships were docked and other operating costs in no way connected with any government.
"Anything could have been expensed in this way. It could be the food put on for the trip; it could be the water," Butterworth said.
Butterworth also said the lines -- including Norwegian Cruise Line Ltd., Celebrity Cruises Inc., Dolphin Cruise Line and Majesty Cruise Line -- would pay Florida $295,000 as part of the agreements.
Carnival said in a news release that the $295,000 in fees were neither fines nor penalties but payments to cover the costs of an 18-month state investigation. The company also said its brochures had always included a notice that extra port fees were required of Carnival passengers.
Carnival President Bob Dickinson said his company had been merely following an industry norm, in which port fees were added on to the advertised prices.
Advertising rates for Carnival and Royal Caribbean trips would be changed beginning later this month, the companies said.
Butterworth said the pricing changes may prove a boon to the cruise-ship industry, since passengers will not be startled by higher prices when they book. "We want just one price, just like the airlines," he said.
Last summer, one-day cruise ship lines in Port Everglades, a major cruise venue near Fort Lauderdale, agreed to stop calling passenger charges as high as $19 "port fees" because only about $3 was being passed on to governments.
"Government gets blamed for enough already," Butterworth said.
