Florida is stepping up anti-smoking efforts by barring cigarette promotions on state roads, forcing Marlboro to drop its name from thousands of banners promoting the Marlboro Grand Prix of Miami motor race.
New rules detailing limits on using banners to promote sports events, to be published on Friday, are due to take effect in early March, a Florida Department of Transportation official said.
Banners for beer, tobacco and other products meant for adults are covered by the new rules. Promoters can place a product name on the banners but cannot use type faces, logos and colours associated with the banned products.
"Most sporting events have a corporate name attached to them and that name would be allowed," said department spokeswoman Lynn Holschuh. "But if it's a product that can't be sold to minors, the banner can't contain logos or significant advertising promoting the product."
Advertising on billboards, often located on private property, will not be affected by the new rules covering state roadways, the official said. The rules do not affect municipal, Interstate and other roads maintained by other governments.
In Miami, an IndyCar-class grand prix site since 1983, thousands of coloured banners no longer bear the Marlboro name, even though the Feb. 4 to March 2 competition is officially called the Marlboro Miami Grand Prix presented by Toyota.
Banners for the event say simply, Grand Prix of Miami presented by Toyota.
Last year's banners carried the distinctive red colour and bold typface of Marlboro, the most popular cigarette in the United States.
A spokeswoman for Philip Morris Cos. Inc., maker of Marlboro cigarettes, said the company had chosen to drop the Marlboro name from the banners as a courtesy. State officials, including anti-tobacco activist Gov. Lawton Chiles, complained about the Marlboro signs last year.
"We will have signage and merchandise and cigarettes for sale to people 21 and over at the site," said Philip Morris spokeswoman Tara Carraro. "We really want to reach smokers choosing brands."
Marlboro, which along with RJR Nabisco Holdings Corp. is a major sponsor of motorsports events, will back other IndyCar events this year in California, Ohio, New Hampshire, Wisconsin and elsewhere.
Such sponsorships are major promotional outlets for the U.S. tobacco industry, with the top two producers spending $50 million or more each year on motorsports sponsorships, according to the IEG Sponsorship Report newsletter.
Marlboro spent about $19 million on motorsport sponsorships and likely as much again on related advertising and promotion during 1996, according to David Jacobsen, senior editor at IEG.
Cigarette advertising has been banned since the 1960s from U.S. television and steadily driven from sponsoring many other sports. The industry now faces still stricter federal government limits on promoting its products.
The federal rules, the first of which are to take effect on Feb. 28, sharply curtail cigarette advertising near schools and playgrounds and in publications favoured by people under 18.
A spokesman for the National Centre for Tobacco Free Kids, an anti-smoking group, said Florida's roadway ban was unusual. Some local transit systems, in San Francisco and elsewhere, have dropped tobacco advertising, he said.
A spokesman for Chiles, who is spearheading a billion-dollar lawsuit against the tobacco industry and advocating new state taxes on cigarettes, described him as pleased by the Marlboro's decision to take its name off the Miami race banners.
