Any walkout by American Airlines pilots would hit tourist-dependent Caribbean islands like a hurricane, while Latin America's diversified economies should easily weather a service-stoppage.
"A hurricane hits only one island, and this will hurt all the islands," said Antonio Colorado, executive director of the Caribbean/Latin America Action economic organisation.
A halt by American Airlines, a unit of AMR Corp., which dominates U.S. service to the Caribbean and Latin America, would come just at the height of the Caribbean tourist season and cause economic havoc, regional industry, political and economic offcials and analysts said.
The roughly 160,000 hotel rooms in Barbados, St. Lucia, Aruba and other Caribbean islands are 90 percent occupied on average and losses from a strike could total $15 million each day of the North American winter, Colorado said.
"Few hoteliers in the Caribbean could be expected to sustain the loss of such revenue for more than a few days without terminal effect," said Caribbean Hotel Association executive vice president John Bell.
American, now in labour talks with its pilots, and its American Eagle subsidiary account for as much as 70 percent of the flights between the Caribbean and North America. Some 7.2 million North Americans travel to the Caribbean each year.
Some Caribbean economies are 50 percent or more tourist reliant, and region-wide tourist spending adds up to some $11 billion each year.
Grenada, Martinique, St. Kitts and St. Lucia are among the islands most reliant on American services.
"An American Airlines strike would be devastating to us at this time," St. Lucia's Prime Minister Dr. Vaughn Lewis said.
Some manufacturers and shippers of perishable goods from Latin America and the Caribbean would be hurt by a stoppage at American but the interruption in passenger traffic to Latin America would be short-lived, economists said.
"I think it would be little more than a blip," said Terry McCoy of the University of Florida in Gainesville.
Much of the travel between North America and the bigger countries in South America such as Argentina and Chile is by business people and much commerce can be carried out by telephone and otherwise.
"A lot of people who would take trips can use faxes," said Jerry Haar at the North-South Centre, a think tank at the University of Miami. "There would be a disruption but it's not anything which can't be recouped."
Cut-flower exporters from Ecuador and Colombia and seafood or horticultural shippers could also be hurt, Haar said. Some shippers of other goods might also face higher transport rates.
But overall the manufacturing and services businesses throughout Latin America were unlikely to feel many effects from a strike, economists said.
Aviation consultant Stuart Klaskin of Miami said a strike running a week or more might be a boon to U.S. rivals of American Airlines such as Delta, United Airlines and Continental Airlines. Each would likely seek to increase flights or add destinations.
