Tobacco companies are countersuing Florida, saying the state government should be held liable for manufacturing cigarettes in its prisons if the state wins a billion-dollar lawsuit against cigarette makers.
Tobacco industry lawyers filed the suit on Wednesday, a Philip Morris Cos spokeswoman said and comes a week after a Florida judge blocked the industry from using Florida's history of cigarette-making in a trial scheduled to begin in August.  
Tobacco legal papers filed in Palm Beach County Court said the Florida Department of Corrections for decades made high-nicotine, high-tar cigarettes and other tobacco products and sold or distributed them to inmates.
State officials believed the cigarettes were "particularly unhealthful "but still distributed them to inmates."
"The state believed that its cigarettes were cancer-causing and addictive," the court papers said.
The tobacco countersuit asked that Florida pay some damages along with the tobacco industry if it should win its lawsuit to be tried in August.  
Florida, the countersuit said, should be liable "for the portion of damages that is attributable to its own conduct, or for its presumptive share of the market."
State officials have said the tobacco used in the cigarettes was bought from one of the defendants, American Tobacco Co, and it no longer makes cigarettes in its prisons.
Spearheaded by Gov. Lawton Chiles, Florida is suing cigarette makers for $1 billion, or more in costs incurred from treating smokers through the state's Medicaid healthcare program.  
The state has also won the right to press for punitive damages under a state racketeering law if it can prove tobacco companies such as RJR Nabisco and the Brown &amp; Williamson unit of B.A.T Industries of Britain conspired to hide the health risks of tobacco from customers.
The governor is also pressing to raise cigarette taxes and backed restrictions made public this week on tobacco-related advertising on Florida's state roads.
Some two dozen state governments and other local governments are suing tobacco companies to recover monies spent on treating tobacco-related illnesses.
"It's ironic," said April Herrle, spokeswoman for the governor. "This is a backdoor admission by the industry that nicotine is addictive, something it denies."
She said the state expects the countersuit to be dismissed.
Last week, the tobacco companies were rebuffed by the trial judge in the case when they sought to use the state's cigarette-making record as a partial defense in the approaching trial.
-- Miami newsroom, 305-374-5013.
