Lawyers in a class-action suit against cigarette makers won the right to question and videotape the chief executives of several top tobacco companies, lawyers said on Thursday.
The chief executives of Brown &amp; Williamson, a subsidiary of B.A.T Industries Plc; the tobacco unit of Philip Morris Cos Inc; the RJ Reynolds Tobacco unit of RJR Nabisco, and Loews Corp's Lorillard were covered in an order issued by Dade County Judge Robert Kaye, according to Edward Moss, a lawyer for Brown &amp; Williamson.  
Stanley Rosenblatt, one of the lawyers bringing the class-action suit on behalf of U.S. flight attendants allegedly sickened by second-hand smoke, said he may use the videotapes at a trial in Dade County Court scheduled to begin in June.
Rosenblatt alleges in his lawsuit that tobacco company scientists and executives conspired to hide the dangers of smoking, even when the industry's own research backed up scores of independent studies that found smoking was unhealthy.  
The suit covers an estimated 60,000 flight attendants who never smoked and who suffer from lung ailments or other sicknesses and worked for U.S. airlines before in-flight smoking was banned.
Moss and other tobacco company lawyers had argued that Rosenblatt questioned tobacco industry chief executives several years ago.
Rosenblatt argued that many of the executives he questioned had retired and that scores of industry documents allegedly backing his claims had since become public.  
Moss said he and other tobacco company lawyers were considering appealing Kaye's order.
Kaye said in a separate order that he would privately review some 1,500 industry documents for possible use by Rosenblatt in the trial.
The tobacco lawyers say the documents, many of them made public by a legal assistant in a law firm representing a tobacco company, are privilged communications. They say the documents should not be used as evidence because the assistant had no right to the documents.
Anti-tobacco activists have described the documents as evidence that the industry for decades knew the risks of smoking while aggressively selling cigarettes and denying the dangers.
((--Miami Newsroom, 305-374-5013))
