Florida Panthers Holdings Inc's cash flow losses are narrowing because of strong professional hockey revenues and a lift from newly acquired leisure properties, President Richard Evans said Tuesday .
"The games are sold out, and advertising and sponsorship revenue is better than expected," Evans told Reuters after a presentation to investors at a conference sponsored by Raymond James &amp; Associates Inc. "We also are benefitting for part of the year from the hotel and Incredible Ice properties."  
He predicted the company would have a cash flow loss, defined as earnings before taxes, interest, depreciation and amortization (EBITDA), of about $3.1 million for the 12 months ending June 30.
The Fort Lauderdale-based company forecast last November, when it made a 7.0 million share initial offering, that EBIDTA losses would total about $15 million in the fiscal year through June.
Evans said EBITDA should turn positive and total $3.1 million or more in the fiscal year ending June 30, 1998.  
EBITDA should total $22.5 million in the following fiscal year, when the Panthers hockey team will have 12 months' occupancy of a new, $185-million arena being built in Broward County north of Miami.
The arena will seat 19,000 during hockey games, stimulate ticket, souvenir and food revenues, and draw from three South Florida counties with four million residents, Evans said.
The Panthers, which now play in the Miami Arena, will also get a bigger share of concession profits than under the current deal, he said.  
He declined to predict when Panthers Holdings would turn profitable.
Evans said he spent two-thirds of his time working on possible acquisitions, under the direction of majority shareholder and Chairman Wayne Huizenga, and that deals were likely this year. He said leisure properties, particularly involving golf, were of keen interest to Panther Holdings.
Since November, Panthers Holdings has bought two marina hotels in Fort Lauderdale, in stock deals, and paid $15.5 million for Incredible Ice, an ice rink offering a spectrum of entertainments. Evans said Incredible Ice sites were likely to be opened elsewhere in the United States.
"The market has given us an incredible currency, and we intend to use it," he said.
Panthers Holdings shares have nearly tripled from their $10 offering price in November.
Evans said all acquisitions would be accretive to cash flow and were very likely to be stock transactions
Huizenga said in a speech at the Raymond James conference Monday night that deals for the Panthers were likely.
((--Miami Newsroom 305-374-5013))
