A 90-cent increase in the U.S. minimum wage will have little short-term impact on most fast food restaurants, since the competition for workers is keeping pay rates above the federally mandated standard.
"The (real) 'minimum wage' is what the closest McDonald's pays or it could be the local Pizza Hut," George Goulson, senior vice president of A&amp;W Restaurants Inc, said.
But longer term, the industry fears that workers, who are already making more than the new minimum wage, will be looking for a raise to maintain the pay premium.  
Earlier Tuesday, President Clinton signed into law the first rise in the minimum wage in five years, boosting the wage to $5.15 an hour from $4.25.
"Our average crew wage is about $5.20 (an hour) so short-term there is not going to be any impact," said Denny Lynch, spokesman for Wendy's International Inc, which operates 4,307 restaurants in the United States.
But higher minimum wages will raise total wages by about $500,000 over the next 12 months at American Restaurant Partners L.P., which operates 62 Pizza Hut restaurant franchises.  
"If you raise someone who started in the last two months (to the new minimum wage level), you also have to raise everybody else," said Terry Freund, chief financial officer of American Restaurant Partners.
Beyond the minimum wage requirements, competition for workers, from cooks to delivery drivers, has forced many fast-food chains to pay up to hire good help, particularly in metropolitan markets. That competition is being driven by an increase in restaurant openings.
"There are neighborhoods where we have to pay $6.00 an hour to $6.50 or $7.00 to get" good workers, Lynch added.  
Fast-food industry executives said there has been competition for workers since the late 1980s, although the increase in restaurant openings is making the search for employees more intense.
Another problem for quick-service restaurants is that wage competition from other employers often lures experienced workers away. A fast-food worker, for example, may be able to bring home more pay as a waiter or waitress at a casual dining establishment where they could receive $50 or $60 a night in tips, executives said.
"For QSRs (quick service restaurants)...it's even tougher to keep the kids," Roger Lipton, president of Lipton Financial Services, said.
Reuters Chicago Newsdesk  312-408-8787
