Breakfast cereal price wars may make consumers smile, but they're putting frowns on faces at some of the nation's largest cereal makers.
Industry analysts said Kellogg Co., the No. 1 cereal maker, is expected to report flat earnings for the latest quarter, while Ralcorp Holdings Inc., a big maker of store brand cereal, was likely to report lower earnings.
Price cuts and promotions in the $9 billion cereal business have hurt results at both companies, analysts said.
Kellogg, based in Battle Creek, Mich., has lost sales to competitors such as General Mills Inc., its biggest rival, which cut prices early last year. General Mills' earnings rose 7.5 percent in its latest quarter, on an increase in market share sparked partly by promotions.
The price cutting, started by Post Cereal, forced Kellogg, General Mills and others to follow suit. Post, a unit of Philip Morris Cos. Inc., does not report results separately.
Kellogg said in November that it would take steps to counter the price cuts and other promotions that eroded its market share to about 33 percent from 35 percent, analysts said.
While its counterattacks appear to be paying off -- analysts said Kellogg's market share seems to have risen a bit in December -- they is also pressuring earnings.
"(Kellogg's) domestic earnings are clearly going to be down on lower sales and some increase in marketing spending," said Goldman Sachs analyst Nomi Ghez.
In October Kellogg said earnings fell 31 percent in the third quarter, hurt by promotions by rivals. It pledged at the time that earnings growth would resume in the fourth quarter, analysts said, but most are forecasting flat or slightly lower results. For the 1995 fourth quarter, Kellogg earned $166.7 million, or 77 cents a share.
Kellogg also moved to diversify its breakfast food business last month when it bought Lender's Bagels from Kraft Foods Inc. for $455 million.
Quaker Oats Co., a maker of cereals and other food products, is expected to report an operating profit for the fourth quarter, compared with a loss a year ago. But Quaker is also expected to take a charge in the quarter to write down the value of its Snapple beverage business.
"The issue for Quaker is how big of a charge they take for Snapple," said BT Securities analyst John O'Neil.
Quaker said in a recent Securities and Exchange Commission filing that it was reviewing a possible writeoff related to Snapple. A Quaker spokesman declined to comment on the possibility of a charge in the fourth quarter.
Among other food companies, Sara Lee Corp. is expected to report a strong increase in earnings, with the biggest improvement in its meat and bakery division, said Donaldson, Lufkin and Jenrette analyst William Leach.
Analysts said CPC International Inc., which makes Hellman's mayonnaise, Mazola corn oil, Skippy peanut butter and Thomas' English muffins, would report a smaller than normal rise in quarterly earnings, due to high corn costs. Corn refining accounts for 15 percent of CPC's sales, which were $8.4 billion in 1995.
