Lower U.S. retail prices and tighter profit margins have raised the performance bar for cereal brands, with those that fail to capture adequate market share quickly losing a spot on the grocery shelf.
"The cereal aisle is one of the most competitive aisles in the grocery store. As a result, to remain on the shelves, products have to meet increasingly high expectations," said Joseph Rutledge, a spokesman for General Mills Inc, the second largest U.S. cereal marker.  
While cutting slow-selling products is a long-standing marketing practice, analysts and industry sources said the process has intensified.
"There is such intense scrunity on the grocery shelf -- what's moving and how fast is it selling -- that you are going to see a tremendous culling out of all these cereals," said Anne Tynion, president of North River Strategies Inc, a consumer and corporate brand consulting firm.
In 1995, General Mills axed Hidden Treasures and Sprinkle Spangles and launched Frosted Cheerios, its most successful new cereal. Rutledge said the events were unrelated.  
The weeding-out of stock-keeping units, or SKUs, is being done by both by cereal manufacturers and retailers, analysts said. In cereal, each variety and box-size is a separate SKU.
"There is evidence that companies are rationalizing their slower-moving, lower-market share SKUs," BT Securities analyst John O'Neil said.
For cereal makers, the need to phase out slow-selling products has intensified with the recent cuts in retail prices, which have pressured profit margins. To make up for lost profits, cereal companies must focus attention on the best-sellers in the grocery store, analysts added.  
Pat Browne-Riso, a spokeswoman for number-three Post Cereal, a unit of Philip Morris Cos Inc, said elimination of poor sellers is a natural process driven by consumer demand.
"For example, if a certain size product is preferred over another, or as new products are introduced, we would (do) our best to optimize our space on the shelf as best as possible," Browne-Riso said.
For retailers, recent cutbacks in promotional spending by cereal makers -- such as offering discounts on wholesale purchases that may not be passed on entirely to consumers -- is prompting grocers to take a closer look at what is selling.  
"It comes back to the efforts of the manufacturers to roll back the promotional spending, which will provide the impetus for the retailers to exercise category management practices," SBC Warburg analyst Chris Jakubik said.
Scanner data, collected at the grocery check-out counter, has provided key information on cereal brand sales.
"It (scanning) has totally changed the grocery environment," Tynion of North River Strategies said.
Kellogg Co, the top U.S. cereal maker, declined to comment on its marketing strategies.
-- Reuters Chicago Newsdesk - 312-408-8787
