DeKalb Genetics Corp, which reported better-than-expected fiscal first quarter results, said Monday it expects higher margins and increased market share for its key U.S. and Canadian seed corn operations this year.
"We have already said that we will be $4 per unit in gross margins better in North American seed," Thomas Rauman, chief financial officer, said in an interview.  "And we have stated we expect to sell more seed corn this year than last year."  
International income, which nearly doubled to $5.9 million in the first quarter ended November 30, likely will be up by a double-digit percentage for all of fiscal 1997, Rauman added.
He declined to comment specifically about earnings for the year.  But analysts said DeKalb, the number two North American seed corn supplier with about an 11 percent market share, will see sharply higher earnings in fiscal 1997.
Dain Bosworth analyst Bonnie Wittenburg raised her fiscal 1997 earnings estimate to $1.42 a share from $1.35.  DeKalb earned $1.03 a share in fiscal 1996.  
In the first quarter, international results were "ahead of schedule," Rauman said, enabling the company to post a profit of $0.12 a share, compared with a year-ago loss of $0.01.
NatWest Securities analyst Mark Wiltamuth said the consensus for the first quarter had been a loss of $0.02 a share.  The seed company typically loses money in the first quarter since it has no earnings then in North America.
"We feel very good about North American operations," Rauman said. "Our seed orders are very strong this year."
Early cash sales, a good indicator of future seed demand, are up this year from last year, Rauman added.  
Based on these early cash sales, Wittenburg said she believes DeKalb will at least meet its goal of increasing seed corn market share in the U.S. and Canada by one-half to one full share point.
DeKalb gained a full market share point last year. The top seed corn supplier in the U.S. and Canada is Pioneer Hi-Bred International Inc.
In its swine operations, in which DeKalb sells breeding stock to farmers, Rauman said the first quarter results were below last year, primarily due to higher feed costs.
Swine earnings for the year, however, are expected to be higher than last year, Rauman added.
((Reuters Chicago Newsdesk (312) 408-8787))
