Former Archer Daniels Midland Co. executive Mark Whitacre, who acted as an informant in an antitrust investigation, filed suit on Monday against the Federal Bureau of Investigation agent who allegedly recruited him.
In his suit, filed in the U.S. District Court of the Central District of Illinois, Whitacre charged FBI Agent Brian Shepard with allegedly violating his constitutional rights, inflicting emotional distress, and assault and battery.
Because the suit targets Shepard in his official capacity as an agent, Whitacre is effectively suing the FBI, according to a legal expert.
"It would be tantamount to suing the whole FBI," said Chicago attorney James Shapiro, who is a former assistant U.S. Attorney.
The FBI press office in Washington, as a matter of policy, declined to comment on Whitacre's lawsuit. "We couldn't discuss or comment on pending litigation," an FBI spokesman said.
A Justice Department spokesman was not immediately available, and an FBI spokesman in Springfield, Ill., also was not available for comment.
The lawsuit is the latest twist in the legal tangle involving Whitacre, who said he acted as a government informant from 1992 through 1995 to assist in the Justice Department's antitrust probe of Decatur, Ill.-based Archer Daniels Midland, one of the world's largest processors of corn and other crops.
Whitacre had been president of ADM's BioProducts Division until he was fired in August 1995. ADM has charged that Whitacre allegedly stole about $9 million from it.
Whitacre has denied those charges, saying he received the money in off-the-books payments that allegedly were authorised by ADM officials.
In October 1996, as part of the antitrust probe, ADM pleaded guilty to two counts of fixing prices of lysine, a feed additive, and citric acid, which is used in food, beverages and other products. ADM agreed to pay $100 million in fines, a record for antitrust actions.
In December 1996, Whitacre was indicted for allegedly conspiring to fix prices of lysine. Also indicted at that time were Michael Andreas, former vice chairman of ADM and son of Chairman Dwayne Andreas, and Terrance Wilson, a former group vice president.
Whitacre, Michael Andreas and Wilson have pleaded not guilty to those charges.
In his lawsuit, filed in Urbana, Ill., Whitacre said he had repeatedly discussed with Shepard a grant of immunity in exchange for cooperating with the antitrust investigation.
Whitacre said he wanted to seek out an attorney regarding his role as a informer. He alleged that Shepard kept him from obtaining an attorney, in violation of his constitutional rights under the 1st and 5th Amendments.
Whitacre also claimed in his lawsuit that there were episodes when Shepard allegedly became "angry, shouted, directed abusive language" toward him and threatened him with criminal prosecution if he sought the counsel of an attorney.
In the lawsuit, Whitacre also claimed that in late February or early March 1993, Shepard allegedly struck him with a hard-sided briefcase.
He further charged that Shepard kept him from seeking medical treatment for depression and suicidal tendencies, which exacerbated his manic depression.
Whitacre said he attempted suicide on Aug. 9, 1995.
Separately, in U.S. District Court in Chicago, Cheil Jedang Ltd. of Seoul, South Korea, entered a guilty plea to charges of fixing lysine prices. The company agreed to pay a $1.25 million fine, which was suspended until the end of the ADM litigation.
