Dayton Hudson Corp. said Friday its Mervyn's division is pulling out of Florida and Georgia and will close 10 other stores as part of its efforts to turn around that retail division.
The actions to pare a total of 35 outlets from Mervyn's chain of 300 stores are part of an ongoing consolidation of the over-saturated retail market.
"It's no secret that the retail industry is 'over-stored,'" Pamela Rucker, a spokeswoman for the National Retail Federation, said. "Consolidations are taking place ... Those retailers and those retail establishments that aren't performing are the ones that are going to close."
Mervyn's 25 stores in Florida and Georgia are modestly profitable, but their operating margins were below the chain average, Dayton Hudson spokeswoman Susan Eich said.
"We did have high fixed costs in terms of distribution and advertising (in Florida and Georgia) and limited market penetration," she said. "Given those two realities, it made more sense to exit those markets."
Out of the 300 stores that Mervyn's has currently, 128 are based in California. Dayton Hudson currently has a total of 1,101 stores, including 736 Target discount department stores, its largest division.
Dayton said the actions at Mervyn's will result in a pretax charge of $134 million against its earnings for the fiscal fourth quarter, ending in late January.
It said the charge also covers previously announced plans to dispose of four Marshall Field's stores in Texas and close a Marshall Field's store in Park Forest, Ill. Marshall Field's is part of Dayton's Department Store Division.
The Mervyn's and Marshall Field's closings will cut a total of $505 million in annual revenue for Dayton and trim about $30 million in annual operating profit, Eich said. But that reduction in profit is expected to be largely offset by interest savings.
Dayton Hudson's operating profit for fiscal 1995 was $1 billion.
The company said Dillard Department Stores Inc. agreed to buy 10 of 18 Mervyn's locations in Florida and J.C. Penney Co. Inc. agreed to purchase three of seven Georgia locations.
The remaining properties are expected to be sold to a variety of other purchasers, it added.
Dayton said that, as a result of the real estate transactions, it expected to generate about $350 million in cash, which will be used to reduce debt and pursue growth opportunities such as opening more Target units.
Dayton has been trying to turn around its Mervyn's division and profitability has been above plan, Eich said. For the first nine months of fiscal 1996, Mervyn's operating profit was $157 million, up from $37 million a year ago.
But Mervyn's sales for the fiscal year-to-date up to Jan. 4 were down 4.3 percent, below the company's plan to have at least flat sales at stores opened for a year or more, Eich added. The company's fiscal year lasts until the end of January.
"I'm sure Florida and Georgia are the areas where they're missing plan the most," Merrill Lynch analyst Daniel Barry said.
Piper Jaffray analyst Saul Yaari said he has been looking for Dayton Hudson to shed all of its Mervyn's division, focusing the company more on its Target division.
"We're looking for a total disposition of Mervyn's over the next few years," he said.
However, Dayton Chairman Robert Ulrich said in a statement that all three retail divisions -- Target, Mervyn's and Department Stores -- are core to the company's overall corporate strategy.
"We remain committed to ... improving the performance of the corporation and believe that this real estate repositioning will help us strengthen our competitive position and achieve our long-term financial goals," Ulrich said.
Dayton Hudson shares were up $1.375 at $38.25 on the New York Stock Exchange in early afternoon trading.
((Reuters Chicago Newsdesk (312) 408-8787))
