Kellogg Co, whose profits for 1996 are under pressure from price cuts and promotions, threw down the gauntlet that it will take the necessary steps to preserve its category leadership, which may mean further discounts, analysts said.
"They (Kellogg) might cut prices again or increase promotions again," said Donaldson, Lufkin and Jenrette analyst William Leach.
On Wednesday, Chairman Arnold Langbo said Kellogg will direct its efforts away from deep price promotion.  
"..However, we are unwilling to see our leadership position compromised," Langbo added in a statement.
Earlier this year, Kellogg, General Mills Inc and the Post Cereal division of Philip Morris Cos Inc cut retail prices in an effort to spark a sluggish category.
"On balance consumers want lower prices still," Smith Barney analyst David Rabinowitz said. "They'll either get that in the form of lower list prices or extraordinarily high levels of promotion."  
While many analysts had expected Kellogg to report earnings below last year's $3.48 a share, the magnitude of the potential decline did come as a surprise for some.
"Their guidance has been much different," added Leach, who had been projecting full-year earnings of $3.15 a share.
In July, analysts said Kellogg was still guiding them that earnings for 1996 would match 1995 levels.
According to First Call, the consensus for 1996 earnings has been $3.35 a share, with a range of $3.15 to $3.50.  
Kellogg said it now believes earnings for the third quarter will be about 20 percent below the $1.05 per share earned in the 1995 period. It added that while earnings per share will grow in the fourth quarter, results for the full year will be less than $3.48 a share.
Kellogg said its results for the third quarter were hurt by competitive promotions in the U.S. cereal category.
In a report issued in late August, BT Securities analyst John O'Neil said there had been a disparity in promotional spending among major cereal manufacturers. Post, he said, continued some discounting and General Mills maintained an Olympics-themed promotion while Kellogg reduced promotion efforts after cutting prices.
"The impact was a loss of market share" for Kellogg, O'Neil wrote.
Reuters Chicago Newsdesk - 312-408-8787
