McDonald's Corp. Thursday reported a 12 percent rise in fourth-quarter profits, in spite of weaker U.S. results, and said it plans to cut back on its restaurant expansion.
The nation's biggest fast-food restaurant chain said its income rose to $410.0 million, including a $48.7 million after-tax charge, from $366.8 million a year ago.
The charge reflects the company's plans to close about 115 low-volume satellite units across the United States this year. As of Dec. 31, McDonald's had 2,218 satellite units, which typically have a limited menu and are located in non-traditional sites like shopping malls.
"These are really the sites that didn't pan out," said McDonald's Chief Financial Officer Mike Conley.
In 1997, McDonald's said it plans to open fewer satellite restaurants, while emphasizing full-scale units. As a result, McDonald's is trimming its overall restaurant opening plan for 1997 to between 2,400 and 2,800, compared with a previous target of 2,500 to 3,200.
"Going foward we think our emphasis is going to be traditional restaurants," Conley said in an interview.
McDonald's said more than 70 percent of the new restaurants will be outside the United States. In the past, about two-thirds of McDonald's new units have been outside the United States.
The fast-food giant, with more than 21,000 units worldwide, including 12,000 in the United States, said it is working to improve its U.S. results.
In the fourth quarter, McDonald's said its U.S. operating income fell 28 percent, including the charge, to $217.7 million. Excluding the charge, U.S. operating income fell 4 percent.
As analysts had expected, McDonald's said its domestic same store sales -- measuring results from units open at least a year -- were down in the fourth quarter and for all of 1996 compared with a year earlier.
Offsetting the decline domestically was a 14 percent gain in international operating income and an 11 percent rise in sales in the fourth quarter.
In the United States, however, McDonald's performance fell short of its goals, according to Jack Greenburg, company vice chairman and chairman-U.S.A. "In 1997, our focus will be squarely on improving sales at existing restaurants through improvements in marketing, service and menu," he said in a statement.
Conley said McDonald's will continue to be aggressive on pricing in the face of competition, but declined to give any specifics.
"We want to provide the best value to our customers ... and a big part of it is price," he said. "You'll see us being aggressive on price-value as we always have been."
Schroder Wertheim analyst Wayne Daniels said he expects McDonald's to launch more national price promotions in 1997, as opposed to its current practice of giving franchisees the option to offer local promotions.
"(McDonald's) average ticket did climb during 1996," when it launched higher-priced premium sandwiches such as the Arch Deluxe, Daniels said. "I do think that they will reverse that somewhat as they are a little more aggressive on national price promotions."
Conley said McDonald's will continue to work on food taste, but said changes would be "evolutionary and not revolutionary."
"So don't expect a spate of new products," he said. "That's really unlikely."
McDonald's stock gained $1.125 to $46.375 on the New York Stock Exchange.
