Quaker Oats Co may take as much as a $1.0 billion write-down for its Snapple beverage business, analysts said on Monday, but the charge may not show up in its fourth quarter earnings report, expected next week.
"I think it could be close to $1.0 billion," BT Securities analyst John O'Neil said of the charge to write-down the ongoing value of Snapple.
"The probability is reasonably high that they do (take a write-down)," added Credit Suisse First Boston analyst Michael Mauboussin. He added a write-down could be about $1.0 billion.  
Quaker spokesman Ronald Bottrell said a review of Snapple operations is continuing, but declined to comment on whether the company plans to take a charge.
In November, Quaker said it would review Snapple to see if it must take a charge to reduce the carrying value of the business it bought about two years ago for $1.8 billion including acquisition costs.
"I don't have any comment on that other than to say the timing of that is not dictated when we would issue the fourth quarter press release or any calendar event," Bottrell said. "It would have to do with the internal accounting process."  
Sanford Bernstein analyst Steven Galbraith said he believes Quaker is compelled to take a charge for Snapple. "It's clearly an impaired asset," he said.
Quaker could avoid taking a write-down to reduce the carrying value of Snapple if it sold that business along with its Gatorade sports beverage, Galbraith said.
Speculation continues that Quaker is looking to sell both Snapple, which it has said will have an operating loss in 1996, and Gatorade, its largest single brand, analysts said.  
If the two beverage businesses were sold together, Galbraith said Quaker might be able to offset a gain from Gatorade with the loss from Snapple. He values the two businesses together at about $3.0 billion.
"If I didn't see a charge this quarter (for Snapple), I would raise eyebrows, meaning something is up," Galbraith said.
Quaker Oats has repeatedly declined to comment on speculation that it was likely to sell Snapple and Gatorade.
"I will tell you again it is our policy not to comment on rumors and speculation," Bottrell said.
Many names have surfaced in the past as possible suitors for Quaker's beverage businesses, including Procter &amp; Gamble Co, Coca-Cola Co, PepsiCo Inc and Cadbury Schweppes Plc.
None of the companies in the past has commented on the speculation. ((Reuters Chicago Newsdesk (312) 408-8787))
