Quaker Oats Co. may take a charge of up $1 billion to write-down its money-losing Snapple beverage business, analysts said Monday, but the charge may not show up in its fourth quarter earnings report expected to be announced next week.
"I think it could be close to $1 billion," BT Securities analyst John O'Neil said of the charge to write-down the value of Snapple.
In November, Quaker said it would review Snapple, which it acquired about two years ago for $1.8 billion, to see if it must take a charge to reduce the value of the business on its balance sheet.
"The probability is reasonably high that they do (take a write-down)," said Michael Mauboussin, analyst at Credit Suisse First Boston. He also believed that it could be about $1 billion.
Quaker spokesman Ronald Bottrell said a review of Snapple's operations was continuing, but declined to comment on whether the company planned to take a charge.
Steven Galbraith, an analyst at Sanford Bernstein said he believed that Quaker would be compelled to take a charge for Snapple. "It's clearly an impaired asset," he said.
Quaker could avoid taking a write-down to reduce the carrying value of Snapple if it sold that business along with its Gatorade sports beverage, Galbraith said.
Speculation continues that Quaker is looking to sell both Snapple, which it has said will have an operating loss in 1996, and Gatorade, its largest single brand, analysts said.
If the two beverage businesses were sold together, Galbraith said Quaker might be able to offset a gain from Gatorade with the loss from Snapple. He valued the two businesses together at about $3 billion.
"If I didn't see a charge this quarter (for Snapple), I would raise eyebrows, meaning something is up," Galbraith said.
Quaker Oats has repeatedly declined to comment on speculation that it was likely to sell Snapple and Gatorade.
"I will tell you again it is our policy not to comment on rumours and speculation," Bottrell said.
Many names have surfaced in the past as possible suitors for Quaker's beverage businesses, including Procter &amp; Gamble Co., Coca-Cola Co., PepsiCo Inc. and Cadbury Schweppes Plc.
None of the companies in the past has commented on the speculation.
Quaker's stock was off $1 cents at $37.375 on the New York Stock Exchange in afternoon trading.
