Maytag Corp., boosted by its Hoover floor care line, said on Thursday its earnings for the fourth quarter more than doubled from a year ago as the company returned to profitability for the full year.
Maytag said Hoover posted double-digit gains in sales for the quarter and the year.
Looking ahead, however, Maytag said it saw a slow start for its earnings in 1997, as it shoulders marketing costs for several new products, including another Hoover upright floor cleaner, refrigerators and washing machines.
"Overall, we expect our earnings performance to start slowly but to pick up after mid-year, when much of the sales and earnings impact from these product introductions will begin to be realised," Chairman Leonard Hadley said in a statement.
The company said its 1996 profits were helped by lower raw material costs and four months of results from its joint venture partner in China, Hefei Rongshida, which is one of that country's leading washing machine manufacturers.
"The joint venture with RSD in China, which we announced in September 1996, also contributed positively to the corporation's results, and we continue to be very enthusiastic about that business opportunity," Hadley said.
For the fourth quarter, Newton, Iowa-based Maytag reported earnings of $35.3 million, or 36 cents a share. That compared with year-ago earnings of $16.6 million, or 16 cents a share, a year ago that included about $24 million in charges.
"It was a good quarter," said Natwest Securities analyst Susan Gallagher, adding that the results were in line with Wall Street expectations.
For the year, Maytag posted a profit of $136.4 million, or $1.34 a share, after $41.5 million in restructuring and debt charges. In 1995, Maytag had a net loss of $20.5 million, or 19 cents a share, after taking $186.8 million in charges or one-time losses.
Maytag's sales for the year of $3 billion were about equal with the 1995 level, which included $181.2 million from divested operations. Sales from ongoing operations, including new ventures, rose 5 percent in 1996, the company said.
Major appliance sales for the fourth quarter increased from a year ago, Maytag said. But major appliance sales for the full year were flat with 1995, with the Maytag and Jenn-Air premium brands selling well, while value-priced brands were off somewhat. Maytag's brands also include Magic Chef and Admiral.
Refrigeration sales in particular were weaker in 1996 due to competition and a sharp decline in private-label sales to national accounts.
Sales of Maytag-brand commercial laundry equipment increased during the year, along with the company's share of the commercial laundry market.
Maytag will launch several new products in 1996, including a new Hoover upright floor cleaner in the second half of the year. It will launch new top-mount refrigerators, with a freezer compartment on top, in February, followed by side-by-side models in late 1997 and early 1998.
Maytag also will launch a new horizontal axis washing machine in March, starting with equipment for commercial laundries. Horizontal axis washing machines, a technology that is popular in Europe, do not use an agitator.
"A lot of trains are pulling into the station at once," Maytag spokesman Tom Schwartz said of the company's schedule of new product launches.
Maytag said it expects its Dixie-Narco vending machine equipment business to improve its earnings in 1997. Dixie-Narco's operating results were break-even for the fourth quarter and operating profits declined 54 percent for the year to $10.7 million.
Maytag's stock was unchanged at $20 on the New York Stock Exchange in afternoon trading.
