Kellogg Co. Friday reported a profit for the fourth quarter, reversing a year-ago loss, but said the U.S. and British breakfast cereal markets remained difficult.
The largest producer in the $9 billion U.S. ready-to-eat cereal market, Kellogg's domestic cereal sales fell in the quarter, spokesman Richard Lovell said. He would not elaborate, though analysts said the drop was about 5 percent.
Kellogg, whose brands include Kellogg's Corn Flakes and Rice Krispies, had a profit of $87.3 million or 42 cents a share, in the quarter, compared with a loss of $71.6 million, or 33 cents a share in the 1996 quarter.
The results included restructuring and other charges of $110.7 million in the latest quarter and $369 million in the 1995 quarter.
Sales fell 6 percent to $1.56 billion from $1.66 billion.
The restructuring is meant to save at least $160 million in savings this year and in future years, it said.
Excluding charges and extraordinary costs, Kellogg's earnings amounted to 78 cents a share in the quarter, compared with 77 cents a share in the 1995 period, which was in line with Kellogg's own projections.
Analysts said lower marketing expenditures helped the company hit its earnings target for the quarter. Because of that, "the quality of earnings in the quarter was not good," said Robert Cummins, managing director of Schroder Wertheim.
Lovell said marketing expenditures declined but would not say how much. Total selling and administrative expense fell nearly 15 percent to $540.7 million from $633.5 million.
"It seems like they're cutting off their nose to spite their face by cutting back marketing when sales volumes are declining," said Donaldson, Lufkin and Jenrette analyst William Leach.
Lovell said spending on marketing was likely to rise this year from 1996 levels. Selling and administrative costs for 1996 dropped about 4 percent to $2.5 billion.
Analysts said some of the increased promotional spending will go for new cereals that Kellogg expects to launch in 1997. The company introduced Kellogg's Honey Crunch Corn Flakes cereal in the United States in September, which garnered a strong a 1.3 percent market share, Kellogg's said.
"While the U.S. and U.K. remain challenging, we are encouraged by the contribution of new cereal products in both markets," Kellogg Chairman Arnold Langbo said in a statement.
Internationally, cereal sales volume rose, Lovell said, with analysts estimating the increase at 4 percent to 6 percent.
Kellogg, which also makes Nutri-Grain snack bars, said convenience foods had a double-digit sales gain in the quarter. "We look forward to the continued growth of this business, both in the U.S., where we have recently acquired Lender's Bagels, and through expansion to new international markets," Longbo added.
Overall, global volume grew 2 percent in the quarter and 1 percent for all of 1996.
Looking ahead, Kellogg repeated that it expected a low double-digit percentage increase in earnings for 1997, compared with 1996. The first quarter, however, is expected to be down from the $212.2 million, or 99 cents a share, earned in the first quarter of 1996.
Kellogg's stock rose $1 to $69 in afternoon trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
