The stock of Kellogg Co. fell Thursday after it warned about lower earnings this year and sparked concerns that it could resort to increased promotions to protect its leading market share, analysts said.
The leading producer in the $9 billion U.S. ready-to-eat cereal market said late Wednesday that its third-quarter earnings would be about 20 percent below the $1.05 a share it earned a year earlier, when it posted net income of $230 million.
Kellogg also said that, while it expected earnings will increase in the fourth quarter, its full-year profits for 1996 will be less than the $3.48 a year it earned in 1995. For all of 1995, Kellogg posted net income of $761.6 million before one-time charges.
Kellogg's stock was off $1.125 to $67.375 in afternoon trading on the New York Stock Exchange Thursday.
Kellogg made the announcement just after the close of trading on the NYSE Wednesday and in after-hours electronic trading its stock had fallen as low as $66.125.
The Battle Creek, Mich.-based company blamed competitive promotions by others in the cereal category for the decline in its third-quarter profits.
Earlier this year Kellogg and other leading cereal makers cut retail cereal prices. At the same time, Kellogg reduced promotional spending, such as offering special discounts in supermarkets.
Kellogg said it has cut back on promotional spending for more than two years.
"We will continue to direct our efforts away from deep price promotion; however, we are unwilling to see our leadership position comprised," Chairman Arnold Langbo said in a statement issued late Wednesday.
Analysts interpreted that as a warning that Kellogg might cut prices further or increase its own promotional spending if competitors continue their promotional practices in an effort to gain market share.
Kellogg accounts for nearly one-third of the U.S. cereal market, followed by General Mills Inc. with about one-quarter of U.S. sales. Third-place Post Cereals, including its Nabisco brands, accounts for about 17 percent of the U.S. market.
"It appears that Kellogg will be forced to deviate from its strategy of reducing promotions and will increase promotions to defend its market share," BT Securities analyst John O'Neil said.
On Thursday O'Neil reduced his estimate for Kellogg's 1996 earnings to $3.10 a share from $3.30 and his 1997 estimate to $3.60 a share from $3.70.
"If competitors do not scale back their promotional spending, (Kellogg) may reaccelerate its own spending or resort to another price cut," Goldman Sachs analyst Nomi Ghez wrote in a report.
Earlier this year Kellogg had predicted its earnings for 1996 would match the $3.48 a share it earned in 1995.
While many analysts at the time questioned Kellogg's ability to meet that target, the magnitude of the drop in the current earnings outlook took the market by surprise.
