Kmart Corp. said Monday it may merge its Builders Square stores with Waban Inc.'s HomeBase business in a deal that would create the nation's third largest home improvement chain.
The deal, which reflects consolidation in the highly competitive home improvement retail niche, would also complete Kmart's exit from specialty retailing.
"What this will do is complete (Kmart's) strategy of divesting non-core businesses," Michael Conn, Gruntal &amp; Co. retail analyst, said.
Kmart said if a deal was completed, the Los Angeles-based investment group Leonard Green &amp; Partners L.P. would hold a majority interest in the new company. Kmart, based in Troy, Mich., and Waban, headquartered in Natick, Mass., would each retain minority interests.
The proposed new company would have about 250 stores in 25 states with annual revenues of nearly $4 billion.
"We've been looking for the opportunity to combine Builders Square, a regional business, with another party...in a consolidating industry," Robert Burton, director of Kmart's investor relations, said.
Builders Square's stores are largely in the Midwest and central United States. HomeBase has 84 stores in 10 Western states.
"It makes perfect sense," First of Michigan analyst Daniel Poole said of the combination.
But he added that Home Depot, which operates retail stores for the do-it-yourself customer and home remodeler, still poses stiff competition for the new company that will be formed by combining Builders Square and HomeBase.
Marvin Rich, Kmart's executive vice president of strategic planning, finance and administration, said the proposed transaction was part of his firm's plan for the disposition of Builders Square.
He said Kmart intends to reclassify Builders Square as a "discontinued operation" in its year-end financial statements and record a net loss of $350 million to $400 million from discontinued operations.
Burton said the combination of Builders Square and HomeBase could be completed in Kmart's fiscal first quarter, which ends in April.
"While we are in the preliminary stages of this transaction, all parties are interested in the potential opportunity that could come from combining these similar home improvement operations," Rich said.
"Clearly, there is opportunity here to create a large, financially liquid home improvement business which can be competitive on a national basis," Rich said.
Waban, which operates BJ's Wholesale Clubs as well as the HomeBase chain, said that as a result of its talks with Kmart it was suspending plans to spin off the BJ's unit.
"This (Kmart) transaction has the potential to provide Waban and its shareholders greater value than our previously announced plan to separate our BJ's Wholesale Club and HomeBase divisions through a tax-free spin-off of BJ's," Waban President Herbert J. Zarkin said in a statement.
He said that if a sale of HomeBase was concluded, the company would use the proceeds to retire corporate debt and for general corporate purposes, including the repurchase of common stock.
Kmart previously shed its specialty retail concepts, selling off to the public several companies including Borders Group Inc, The Sports Authority Inc. and OfficeMax Inc.
In 1994, Leonard Green &amp; Partners acquired PayLess Drug Stores Northwest Inc. from Kmart and merged it with Thrifty Corp. to form Thrifty Payless Inc. That chain was recently acquired by Rite Aid Corp.
K-Mart stock closed up 12.5 cents at $11.25 on the New York Stock Exchange.
