Swiss pharmaceutical company Roche Holding AG agreed on Wednesday to acquire Tastemaker, an international manufacturer of food flavorings, from two U.S. chemical companies in a deal worth about $1.1 billion.
St. Louis-based Mallinckrodt Inc., which also makes drugs and other medical products, and Hercules Inc. of Wilmington, Del., each said they expected to net $550 million from the transaction.
Tastemaker, a Cincinnati-based company that makes flavoring and citrus specialities used in foods and beverages, has about 1,280 employees in the United States, Holland, England, Mexico, Australia and Japan. It had 1996 sales of about $320 million.
Roche said Tastemaker will be strategic fit with its Givaudan-Roure unit, an international fragrances, flavors and aroma chemicals business. Givaudan-Roure had consolidated sales of 1.4 billion Swiss francs ($981 million) in 1996.
Roche's other core businesses include pharmaceuticals, vitamins and fine chemicals, and diagnostics.
For Mallinckrodt and Hercules, the deal enables the two companies to shed a venture that they formed in 1992 by combining their smaller food ingredient and flavors businesses.
"We've said that we would look for the best way to create value (from the Tastemaker venture)," Hercules spokeswoman Amy Binder said.
She added that Hercules, a speciality chemical company, will use its cash proceeds to repurchase shares. Hercules shares gained 62.5 cents to $47 on the New York Stock Exchange in afternoon trading.
Mallinckrodt said it expected to use part of its proceeds to buy back up to $250 million in stock over the next 18 months and also will look for acquisitions to build its human health care business.
Mallinckrodt's $550 million deal with Roche includes the Swiss company assuming about $500 million of Mallinckrodt debt. That, analysts said, puts Mallinckrodt in a better position to make acquisitions.
Last August, Mallinckrodt said it would seek a buyer for its Tastemaker venture and would "explore options" for its animal health division while focusing on its core businesses of speciality chemicals and human health care.
"We have said explicitly that we expect to use proceeds from (Tastemaker) and from our animal health business ... for strategic acquisitions," said Cole Lannum, director of investor relations for Mallinckrodt.
Asked if a potential sale of the animal health business was pending, Lannum said it was "certainly possible that we'll have a deal by the end of the fiscal year" which ends in June.
Future acquisitions for Mallinckrodt likely would be in the hospital supply area, which includes pharmaceuticals. Mallinckrodt makes analgesic drugs, diagnostic imaging agents, medical devices and other pharmaceutical products.
"Mallinckrodt gets the liquidity that they're looking for to reinvest in their core business, especially on the medical side," A.G. Edwards analyst Gary Stevenson said of the deal.
Mallincrkrodt's stock fell 25 cents to $40.25 in late afternoon after trading as high as $41.50 earlier in the day on the New York Stock Exchange.
Roche is a worldwide research-based health care group with 50,000 employees in more than 100 countries. It recorded 1996 sales of about 16 billion Swiss francs ($11.2 billion).
