Tate &amp; Lyle Plc said Tuesday its U.S. subsidiary A.E. Staley continues to face reduced profit margins for high fructose corn syrup, a sweetener.
Fructose contract prices for 1997, which largely have been set, are lower than a year ago, as are corn costs, said Larry Pillard, chief executive of London-based Tate &amp; Lyle.
"On a margin basis (factoring out corn cost changes) they are maybe slightly lower," Pillard told Reuters at an analysts' conference here.  
Pillard blamed lower margins on overcapacity in the U.S. fructose industry. Staley's output accounts for a little over 20 percent of total U.S. fructose production.
To balance the softness in fructose margins, Staley has shifted some output to other corn-based products, including ethanol, starch used by the paper industry, and specialty food starches.  
"In addition to that, we've continued our very aggressive cost-reduction initiatives at Staley," Pillard said. "Yes, we'd like higher margins in fructose. But we're not completely dissatisfied with Staley. We're still very bullish on the corn refining business."
He added that U.S. fructose demand continues to grow by four to five percent a year.
Pillard acknowledged that "in a worst case scenario" it may be another two or three years before demand in the U.S. catches up with fructose supplies.  
But one promising variable is the potential for greater demand for fructose in Mexico.
Beyond fructose, Tate &amp; Lyle is investing in number of value-added products, including a lactic acid plant it likely will build in the United States and a citric acid joint venture in India.
Tate &amp; Lyle, as a producer of sweeteners and starches, is already expanding its global presence, with investments in developing markets.
Those investments, which have totaled $250 million over the past few years and spread over four continents -- is projected to generate a return on invesment of over 20 percent after five years, according to Simon Gifford, group finance director for Tate &amp; Lyle.
Investments have been made in Mexico, central and eastern Europe, Asia and Africa.
Tate &amp; Lyle also is building a world-scale starch plant in northern France, which will use wheat as a raw material.
"That will be completed by the end of this calendar year," Gifford said. "We will start getting returns after commissioning in the second half of next year."
	 ((Chicago newsdesk 312 408-8787))
