General Mills Inc said Wednesday it expects a recovery in sales volume in the $9.0 billion U.S. ready-to-eat cereal market, in which it is the number two player.
"The fundamentals of the category are encouraging now," General Mills Chairman Stephen Sanger said in an interview.
In the past 12 months, the total U.S. cereal category saw a 1.5 percent rise in physical sales volume, compared with growth of only 0.5 percent in the prior 12 months.  
While Sanger declined to predict total cereal growth in the near term, he said he believes that domestic volume gains will "move back toward that long-term trend three percent category growth."
Despite the recent slump in overall cereal sales, the U.S. ready-to-eat cereal market's per capita consumption has grown to 11.4 pounds in 1996 from 9.3 pounds in 1986, Sanger said.
While facing competition from other foods, cereal's share of the  breakfast market grew over the past five years to nearly 30 percent from 28.8 percent, he added.  
To combat sluggish cereal sales in prior years, U.S. cereal makers have cut prices and stepped up new product launches. Looking ahead, new products will continue to play an important roll in boosting company sales and expanding the U.S. cereal category, Sanger added.
After launching Betty Crocker Dutch Apple and Cinnamon Streusel cereals last fall, General Mills will introduce one more cereal by the end of fiscal 1997 in May.
General Mills said its cereals that are two years old or less, including its Frosted Cheerios, have a 3.4 percent market share.  
After its recently completed acquisition of branded cereals from Ralcorp Holdings Inc, General Mills gained about 2.5 percentage points of domestic market share, for a total of 27 percent.
While that deal narrowed the gap between General Mills and market leader Kellogg Co, which accounts for roughly one-third of the U.S. cereal market, Sanger said he has no plans to make a run for the top spot.
"We're not fixated on somebody else's (market) share," Sanger said. "They (Kellogg) have been a strong market leader...and they still are. There's every likelihood that their market share will grow in the future with the new products that they're bringing out." 
To boost sales of all its products -- ranging from cereal to Betty Crocker baking mixes and Hamburger Helper skillet dinner mixes -- General Mills will launch a marketing tie-in in its fiscal fourth quarter with the release of "The Lost World" movie.
General Mills said promotions will involve 45 brands in the United States and Canada. Cereal Partners Worldwide, General Mills' European cereal venture with Nestle SA, will tie into the promotion, which will include a special "Jurassic Park Crunch" cereal, brownies with "dinosaur footprints" and dinosaur macaroni shapes in Hamburger Helper.
 ((Chicago newsdesk, 312-408-8787))
