Earthgrains Co, the baked goods concern spun off less than a year ago by beer brewer Anheuser-Busch Cos Inc, aims to expand geographically through acquisitions in a consolidating industry.
"How fast we do it will depend on how those properties become available and what we have to pay for them. But we are looking for geographic expansion through acquisitions," Chairman Barry Beracha said in an interview .
Earthgrains made a presentation at an analyst conference here.  
Earthgrains serves about 35 percent of the U.S. population with a presence in the Southeast, Midwest, Southwest and Far West.
The company, which was shed in March 1996, made a few acquisitions in late 1996 in Mississippi, West Virginia and Texas. Those deals helped expand Earthgrains' reach and took some excess capacity out of the baking industry.
"The key for us is to use the industry consolidation as a way to improve our profitability and improve shareholder value and not just get bigger," Beracha said.  
While geographic expansion through acquisitions will be the main driver of Earthgrains' future growth, Beracha said the company is also looking to increase revenues, including with new products.
The company, which is the third-largest producer of fresh baked goods with brands like IronKids, recently launched fresh bagels under its Earth Grains brand. It is also testing other products, all of which fall in the higher end of the bread and baked goods category.  
Earthgrains sees a greater willingness for consumers to pay more for products that promise better flavor or enhanced nutrition. Beracha pointed to recent sales data that showed per capita bread consumption in pounds is flat, but sales revenues are up.
Earthgrains, which also produces refrigerated dough in both the United States and Europe and has a European bakery operation, posted third quarter sales of $523 million. Adjusting for facilities and businesses that were closed or sold, sales rose 3.9 percent.
On the profit side, Earthgrains posted a dramatic turnaround, with third quarter earnings of $0.91 a share, compared with a year-ago loss of $0.91 a share before extraordinary items.
"In our first year...we've exceeded most people's expectations," Beracha said. "The really good news behind that is there's still a long way to go."
((Reuters Chicago Newsdesk  312-408-8787))
