Hershey Foods Corp, already the top U.S. producer of chocolate and other confections, is looking to establish a presence in the cookie and sweet snack market.
"It's a much bigger category," William Christ, chief financial officer, said of the sweet snack category, which reaps about $30 billion annually in U.S. sales.
By contrast, chocolate and other candy has about $11 billion in annual U.S. sales.  
To go after the sweet snack market, Christ said, Hershey will look for acquisitions and develop products on its own -- including some "hybrids" that combine cookies with its trademark candies.
For example, Hershey has launched Reese's Crunchy Cookie Peanut Butter Cup, which combines a chocolate cookie and a peanut butter cup.
"There's a fine line right now between candy bars and cookies," Christ said in an interview here, where the company presented at an analyst conference on Wednesday. "Certainly there are areas that we're interested in" within the sweet snack category.  
Outside the sweet category, the future is less certain for Hershey's dry pasta business, where it is the U.S. leader.
High flour prices coupled with intense price competition have nibbled away at profit margins, although the dry pasta business remains profitable, Christ said.
"There's no plan to say today that we're sellling our pasta operations," Christ said. "As wheat prices go lower, it (dry pasta) could move closer to the growth category."  
Christ said he believes Hershey's dry pasta operations, a business it has participated in for more than 30 years, has the lowest costs in the United States.
"It still performs well," he added. "But it's not a chocolate performer. It doesn't have the same kind of margins."
Pennsylvania-based Hershey, whose products include Hershey's chocolate bars and Twizzlers licorice candies, added to its leading presence in the U.S. candy market with the $437 million acquisition in late 1996 of Leaf North America.  
The Leaf acquisition launched Hershey into the top spot among U.S. non-chocolate confectionary companies. Leaf's, whose products are one-third chocolate and two-thirds non-chocolate, has brands that include Jolly Rancher hard candies.
As the Leaf integration continues, Christ said one of the issues that remains is whether Hershey will keep Leaf's manufacturing and distribution assets in the Midwest. Hershey's manufacturing and distribution are largely concentrated on the East and West Coasts.
Hershey previously said the Leaf acquisition will cause "modest" dilution in 1997, which Christ said will probably amount to $0.05 to $0.10 a share in 1997. Analysts currently peg Hershey's 1997 earnings at $2.25 to $2.30 a share in 1997, before dilution, he added.
((Reuters Chicago Newsdesk  312-408-8787))
