The worst may be over for Quaker Oats Co's Snapple beverage business, which has posted operating losses for the two years since it was acquired for $1.8 billion.
"I suppose Snapple has declined all that it is going to decline," Robert Cummins, managing director of Schroder Wertheim, said on Thursday.
To be sure, Quaker still faces challenges to recover the hefty investment it made in the Snapple iced tea and fruit-flavor beverage business.  
"To get the return on this investment, they still have a long way to go," Goldman Sachs analyst Nomi Ghez said.
Quaker Chairman William Smithburg, speaking to reporters in Naples, Florida, after a presentation at an analyst conference, again acknowledged that Snapple had been a disappointment. Snapple's sale volume declined in 1996 from the previous year, and it posted an operating loss before amortization.
For 1997, Smithburg reiterated that he expected a turnaround for Snapple, promising to an end to operating losses.  
"We believe the business can be stabilized and run for positive cash," Smithburg said.
Being cash positive means Snapple would post a profit after amortization costs.
Smithburg declined to give a sales projection for Snapple in 1997. Analysts have said previously that flat sales and reduced costs would help the beverage line break even this year.  
"At least they'll ebb the bleeding," said SBC Warburg analyst Chris Jakubik, who expects Snapple to break even this year.
Disappointing results at Snapple have prompted speculation that Quaker might look to get rid of the business. Quaker has been rumored to be shopping Snapple around to prospective buyers.
Smithburg declined to comment on any rumors or potential merger and acquisition activity.
But he reiterated that Quaker would continue to "evaluate all options for the business."  
"The first order of business is to run it better," Smithburg said.
He said the company had improved Snapple's distribution system and planned more aggressive promotion of the Diet Snapple line, which enjoyed a 20 percent rise in sales in 1996 and gains of 30 percent during the last four months.
((Chicago newsdesk, 312-408-8787))
