Ralcorp Holdings Inc, which cut itself in half through recent divestitures, is trying to slash costs to return its cereal business to profitability by next year while scouting for possible acquisitions.
"We want to continue to grow internally and opportunistically," Joe Micheletto, president, said in an interview here after making a presentation at an analysts conference.  
But for Ralcorp, which was spun off by Ralston Purina Co in March 1994, recent moves have continued to make the company smaller, not bigger.
Last month, it completed the sale of its branded cereal and snack business to General Mills Inc in a $570 million deal. That left Ralcorp with annual cereal sales of $274 million from private-label -- or grocery store brand -- cereal only, down from $660 million.
That sale also left Ralcorp with an infrastructure that is too large for the pared-back business.  
The plan now is to make cutbacks to return cereal to profitability in fiscal 1998, Micheletto said.
"For us to realize the full potential of our industry-leading position in private label cereal, we must first correct this imbalance in our cost structure," Micheletto said in the text of a speech given to analysts.
As previously reported, Ralcorp will take a $20 million charge in its second quarter related to staff cuts and other costs.  
The sale of the branded business, which included the Chex cereal line, was precipitated by intense price competition that put the squeeze on that line's profits.
"It was more valuable in someone else's hands than in ours," added Patrick Farrell, vice president of investor and public relations for Ralcorp.
Ralcorp also sold its ski resort operation in a $310 million deal to Vail Resorts Inc on January 3. Ralcorp holds a 22.7 percent stake in Vail, which the company may keep or sell, depending on what generates the most shareholder value, Micheletto said.
Debt-free and with an expected $15 million to $20 million in cash from accounts receivable, Ralcorp is looking to grow its remaining businesses, which also include private label crackers and cookies and Beech-Nut baby food, he added.
Ralcorp will be looking for acquisitions, likely in grain- based products, with an emphasis on private label products.
"We will strike when the iron is hot, if that's a year from now or six months or now or tomorrow," Micheletto said.
   ((Reuters Chicago Newsdesk  312-408-8787))
