ReliaStar Financial Corp chairman John Turner said Monday his company's $488 million merger deal with Security-Connecticut Corp would broaden the insurance products sold by both firms.
"We identified Security-Connecticut as a company that was positioned in the market with both product lines and distribution that fit very well with ours. They were strong where we weren't so strong, and we had products that we were sure their distribution chain could sell," Turner said in a telephone interview.  
The merger of the two companies in a stock-for-stock transaction, which values Security-Connecticut at $47 a share, is expected to result in at least $7.0 million in annual pretax cost reductions.
Another $2.0 million may be saved with the planned consolidation of ReliaStar's and Security-Connecticut's New York operations, Turner added.
But ReliaStar expects to reap the main benefit of the deal on its top line.
"The big payoff is in the cross-selling," Turner said.  
For example, Minneapolis-based ReliaStar has variable life and annuity products that expand Security-Connecticut's offerings. Avon, Conn.-based Security-Connecticut has second-to-die universal life and term life products, which cover two lives, that complement ReliaStar.
"Cross-selling works best when products and distribution are complementary and not redundant," Dain Bosworth analyst J. Chris Sergeant. "It's set up to be successful."
Turner said the deal will not hurt earnings in 1997 and will be "a little accretive" in 1998, which also reflects a planned $100 million share buyback of ReliaStar stock.  
Security-Connecticut shares were up eight at 45-1/2 at midday, reflecting the offer price.
"I think it's a good deal," Nutmeg Securities analyst Ira Zuckerman said. "ReliaStar picked up an excellent marketing operation."
ReliaStar shares were off 1/4 at 59, which Sergeant said reflects the near-term neutral earnings impact.
"The stock has done very well already," he said.
One advantage for Security-Connecticut in the deal is gaining access to a stronger balance sheet to back up the claims paying ability of its life insurance operation. That, Sergeant said, opens the potential for an upgrade by ratings agencies.
Turner said the Security-Connecticut deal fits its criterion of a 16 percent return on equity and will not derail its goal of a 13 percent increase in earnings per share.
"What we say is we intend to attain (these goals) without acquisitions, but we also readily recognize that consolidation is occurring in our industry," he added.
After the Security-Connecticut deal, ReliaStar would become the 11th largest publicly held life insurance holding company in the United States.
((Reuters Chicago Newsdesk (312) 408-8787))
