CPC International Inc. said Wednesday it will spin off its corn refining operations to shareholders so it can concentrate on producing consumer foods like Hellmann's mayonnaise, Mazola corn oil and Skippy peanut butter.
"The fit of those businesses (corn refining and packaged foods) is not as good as it was," CPC Chairman C.R. Shoemate said in a telephone interview. "Going forward they will be able to grow ... faster by focusing on the key drivers of each of those businesses."
The stock market applauded the move, sending CPC's shares up $2 to $84 on the New York Stock Exchange in afternoon trading.
"I think it's a good strategic move," Donaldson, Lufkin and Jenrette analyst William Leach said.
CPC's corn refining operations yield high-fructose corn syrup, a sweetener; corn starch; dextrose, a food ingredient and sweetener, and traditional corn syrup.
Although corn refining was profitable in 1996, that business was a drag on CPC's overall earnings due to dramatic swings in the corn market, the company said.
CPC reported net income of $580 million last year, up from $539 million a year ago.
After shedding the corn business, CPC will concentrate on its global packaged food, bakery and food service businesses, which analysts called among the best in the industry.
"I think that the company will finally come into its own in terms of recognition of the quality and growth potential that it has," Schroder Wertheim analyst Robert Cummins said.
After the spin-off, CPC will be a global branded packaged food company with grocery products, baking and food service operations. Sales from these businesses amounted to $8.5 billion in 1996.
CPC's branded grocery and foodservice businesses operate in 62 countries worldwide. CPC has a large and profitable packaged food business in North America, although 60 percent of its total packaged food business is in Europe, Latin America, Asia and Africa.
The spun-off company will be the third-largest corn refiner worldwide with sales of $1.5 billion, excluding non-consolidated joint ventures.
About two-thirds of the corn refining operations are in the United States and roughly one-third in Latin America, where it has about a 60 percent market share.
In North America, CPC's corn refining business is the leading producer of dextrose and corn starch, Shoemate said.
Corn refining joint ventures and technology agreements in Asia and Africa are small in terms of overall profits currently. "But they are great starter positions for the longer term," Shoemate said.
Shoemate said the spin-off is expected to be completed in about 10 months, pending approvals, including a ruling by the Internal Revenue Service that it will be tax-free to CPC and its shareholders.
CPC, based in Englewood Cliffs, N.J., said it did not expect to assign any of its existing debt to the new company.
However, it may launch an initial public offering of stock in the new company before distributing the new shares to existing shareholders, it said.
Konrad Schlatter, currently senior vice president and chief financial officer of CPC International, will be chairman and chief executive of the new corn refining company.
Samuel Scott will be president and chief operating officer of the new company and will be responsible for the day-to-day operations of the business.
