Summit Medical Systems Inc., said Monday its 1996 revenues will be "substantially less" than what it reported last week due to accounting discrepancies discovered by its new chief financial officer, who resigned after less than a week on the job.
The company, which makes computer-based information systems for the healthcare industry, said it expected to revise downward the $19.5 million in revenues it reported in 1996, and could also cut revenues for 1995 and 1994 as well.
Company officials were not available to comment.
Summit's shares fell by $1.44, or 30 percent, to $3.31 in afternoon trading on the Nasdaq market.
Volpe, Welty &amp; Co. analyst Chris Paul said Summit was believed to have about $40 million in cash and roughly 10.5 million shares.
"So it's trading below its cash value," he said. Still, he added, the cash the company is believed to have was "providing a base for the shares."
Minneapolis-based Summit said a preliminary review of its books indicated that revenues for the past three years had been overstated by between $4 million and $6 million -- or between 8 percent and 12 percent of the total.
Summit said the concerns over its revenues stem from the erroneous recognition of some revenues from the sales of software and related services.
Paul said the company did not provide any further explanation to analysts on a conference call.
"Summit Medical is extremely concerned by the discovery of accounting errors and is working vigorously to correct past mistakes and to establish stricter management controls and policies," Chief Executive Kevin Green said in a statement.
The company also announced that it planned to eliminate an unspecified number of jobs and establish a cost reduction program to reduce annual expenses by 20 percent.
That program is expected to result in an unspecified charge in the current quarter for employee severance and other costs, it said.
Last Wednesday, Summit reported 1996 revenues of $19.5 million, up from $17.7 million in 1995. It also posted a net loss for the year of $10.4 million, compared with a year-ago loss of $7.2 million.
The exact size of the adjustments to revenue and the years in which they apply will not be determined until an extensive audit is completed, the company said Monday.
Summit said that Donald Haas, who joined the company as chief financial officer last Monday, resigned Saturday -- after informing management that some 1996 revenue had been incorrectly recognized.
The company said that Haas told management on Thursday, the day after the company reported its 1996 results, that it had incorrectly recognized revenue during 1996 in some circumstances.
Management immediately began a review of these issues, it added.
"The company's auditors, Ernst &amp; Young LLP, have expanded the scope of their audit and are performing additional audit procedures based in part on the questions raised by Mr. Haas," Summit said in its statement.
Summit added that it had retained the law firm Dorsey &amp; Whitney LLP to investigate the matter with the assistance of independent accounting advice from Arthur Andersen LLP.
The company said it expected to announce corrected financial information by the end of March.
The likely downward revision of revenues for at least a year comes at a time when Summit is in the midst of a product transition, said Paul.
The transition, Paul explained, is to a single platform for Summit's computerized information system, which collects and analyzes patient data and likely outcomes. This anlaysis enables health care providers to monitor and potentially change a patient's treatment.
