Bagel sales continue to heat up as more restaurants open across the United States, but the number of companies that will be doing most of the baking is expected to narrow.
"It's a consolidating category," said Morgan Stanley analyst Howard Penney.
For now, much of that consolidation in the $2.3 billion industry will involve smaller, regional chains being acquired by the larger, publicly traded firms.
Later on, access to capital is expected to be a key factor in determining which players emerge as dominant, analysts said. That competition appears to favor, in particular, the No. 2 chain, Einstein/Noah Bagel Corp..
"If you were to handicap the race to supremacy on that factor alone (access to capital), it would be hard not to arrive at the conclusion that Einstein is going to be the dominant chain," Piper Jaffray analyst Allan Hickok said.
Einstein/Noah Bagels currently has more than 315 stores in 27 states and the District of Columbia.
"We're now No. 2 in bagels but expect to be No. 1 by the end of 1997," said Einstein spokesman Gary Gerdemann, adding the company planned to open 300 to 350 stores this year.
Bruegger's Bagel Bakeries, a unit of Quality Dining Inc., now ranks No. 1 with 450 units in 37 states. It plans to open a "triple-digit number" of new stores this year, said Chris Romoser, a spokesman for Bruegger's. He did not give an exact figure.
"The category is growing by leaps and bounds," Romoser said. "We believe there is a lot more room for growth."
Jack Grumet, chairman of Manhattan Bagel Co., a chain of about 300 units, said much of that growth comes as small, independent units are gobbled up by the larger players.
"We see a lot of consolidation," Grumet said. "There's a lot of fear in the minds of the smaller guys with two, four, six, eight stores" as the large chains survey their markets.
He added that Manhattan Bagel, which plans to add 120 to 160 units this year through franchisees or area developers, gets offers from independents to purchase their stores.
The expanding industry reflects America's growing appetite for bagels, which date back to the late 17th century.
Sales in 1996 were an estimated $2.3 billion, up from $1.6 billion in 1995 and only $429 million in 1993, according to the Independent Bakers Association, citing industry figures.
"It's really a substitute for bread and for doughnuts," said Michael Evans, chairman of BAB Holdings Inc., which operates Big Apple Bagels.
Evans said BAB hopes open 70 to 80 units this year, expanding its network of 162 stores.
Bagel sales include products sold in grocery stores, which in the aggregate are still the leading outlet. To tap into the popularity of the bagel, breakfast cereal giant Kellogg Co. last year bought Lender's Bagels, a line of frozen grocery store bagels.
Eateries that bake fresh bagels, however, say they do not compete with the grocery stores.
"They are two separate outlets," Evans said, adding consumers often acquire a taste for bagels at the grocery store and then discover hot-from-the-oven products at restaurant chains.
"Lender's has done us a great favor," Evans said. "It has educated the consumer..."
