BAB Holdings Inc, which is still digesting its $29 million acquisition of Chesapeake Bagel Bakery, said it expects to buy more independent chains to expand its national presence as bagels grow in popularity.
"We probably get a call a week from independent bagel companies looking to be acquired," said Michael Evans, president of BAB, which operates Big Apple Bagels.
He added that while BAB is open to acquisitions, the focus in the near-term is integrating Chesapeake, which the company agreed to acquire earlier this year.  
Going forward, BAB will operate stores under the Big Apple Bagels and Chesapeake names, he added.
The opportunity to expand reflects the growing popularity of bagels, which have become a staple for many Americans as a substitute for bread, Evans said.
Evans reiterated that BAB, which will have 285 units after it completes its Chesapeake acquisition, hopes to have 800 units at the end of five years.
"If you take all the national chains, we have maybe 1,000 to 1,100 units. We're a long way from market saturation," Evans added in an interview.  
Analyst Ernest Andberg of R.J. Steichen &amp; Co said bagel restaurants are in their infancy in terms of growth potential. "There is significant room to grow chains now," he said.
R.J. Steichen, which was the underwriter for BAB when it went public in November 1995, rates the stock a buy.
Also adding units are Quality Dining Inc's Bruegger's Corp, the largest U.S. bagel chain, Einstein/Noah Bagel Corp, and Manhattan Bagel Co Inc, Andberg said. He added he believes BAB is well positioned to expand particularly in smaller markets in part because its units require a relatively modest capital investment.  
Andberg added that BAB, which is headquartered in Chicago, makes its bagels from scratch on premise, which eliminates distribution concerns to serve smaller markets.
Evans said BAB, which has both franchised units and a growing number of company-owned stores, sees a "huge potential" in secondary markets. He added BAB would locate in a smaller city if it could draw from a surrounding population base of 25,000 to 35,000 people.
Evans said BAB also hopes to expand its Brewster's Coffee Co, which it acquired recently, including units in smaller towns.
Evans declined to give earnings and sales growth targets for BAB, which had a net loss in fiscal 1995 of $0.19 a share due to expansion costs. Earlier this month, BAB said it expects fiscal 1996 revenues, excluding the Chesapeake acquisition, to more than triple 1995 revenues of $2.0 million.
Reuters Chicago Newsdesk - 312-408-8787
