Tony the Tiger is going global -- and he's adding chocolate-flavored Frosted Flakes in the United States.
Kellogg Co., the leading U.S. cereal maker, said Tuesday it will launch Frosted Flakes in the world's two most populous countries -- China and India -- and also in Thailand, starting this month.
This will expand international marketing for Frosted Flakes, the top-selling U.S. cereal backed by Kellogg's Tony the Tiger emblem. Frosted Flakes are already sold in markets such as Europe, Latin America, Australia and South Africa.
Battle Creek, Mich.-based Kellogg, which accounts for about one-third of the $9 billion U.S. cereal market, also said it will begin selling a chocolate-flavored version of Frosted Flakes -- Cocoa Frosted Flakes -- in the United States next month.
Cocoa Frosted Flakes are fat-free and cholestrol-free, the company said.
Frosted Flakes is the industry's top-selling cereal in the United States and ranks second worldwide behind Kellogg's Corn Flakes, Kellogg spokesman Anthony Hebron said.
The new markets for Frosted Flakes reflect Kellogg's efforts to expand its international cereal business, which has been growing at a faster rate than its U.S. operations, analysts said.
Donaldson, Lufkin and Jenrette analyst William Leach said he estimated Kellogg's international cereal sales grew by about 4 percent in 1996, a rate it is expected to match in 1997.
By contrast, Kellogg's domestic volume was down about 4 percent in 1996, Leach added.
In the United States, Cocoa Frosted Flakes cereal is part of Kellogg's efforts to jump-start sluggish sales and volume growth.
"One product by itself doesn't do it," Schroder Wertheim analyst Robert Cummins said of Kellogg's efforts in the United States. "You have to have a steady stream of new products."
Late last year, Kellogg launched Honey Crunch Corn Flakes, a new variety of its long-standing Corn Flakes cereal. By late 1996, Honey Crunch Corn Flakes held about a 1.2 percent market share, the company said.
Internationally, nations like China, with a population of 1.2 billion, offer long-term sales potential for Kellogg's. But Leach cautioned the Frosted Flakes launch will not have an immediate impact on Kellogg's earnings since there is not a widely established cereal market in some nations.
"Cereal is a breakfast habit that is not common to all humanity," Leach added.
Starting Wednesday in China, Kellogg will introduce Tony's Flakes, a reference to Frosted Flakes' Tony the Tiger.
The cereal will be launched in Thailand, which has a population of more than 60 million, under the name Kellogg Corn Frosties on March 25, when a new plant is expected to be opened there.
In India, with a population of nearly 1 billion, the product will be introduced later this year as Kellogg's Frosties.
Kellogg has been selling Corn Flakes, Rice Flakes and Wheat Flakes in China since 1995. In India, it has sold Corn Flakes, Wheat Flakes and Basmati Flakes, made from a type of rice, since 1994.
Battle Creek, Mich.-based Kellogg also plans additional marketing support for Frosted Flakes in several countries outside the United States.
"Our cereal business is showing good growth in high-potential growth markets in Asia, Latin America and southern Europe," Hebron of Kellogg said. "And, in more established markets like Australia, Canada and Mexico.
Kellogg stock dropped 75 cents to $68.25 in consolidated afternoon trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
