General Mills Inc., the maker of Cheerios and Wheaties breakfast cereals, Wednesday reported higher earnings for its fiscal third quarter, despite a drop in total sales and domestic cereal volume.
Looking ahead, Minneapolis-based General Mills said some of its product lines, including cereal, have continued to see softer sales. Analysts said that may mean the company may post a smaller increase in earnings for fiscal 1997, which ends in May, than originally expected.
"We had weak volume in January and February. Some of that softness has extended into the first half of March," Eric Larson, senior vice president, investor relations, said. "We need to get that turned around."
General Mills, which also makes Betty Crocker cake mixes and Hamburger Helper, earned $122.8 million, or 78 cents a share, in the third quarter ended Feb. 23. That was up from year-earlier earnings of $116.3 million, or 73 cents a share. Sales dropped to $1.29 billion from $1.31 billion.
Third quarter earnings were in line with analysts' estimates.
General Mills said its domestic retail packaged food volume declined 1 percent in the third quarter, and cereal unit volume was down 3 percent in the quarter.
For the first nine months of the year, however, General Mill's cereal sales volume was up 4 percent, outpacing the industry's 1 percent growth.
Excluding its recent acquisition of branded cereals from Ralcorp Holdings Inc., including the Chex line, General Mills' cereal market share for the first nine months was up nearly a percentage point to 24 percent.
General Mills is the second-largest U.S. cereal market behind Kellogg Co., which accounts for about one-third of the domestic cereal market.
Schroder Wertheim managing director Robert Cummins said that, despite General Mill's year-to-date gains, the total U.S. cereal market has declined for several months, including in early March.
"They talk about this being a transition period for consumers," Cummins said. "(Cereal) prices on the shelf are lower, but there are fewer promotions."
After a "very quiet third quarter" in terms of marketing, Larson said, General Mills will roll out new promotions in the fourth quarter that will tie-in with the movie, "The Lost World: Jurassic Park."
Analysts said the company indicated its earnings for fiscal 1997 would beat the $476.4 million, or $3 a share, it earned in fiscal 1996. But earnings likely will not be as high as the $3.10 a share that many analysts had been predicting.
To meet the $3.10 estimate, Larson said General Mills would have to see total domestic sales volume growth above the 4 percent increase it posted in the first nine months of the year.
"We need to see volume slightly above our nine-month trend line rate to achieve the estimate," he added.
Analysts added that the company indicated it was more comfortable with earnings estimates around $3.05 a share.
"(Fiscal 1997 earnings of) $3.10 would be a best-case scenario," BT Securities analyst John O'Neil said. "For that to happen, things would have to turn around, and you can't always predict a turnaround." O'Neil cut his fiscal 1997 earnings estimate to $3.07 a share from $3.10.
General Mills stock was down $1.75 at $63 in afternoon trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
