Vita Food Products Inc, which sells kosher seafood and other specialty products, is scouting for acqusitions that could help it boost annual sales four-fold within the next five years.
"With the right mix of acquisitions, I think we could do $75 million to $100 million (in sales) annually. We've (also) got some things that could really take off internally," Stephen Rubin, president, said in an interview. "I'd like to see it (the sales target reached) before five years."
Vita's sales amounted to $21.4 million in 1995.  
The company, with products such as salmon and herring sold under the Vita brand, expects to complete at least one acquisition by the end of the year, Rubin said.
Acquisition targets include companies that sell kosher food or products that could later be certified as kosher. One of the targets is related to seafood, he added.
Rubin added that Vita could also acquire a regional, non-kosher food company and take it national under the existing brand name through Vita's distribution network.
Over 95 percent of Vita's sales, however, are kosher products.  
Jay Dembsky, Vita's chief financial officer, estimated that the kosher food market overall is growing by 10 to 11 percent annually, whereas the overall food industry grows only in line with the population.
Kosher food, he added, appeals to consumers beyond those adhering to Jewish dietary laws. Kosher food carries "a perception of higher quality," Dembsky said.
Vita also hopes to reap higher sales in 1997 from two new products that were rolled out in the fourth quarter of 1996 -- a line of hummus, a Middle Eastern dish made from chick peas, and frozen salmon burgers.
"We expect to see meaningful impact in 1997 from these products," Dembsky said.
Vita, which went public earlier this year at $6.00 a share, said it would make secondary offerings in the future if it needed to raise capital for acquisition programs, Rubin said.
Vita shres were up 1/8 at 5-1/8.
((Reuters Chicago Newsdesk (312) 408-8787))
