Dean Foods Inc, which staged a turnaround in the fiscal third quarter with earnings more than double a year ago, expects to make an acquisition in the fourth quarter, potentially in the fluid milk business.
"We are probably talking to more companies today than ever (before)," William McManaman, chief financial officer, said in a telephone interview.
Potential acquisition targets include fluid milk processors and or a small company that would complement Dean Foods' specialty segment, which makes coffee creamer, he said.  
McManaman said he expected Dean Foods to close at least one acquisition "in the not too distant future," and likely in the current fiscal fourth quarter.
Acquisitions in the past have been a growth engine for Franklin Park, Ill.-based Dean Foods. Earlier, it posted better than expected third quarter earnings of $0.51 a share, up from $0.17 a year ago. Earnings reflected improvements in all of its segments, including dairy, vegetables, pickles and specialty foods.
Prudential Securities analyst John McMillin called the third quarter results a "positive surprise."  
"It's a company that's getting its act together," McMillin said.
Last year, Dean Foods undertook a strategic review of all its operations, which included closing or disposing of several plants, streamlining vegetable operations, and cutting costs.
"We've pulled back in a number of areas and ridded ourselves of a lot of poor performing pieces," McManaman said. "Now we have to grow our cores a lot faster than in the past."
For example, Dean Foods' pickle operations earned $7.8 million in the quarter, up from $4.9 million a year ago, although sales declined to $82.6 million from $88.0 million.  
"We eliminated a couple of...products where we were not making a lot of money and customers where we were not making a lot of money," McManaman said, actions that cut pickle sales but boosted earnings.
Vegetable sales in the quarter dropped to $143.4 million from $146.5 million, reflecting lower inventories and higher prices that trimmed some sales. But the division posted a profit of $8.5 million, benefiting from lower costs, compared with a year-ago loss of $547,000.
On the dairy side, earnings were $27.0 million, up from $13.5 million last year, while sales gained to $443.1 million from $409.2 million.
"Our volume in the fluid milk business was up over four percent in the quarter, and we didn't make any acquisitions," McManaman said. "That's increased volume or market share in the markets in which we compete."
Dean Foods shares were up 5/8 at 33-7/8 after trading as high as 34-3/8 earlier in the day.
((Reuters Chicago Newsdesk (312) 408-8787))
