Pioneer Hi-Bred International Inc is launching 28 new corn hybrids this year, which it hopes will help reverse over the next few years a recent drop in its leading seed corn market share.
"We feel very good about the 28 new hybrids that we're introducing in 1997," Richard "Rick" McConnell, senior vice president and director of research, said in a telephone interview. "We think we're going to be able to position those well in 1997 for customers to get a good look at, and will be able to build volume up very quickly for '98 and '99..."  
Of the 28 new corn hybrids that Pioneer is introducing, eight have the Bt gene to fight off the European corn borer, a serious insect pest, McConnell said.
These Bt corn varieties are part of a host of genetically altered, or transgenic, corn hybrids that are being developed and launched by Pioneer and other agricultural companies.
Although Pioneer's share of the North American seed corn market is four times that of its nearest competitor, the need to develop unique biotech crops has leveled the playing field, analysts noted.  
"It (biotechnology) has made the other players seem a lot bigger. They (Pioneer) did not move as quickly and as early on biotechnology," Piper Jaffray analyst George Dahlman said. "They have done an amazing job of catching up."
In addition to Bt corn, Pioneer's other transgenic products include soybeans that can withstand the use of Monsanto Co's Roundup herbicide. Pioneer also will have limited quantities of corn that can resist Liberty herbicide, which is produced by AgrEvo, a venture between Hoechst AG and Schering AG.  
Pioneer is developing corn that can resist Roundup, but it may be 1998 or 1999 until it is introduced, McConnell said.
For this year, McConnell declined to project Pioneer's North American corn market share, which in fiscal 1996 dropped to 44 percent from 45 percent. DeKalb Genetics Corp, the number two player, has an 11 percent market share in corn.
He linked the market share loss in 1996 in part to the fallout from disease and insect problems that hurt two Pioneer hybrids in 1995. Those problems are being addressed with new corn hybrids.  
Piper Jaffray's Dahlman said he expects Pioneer's market share will be about flat in fiscal 1997 ending in August compared with 1996.
To bolster its future product lineup, Pioneer would consider collaborating with other players, including some outside the agricultural industry, McConnell said. "There will be other biotech boutiques that we will want to work with," he added.
Pioneer currently collaborates with Mycogen Inc, an agricultural biotech company, and Human Genome Sciences Inc, which is involved in a DNA project with Pioneer.
While Pioneer targets 20 percent return on equity and double-digit percentage growth in earnings per share, it will not shy away from investing in technology, McConnell said.
"We're not looking to shoot ourselves in the foot with short-term issues just to achieve those goals," McConnell said. "We'll make the appropriate investments."
	 ((Reuters Chicago Newsdesk (312) 408-8787))
