Inco Ltd's huge nickel, copper and cobalt property at Voisey's Bay in remote Labrador keeps getting bigger, with 11 drill rigs working around the clock to define three enormous deposits that promise to upset the world's metals markets.  
"There are a couple hundred million tonnes for sure, close to proven," said Greg Soper, a drill manager for Archean Resources, which has an exploration contract until the end of the year at the Northern site on a sub-Arctic land mass that is closer to Greenland than to much of the rest of Canada.
"This here is a world class deposit. Every week we're hitting stuff," said Soper, waving his arm to point at the vast stretch of bog and thin forest surrounding the round, rocky hill where metals were discovered two years ago.  
Inco's most recent calculations, compiled in an internal report at the end of August, showed 138 million tonnes of resource (corrects from "proven or probable reserves") spread out over three different deposits at the Voisey's Bay property. Resources are potential reserves.
On average, the deposits graded 2.09 percent nickel, 1.24 percent copper and 0.99 percent cobalt, the report said.
At the Ovoid deposit, found close to the surface of a bog close to the Labrador Sea, drilling has outlined 37.5 million tonnes. Exploration is finished at the Ovoid and Inco now plans to mine the area through an open pit mine.  
The Eastern Deeps, which lies under a series of hills covered with sparse trees and lush moss, has not yet been defined.
Recent calculations showed 75.5 million tonnes of ore, but the deposit was open in all directions.
To the west of the Ovoid, in the Western Extension, drills are uncovering another rich deposit. The mineralization was uncovered last April, after Diamond Fields Resources Inc, the owner of Voisey's Bay, accepted Inco's C$4.3 billion takeover offer.  
So far, drilling has defined 24.7 million tonnes, but the deposit is growing steadily.
Both the Eastern Deeps and the Western Extension need extremely deep holes to strike significant metal, and each major hole takes about three weeks to drill, said Soper.
More than 340 holes have been completed so far, with a total drilling meterage of more than 135,000 metres, Inco said in its recent mine and mill project description.
"Over half of our holes are good. They're mineralized," said 25-year-old geologist Mary Vaughan as she examined a new box of core samples just brought in from the Eastern Deeps.  
"It just blows you away. It's an explorationist's dream."
Archean Resources plans to keep drilling at a breakneck pace until its contract ends in December.
Inco has not said whether it will extend Archean's contract, but the Toronto-based company has promised to spend C$20 million over the next four years on exploration.
Only five percent of the property has been explored so far, but small exploration companies that have claims surrounding Inco's 495-square-kilometre site have not found anything significant.  
New resource calculations are expected within the next month, Rick Gill, spokesman for Inco subsidiary Voisey's Bay Nickel Co told Reuters in St. John's, Newfoundland.
Mining at Voisey's Bay is expected to last at least 20 years, with a concentrator on site handling 15,000 tonnes of ore a day. Mining will likely continue all year round, despite high winds, extremely cold temperatures and thick ice that locks in the site for a few months every winter.
"The information that we have at this time suggests it will be possible to operate year 'round with ice breaker support," said Gill.
-- Reuters Toronto Bureau 416-941-8100
