Weak metals prices will undermine third-quarter earnings for many North American metals producers, analysts surveyed by Reuters said.
"In most cases, we'll see they're going to be down, either year over year or quarter over quarter," said Manford Mallory, analyst for Research Capital. "Metal prices are down a long way and volumes in some cases are down too. The conditions are not as good as they were a year ago."
Copper is in the doldrums after having fallen sharply since mid-June, while nickel and aluminum have slid steadily.  
Gold has been anemic, hovering around US$380 an ounce.
"It's not going to be a buoyant trend," Mallory said. "Most of them are going to be reporting profits, but there will be a few losses as well."
Earnings in the mining sector were disappointing in the first quarter and dropped off in the second quarter when the copper scandal at Japan's Sumitomo Corp sent base metals downward.
The third quarter will be even worse, said base metals analyst David Davidson with Wood Gundy. He estimated earnings would be 10 to 15 percent lower than in the second quarter.  
"The more leverage you have to copper, the bigger the loss," he said in a phone interview.
Phelps Dodge Corp led the way on Thursday when it reported third-quarter net income of US$80.2 million or US$1.22 a share, compared to US$211.8 million or US$3.03 a share a year earlier.
Most large gold companies hedge part of their production, curbing their exposure to the low gold prices of the third quarter this year, said Davidson.
"But those who haven't much in the way of hedging are certainly suffering in the market," said Mallory.  
Investors should keep their eyes on Inco Ltd, said Davidson, who predicted "the earnings are not going to be great."
"You're going to have the impact of diluted earnings with the Diamond Fields Resources purchase," he said. Inco, the western world's largest nickel producer, completed the C$4.3 billion takeover of Diamond Fields Resources Ltd in August.
The takeover, along with a 10-day lockout at its Thompson, Manitoba facility and a smelter out of commission in Indonesia, will hurt earnings.
