A chill swept through the Canadian village of Nain this month when a small plane carrying two mineral explorers disappeared in a snow squall.
Prospectors passing through the town near the huge Voisey's Bay nickel deposit, believed to be one of the largest in the world, spoke quietly about the missing men from Vancouver-based Castle Rock Exploration Corp., speculating about what happened, imagining themselves in their position.
"I fly a lot over this area, and you just never know," said Capt. Luc Plourde at the military base in Goose Bay, Labrador. "It's a rugged terrain. You can't imagine what it's like to survive out there."
Two hundred exploration companies are active in Labrador, staking more than 250,000 claims in the past two years and investing about C$85 million ($62.9 million U.S.) so far this year. About 184,000 diamond drill holes have been plunged into the dome-shaped hills that dot the sparse landscape, and only one site, Voisey's Bay, has revealed anything significant.
The nickel, copper and cobalt deposits at Voisey's Bay are among the biggest base metals discoveries ever. The world-class finds boosted stock in Vancouver-based Diamond Fields Resources Inc. from pennies to more than C$42 ($31) before the company was taken over by Toronto-based nickel giant Inco Ltd.
Exploration companies and investors from all over Canada want their own Cinderella story. The discomforts at most camps are tempered by hot running water, radio, videos, laundry facilities and good, hearty food, but stories of people being blown off cliffs, tents torn by the wind, and bad exploration luck persist.
"The feeling is another Voisey's Bay will be found, but at great depth," said geologist Kevin Brewer, who heads an exploration management service and works with several companies in the area.
The Voisey's Bay deposit was discovered in late 1993 by a pair of explorers who initially set out to look for diamonds. As the story goes, they spotted a rusty outcrop of mineralised rock, tested it and hit the jackpot.
No one else has been that lucky, noted Brewer.
"When you fly over the country, you see hundreds of really large rusty zones," he said in an interview in St John's, Newfoundland. "You see similar brilliant rusty hills, oxidised rocks that look tremendous. But there's nothing in them."
Many of the mining companies are giving up, but a few have made long-term financial commitments to continue drilling.
"It's really hard for a junior mining company now," observed Brewer. "You have to have more than a really good showing on the surface. People want drill results."
But David Barbour, in charge of exploration for Vancouver-based NDT Ventures Ltd., is still optimistic.
"There's lots of mineralisation kicking around out there," he said in an interview in the warm and spacious kitchen tent at one of NDT's snowy sites near Nain.
"The biggest setback to actually finding something is there's not much known about the geology of the area. There's so much land that hasn't been touched," said Wayne Jenkins, a Nain-based expediter for exploration companies.
The millions of dollars and influx of people in this forgotten patch of Canada have changed the isolated region permanently.
Residents of Nain and Goose Bay, about 250 miles (400 km) away, have started investing in junior mining stocks. Housing starts and new businesses in Goose Bay are booming.
In Nain, rents have soared. Expansion of the village is impossible because of a border of huge cliffs and hills as well as a shortage of municipal money for water, sewerage and electricity. What little space is available can command thousands of dollars a month in rent.
Helicopters and aircraft fly into Nain in a constant stream. Some new businesses have appeared along Nain's pot-holed, muddy streets.
The noise and activity have offended many of the Inuit, or Eskimos, who live in Nain. "There is the mindset that when you come to Labrador, you can do anything you want," said William Barbour, president of the Labrador Inuit Association, which acts as a regional government.
The Inuit have been trying to negotiate a land claim with the provincial government for 19 years, but mining companies seem to get permission to lay claims as a matter of course, he complained.
"It seems like the mining companies come first, not the community," added Fran Williams, who heads a local aboriginal radio station.
The Labrador Inuit Association has started issuing report cards to exploration companies as a reminder that they are under close scrutiny.
