Before the huge nickel, copper and cobalt deposits at Voisey's Bay were discovered two years ago, the mainly aboriginal population of Nain did not know much about mining.
But as hundreds of prospectors flooded their snug coastal village in the northern Canadian province of Labrador, the inhabitants figured they had better learn fast.
"It fell on us like a ton of bricks in 1994," said William Barbour, president of the Labrador Inuit Association, which represents the Inuit -- or Eskimos -- who populate the frozen territory, which is on the Canadian mainland but is part of the Atlantic province of Newfoundland.
"There was panic. We felt completely ignored. So we educated ourselves in terms of the mining industry," Barbour told Reuters.
Now, even people with little education can keep up a steady conversation about massive sulphides and tailing ponds.
But that does not mean everybody sees things the same way as Inco Ltd, the Toronto-based nickel giant that owns the deposit. The tight-knit community of 1,200 is split over whether mining will help their remote town.
Adam Igloliorte, a 32-year-old Inuit from Nain, sees development as a chance for a good job. He has worked his way up to general labourer from janitor at the Voisey's Bay site.
Steady work and decent pay are hard to come by in the poor and troubled northern coast of Labrador, especially if, like Igloliorte, you only have six years of schooling.
"I got suspended (from school) and never went back," he said. Now he wants to upgrade his skills to land a permanent job with Inco once it takes over management of operations in January. "That would be excellent."
Igloliorte has improved his standard of living, is able to support his girlfriend and his one-year-old son and buy spare parts for his snowmobile.
He said he trusts Inco to be responsible as it develops the huge metals deposit that sits hidden underneath the moss which caribou graze on.
COMMUNITY FEARS OF WHAT MINING WILL BRING
Others are not as optimistic. They fear mining in the area will bring disease and drugs, destroy their aboriginal culture, eradicate their language, corrupt their daughters and upset the delicate balance of the vital ecosystem.
"Everybody sees some economic benefit. All the talk has been jobs," said Fran Williams, the director of an aboriginal radio station and local activist. "But there's still no focus on what the impact is on culture and tradition."
The effects are already starting to show in Nain, a town accessible only by plane, boat or snowmobile.
The community has struggled since the 1970s, when fish, the main resource, became scarce. Residents have experimented with a fish plant, commercialised caribou hunting and a nearby quarry, but so far nothing has overcome the dependence on government assistance or solved the alcohol and drug abuse, violence and suicide that so often stem from isolation and hardship in the region.
Williams feels mining and exploration are pulling her community further from a solution. Young men have been leaving to work in exploration camps, while women and the older generation stay behind to care for the huge number of children.
The men are too busy to hunt for the winter's supply of caribou, forcing their families to shop for the tasteless, outdated and costly canned food at the Nain grocery store.
"It's already having an impact on women," said Williams. "They are the ones with the least to gain and the most to lose. This activity will be a big disruption of family life."
The older people complain about the constant drone of airplanes and helicopters overhead.
Many of those earning large salaries at Voisey's Bay and other exploration camps have not learned how to handle the money. "We're not wage earners," said Williams. "We get it, we spend it."
While social services and courses may resolve some of the problems, the long-term effects of mining could be devastating.
"Drug abuse is already on the rise," said Williams, adding that she expects an increase in unwanted pregnancies, sexually transmitted diseases and violence as strangers bring their bad habits to town.
"It's incredible how all of Labrador has all of a sudden become dots of mining claims," she said. "You no longer feel like you're an inhabitant of your own land."
One 25-year-old from Nain who has worked at the Voisey's Bay site for about two years, is in an ideal position to gain from the development.
The man, who preferred not to be named, said he was kicked out of school, fathered two children when he was in his teens and has a criminal record for a string of alcohol-related assaults.
He was glad to get a position at Voisey's Bay after years of drifting between odd jobs. But he has no plans to make a career of it.
He does not trust Inco to treat him properly or respect the land, he said. And he resents the tight controls of managers, who ban liquor and keep close tabs on the workers.
He said he has seen an influx of drugs on the site, and he has become part of a chain of people who smuggle alcohol into Voisey's Bay for the workers.
Nain's transition to a mining town from a troubled, dependent community is bound to be bumpy, noted John Igloliorte, an elected elder and Adam's father. But he feels the results will be positive for his people.
"In the community, a lot of young people had nothing to do," he said in his native Inuktitut. "They were doing mischief, break and enters. That seems to have stopped a bit now that they have jobs."
Igloliorte and the other elders were opposed to exploration and development when it started, but most have changed their minds as they become better informed, he said.
"The companies are doing a good job. They're looking after the land and the environment," he said. "If they keep doing that, everything will be all right."
