North America's largest gold producer, Toronto-based Barrick Gold Corp, reported lower third-quarter earnings on Tuesday due to an after-tax charge and higher operating costs.
Barrick's net income for the quarter fell to $21 million, or 6 cents a share, from $67.7 million, or 19 cents a share, in the same period a year earlier.
Earnings were slightly below analysts' expectations.
"I think their quarter clearly underscores that Barrick has made the transition from a growth company to one that's trying to maintain its existing base," said mining analyst Barry Allan of Gordon Capital.
Barrick pointed to higher cash costs, which rose to $203 an ounce from $194 an ounce a year earlier.
The company also took a $38 million hit to bail out of its Cerro Corona exploration project in Peru.
Barrick hiked its exploration budget more than 50 percent, to $46.4 million for the first nine months of the year, compared with $30.9 million previously.
Investors seemed to shrug that off. Barrick's shares rose C50 cents to C$36.15 in heavy trading on the Toronto Stock Exchange. In New York, the stock rose 37.5 cents to $26.875.
The market seemed positive to Barrick's plans to develop its Pascua mine in Chile and its new Pierina property in Peru, analysts said.
Barrick bought the Pierina deposit last summer through its $800 million takeover of Arequipa Resources Ltd, based on a minimum of 4.5 million ounces of gold. According to the company, recent drilling on the property suggests the number was conservative.
Barrick said production at Pierina should begin in late 1999 at a rate of 500,000 ounces of gold a year. Costs should be below $100 an ounce thanks to a substantial silver credit and high grade gold.
Capital costs should be about $200 million, the company said. It has eight drills on the property working to define the deposit.
"They are proceeding very aggressively on Pierina," Allan said. However, he cautioned that it was risky to make such claims while drilling was still underway and a feasibility study is still a long way off.
At Pascua in Chile, recent exploration suggests the deposit may extend across the nearby border into Argentina, Barrick said. Production is expected to begin in 1999, totalling 400,000 ounces a year at an operating cost of $240 per ounce. Capital costs are expected of about $475 million.
