Canada's Bre-X Minerals Ltd., moved on Monday to resolve a dispute over its huge Busang gold discovery in Indonesia, forging an alliance with a company controlled by the eldest son of Indonesia's President Suharto.
"This is an important first step to the resolution of Bre-X's problems," said gold analyst John Ing of Maison Placements Canada.
The stock jumped C$3.50 to C$24.30 on the Toronto Stock Exchange, topping actives on more than 6.4 million shares. On Nasdaq, Bre-X rose $2.625 to $18.25.
Bre-X said it will pay $40 million for a deal with PT Panutan Duta, part of the Panutan group run by Sigit Harjojudanto, Suharto's eldest son.
Analysts said the alliance with Panutan Duta, part of the Panutan group involved in energy, mining and telecommunications, should help Bre-X clear up a widely publicised dispute over the ownership of its glittering Busang gold discovery.
Bre-X stock has taken a beating in recent weeks because of the dispute.
One of Bre-X's Indonesian partners, Jusuf Merukh, is seeking a 40 percent stake in Busang, which has estimated gold reserves of 47 million ounces.
The Indonesian government has said it will delay issuing the crucial contracts of work to Bre-X until the dispute is resolved. Without the contracts, Bre-X cannot advance its work on the Busang deposit.
The dispute has also clouded Bre-X's quest to find a major mining partner to develop and operate Busang.
Panutan will receive a 10 percent interest in the richest parts of the Busang gold deposit on the island of Kalimantan, Bre-X said.
In return, Panutan will act as a consultant for Bre-X in Indonesia and help the Calgary, Alberta-based company deal with administrative and technical matters. The deal is conditional on Bre-X's receiving essential permits from the Indonesian government.
"Having an arrangement with this fellow is a bonus," said Ing, the analyst. "The key in Indonesia is who you know."
"They seemed to have teamed up with a partner with high standing," said mining analyst Michael Fowler of brokerage Levesque Beaubien Geoffrion.
"This should clear up most of the (ownership) claims that are out there."
Merukh told Reuters in Jakarta on Monday that he was optimistic a deal would be reached in November.
But Bre-X's hold on the Busang discovery is shrinking as it works out its problems, said Ing.
He said Bre-X will probably have to give away another slice of the deposit to Merukh and his Australian supporters, Golden Valley Mines NL.
"Slowly and salami-like, Bre-X is getting cut back," said Ing.
Officials at Bre-X did not return phone calls to discuss details of the alliance.
