Major mining companies may have second thoughts about teaming up with Bre-X Minerals Ltd in its huge Indonesian gold discovery because of Bre-X's new strategic alliance, analysts said.
Bre-X announced this week an alliance with PT Panutan Duta, an Indonesian company controlled by Sigit Harjojudanto, the son of President Suharto.
Part of the deal forms a support services company to be owned 60 percent by the Bre-X group and 40 percent by Panutan.  
"There will be certain companies that look at this and shake their heads," said mining analyst Doug Leishman of Yorkton Securities.
The support services company will provide utilities, petroleum products and limestone for the Busang gold discovery on the island of Kalimantan, Bre-X said.
The new company could have control over major parts of operating and capital costs, said Leishman.
"If these things aren't done at normal world market prices, it could add on unwarranted capital and operating costs," he said in a telephone interview from Vancouver.  
Any major mining company considering a bid for Bre-X would have to take into account the potential extra costs and the loss of control over supplies that the new alliance brings, he said.
Bre-X is in the middle of a search for a major mining company to act as its partner to help develop the Busang discovery.
"Certain major companies will not like this. It ties them to a supplier, and no one likes that," Leishman said.  
Canadian gold giants Barrick Gold Corp and Placer Dome Inc, both said they needed more details about the supply company before they could judge whether it would be a factor in bidding for Busang.
"Does this change things? Unless you know the details of the agreements, you don't know if this changes things or not," Barrick spokesman Vince Borg said in an interview. "It could and it could not."
Bre-X would not return repeated telephone calls this week to ask for details of the Panutan agreement.  
Analyst Catherine Gignac at Deacon Capital Corp said the agreement is vital to Bre-X's progress.
"I think it's something they should have done two years ago," she said in an interview. "You need a local company that's on side. You need local connections."
Bre-X stock shot up C$3.50 to C$24.30 on Monday after the alliance was announced, but has slid back to C$22.40 since then as investors began to realize that the Panutan deal does not solve all Bre-X's problems, analysts said.
Bre-X has been plagued by a dispute over the ownership of Busang. One of its Indonesian partners is claiming up to 40 percent of the discovery and has said he will not back down despite Bre-X's alliance with Suharto's son.
The Indonesian government has vowed not to issue essential contracts of work until Bre-X sorts out its problems. The alliance with Panutan is also contingent on Bre-X receiving the permits.
--Reuters Toronto Bureau 416 941-8100
