Barrick Gold Corp. completed its C$1 billion takeover of the promising smaller exploration company Arequipa Resources Ltd. Tuesday, solidifying its position as the world's third biggest gold producer.
"We are pleased that Arequipa shareholders have chosen so overwhelmingly to accept this offer," Barrick Chairman Peter Munk said in a statement. "We now have the opportunity to realize the potential of Arequipa's excellent assets."
A total of 93 percent of Arequipa shareholders accepted Barrick's C$30 ($21.94) a share bid overnight, and Barrick said it plans to exercise its right to buy the remaining shares.
Barrick said it will have to spend at least C$512 million ($374 million) and issue about 13.4 million shares to complete the takeover, giving the deal a total value of C$1.02 billion ($745 million) based on the closing price for Barrick stock Tuesday.
The acquisition gives Barrick, North America's largest gold mining company, ownership of Arequipa's prize possession, the Pierina gold deposit in Peru.
While exploration on the property is in its early stages, some experts have speculated the deposit has potential reserves of up to 12 million ounces of high-quality gold.
Barrick originally offered Arequipa shareholders C$27 a share July 11 to take over the Vancouver-based company. Analysts initially saw the offer as generous since exploration at Pierina was preliminary.
But Arequipa recently released a fresh batch of drill results from the property, attracting interest from other potential bidders.
On Aug. 16, Barrick raised its offer to C$30 a share to pre-empt a takeover battle.
More drill results were expected soon.
Hours after Barrick officials got the news that the takeover offer had succeeded, two top executives in charge of exploration left to take a closer look at their new treasure.
"They're on their way to Lima right now, to start work on Pierina," said company spokesman Vincent Borg. "What's next is to get a handle on the ore body."
Drilling on the property will continue at an accelerated pace, he said. Barrick also plans to send in additional drill rigs and prepare for engineering work leading up to an eventual feasibility study.
"Things will start kicking in," Borg said.
Analysts were also on their way to Vancouver to scrutinize data collected by Arequipa that Barrick has not yet seen.
Funding the takeover will not be a problem, Borg added. "We've got a very strong balance sheet. We've got no long-term debt."
But the company will have to pay interest on its line of credit and bump up its exploration budget to uncover the metal at Pierina, cutting into earnings, one analyst said.
The Arequipa acquisition was a very "aggressive" move for Barrick and signals the start of a bold, new expansion strategy for the gold giant, mining experts said.
"I don't think they'll stop here. I think they'll continue on the acquisition track," one said.
Barrick would not say if it had its eye on another property. But the company has said in the past it plans to make more than one acquisition.
