Canadian gold giant Barrick Gold Corp is the most likely contender to partner junior mining company Bre-X Minerals Ltd in developing its huge Indonesian gold deposit, analysts polled by Reuters said.
"We really only have one potential front runner: Barrick," said gold analyst Barry Allan with Gordon Capital.
Barrick has demonstrated its interest in Indonesian gold by investing more than US$10 million in exploration and amassing a large land position in Indonesia, analysts said.  
And Barrick's association with a construction company run by the daughter of Indonesia's President Suharto suggests Barrick is carefully setting up its network to control a piece or all of the Busang, Bre-X's 47-million-ounce discovery in the middle of the jungles of Borneo.
"They're trying to position themselves the best they can," said one analyst who did not want to be named.  
Analysts who have been closely watching developments around Busang,said Barrick stands the best chance of bidding successfully for a stake in the property because Barrick's own high-priced stock, relative to the value of its assets, will look attractive to Bre-X shareholders.
"In order to pay the sort of multiples Bre-X is trading at, you have to have a high gold multiple in order to land the company or the property at these prices," said Rick Cohen at Goepel Shields in Vancouver.  
Bre-X shareholders will likely look for a combination of cash and shares so they can keep a stake in the fortunes of Busang, analysts said.
Bre-X is looking for a heavyweight mining company to buy all or part of the Busang discovery and act as operator of what is expected to become one of the world's biggest gold mines. But the search has been dogged by a dispute with Bre-X's Indonesian partners over ownership.
The spat has caused the Indonesian government to delay granting Bre-X essential contracts of work needed to develop Busang. Without the contracts, analysts said a bid for Bre-X would be unlikely.  
Bre-X has refused to speak to the media since it forged an alliance with Indonesian President Suharto's son last week. But some analysts said Bre-X told them recently the dispute should be cleared up this month.
While Barrick is at the top of the list of companies who could afford to buy into Bre-X, Vancouver-based Placer Dome Inc also has the resources and the attractive stock price to make a bid, analyst Cohen pointed out.
"The size of this deposit and the potential involved here sort of limits it to those two," he said.
Others said the Bre-X play was not Placer Dome's style.  
"Definitely Placer has the capability to do it. I just don't think they have the stomach for it," said Allan.
Newmont Gold Co, RTZ Corp PLC, Minorco SA and Freeport-McMoRan Copper and Gold Inc could also be in the running for Bre-X. However, their chances are not as good as Barrick's, analysts said, noting that Newmont, Freeport and RTZ already have large exposure in Indonesia.  
While the Luxemburg-based Minorco, controlled by Anglo American Corp of South Africa  ANGL.J., has recently raised US$400 million, the company's stock lacks the high multiple that would make it attractive to Bre-X shareholders.
Minorco could run into political problems if it were to make a bid for Bre-X, said one South African analyst who follows Minorco closely.
"The South Africans might not want to get into a situation that's so blatantly political," he said. "It might backfire on them."  
If Barrick does eventually succeed in controlling the Busang deposit, it would go a long way to fulfilling Barrick chief executive Peter Munk's dream of building the world's largest gold company to supplant Anglo American, analysts said.
"It fits very nicely with Munk's strategy," said one analyst. "Munk is not driven by money. He wants to have a legacy. He wants to be able to say he started with nothing and ended with the largest gold company in the world.
