The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency lost a bid on Tuesday to freeze shares in Inco Ltd. worth $152 million belonging to international mining financier Robert Friedland.
The EPA had said that Friedland should be held responsible for environmental problems at a former gold mine in Summitville, Colorado. It requested an injunction on the shares until it could sue Friedland for $152 million in costs to clean up the Summitville site.
But an Ontario Court judge Tuesday shot down the EPA's arguments and scolded the agency for the "nondisclosure and misrepresentations" that he said riddled its case.
"The evidence has led me to the conclusion that the liability of Robert Friedland is anything but clear," Justice Robert Sharpe of Ontario Court's general division said as he read his decision.
He ordered that the Inco shares be held by Friedland's lawyers until Friday afternoon to give the United States a chance to apply for an appeal.
Lawyers for the United States would not say if they would appeal.
"This is the most devastating judgment they've ever had," Friedland lawyer Alan Lenczner said in an interview. "This is just unprofessional."
Friedland gained the Inco stock as part of Inco's takeover last August of Diamond Fields Resources, a company run by Friedland, which controlled the huge Voisey's Bay nickel deposit in remote Labrador.
In the 1980s, Friedland founded and ran Galactic Resources Ltd., the company that controlled the Summitville mine and the firm the EPA said was responsible for the pollution.
The EPA wanted Friedland's assets frozen since it said it had a strong case against Friedland in Colorado.
But the Ontario judge said the EPA's case was far from strong. The EPA failed to show that Friedland was directly responsible for any pollution in Summitville, he said.
"In my view there are serious shortcomings in the case of the United States," he said.
More important, the United States did not present the court with the full and fair information required for an injunction, making it hard for the judges who granted the injunction to make a fair decision, the judge said.
"This is a serious departure from the fundamental integrity of the judicial process," he said.
A previous ruling from Sharpe ordered the United States to disclose all documents related to the case, not just the ones the agency had presented voluntarily.
Those documents showed the EPA had doubts about its ability to win the case against Friedland, the judge said.
"The extent of nondisclosure of the United States in this case is serious and fundamental."
Galactic mined gold at the Summitville mine in the 1980s, using open-pit heap leaching methods where ore is placed on top of rubber pads and then sprayed with a cyanide mixture. Cyanide leaked through the pads, threatening the area's rivers.
