Everything old is new again in the ageing gold zone near Timmins in northern Ontario.
Exploration has exploded in the area, which has been mined since the early 1900s.
While most Canadian exploration companies are off making inroads in South America and Asia, a handful of innovative and optimistic junior companies are staying behind, hoping to strike gold on their home turf.
Established producers in the area, 438 miles (700 km) north of Toronto, are expanding and sinking millions of dollars into new exploration.
"We've had lots of speculative money coming in. It's got a lot of people interested," said Lorne Luhta, geologist for the Ontario Ministry of Northern Development and Mines. What better place to look but around Timmins, where there's been a history of gold."
Junior explorer Band-Ore Resources Inc. has attracted the most attention, after hitting mineralisation last February just outside the traditional mining camp.
"We kind of went against the trend," said Bruce Durham, vice president of Band-Ore. As everyone else was going off to Chile and Mexico and Africa and Asia, we sat here in Timmins and put together a large land position."
Band-Ore's find inspired other exploration companies to set up in the area and a couple of them have drilled some "interesting" holes, said mining analyst Barry Allan with Gordon Capital.
Major companies with established mines in the area have also been exploring and expanding.
Royal Oak Mines Inc. said this autumn it discovered more gold on its Timmins and nearby Matachewan holdings and decided to expand production. It is now reshaping operations to put Timmins at the centre of its production.
Echo Bay Mines Ltd. is considering an open pit mine at nearby Night Hawk Lake and Kinross Gold Corp. has been steadily increasing its reserves at its Hoyle Pond Mine and it has set up a separate exploration company to search out more prospects in the area.
Gold giant Placer Dome Inc. is turning its old underground deposit into a huge, low-cost, low-grade open-pit.
"One of the things that's rejuvenating the area is Placer Dome looking at their operation as a large, low-grade open pit as opposed to an underground operation," said Band-Ore's Durham.
A new emphasis on large, low-grade deposits has changed the way Placer Dome approaches mining in the area, confirmed Paul Burchell, senior geologist for Placer Dome in Timmins. "Our ideas have changed, and certainly the economics have changed for us."
The major producers have created an intricate infrastructure in the Timmins area that makes it attractive for exploration companies, said Durham. "We've got roads, workforce, cheap power and reliable workers. It can really help to keep the cost down."
But new technology has been the biggest boost for exploration in Timmins. Most of the old discoveries in the area were found where mineralised rock lies near the ground surface, said Burchell.
The areas being explored are covered with a thick layer of sand, gravel and clay. "It acts as a very effective mask. The gold has no signature," said Burchell.
With new exploration equipment, junior mining companies -- their pockets lined with the riches of the ongoing boom in exploration stocks -- can find fresh drilling targets.
But exploration in the area is expensive. And it takes more than money and persistence drilling to hit gold.
Band-Ore disregarded the traditional beliefs about geology in the area and explored in new directions.
"We kind of went contrary to that, reinterpreted some geophysical data and some of the old work done in the area, and came up with some new ideas," said Durham.
"It's one of those ideas that paid off."
