Canadian mining company Bre-X Minerals Ltd has been in hiding since it announced 17 days ago that it has formed a partnership with the son of Indonesian ruler Suharto, prompting a flurry of comment on its ethics. (Corrects description of Suharto.)
Despite a constant whirl of rumors and persistent questions that have sent the company's shares on a roller coaster ride, Bre-X is maintaining a dogged silence. 
The Calgary-based company that controls one of the world's biggest gold prospects in Indonesia has not talked to the financial press for weeks. Company officials will take calls only from a handful of favoured analysts, according to market sources.
"I haven't had any calls returned," said gold analyst Rick Cohen with Goepel Shields in Vancouver. "There seems to be a certain number of people they talk to. Everybody's a bit in the dark." 
Bre-X sent out a news release on October 28 about its alliance Suharto's son, Sigit Harjojudanto, whose business influence is pervasive in Indonesia.
Since then, instead of directly addressing material questions about its business in Indonesia -- many of which are playing havoc with its stock price -- Bre-X has opted instead to leak to the market carefully selected press material.
On Sunday, for example, the company faxed the media, analysts and shareholders a copy of a story from the Far Eastern Economic Review detailing its links with Sigit. 
The article referred to Sigit's possible ties with the Indonesian army, stated flatly that one of Bre-X's Indonesian partners has been bought out and asserted that Canadian gold giant Barrick Gold Corp had tried to push Bre-X into a bad deal.
Despite questions about the article, Bre-X refused to respond and still has not said whether it endorses the story or puts any faith in the statements contained in the story.
"I've certainly suggested a few times that they talk to the media and clear things up," said Neil Winchester, manager of surveillance at the Toronto Stock Exchange. 
"It would be advantageous to the marketplace," he added.
Rumors have surrounded Bre-X since the Indonesian government said last month it would not issue essential contracts of work until Bre-X cleared up an ownership dispute with some of its Indonesian partners.
The dispute has placed a cloud over Bre-X's search to find a major mining partner to help it develop the rich Busang gold deposit in East Kalimantan, but the alliance with Suharto's son was expected to help the company clear up its problems. 
"They're optimistic that they can get everything (the permits) within a couple of weeks," said gold analyst Michael Fowler of Levesque Beaubien Geoffrion, who said he spoke with Bre-X on Tuesday.
But he said Bre-X would not comment on the article it distributed. "They just sent it out for general interest purposes," he added.
Still, the rumors in the article and other rampant gossip are taking a toll on shares linked to Bre-X. Other exploration companies in Asia have complained the uncertainty has spilled over and hurt their stocks. 
Minorca Resources Inc, a Canadian junior mining company that has an interest in the Busang deposit through an alliance with Bre-X's Indonesian partner, PT Askatindo Karya Mineral, has found itself on the defensive.
Talk about Askatindo being bought out is unfounded, Minorca president Roland Horst said in an interview. "They have no intention to sell out," he said.
Minorca's chairman is in Indonesia this week meeting with Askatindo officials and verified the company's intentions.
"There were discussions, but they were rebuffed," said Horst. 
He added that he also had a slew of unanswered questions about Bre-X's arrangements with Suharto's son.
"To be frank, the relationship between Minorca and Bre-X is relatively cool."
--Reuters Toronto Bureau 416 941-8100
