Canada's Bre-X Minerals Ltd could face a multi-billion-dollar lawsuit over the ownership of its spectacular Busang gold deposit in Indonesia.
The young Calgary-based company said Friday that one of its Indonesian partners, PT Krueng Gasui, threatened it and 19 others with legal action in Canadian courts, claiming damages of US$1.9 billion.
"I find it curious that PT Krueng Gasui has chosen to threaten a lawsuit in Canada relating to matters that allegedly occurred in Indonesia," Bre-X chief executive David Walsh said in a statement. "However, we will sit down with them and listen to what they have to say."
Krueng Gasui owns an undisputed 10 percent of one section of the Busang discovery. It claims it owns up to 40 percent of the entire deposit, but Bre-X says the Indonesian company does not have the documentation to back up its claims.
Bre-X, which closed down C$1 at 20.90 in heavy trading on the Toronto Stock Exchange, said Friday it had received a letter from its Indonesian partner demanding a meeting before November 22 to resolve the dispute. If Bre-X refuses or does not make an attempt to settle the argument, Krueng Gasui will sue, the letter said.
Bre-X said it has asked its lawyers to arrange a meeting.
"In my opinion, this (threat of a lawsuit) appears to be a last minute act of desperation," said gold analyst Chad Williams of Research Capital Corp.
"My question is, why have they waited so long? And why did they choose to do this in Canada?"
The dispute between Bre-X and Krueng Gasui, who is backed by Australia's Golden Valley Mines NL, became public at the beginning of October.
The argument prompted the Indonesian government to delay issuing vital contracts of work until the two parties worked out their difficulties. Without the contracts, Bre-X cannot proceed with work on Busang and has had to stall its search for a major gold producer to operate or buy the discovery, analysts say.
"The key is how the Indonesian government will react" to the lawsuit, said Williams.
The threat of a lawsuit gives Bre-X a strong incentive to settle with Krueng Gasui and Indonesian businessman Jusuf Merukh, who controls Krueng Gasui, said gold analyst Catherine Gignac of Deacon Capital.
While most analysts said it was too early to tell whether the Indonesian case would stand up in Canadian court, they said the threat of a lawsuit will definitely force Bre-X to treat the claims more seriously.
"It reinforces the uncertainty with respect to Bre-X," said gold analyst John Ing of Maison Placements. "My sense is this thing is not going away. This is more of a manoeuvring than an actual threat, but it does not look like this will end any time soon."
Krueng Gasui said in its letter that it will also sue the other Indonesian partners of Bre-X, some Bre-X officers and Canada's Minorca Resources Inc., which has a small stake in the discovery.
Minorca president Roland Horst said his company has no reason to be involved.
Exploration at Busang has outlined 47 million ounces of gold so far, and some analysts predict there could be up to 100 million ounces.
