The world potash market is churning, and Canada's huge Potash Corp of Saskatchewan Inc is in the middle of the upheaval.
Since Potash Corp, the world's biggest potash producer, said last week it had entered into talks to buy a controlling stake in a major European potash firm, its stock has zigzagged as the market comes to terms with a quickly changing picture of the potash world.  
"You're getting into an interesting part of the fertilizer world, and I don't know what will happen," said James Searls, a potash analyst for the U.S. Geological Survey in Virginia.
"It's going to be really curious."
Potash Corp wants to acquire a 51 percent interest in Kali und Salz AG from German chemical conglomerate BASF AG. If it succeeds, Potash Corp would control 25 percent of Germany's four-million-tonne-per-year potash market.
The deal would boost the Saskatchewan company's share of world production capacity to about 50 percent from 35 percent, analysts have said.  
But there is another player waiting in the wings, promising to make Potash Corp's consolidation plans more intriguing.
Asia Pacific Resources Ltd of Vancouver has made an important potash discovery in Thailand. The company says exploration so far has shown at least one mine is economical.
"We believe we've got the potential for than one," Asia Pacific president Gerry Wright said in an interview. "It may be two, it may be three or whatever."  
Wright believes the property will be producing about two million tonnes of potash by the turn of the century and between four and six million tonnes by 2005 -- a sizable chunk of the world's current production of about 40 million tonnes last year.
While Asia Pacific plans to take develop the mines itself, it has signed confidentiality agreements with eight companies in the hopes of finding a partner, said Wright.
Potash Corp is not among them, he said.  
He hopes three of the eight will sign non-binding agreements with Asia Pacific by October and one will emerge as a partner by the first quarter of 1997.
The attraction of Asia Pacific's find is its location, said analyst Sam Kanes with ScotiaMcLeod in Toronto.
"These mines appear to have twice the margin per tonne that Saskatchewan Potash gets, because it's so close to the market that imports all of it," Kanes said.
China and the Pacific Rim are growing potash consumers, he said, and the Thai deposits are convenient.  
But Wright has no plans to take on Potash Corp for its market share.
"We have no interest in getting into a tussel with existing suppliers to that region," he said.
The growing market will be big enough for everyone, he said.
But market growth depends on healthy economic growth in Asia, said Michel Prud'homme, senior minerals analyst for federal department Natural Resources Canada.
In 1995, the type of potash produced by Potash Corp had a surplus supply capacity of about 7.5 million tonnes, he said.  
"Any new major project would be jeopardizing current supply arrangements."
The recent developments have the stock market in a tizzy. Potash Corp shares soared on news of its negotiations in Germany, but it has been a volatile ride for the stock since then.
The stock dropped off Wednesday after a U.S. brokerage downgraded it from a buy to an outperform. But it was up C$2.50 to C$104 on Thursday, due to hedge buying by fertilizer distributors trying to sidestep an expected potash price increase, analysts said.  
"It will remain volatile until this deal with Germany is settled and until APQ is settled," said Kanes.
Asia Pacific lost C$0.10, falling to C$10.15, but the stock has been climbing steadily on news from Thailand.
-- Reuters Toronto Bureau 416 941-8100
