Gold giant Barrick Gold Corp. is negotiating with Canada's Bre-X Minerals Ltd. to gain control of Bre-X's huge Busang gold discovery in Indonesia, the two companies said on Tuesday.
The companies were negotiating under the "guidance" of the Indonesian government, which asked Bre-X to form a joint venture with Barrick, Bre-X said.
Calgary, Alberta-based Bre-X discovered Busang, one of the world's biggest gold deposits, in 1994.
Official estimates of Busang have outlined 47 million ounces of gold so far, but analysts have said that number could rise to 100 million ounces.
"This is a result of Barrick working very hard behind the scenes to circumvent Bre-X's sale process," one analyst said of the news. Bre-X has been seeking a partnership with a major gold producer to operate Busang.
To satisfy Indonesia, Bre-X would keep 25 percent of its stake and 75 percent would go to Toronto-based Barrick, the world's third largest gold producer.
Bre-X said that the Indonesian government "would appreciate it if the parties could consider a 10 percent participation being given to the Indonesian government."
The Indonesian government wants Barrick and Bre-X to reach a deal by December 4 or else the government "will take steps to prevent a delay in the development" of Busang, Bre-X said.
Development of Busang has been held up by disputes between Bre-X and its Indonesian partners over ownership of the discovery.
Bre-X, which controls 90 percent of Busang, said it asked Indonesia's Mines Ministry if other deals would be acceptable, but had not yet received an answer.
A deal between the two companies was not a sure thing, Barrick spokesman Vince Borg said in an interview.
He said he had no details about how much money or stock would change hands or when a deal would be reached.
With the Indonesian government guiding the Busang negotiations, Bre-X's powers to negotiate a favorable deal were curbed, analysts said.
"There have been some constraints imposed on Bre-X," said mining analyst Chad Williams at Research Capital Corp. in Montreal. "That's going to negatively impact on how much Bre-X can receive for its interest."
But Barrick has an international reputation at stake and will have to be seen to treat Bre-X fairly, analysts said.
"Given the possible questions that may be raised over how Barrick obtained this special status, it will be essential that they are viewed as treating Bre-X shareholders fairly in any negotiations going forward," said an analyst who did not wish to be identified.
Barrick shares soared on the news, gaining C$2.30 to C$38.85 by mid-afternoon on the Toronto Stock Exchange. They rose 2-1/4 to 29-3/8 on the New York Stock Exchange.
Bre-X shares fell in Toronto before the news and held steady in active trading at C$20.10, down C$2.45, after the market digested the news.
Its stock has been volatile lately, clouded by the ownership dispute over Busang.
Busang would set Barrick well on its way to achieving its dream of becoming the world's biggest gold company.
In 1995, the company -- already North America's largest -- produced 3.1 million ounces of gold and had gold reserves totaling 43.3 million ounces.
It has become increasingly aggressive in moving towards its goal, analysts said.
Last summer, Barrick acquired Arequipa Resources Ltd. and its promising Pierina gold property in Peru for about $800 million.
-- Reuters Toronto Bureau 416-941-8100
