North America's largest gold producer, Barrick Gold Corp., is negotiating with Canada's Bre-X Minerals Ltd. to gain control of Bre-X's huge Busang gold discovery in Indonesia, the companies said Tuesday.
Acquiring a stake in Busang would set Barrick well on its way to becoming the world's biggest gold producer, industry analysts said. It is currently ranked third.
Barrick has become increasingly aggressive in moving toward its goal, analysts said. Last summer, it acquired Arequipa Resources Ltd. including its promising Pierina gold property in Peru, for about $800 million.
The companies were negotiating under the guidance of the Indonesian government, which asked Bre-X to form a joint venture with Barrick, Bre-X said.
Calgary, Alberta-based Bre-X discovered Busang, one of the world's biggest gold deposits, in 1994.
Official estimates of Busang have outlined 47 million ounces of gold so far, but industry analysts have said that number could rise to 100 million ounces.
"This is a result of Barrick working very hard behind the scenes to circumvent Bre-X's sale process," one analyst said. Bre-X has been seeking a partnership with a major gold producer to operate Busang.
To satisfy Indonesia, Bre-X would keep 25 percent of its stake and 75 percent would go to Toronto-based Barrick.
Bre-X said the Indonesian government "would appreciate it if the parties could consider a 10 percent participation being given to the Indonesian government."
The Indonesian government wants Barrick and Bre-X to reach a deal by Dec. 4, or else the government "will take steps to prevent a delay in the development" of Busang, Bre-X said.
Development of Busang has been held up by disputes between Bre-X and its Indonesian partners over ownership of the discovery. Bre-X, which controls 90 percent of Busang, said it asked Indonesia's Mines Ministry if other deals would be acceptable, but had not yet received an answer.
A deal between the two companies was not a sure thing, Barrick spokesman Vince Borg said.
With the Indonesian government guiding the Busang negotiations, Bre-X's powers to negotiate a favourable deal appear to be curbed, analysts said.
"There have been some constraints imposed on Bre-X," said analyst Chad Williams at Research Capital Corp. in Montreal. "That's going to negatively impact on how much Bre-X can receive for its interest."
Barrick has an international reputation at stake and will have to be seen as treating Bre-X fairly, analysts said.
"Given the possible questions that may be raised over how Barrick obtained this special status, it will be essential that they are viewed as treating Bre-X shareholders fairly in any negotiations going forward," said one analyst who asked not to be identified.
Barrick shares soared on the news, gaining C$2.45 ($1.82) to C$39 ($29.05) on the Toronto Stock Exchange. They rose $1.75 to $28.875 on the New York Stock Exchange.
Bre-X shares fell in Toronto before the news and held steady at C$20.35 ($15.16), down C$2.20 ($1.64) afterward. The stock has been volatile lately, clouded by the ownership dispute over Busang.
In 1995, Barrick -- already North America's largest gold miner -- produced 3.1 million ounces of gold and had gold reserves totalling 43.3 million ounces.
