Canada's gold giant Placer Dome Inc said it is poised to become a more powerful player in the Asia-Pacific region with its late Wednesday US$600 million takeover bid for Highlands Gold Ltd and the rest of its subsidiary, Placer Pacific Ltd.
A takeover of Papua New Guinea's Highlands would make Placer the main company involved in the rich Porgera gold deposit in that country,  Placer Dome spokesman Hugh Leggatt said in an interview from Vancouver.
"We think exploration at Porgera will be very prospective in the future," he said.
"It simplifies our structure and we believe it gives us more bang for the buck in terms of future exploration."
Highlands owns 25 percent of the Porgera joint venture. Placer Pacific also owns 25 percent of the gold deposit and is the mine's manager. The takeovers would give Placer Dome a 50 percent stake.
If the takeovers are successful, Placer Dome's yearly gold production would be boosted by 430,000 ounces to more than three million ounces a year by 1998, Leggatt said.
Reserves would go up by four million ounces to a total of 30 million ounces, he said.
"It clearly consolidates Placer's position in Porgera," said gold analyst David Christensen of Merrill Lynch in San Francisco.
"It's a very high quality operation with low production costs."
But Highlands' initial reaction to the takeover bid was to advise shareholders not to sell their shares.
"At the moment, the advice would be not to sell," Highlands company secretary Phillip West told Reuters in Sydney. "But the directors are considering the offer and are expected to make a statement later today," he said.
Placer has offered A$0.75 (corrects from A$0.25) a share for Highlands and has offered one Placer Dome share for every 15 Placer Pacific shares.
"We think it's a very fair bid. We have no intention of changing it," said Leggatt.
Placer already owns 75 percent of Placer Pacific and 33 percent of Highlands Gold.
It said its bid for Highlands represents a 36 percent premium to the price of Highlands shares on November 26, and its bid for Placer Pacific has a premium of almost 50 percent.
"This is about growth for Placer Dome shareholders and a golden opportunity for the shareholders of Highlands Gold and minority shareholders of Placer Pacific," John Willson, Placer's chief executive, said in a statement.
"We have great confidence in the Asia Pacific region. Placer Dome is consolidating its presence to compete more effectively."
