Canada's Barrick Gold Corp seems poised to supplant two South African mining giants to become the world's biggest gold producer through an unprecedented deal which will give it a majority share in Indonesia's rich Busang gold discovery.
Barrick, whose high-profile board of directors includes a former U.S. President George Bush, on Wednesday confirmed weeks of rumors it was negotiating with Bre-X Minerals Ltd for a stake in the Busang deposit, which contains at least 47 million ounces of gold, possibly more.
The unusual negotiations were requested by the Indonesian government, which has urged Bre-X to hand over 75 percent of its Busang stake to Barrick and form a joint venture.
"If this thing comes off, it makes Barrick the leading gold producer in the world," said Fred Ketchen, vice-president of Toronto brokerage ScotiaMcLeod.
"It indicates the advantages to major companies in having such high profile people on their board as George Bush and (former Canadian prime minister) Brian Mulroney."
Exploration at the Busang property is still in its early days, but already the potential promises to catapault Barrick's production above that of the world's two leading gold companies, Anglo American Corp of South Africa Ltd and Gold Fields of South Africa Ltd.
Barrick started with basically no gold production in 1983 and grew through acquisition and exploration to produce about 3.1 million ounces a year.
Barrick's flamboyant chairman Peter Munk, a fabulously wealthy risk taker well connected in both business and politics, has made no secret of his ambition to make his company number one.
While neither Barrick nor Bre-X would comment on how Barrick managed to persuade the Indonesian government to virtually mandate a deal with Bre-X, pieces of an intriguing jigsaw are beginning to fit together.
Bre-X bought the Busang properties in 1993 and made the huge gold find in 1995. The discovery propelled the company's stock from pennies to over C$200 before a stock split.
After Bre-X announced it would search for a heavyweight mining partner in Busang, the Cinderella story turned sour.
One of Bre-X's Indonesian partners claimed rights to up to 40 percent of the deposit and threatened to sue. The Indonesian government then delayed granting Bre-X its vital mining permits because of the ensuing disputes. "It's quite clear that Bre-X did not follow protocol in its ownership issues," said an analyst who asked not to be named.
So Bre-X set up a strategic alliance with the eldest son of Indonesia's President Suharto, hoping the alliance would help sort out its problems. At the same time, Barrick was worked behind the scenes to gain the upper hand, sources said.
"Peter Munk is a pretty smart guy," said Ketchen. "No grass grows under his feet."
Barrick developed a relationship with Suharto's eldest daughter, hiring her construction company for future mining work. It developed ties with the Indonesian government, probably using Bush and Mulroney's influence, sources said.
"They (Barrick) really did the end run. There was lots of arm twisting," said an executive at a rival mining company.
Spokesmen for both Bush and Mulroney declined comment.
With the Indonesian government almost forcing Bre-X into Barrick's arms, Bre-X has lost much of its bargaining power. "The government is God here. It holds most of the cards," said Michael Fowler with brokerage Levesque Beaubien Geoffiron.
Jakarta has given the companies until December 4 to come up with an arrangement. If they do not, the Indonesian government could take matters into its own hands.
But on Wednesday Bre-X investors seemed confident that Bre-X would win a reasonable deal. They pushed the stock up C$0.65 to 21.00 in heavy trading. Barrick rose 0.75 to 39.65.
"At the end of the day, I believe Barrick will be fair," said Fowler. Barrick has an international reputation to uphold and could face lawsuits from Bre-X shareholders if it tries to undermine Bre-X. Barrick may buy part of Busang and act as operator, rather than bidding for Bre-X, analysts said.
"None of the parties involved here will walk away completely unscathed," said analyst David Christensen with Merrill Lynch in San Francisco.
With all the intrigue and rumor clouding the Busang developments, investors will always wonder if they've heard the whole story, he said.
