Shareholders are troubled about negotiations between Barrick Gold Corp and Bre-X Minerals Ltd over the huge Busang gold deposit in Indonesia.
Some Bre-X shareholders are concerned they may be pushed into a bad deal; while some Barrick shareholders are worried they could emerge from any deal with a poor reputation.
"Shareholders are very vocal at this point," gold analyst Michael Fowler of brokerage Levesque Beaubien Geoffrion said Friday. "And you've got some influential shareholders here."
Many big institutions hold both stocks, he noted.
"I think it's the responsibility of Barrick to be responsible here, given that Bre-X has a gun to its head."
Earlier this week, Calgary-based Bre-X said the Indonesian government had told it to negotiate with gold giant Barrick Gold to carve up Bre-X's stake in Busang.
Jakarta wants Barrick to control 75 percent and Bre-X to control 25 percent, while both are to consider giving a 10 percent stake to the Indonesian government, Bre-X said.
"It's got to be a fair deal. Barrick can't screw Bre-X shareholders or there will be hell to pay," said Fowler.
If Barrick makes what is seen as a fair deal with Bre-X, shareholders may be prepared to ignore the fact that Bre-X is negotiating with a gun to its head, oberved a portfolio manager at one Canadian institution that has significant holdings in both companies.
"Everybody can sort of hold their nose and say, this thing smells, but it doesn't smell too badly," said the source, who asked not to be indentified.
However, if Barrick takes advantage of its favorable position and does not treat Bre-X fairly, "then it smells very, very bad," the portfolio manager said.
"The constraint on Barrick is that they have to go back to the capital markets from time to time doing other deals. "It's a question of sawing off somewhere where it smells but doesn't smell too bad," he told Reuters.
Retail shareholders are expressing their worries too.
One Bre-X shareholder, Gregory Chorny, who said he and his family owned about one percent of Bre-X's issued shares, circulated a letter to other shareholders on Friday, urging them to register their concerns by faxing a form letter to Barrick and Bre-X.
"I wish to register my concern with these developments and put both Bre-X and Barrick on notice that any transaction struck between them must fully represent full and fair value to Bre-X shareholders," the letter reads.
"I and other like-minded Bre-X shareholders plan to watch developments closely and are prepared to take appropriate action to ensure the rights of Bre-X shareholders are fully respected."
The letter demands access to any internal or external resource calculations so that shareholders can better judge the fair value of any deal between the two companies.
"We've had 4 1/2 months of drills working on that site and no published results. How can anyone possibly comment on the value?" Chorny told Reuters.
While Chorny acknowledged it is too early to judge the success of campaign, he said he had consulted with  "several dozens" of concerned Bre-X shareholders.
A fax machine at Bre-X was reportedly spewing out letters from shareholders at full tilt. Barrick spokesman Vince Borg said his company's fax machines were no busier than usual.
