Consolidated Eurocan Ventures Ltd , a small Canadian mining exploration company, was poised to gain control of one of the world's largest unexplored copper-cobalt discoveries on Friday.
The Zaire government agreed to a deal with the Vancouver-based company backed by Geneva-based Swedish financier Adolf Lundin, spokesmen from both sides told Reuters in Zaire. The deal gives Gecamines, Zaire's state-owned mining company, a 45 percent stake in the huge Tenke Fungurume deposit. Eurocan will have a 55 percent stake, sources said.  
A spokeswoman for Eurocan in Vancouver said she expected official confirmation by Monday morning.
Eurocan has said it expected to win the property for US$250 million and a commitment to develop the property.
"It's a very satisfactory deal for Eurocan, if they've got it," said Andrew Milligan, president of Cornucopia Resources Ltd, a Vancouver-based company that had also had its eye on Tenke Fungurume.
"It's one of the best projects anywhere in the world."  
Cornucopia had formed a tentative consortium last spring with metals giants Inco Ltd and Phelps Dodge Corp, hoping to submit a proposal for the project.
But Eurocan's pact freezes Cornucopia out of the running.
The deal gives a hint of some stability in Zaire's business world, said Ken MacLeod, president and chief executive of International Panorama Resource Corp, another Vancouver-based company exploring in Zaire.
"It gives a signal that the government is working and it's in business," he said in an interview. "From an investment perspective, it's a powerful message.  
"It means when Gecamines gets involved in an agreement, the government backs them up."
But some analysts were concerned about the high risks involved in doing business in Zaire, a country plagued by political uncertainty and overrun by crowds of refugees from neighboring Rwanda.
"Zaire is a basketcase," said mining analyst Tony Hayes at brokerage Credifinance in Toronto.
The amount of money Eurocan will have to invest and pay for the project is "ridiculous" for the return and the risk the company can expect, he said.
Milligan estimated it would cost about US$300 million for initial development of Tenke Fungurume and up to US$3 billion in total capital costs.
The project was previously explored by a consortium led by Anglo American Corp of South Africa Ltd, which invested almost US$300 million in the project in the 1970s but walked away because of political risk.
-- Heather Scoffield, Reuters Toronto Bureau 416 941-8104
