Some of the world's most influential gold producers are upping the ante as Wednesday's deadline edges closer for Canada's Bre-X Minerals Ltd. to make a deal with gold giant Barrick Gold Corp.
At stake is the rich Busang gold deposit in Indonesia. New estimates released Tuesday suggest the discovery contains more than 57 million ounces of gold that can be mined at the low cost of $96 an ounce.
The Indonesian government has virtually mandated that Bre-X must carve up its find, with Barrick getting 75 percent of Bre-X's stake and Bre-X 25 percent.
And the government of President Suharto has also made it plain it would "appreciate" a stake of 10 percent in Busang.
But now, some major figures in the gold mining world are protesting that the deal ordered by Indonesia is unprecedented and unfair. They are pressuring Jakarta to allow rival bids.
"I think it's Bre-X's natural right to have a say who their partner will be," John Willson, chief executive officer of Vancouver-based Placer Dome Inc., said.
Placer Dome, Canada's second biggest gold company and one of the world's largest, wants to bid on Busang, and Willson said Newmont Mining Corp. and Teck Corp. have also been at the negotiating table for months.
The three heavyweight mining companies were abruptly shut out of the process last month when Indonesia forced Bre-X into Barrick's arms.
Analysts have speculated that Barrick used its business connections with Suharto's eldest daughter, as well as connections through former U.S. President George Bush and former Canadian Prime Minister Brian Mulroney, Barrick advisers, to sway the Indonesian government.
"We were clearly disappointed -- that's a nice way of putting it -- that all of a sudden the thing went away from us," Willson said. "Something has been going on that is not kosher in the West."
Willson said he thought the Indonesian government could be persuaded to consider other offers for Busang. Otherwise, the country would face international condemnation and risk losing foreign investment, he said.
"This is indeed unusual. The message to the whole market is we risk our money big time to find gold, and if we really find the jackpot, somebody's going to come along and tell us what to do with it.
"It would put a great big red flag on Indonesia."
Placer, Newmont and Teck must now await word from Jakarta on whether they will be allowed back into the bidding process.
Indonesia's consulate in Toronto declined to comment on the matter Tuesday. Newmont Mining also would not comment.
Teck's chief financial officer, John Taylor, said the company would consider bidding for Busang if Indonesia opened the door to an auction process, but would likely seek a partner in any bid.
"That's a pretty big bite," Taylor said.
Willson, however, noted Placer Dome could comfortably afford to take on Busang alone, despite a recent $600 million bid for a larger stake in Papua New Guinea's Porgera gold deposit.
He would not say what price Placer was willing to offer, but "it's clearly worth considerably more that what's being contemplated," he said after looking at the new resource calculations for Busang.
The resource calculations are in line with analysts' expectations, said mining analyst Bruno Kaiser with CIBC-Wood Gundy in Toronto, who noted that most analysts believe Busang holds a lot more gold than has already been outlined.
Kaiser said he was not concerned about the Dec. 4 deadline ticking past without news from Jakarta.
"My take on it is that the Indonesian government imposed this Dec. 4 deadline primarily as a means to facilitate bids and get the process moving," he said. "You get everyone who is interested and serious stepping up."
But analyst Catherine Gignac with Deacon Capital in Toronto expressed doubts about the Indonesian government soliciting more suitors for Bre-X. "Why should the Indonesian government provide the market with a bidding process just because we want them to?" she said.
North America's gold miners are not alone in seeking a piece of Busang. Bre-X's Indonesian partner Jusuf Merukh has claimed up to 40 percent of the deposit. And the former Australian owners of the property say they also have rights to part of the riches.
