No final deal was in sight Wednesday for Bre-X Minerals Ltd. and Barrick Gold Corp., which are in the midst of forging a deal on one of the world's biggest gold deposits -- Indonesia's Busang.
As a Wednesday deadline slid by, Bre-X and Barrick said they were still trying to hammer out several issues, leaving the market to speculate about the status of negotiations.
A few issues remain to be solved, and Bre-X will have more news on the negotiations "shortly," Chief Executive David Walsh said in an interview from New York.
He said the main issues that stand in the way of a full agreement with Barrick are "regulatory" but maintained he was prevented by a confidentiality agreement to give details.
"We need certain additional comfort in any agreement that would satisfy the regulatory authorities and our shareholders," he said.
The Indonesian government directed Bre-X to form a joint venture with Barrick by Dec. 4, with Barrick getting 75 percent of Bre-X's stake in the rich gold discovery and Bre-X keeping 25 percent. The companies were invited to consider giving the Indonesian government 10 percent of the rich find.
As the clocked ticked, Bre-X issued a statement saying no new deadline had been set by the Indonesian Mines Ministry. It said it expected the Ministry of Mines to clarify its stand on the outstanding issues "in due course."
The direction of negotiations is in the hands of the Indonesian government, Walsh said.
"We are waiting on the answers we get from the Minister of Mines," he said.
Sources close to the talks said Indonesian mining officials had left Jakarta and would not be back until Dec. 9.
"I think both sides are probably worried about the so-called deadline, which has come and gone," said gold analyst John Ing with Maison Placements Canada Inc. "It's back in the lap of the Indonesians."
In Jakarta, a senior Indonesian mines official said the government of President Suharto would explore other possibilities to develop Busang if the two companies fail to clinch a deal.
"If they cannot reach an agreement, the government will take the necessary and appropriate action ... to expedite the development of Busang's resouces," Umar Said, secretary-general of the Mines Department, told a news conference in Jakarta.
"What the action will be ... I have to get back to the government. This is not my playground," he added.
Meanwhile, investors pushed up Bre-X's stock C$1.30 to close at C$20.10 ($14.84) in heavy trading in Toronto Wednesday, while Barrick rose C$1.45 to C$39.30 ($29.01).
"People think there's an agreement that will come out sooner rather than later," said gold analyst Catherine Gignac of Deacon Capital in Toronto.
But she noted that the uncertainty surrounding the negotiations was preventing Bre-X's stock from rising to meet the level of rumoured offers of about C$25 ($18.50) a share from Barrick.
"We're actually hearing that (the deal) is done and they're just dotting the i's and crossing the t's," Gignac said. "Everything has been set. We just don't know the details."
But a source close to the negotiations said he understood that the two companies did not have a deal and were trying to get a deadline extension from the Indonesian government.
The latest deadline is the second the two companies missed. They let a deadline at the end of November slip by too, sources said.
Possible stumbling blocks in the talks include price, how to pay for the deal and a series of threatened lawsuits over Bre-X's claims, analysts said.
Waiting to pounce on the deposit if the Indonesian government does open the door to outside bidding is another North American gold giant -- Placer Dome Inc., which seemed to be positioning itself in case the Barrick, Bre-X talks fail.
"I don't think today's deadline had any great significance," Placer spokesman Hugh Leggatt said in Vancouver, British Columbia. He added that the company still hoped to be allowed to form a partnership with Bre-X to develop Busang.
"We're not discouraged. It's going to be a long process," he said.
Newmont Mining Corp. and Teck Corp. also expressed an interest in Busang, which is located deep in the jungle in East Kalimantan on the island of Borneo.
