The rights to Bre-X Minerals Ltd.'s huge Busang gold discovery in Indonesia appeared to be up in the air Monday despite an Indonesian government statement declaring Canada's Barrick Gold Corp. the winner.
"We still don't have a deal. There are a number of points that are still being negotiated," Bre-X spokesman Steve McAnulty said in a phone interview. "Negotiations are still ongoing."
"I can explain to you that we don't have a signed agreement," Barrick spokesman Vince Borg said.
The Indonesian government told Reuters in Jakarta Monday that the two companies had agreed to split the deposit, with Barrick getting 75 percent and Bre-X keeping 25 percent.
"They have reported they can both accept the government suggestion," of a 75-25 split, said Umar Said, secretary-general of the Mines and Energy Ministry.
"They are also ready to provide a 10 percent stake to the government," he said. "It is good."
Last month, Indonesia asked Bre-X to form a joint venture with Barrick and announce a deal by Dec. 4. When the deadline passed, the two companies said they had reached agreement on some issues but that others were still outstanding.
"We are negotiating toward an end," McAnulty said Monday.
He said legal issues stood in the way of an agreement.
"The whole thing is totally confusing," said gold analyst Michael Fowler of brokerage Levesque Beaubien Geoffrion in Toronto.
"I think these guys are close, but there are probably a few things in the way."
The companies are wrangling over the Busang gold find, which holds at least 57 million ounces of low-cost gold on the island of Borneo.
Neither company would provide details about the terms of a deal, when the terms would be announced, whether shareholders would be able to vote on the agreement or who would be given essential contracts of work granting mining rights to the property.
Bre-X was still hoping the Indonesian government would drop its request for a deal with Barrick and let Bre-X find a partner through an open bidding process, McAnulty said.
"We're getting signals from the consulate, from the embassy, from Mr. Said," he said. "We certainly hope the government allows the process to proceed as originally planned. It would be to the best interest of Bre-X shareholders."
Vancouver, British Columbia-based gold firm Placer Dome Inc. has complained about being shut out of the process despite months of negotiations.
Placer Dome has said it wanted a chance to put forward a bid, but its status was in limbo as it awaited word from the Indonesian government.
Newmont Mining Corp., which had previously shown interest in Busang, said Monday it was preoccupied with a takeover bid for Santa Fe Pacific Gold Corp.
Bre-X closed down C10 cents (8 cents) to C$20.05 ($14.80), topping the list of most active stocks on the Toronto Stock Exchange. Barrick fell C15 cents (11.7 cents) to C$40.05 ($29.67) in Toronto and by 12.5 cents to $29.375 on the New York Stock Exchange.
