Confusion whirled around Canada's Bre-X Minerals Ltd on Wednesday after Indonesia's mines minister said the government canceled parliamentary approval for Bre-X's application for essential contracts of work for the huge Busang gold deposit.
Bre-X asked that its stock be halted on the Toronto Stock Exchange on Wednesday morning so company officials could explain the news to the public, said Neil Winchester, head of surveillance at the Toronto exchange.
Trading in Bre-X was also halted on Nasdaq.
Bre-X had not yet released a statement late in Wednesday's trading session, leaving investors and analysts trying to assess the impact of the minister's statements on Bre-X's future.
"Does Bre-X lose everything? We have no idea," said gold analyst Catherine Gignac. "It's very unclear. We have to sit tight and wait for news out of Jakarta. There are many options open to the government right now."
Earlier on Wednesday, Indonesian Mines and Energy Minister Ida Bagus Sudjana spoke to reporters about Bre-X's application for vital contracts of work for Busang.
"We cancel it. The Bre-X contract of work will be processed from the beginning," he said.
The secretary-general of the ministry, Umar Said, told a parliamentary commission hearing that the government was checking into representations Bre-X had made to North American regulatory authorities.
"I don't have an answer on what it means," said Vince Borg, a spokesman for Toronto-based Barrick Gold Corp .
Barrick has been negotiating with Bre-X to form a joint venture to operate Busang after the Indonesian government asked the two companies to work out a deal.
The move has irked Bre-X shareholders and other major gold companies wanting to bid on the 57 million-ounce deposit, but there were rumors on Wednesday that the Indonesian government may be considering an open bidding process.
"We need to clarify what this means," said Borg. "We are seeking to asctertain from both Bre-X and the Indonesian Mines Ministry what impact the parliamentary committee will have on our negotations."
Barrick, the world's third biggest gold producer, fell C$2.35 ($1.70) to C$38.90 ($28.55) on the Toronto Stock Exchange on Wednesday and by 1-7/8 to 28-3/8 on the New York Stock Exchange.
A deal to control Busang would take Barrick a long way to achieving its goal of becoming the world's biggest gold producer.
Bre-X has a contract of work for the Busang I area of the property on the island of Borneo. But Busang I contains only an estimated 2.6 million ounces of gold, with the bulk of the precious metal in two adjoining lots, Busang II and Busang III, for which it needs contracts of work to explore and develop.
The permits were held up this autumn because of an ownership dispute between Bre-X and one of its Indonesian partners over the Busang property.
