North America's major gold companies are waging an expensive battle to win the coveted title of world's biggest gold producer.
"We want more of the action," said Hugh Leggatt, spokesman for Vancouver-based gold firm Placer Dome Inc.. "We want to be positioned in the industry as a bigger player."
Placer Dome has made a $600 million bid for Highlands Gold Ltd. of Papua New Guinea and the 25 percent of Placer Pacific Ltd.  it does not already own.
The company also plans to raise $300 million through a preferred share issue and sell off some small Canadian mine properties.
Placer also has its eye on Bre-X Minerals Ltd., a Calgary, Alberta-based exploration company that discovered what could become one of the world's largest gold mines, the Busang deposit in Indonesia.
But Bre-X is also crucial to Barrick Gold Corp.'s plan to become the world's biggest gold company.
Toronto-based Barrick is already the the world's most profitable gold company and North America's biggest, but it wants to surpass Anglo American Corp. of South Africa Ltd. and Gold Fields of South Africa Ltd. to be the world's largest.
Barrick, through skilful navigation of Indonesian politics, appears to have Bre-X within its grasp. Jakarta has asked the two companies to form a joint venture to develop the 57 million ounce Busang deposit, with Barrick controlling 75 percent.
Denver-based Newmont Mining Corp. was interested in Bre-X, but when Barrick appeared to gain the upper hand, Newmont turned its sights to Santa Fe Pacific Gold Corp., a mid-tier gold company.
Although Newmont seems to have lost out on its stock swap offer for Santa Fe to a $2.3 billion competing bid from Homestake Mining Co., analysts said Newmont was still hunting for other takeover targets.
"This is a very capital-intensive industry and it's becoming a global industry," Newmont spokesman Doug Hock said in an interview.
"In order to compete, you have to have large resources to do that. What you see is the larger players becoming bigger in order to compete."
Homestake is poised to become North America's second-biggest gold company after Barrick if its takeover of Santa Fe succeeds.
Major gold companies are under pressure from their shareholders to keep gold reserves growing, analysts said.
"If one company gets big, they have a lot of clout in the marketplace to acquire properties or resources," said gold analyst Michael Fowler of brokerage Levesque Beaubien Geoffrion.
With gold bullion prices in a steep decline, the share prices of many mid-tier companies have been hit, making takeovers cheaper, Fowler said.
But he said the current leaders of the gold world, the South Africans, were not caught up in the recent consolidation.
"It looks as though they're losing out to the North Americans," said Fowler. "They're behind the eight-ball really."
North American gold producers were geared to react aggressively and quickly, but the South African producers concentrated more on paying dividends, he said. "They don't move very fast."
Analysts said this round of deal-making was far from over as major gold companies fought it out to satisfy their shareholders' thirst for growth.
Analysts said possible future takeover targets included large mid-tier producers such as Dayton Mining Corp., Battle Mountain Gold Co., Cambior Inc. and Echo Bay Mines Ltd..
