Canada's Bre-X Minerals Ltd and Barrick Gold Corp are still trying to forge a joint venture to mine the spectacular Busang gold discovery in Indonesia, despite a cloud of uncertainty over the rights to the deposit Bre-X's chief executive David Walsh said.
Progress in the negotiations with Barrick is slow, Walsh told Reuters in a telephone interview on Thursday.
"We're moving ahead, albeit at a snail's pace," he said, adding that legal issues stood in the way of a full agreement. "We're trying to get them to appreciate our views and the legal stance that we've taken," he said.
Last month, the Indonesian government advised Bre-X to form a joint venture with Toronto-based gold giant Barrick to operate Busang. The government requested a deal by December 4, but the two companies announced after the deadline that several issues were still outstanding.
Since then, the Indonesian government has raised doubts about Bre-X's grip on Busang, which is estimated to contain at least 57 million ounces of gold, worth around $21 billion at today's prices.
"The government has stopped processing the previous application for contracts of work by Bre-X because of various problems," Umar Said, Indonesia's secretary-general of mines, told Reuters in Jakarta on Thursday. "Therefore the previous application by Bre-X that has been delayed must be stopped and must be said to have been canceled."
He said Bre-X and Barrick must jointly submit new applications for contracts of work on the deposit.
Without contracts of work granted by the Indonesian government, Bre-X cannot proceed to exploit the find
But Walsh defended his company, saying its permits and applications for the gold property were "in good standing."
He said two Bre-X officials met with Umar in Jakarta on Thursday and were assured everything was in line.
"The telephone call that I got from Rolie (Francisco), he was quited pleased with the meeting. He said we're making very good progress in our relationship (with the mines ministry)," Walsh said.
Bre-X spokesman Steve McAnulty tried to explain the apparent contradiction in Umar's statements. "What the government wants to do in essence is that if an agreement with Barrick is made, the existing applications will be replaced with new applications," he told Reuters
Bre-X earlier said Umar had apologized for the misunderstanding, saying his comments were "erroneously reported in a December 11 Reuters newswire article."
Peter Thomas, the Reuters company spokesman in London, said Reuters was confident the quotations in its December 11 story from Jakarta were accurate.
Despite the barrage of news releases from Bre-X on Thursday, Barrick was still seeking clarity on the situation from the Indonesian government.
"We're still seeking clarification and we want to hear directly from the government of Indonesia," Barrick spokesman Vince Borg said in Toronto. "We're not saying anything until we talk directly to the government of Indonesia."
Bre-X, too, is waiting for the Indonesian government to make a move.
Walsh said he still had high hopes that Indonesian President Suharto would open up an auction for Bre-X, allowing other major mining companies to bid on the Busang project.
He said Bre-X had not made a formal request for an auction, but "we understand that the president is reviewing the situation."
An auction would be advantageous for Bre-X shareholders and for Indonesia, he said.
"We're not soliciting offers. We are getting other phone calls," Walsh said. "I am talking to to principals of other companies."
He said he had spoken to executives at Placer Dome Inc, Newmont Mining Corp and Teck Corp.
In Vancouver, Placer Dome spokesman Hugh Leggatt said any suggestion of an open auction on Busang was encouraging. His company has made a formal request for an open bidding process.
But gold mining analyst Bill Belovay with CIBC Wood Gundy said Barrick's competitors may be trying to make a deal with Bre-X more expensive for Barrick.
"They're playing games," he said. "One has got to read between the lines."
He said Busang was so fraught with uncertainty that he has a hard time understanding why the major gold producers would be interested. "One doesn't even know what percentage (Barrick) will end up with. One doesn't even know how to keep Suharto happy," he said. "To me it's a whole big nightmare."
Investors were thoroughly confused by Thursday's developments, analysts said.
"We're getting so much information, headline after headline," said one analyst. "It's causing anxiety for everyone."
Bre-X, which has halted all day Wednesday, closed down C$0.85 at 19.80 in rapid trading on Thursday of more than 8.6 million shares. Barrick, which lost C$2.75 on Wednesday, regained C$1 on Thursday to C$39.50 in trading of more than two million shares.
