Bre-X Minerals Ltd's hold on the huge Busang gold deposit in Indonesia remained unclear Thursday after a string of statements from the company defending its rights to the find.
Calgary, Alberta-based Bre-X issued three news releases in as many hours early on Thursday about its grasp on Busang, worth at least $21 billion at today's gold prices and one of the world's biggest gold deposits.
Bre-X said its exploration permits and applications for contracts of work on Busang remained in good standing.
"Obviously significant progress is being made on all fronts toward the development of the Busang deposit," Bre-X Chief Executive David Walsh said in a statement issued from Jakarta.
Bre-X said its officials had met with Umar Said, Indonesia's secretary general of the Ministry of Mines, to clarify its status with Busang.
The company said Umar apologised for comments relating to the cancellation of permits and contract of work applications for Busang.
"The exploration permits and CoW applications for Busang II and Busang III remain in good standing," Bre-X said. Busang II contains most of the gold found so far on the property.
But earlier on Thursday, Umar repeated his comments to Reuters in Jakarta casting Bre-X's status in doubt.
Indonesian mining officials told Reuters in Jakarta that they had stopped processing Bre-X's applications for vital contracts of work on the gold find. Instead, Bre-X and Toronto-based Barrick Gold Corp. must jointly submit new applications for the permits.
"The government has stopped processing the previous application for contracts of work by Bre-X because of various problems," Umar said. "Therefore, the previous application by Bre-X that has been delayed must be stopped and must be said to have been cancelled."
While mining officials were explaining their position in Jakarta, Bre-X was issuing optimistic statements.
Bre-X said it appeared that the development of Busang was "possibly open to negotiation" and that draft documents showed it had exclusive operating rights to Busang.
The Indonesian government encouraged Bre-X in November to form a joint venture with Barrick, with Barrick getting 75 percent of the joint venture, Bre-X keeping 25 percent and the two companies granting the Indonesian government a 10 percent stake.
But Bre-X said on Thursday that "the government of Indonesia appears to be seriously reconsidering its earlier decision that would have compelled Bre-X into a partnership with Barrick."
Bre-X cited a published report that suggested Indonesian President Suharto was ready to intervene in the process.
Bre-X and Barrick said last week they reached agreement on some points to form a joint venture for Busang, but outstanding issues remained and no overall agreement had been settled.
But Bre-X was still hopeful on Thursday that the negotiations for Busang could be opened up to an auction process.
"We have believed from the outset that the best interests of the Indonesian people and their economy would best be served by a truly open negotiation process for the development of this extraordinary natural resource," Walsh said in a letter to Indonesia's Minister of Mines.
Bre-X shares were still halted on the Toronto Stock Exchange. The company requested a halt on Wednesday so it could clarify statements from Jakarta. The stock closed Tuesday at C$20.50.
