Bre-X Minerals Ltd. and Barrick Gold Corp. are trying to forge an alliance to mine the huge Busang gold deposit in Indonesia despite a cloud of uncertainty over the rights to the find, Bre-X's chief executive said Thursday.
But the negotiations with Barrick are progressing slowly, Bre-X Chief Executive Officer David Walsh told Reuters.
"We're moving ahead, albeit at a snail's pace," he said, adding that legal issues stood in the way of a full agreement. "We're trying to get them to appreciate our views and the legal stance that we've taken."
Last month the Indonesian government advised Bre-X to form a joint venture with Toronto-based Barrick to operate Busang. The government, which also requested a 10 percent stake, set a Dec. 4 deadline, but the two companies announced after that date that several issues remained outstanding.
Since then, the Indonesian government has raised doubts about Bre-X's grip on Busang, estimated to contain at least 57 million ounces of gold, worth about $21 billion at today's prices.
"The government has stopped processing the previous application for contracts of work by Bre-X because of various problems," Umar Said, Indonesia's secretary-general of mines, told Reuters in Jakarta on Thursday. "Therefore the previous application by Bre-X that has been delayed must be stopped and must be said to have been cancelled."
He said Bre-X and Barrick must jointly submit new applications for work on the deposit. Without contracts of work granted by the Indonesian government, Bre-X cannot proceed to exploit the find.
Walsh defended his company, saying its permits and applications for the gold property were "in good standing."
He said two Bre-X officials met with Umar in Jakarta Thursday and were assured everything was in line. "The telephone call that I got from Rolie (Francisco), he was quite pleased with the meeting. He said we're making very good progress in our relationship (with the mines ministry)," Walsh said.
Bre-X spokesman Steve McAnulty, explaining the apparent contradiction, said: "What the government wants to do in essence is that if an agreement with Barrick is made, the existing applications will be replaced with new applications."
Bre-X earlier said that Umar had apologised for the misunderstanding, saying his comments were "erroneously reported in a Dec. 11 Reuters newswire article." But Peter Thomas, a Reuter spokesman in London, said the international news and information company was confident the quotations in its Dec. 11 story from Jakarta were accurate.
Umar's comments to Reuters Thursday were essentially repeating what he said on Wednesday.
Despite a barrage of statements from Bre-X on Thursday, Barrick was still seeking clarification on the situation from the Indonesian government.
"We're still seeking clarification and we want to hear directly from the government of Indonesia," Barrick spokesman Vince Borg said in Toronto. "We're not saying anything until we talk directly to the government of Indonesia."
Bre-X, too, is waiting for the Indonesian government to make a move.
Walsh said he still had high hopes that Indonesian President Suharto would open up an auction for Busang, allowing other mining companies to bid on the project. He said Bre-X had not made a formal request for an auction, but added: "We understand that the president is reviewing the situation."
An auction would be advantageous for Bre-X shareholders and for Indonesia, he said. "We're not soliciting offers. We are getting other phone calls," Walsh said. "I am talking to principals of other companies."
He said he had spoken to executives at Placer Dome Inc., Newmont Mining Corp. and Teck Corp.
In Vancouver, Placer Dome spokesman Hugh Leggatt said any suggestion of an open auction on Busang was encouraging. His company has made a formal request for an open bidding process.
But gold mining analyst Bill Belovay of CIBC Wood Gundy said Barrick's competitors may be trying to make a deal with Bre-X more expensive for Barrick. "They're playing games," he said. "One has got to read between the lines."
Belovay said Busang was so fraught with uncertainty that he has a hard time understanding why the major gold producers would be interested. "One doesn't even know what percentage (Barrick) will end up with. One doesn't even know how to keep Suharto happy," he said. "To me it's a whole big nightmare."
Investors were confused by Thursday's developments, analysts said.
Bre-X, whose stock was halted all day on Wednesday, fell 85 cents to C$19.80 in heavy trading of more than 8.6 million shares. Barrick, which lost C$2.75 on Wednesday, regained C$1 to C$39.50 in trading of more than 2 million shares.
