The fate of one of the world's most glittering gold finds landed back in the hands of the Indonesian government on Monday after two Canadian mining concerns said they finally agreed on a plan of joint development.
Canadian gold giant Barrick Gold Corp. and Bre-X Minerals Ltd. ended weeks of speculation on whether they could work together when they submitted a proposal to develop the huge Busang deposit, which contains at least 57 million ounces of gold.
"We've made a submission...which says we can work together if the government can satisfy requests by both parties on a couple of items," Bre-X chief executive officer David Walsh said in a phone interview from New York.
"Within the document, there were certain concerns that we've asked the government to give us guidance on," said Walsh. "They are concerns from both parties."
He would not say what the concerns were, but he said price was not an issue.
The Indonesian government told the two companies in November to form a joint venture, with Barrick gaining 75 percent and Bre-X keeping 25 percent. The two companies were also asked to give the government a 10 percent cut.
The joint submission "is in accord with the government parameters," said Barrick spokesman Vince Borg. Neither company would say what the terms or structure of the proposed deal were or whether Bre-X shareholders would have a chance to vote on it.
They said a government response was expected in due course.
The government has twice extended a deadline for the two companies, with the latest extension being the end of December.
"This to me looks like they're doing what (Indonesian president) Suharto asked," said gold analyst Rick Cohen with Goepel Shields in Vancouver.
"There wasn't much else Bre-X could have done at this point."
The government's statements have angered Bre-X shareholders and hurt the company's once high-flying stock on Canadian stock exchanges.
One group of shareholders has hired high profile Texas lawyers to make sure shareholders get a fair deal.
"Talk of lawsuits is premature. We've got to see an offer first," said Greg Chorny, a retired lawyer who lives near Toronto and is spearheading the initiative. "We'll see what they have on the table, judge it and react appropriately."
Until Monday, Bre-X had been optimistic that the Indonesian government would endorse an open bidding process for Busang. Mining giants Placer Dome Inc., Newmont Mining Corp. and Teck Corp. have expressed interest.
But the statements from Barrick and Bre-X on Monday suggested there was little hope of an auction process, analysts said.
"We still remain hopeful," Placer Dome spokesman Hugh Leggatt said. "It's not over till it's over."
Investors appeared to be dumping Bre-X shares on Monday and picking up Barrick shares to participate in Busang, analysts said.
Barrick stock was up C$1.35 to C$40.15 while Bre-X fell C$1 to C$20 by late afternoon trading on the Toronto Stock Exchange.
