Three Canadian mining companies are caught up in a quarrel over what do with the Petaquilla copper-gold project in Panama.
Adrian Resources Ltd, a Vancouver-based exploration company, Teck Corp, a big Vancouver-based miner, and troubled Toronto-based Inmet Mining Corp are partners in the deposit.
Adrian, which controls 52 percent of the find, says that a feasibility study on the property done by Teck was "incomplete and not in compliance with existing arrangements."  
Teck had an option to acquire up to 26 percent of the development by funding a feasibility study and eventually operating and arranging to fund the mine.
But Adrian said Teck has not filled the first requirement to move forward with its option.
"They had a job to do and they didn't complete it," Doug Turnbull, a consulting geologist for Adrian, said in an interview on Tuesday.
"Our stand right now is, they do not have their option until they complete their obligations," Turnbull said.  
But Teck says there was nothing wrong with its feasibility study.
"The study was a comprehensive assessment of the project, but...the economics would make a production commitment difficult under present metal price conditions," Teck's senior vice president of mining operations, Michael Lipkewich, said in a statement.  
Teck hopes to resolve its difficulties with Adrian and work with the junior company and Inmet to continue exploration on the property in search of higher grade ore, Teck's vice-president of corporate affairs, George Stevens, said in an interview.
The ore at Petaquilla so far is low grade, he said.
"The capital costs are higher than we had both anticipated a couple of years ago," he added.
He said Teck's agreement with Adrian allows Teck to defer a production decision twice before Adrian "can make us walk."  
"Their problem is they came out with a very optimistic scoping study," Stevens said. He said Adrian had not revised its projections.
According to Adrian, the study said the property had a geological resource of 3.74 billion tonnes of ore, including 31.8 billion pounds of copper and 9.8 million ounces of gold. The study said the proven reserves came to 1.46 billion tonnes of ore containing 13.74 billion pounds of copper and 3.17 million ounces of gold.
Teck's numbers were considerably lower but the company had not done sufficient infill drilling, Adrian's Turnbull said.  
The spat has knocked Adrian's stock down from C$3.85 on Friday to C$2.07 by Tuesday on the Toronto Stock Exchange.
Caught in the middle of the dispute is Inmet, which has just written off a series of mining interests and is struggling to regain investor confidence. Inmet controls 48 percent of Petaquilla.
"Under the current metal price conditions, we agree with Teck," Inmet's chief financial officer Richard Ross said in an interview.
But he said the company did not have anything to add to the dispute.
((Reuters Toronto Bureau (416) 941-8100))
