The Indonesian gold bug is nibbling away at Inco Ltd, the world's biggest nickel company.
The company whose name has become synonymous with nickel is turning its sights to gold, copper and zinc exploration in Indonesia, Africa, Canada's Far North, Turkey and Brazil.
"Our target exploration area is Indonesia," Bob Horn, Inco's vice-president of exploration, said in a recent interview.
"We've reassessed what we're doing, we've refocused on our work," he said.  
"When we got rid of TVX, it was sold at a substantial profit...It was not a strategic move to get out of gold. It was a strategic move to get out of that particular company," Horn said.
"There's nothing wrong with gold. If it makes money, we'll be there."
Inco does not have any plans to go head-to-head with the world's huge gold producers, however.
"They always pay too much, but if we come across a situation where we find gold, we'll go for it, like we have in Indonesia," Horn said.  
The company has budgeted US$24.8 million for field exploration in 1997, slightly less than the US$25 million in 1996. But three recent alliances mean up to an extra US$15 million will be devoted to exploration through the junior partners, Horn said.
In addition to its alliance with Colony Pacific, Inco also has an arrangement with Carlin Resources Corp to explore in Africa, and a third deal in the works.
The company has just about all the nickel it needs with continued exploration in Canada at the huge and expanding Voisey's Bay deposit in remote Labrador as well as growing mines in Thomson, Manitoba and Sudbury, Ontario.
Instead, Inco hopes to grow through an exploration focus on copper, zinc and gold, Horn said.
In 1995, Inco did not produce any zinc, but it produced 240 million pounds of copper, 3.775 million pounds of cobalt, 60,000 troy ounces of gold and 403 million pounds of nickel.  
"We already market copper, so it's no big deal to us," said Horn. "And the technology for zinc is pretty well the same. We don't have to develop any new expertise to get into zinc."
But gold?
Inco got rid of most of its gold in 1993, when it sold its controlling interest in TVX Gold Inc. Gold production since then has been minimal.
Inco kept many of its gold experts on staff, however, and Horn said the company has all the expertise it needs to mine gold.  
Analysts said Inco is wise to use its solid status and its 28-year history in Indonesia to explore the vast mineral potential there.
Inco, which has a huge nickel operation in Indonesia, has several exploration projects there and recently struck deals with Highlands Gold Ltd and Canadian explorer Colony Pacific Explorations Ltd to step up its search for gold and copper.
Alliances with smaller companies will be key to Inco's exploration in the future, Horn said.
