Canadian nickel giant Falconbridge Ltd has a growing appetite for expansion and is poised for growth through acquisition and exploration, the company's new chief executive officer said in an interview.
"The appetite of this company is much higher than what it used to be," Oyvind Hushovd told Reuters on Wednesday. "Falconbridge is in very good shape financially today, which means that we have the ability to grow."
Hushovd, 46, replaced Frank Pickard as chief executive this month after Pickard died suddenly at the age of 63 during a business trip in Chile this September.
Hushovd, originally from Norway, has worked for Falconbridge for more than 22 years.
He spent the past year and a half working closely with Pickard in the position of executive vice-president and was chairman of the steering committee that put together a strategic plan to carry Falconbridge into the next century.
"I don't see a need to revolutionize Falconbridge," he said. "The backbone of Falconbridge is nickel, and copper is another leg of Falconbridge. It will probably be like that in the future."
However, Hushovd is not content simply to sit back and let the long-term strategic plan unfold.
The plan calls for Falconbridge to double its annual nickel production to 200,000 tonnes and triple its copper production to about 500,000 tonnes a year, within 15 years.
To do that, Falconbridge needs to find growth opportunities, especially since the company lost a bid to take over the huge Voisey's Bay nickel, copper and cobalt deposit in remote Labrador, said Hushovd.
Ongoing work in New Caledonia, Ivory Coast and Zambia should complement plans to start producing nickel by the end of next year at the Raglan project in Quebec and plans to produce copper by 1998 at the Collahuasi joint venture project in Chile, Hushovd said.
In Zambia, Falconbridge joined a consortium in November to develop the Konkola Deep copper mine, in which Falconbridge is partners with South Africa's Gencor Ltd and Anglo American Corp of South Africa Ltd.
In New Caledonia in the South Pacific, Falconbridge is poised to gain access to nickel reserves to supply a nickel plant planned in the north of the country. The board of France's Eramet on Thursday said it had agreed to reallocate its mining reserves in New Caledonia, which would give Falconbridge access to Eramet's Koniambo field.
Hushovd does not intend not stop there.
"Falconbridge has always been very strong in exploration," he said. "We felt we lacked the business development infrastructure."
So last summer, the company set up a business development group, to search out growth opportunities either through exploration or acquisition.
While Hushovd would not hint at specific acquisition targets, he stressed, "I want properties that are not only profitable today but are also profitable in the future."
In any future acquisitions, Falconbridge can probably count on support from its powerful majority shareholder, Noranda Inc, which owns 46 percent.
"We have a big owner, which means that hopefully we can pursue things that might be tough to pursue on our own," Hushovd said. "We can have a bigger appetite than the company on its own would have."
Hushovd said he had no immediate plans to boost the company's share price, which peaked at C$32.75 in May but is currently trading around C$29.15.
He noted that the stock normally reflects the nickel price, which has failed to meet expectations in 1996.
"I think we all had very high hopes for nickel this year, and the market did not turn out the way that we had forecasted," he said.
As for next year, "I feel it's difficult to give a prediction at the present time. Fundamentally I do believe we're going to see better prices in 97 than we did in 96," Hushovd said.
((Reuters Toronto Bureau 416 941-8100))
