The world's gold producers will likely pay dearly for the steep fall in the bullion price and the deep uncertainty overhanging the gold market.
If the bullion price weakness continues or worsens, gold miners face lower profits, money-losing operations, closed mines, slashed exploration budgets and plunging share prices.
Analysts predict smaller companies will be increasingly vulnerable to takeovers as industry conditions get rougher.  
"Earnings are going to be terrible," said gold analyst Michael Fowler at Levesque Beaubien Geoffrion in Toronto. "There have already been some mines that have shut and there could be a few more. And consolidation is likely to continue."
Gold, which was fixed at $358.55 an ounce in London on Friday, has lost more than $13 since the start of the new year, and few analysts believe the decline is finished.
The low price has already taken its toll on Canadian gold stocks, knocking the Toronto Stock Exchange's heavily weighted gold index down more than nine percent since Dec. 30.  
At least two companies have announced shutdowns of marginal mines recently. Toronto-based TVX Gold Inc. said earlier this week it would close its Casa Berardi gold mine in Quebec. In December, Vancouver-based Placer Dome Inc. said it would sell two small mines in Quebec and stop work at its high-cost Paymaster mine in Northern Ontario.
"That can certainly happen again," said Jim Taylor, mining analyst with Yorkton Securities in London. "The high-cost producers are certainly vulnerable."  
The effect will begin to show in fourth-quarter earnings, and earnings in the first quarter of 1997 will certainly reflect the low bullion price, according to analysts.
If Merrill Lynch's predictions of an average 1997 gold price of between $370 and $375 an ounce hold true, it could spell earnings trouble for many producers.
Merrill Lynch analyst David Christensen predicted that U.S. gold firm Homestake Mining Co.'s earnings for the year would drop to about 13 cents a share if gold averaged $370. Homestake would earn 22 cents a share at a gold price of $385.  
Companies that do not hedge their gold sales -- such as Homestake, Echo Bay Mines Ltd., Battle Mountain Gold Co. and Agnico Eagle Mines Ltd. -- were especially vulnerable, Christensen said. Other analysts mentioned Royal Oak Mines Inc. and Pegasus Gold Inc. as prime victims of a lower price.
"A surprisingly large number of these companies are marginal -- companies that you wouldn't traditionally think of being marginal producers," he said.  
Companies that rely on the spot price of gold "are fully exposed to a decline in the gold price," Christensen noted. "They're all either spot sellers or don't have significant forward selling. They'll all be negatively affected in terms of earnings and cash flow."
One exception was U.S.-based Newmont Mining Corp., which would likely see earnings rise in 1997 because of projects ready to start this year, he added. His projection did not take into account the potential acquisition of Santa Fe Pacific Gold Corp..  
Even companies with solid hedging programs, such as Canada-based Barrick Gold Corp., will likely find their share prices hit along with the gold price.
"This is a sentiment swing," said gold analyst Manford Mallory with Research Capital in Toronto. Investors do not usually differentiate between hedgers and non-hedgers when the gold price starts to drop, he added.
Although some analysts believe a few more marginal projects could bite the dust if the gold price stays low, most say the production effects of lower gold prices will become apparent in decisions to delay development.  
"Most of these companies will continue to produce as long as they are cash flow positive as opposed to earnings positive," said Christensen.
But as earnings start to drop, one of the first casualties will likely be exploration budgets. While some 1997 exploration commitments have been made, high-cost companies could find themselves slashing any flexible plans in order to cut their losses.  
Exploration companies will become more vulnerable to takeover moves from larger companies with strong cash flow, analysts said. As the low price of gold discourages investors, junior companies will find it more difficult to raise money for exploration programs.
"The capital is drying up," said analyst Daniel McConvey of Lehman Brothers in New York.
The smaller companies may well see their share prices drop, making it cheaper for companies laden with cash to swallow them.  
Toronto-based Kinross Gold Corp. a mid-tier producer, said it plans to take advantage of the sector weakness to expand.
"I would classify us as a predator," Kinross spokesman Gord McReary said in an interview. "We think we're in a very privileged position. We're in the kind of strange situation where maybe some of the bad news for the sector can be good news for us," he said.  
Gold equities in Australia may also be knocked down by lower gold prices, said analyst Taylor. But since many Australian companies hedge their sales, earnings will not be hurt as much as among some companies in North America.
In South Africa, however, analysts expect first-quarter earnings to be trampled by low gold prices.
In Mexico, mining giants Industrias Penoles and Grupo Mexico will probably not alter their expansion plans for polymetallic mines with high gold contents but will see slightly differing bottom-line impacts.
