Shares in British commercial television (ITV) broadcaster Yorkshire-Tyne Tees slid on Tuesday despite an 80 percent rise in interim profit.
Pre-tax profit for the six months to June 30 rose to 13.3 million pounds ($20.76 million) from 7.4 million pounds in the same period a year ago. Interim dividend was increased to 6.8 pence from 3.7 pence.
The company said that the improvement had come despite a "very disappointing" advertising sales performance.
The northern English company, based in the city of Leeds, said that a smaller than expected increase in total ITV advertising revenues had been compounded by a slight decline in its share of that income.
The sales shortfall was, however, more than compensated by higher programme sales and the effects of cost controls.
Yorkshire shares had fallen 30p to 1210 by 1440 GMT. Bid speculation has helped them to power ahead in recent months from a 1996 low of 679p.
The decline was hastened after Yorkshire chairman and chief executive Ward Thomas said that he hoped British media and leisure company Granada would hold off from mounting an expected takeover bid.
Share analysts said that Yorkshire's comments on advertising and Granada had pushed the price lower in what was already a weak London market.
Granada, which already operates two ITV licences, has built a 24 percent stake in Yorkshire. It had been expected to follow through with a takeover bid following a relaxation in media ownership laws.
But Granada, which earlier this year acquired Britain's leading Forte hotel chain for 3.9 billion pounds, has recently given the impression of going cool on the bid.
Duncan Lewis, head of Granada's Media Division, was last month reported as saying Granada may look at other ITV targets.
Thomas dismissed the reported comments as a "fairly puerile attempt to get the (Yorkshire) share price down".
But he said any delay in a Granada bid would give Yorkshire time to rebuild its share of ITV advertising revenue and to make progress in its campaign for a reduction in its licence payments. These totalled 33 million pounds in the first half.
He suggested that full value for Yorkshire shares in any bid could be as high as 18 pounds. ($1=.6406 Pound)
