Britain's Express Newspapers, seeking to halt a long-term sales decline, announced plans on Tuesday to shed around 85 jobs as it puts its Daily and Sunday Express national titles under a single editorial team.
Express Newspapers, part of the recently enlarged United News &amp; Media empire, said it would invest around 10 million pounds ($15.6 million) in an effort to improve the quality of the two ailing newspapers.
The planned job cuts will cost in the region of six million pounds in redundancy charges, an Express spokesman said.
The Daily Express has average sales of around 1.2 million copies, a far cry from its heyday in the 1960s when it had circulation of over four million and could boast with some justification of being "The Voice of Britain".
The Daily Mail, its rival in the mid-market area, sells more than two million copies daily.
Express Newspapers plans to offer colour supplements on Saturdays and Sundays plus a seven-day-a-week pull-out sports section. The number of pages in the titles will be increased and more of them will be in colour.
Richard Addis, editor of The Daily Express, will take charge of the papers seven days a week. Sunday Express editor Sue Douglas, appointed only nine months ago, has resigned.
The establishment of a single editorial team is intended to make the changes easier to implement and to maximise cross readership of the two newspapers. The Sunday title also sells just over 1.2 million copies.
The reorganisation confirms that United News &amp; Media plans to hang on to the titles and seek to turn them around.
There had been speculation that the company might seek to divest its national titles following its merger earlier this year with MAI Plc, the television and financial services group.
United News also owns the down-market Daily Star. The Star is unaffected by the changes.
"This significant new investment will improve the quality and coverage of the Express titles seven days a week and bring major benefits to our readers," said United News chief executive Clive Hollick, who joined the company from MAI.
"Bold marketing initiatives will be launched to support our new products. This step confirms United's determination to revitalise and strenghten its national newspapers," he added.
United News shares closed 18p lower on Tuesday in a London market depressed by U.S. interest rate fears and the hostilities in Iraq. ($1=.6406 Pound)
