Britain's Ladbroke Group Plc and Hilton Hotels Corp (HHC) of the U.S on Monday agreed to reunite the Hilton brand worldwide in a deal which they said could be worth tens of millions of dollars annually.
The worldwide alliance signed on Monday covers 400 hotels in 49 countries and unifies the world-renowned brand for the first time since 1964.
HHC president Stephen Bollenbach said the two companies had explored every possible avenue in their talks but had concluded that a worldwide alliance provided the benefits they were seeking without the complications of a merger.
Ladbroke chief executive Peter George said the agreement should be worth "tens of millions of dollars per annum" to the two companies.
"Our people can really get on with the business of reuniting the two parts of Hilton," he told a news conference, describing Hilton as one of the world's great brand names.
HHC owns the Hilton name in the U.S. while Ladbroke holds the rights everywhere else through its Hilton International (HIC) subsidiary.
The Hilton hotel chain was founded in 1919 when Conrad Hilton opened his first hotel in the Texan town of Cisco. In 1946 Hilton became the first hotel company to list on the New York Stock Exchange.
HIC was spun off in 1964 and acquired three years later by Trans World Airlines. It was eventually bought by Ladbroke some 10 years ago.
The companies said that the deal covering sales and marketing, loyalty programmes and reservations would drive revenues and dispel the confusion that has surrounded the two groups in recent years.
As expected, the agreements provide for taking cross shareholdings of up to 20 percent. HHC said it intended to acquire a five percent stake in Ladbroke in due course.
George said that Ladbroke had no current plans to take a stake in HHC but would invest in HHC gaming projects.
He said that HHC could build its Ladbroke stake either through buying shares on the market or taking up new equity, or a combination of the two methods.
The two companies announced an outline agreement to unify the Hilton brand last August and share analysts said the announcement on Monday contained few surprises.
Ladbroke shares ended 1p lower at 232.5p but have appreciated some 10 percent since that August announcement.
Analyst Greg Feehely of Kleinwort Benson Securities said the deal could add 15 million pounds ($25 million) to Ladbroke's operating profit next year.
($1=.5974 Pound)
