Newcastle United said on Thursday that it would seek to raise up to 50 million pounds ($84 million) when it joins the growing band of British soccer clubs on the stock market.
But the plan for a flotation this spring does not mean that new team manager Kenny Dalglish, who was appointed to succeed Kevin Keegan on Tuesday, is about to embark on a spending spree.
"We believe we have arguably one of the best playing squads in Europe and we are not entering a phase of substantial incremental investment," joint chief executive Mark Corbidge told Reuters.
The announcement follows a dramatic few days for the northeast English club which hired former Liverpool and Blackburn boss Dalglish after Keegan's resignation last week.
Keegan had spent around 60 million pounds in recent seasons as he turned Newcastle into a potent footballing force but he failed to win any major honours.
Potential investors will be reassured that Sir John Hall, whose millions have helped to bring stars such as England's Alan Shearer, Frenchman David Ginola and Colombian Faustino Asprilla to Newcastle, is to remain as chairman of the club.
But NatWest Markets, which is organising the flotation, said a new non-executive chairman would be named for the holding company.
Property magnate Hall, whose Cameron Hall investment company owns a controlling stake in the club, plans to devote his time to developing a centre of excellence for young players.
The club plans to raise 40-50 million pounds through the issue of new shares and analysts expect the value of the club as a whole to total some 160 million pounds when it joins the stock exchange. Trading in the shares is likely to begin by April.
That would make it the second biggest British listed club, behind English champions Manchester United, valued at in excess of 400 million pounds.
The trend for soccer club flotations appears to be spreading across Europe, with reports in Italy on Thursday that European champions Juventus, controlled by Fiat's Agnelli family, would soon seek a market listing. However, the club owners later denied the report.
Paul Deakin, a director of corporate finance at NatWest Markets, said that the Hall family would remain major stakeholders after the flotation.
Asked about the use of the flotation proceeds, Deakin said that some would be used to pay off debts but that cash would be left over to fund the club's future development.
"The money has not been earmarked for one cause, there is a lot of flexibility," he said, adding that the club planned to invest in its commercial activity and the centre of excellence.
Deakin dismissed suggestions that Newcastle might have to issue more shares to pay for a planned move to a new stadium, which is likely to cost 65 million pounds.
Newcastle revealed that its interests in local rugby union, ice hockey and basketball teams had been sold last July to a company controlled by some of its directors.
It said they were sold because they were at an early stage in their commercial development and would require substantial further investment before producing a significant return.
Newcastle United reported a group operating profit from continuing operations of 5.9 million pounds for the year to end-July 1996 on 29 million pounds of turnover. However, that profit excluded the huge cost of transfer fees.
At least 10 percent of new shares will be available to Newcastle's fans, for a minimum investment of 500 pounds.
The club is still in contention for the premier league title plus the F.A. and UEFA Cups this season. Newcastle have not won the championship for 70 years but Dalglish is a winner, having led Liverpool and Blackburn to the title.
