The plight of English soccer team Millwall provides a cautionary tale for investors planning to buy into the growing number of clubs joining the stock market, share analysts said on Wednesday.
Millwall's financial crisis was likely to make potential investors more careful about which stocks they pick in what is a much-hyped and increasingly crowded sector, analysts said.
Millwall Holdings Plc, owners of the London second division club, have called in administrators to run the company while it seeks to put together a financial rescue package.
Shares in Millwall remain suspended on the London Stock Exchange. They were worth just 4p each before their suspension on Tuesday, having slipped away from a price of 20p when they were issued seven years ago.
"This is a warning shot across the bows. Just because it is a soccer stock does not mean that it will outperform the market," said Vinay Bedi of stockbrokers Wise Speke.
Shares in premier league clubs Manchester United, Tottenham Hotspur and Caspian, owners of Leeds United, have almost trebled over the past year.
Revenue from a television deal with satellite broadcaster BSkyB and the anticipated riches from the introduction of pay-per-view in the coming years have driven growth.
An increasing number of clubs have come to the market to raise new funds and widen ownership.
Premier league glamour club Newcastle United were the latest to join the trend, announcing last week that they aimed to raise up to 50 million pounds ($83 million) through flotation.
But smaller clubs such as West Bromwich Albion have recently joined the junior AIM (Alternative Investment Market) market and their first division rivals Birmingham City and Charlton Athletic are also planning to float.
Analysts point out that there is clearly a greater risk in investing in clubs outside the premier league.
"It is not uncommon for clubs to run into financial problems but Millwall are the first time it has happened to a quoted company," said Nick Batram, of brokers Greig, Middleton.
"Fans will buy stocks in their favourite clubs because they want to become more involved. But institutional investors must look beyond the name and at the commercial strategy," he said.
"Millwall show that you can't run a lower division club on a premier division cost base," he said, noting that Millwall's wage bill of four million pounds last year was as high as that of premier league Southampton.
Millwall made a pre-tax loss of 2.9 million pounds in the year to end-May 1996 as the club tumbled to relegation after a disastrous run of form in the second half of the season.
The success of the premier league over the last five years has widened the gulf between the 20-club elite and the 72 members of the three lower divisions.
A study of the 1994/95 season by accountants Deloitte &amp; Touche showed that the premier league generated almost 70 percent of soccer's total income of 468 million.
But Batram said that lower division clubs, which have their own separate BSkyB deal, could still prove good bets.
"You can be a profitable and successful club in the lower divisions if you have the right cost base," he said.
"The key is for clubs to build their business slowly. But it's hard to do that as all fans want their team to be in the premier league." ($1=.6021 Pound)
