The $10.5 billion bid by Hilton Hotels Corp (HHC) for U.S. rival ITT Corp reduces the likelihood of an HHC takeover of British partner Ladbroke Group Plc, share analysts said on Tuesday.
"The Ladbroke share price is off as people had been expecting HHC to take more than a five percent stake in Ladbroke and maybe eventually bid for the company," said one analyst.
"It looks as if they now have other fish to fry," he added.
Ladbroke shares were 1.5p lower at 227p in heavy trading at 1220 GMT on Tuesday, having earlier dipped below 223p.
HHC, America's largest hotel and gaming company, announced in the U.S. on Monday that it was bidding for ITT, owner of the Sheraton hotel chain and Caesars World Casinos.
A Ladbroke spokesman said on Tuesday that the move should have no immediate effect on a worldwide alliance it signed with HHC earlier this month.
The deal reunited the Hilton hotel brand worldwide for the first time since 1964. HHC owns the rights to the name in the U.S. while hotel and betting group Ladbroke held them in the rest of the world.
The two companies can take a share of up to 20 percent in each other under the deal and HHC has said it intends to take a five percent stake in Ladbroke "in due course".
Leisure industry analyst Fraser Ramzan of Lehman Brothers said that a HHC/ITT merger would prove a mixed blessing for investors in Ladbroke.
"A bid from HHC could seem less likely," he said, noting that bid speculation had been supporting Ladbroke's share price.
"On the positive side, if HHC succeed then there is a much larger park of hotel properties which could be brought under one reservation system," he said. ITT's operations include 415 hotels and 130,000 rooms worldwide.
Greg Feehely of Dresdner Kleinwort Benson said that he expected HHC to take a five percent stake in Ladbroke after the British company released its results in March.
He said that it may now take longer for HHC to raise its stake in Ladbroke to 20 percent. However, he said that Ladbroke shares should remain around current levels.
"We are not going to see the stock coming off much. It is still solidly underpinned and there may be potential for Ladbroke to invest in ITT's non-U.S. assets," he said.
Feehely said that a merger between HHC/ITT and Ladbroke remained a medium-term possibility.
"At the turn of the decade all this might just be one company," he said.
