Michael Grade, who shocked the British media world this week when he announced he was quitting Channel 4 television, said on Wednesday he was to head First Leisure Plc.
Grade is to become executive chairman of the company by July 31. Current chief executive John Conlan plans to leave the business by the end of the year.
Founded in 1982 by Grade's uncle, Lord Delfont, First Leisure operates a range of leisure business from bowling alleys and bars to the Blackpool Tower tourist site.
"I think I have a feel for what entertains the British public," said Grade when asked about his new role at a company where he is already non-executive chairman.
Grade, 53, announced on Monday that he was quitting as chief executive of the Channel 4 commercial televison network after almost a decade in the job.
Grade, who comes from a leading British showbusiness family, won plaudits at Channel 4 for building the station's audience share to more than 10 percent while maintaining its reputation for distinctive programming.
"The fear I had was that I would get stale," said Grade, commenting on his decision to leave the world of television.
Grade said he wanted to "quit while he was ahead" at Channel 4, having apparently seen off attempts to privatise the station and won the battle to end a system of payments to the ITV commercial television companies.
His move is certain to ensure a higher profile for First Leisure, a company with a market capitalisation of only around 600 million pounds.
The company had pre-tax profit of 43.7 million pounds ($71 million) in the year to end-October on turnover of 183 million.
First Leisure shares added 18.5p to 359.5p on Wednesday as the market welcomed news of Grade's appointment.
But Grade said "continuity not change" would be his motto.
"Anyone who is expecting radical change will be disappointed," he said. "We have a major development programme ongoing. That is where the growth of the company is coming from. That is the strategy."
First Leisure is spending 55 million pounds this year alone on new bars, nightclubs and fitness centres, part of an investment programme worth a total of 100 million pounds.
Channel Four has helped to produce hit British movies such as Four Weddings And A Funeral and Trainspotting in recent years and there had been speculation that Grade might seek to take First Leisure into the movie business.
However, Grade denied press speculation that the company planned to bid for Britain's Rank Film Distributors.
Grade, who was on an annual salary of around 450,000 pounds at Channel Four, would not be drawn on how much he would earn at First Leisure.
Conlan, who denied he had been forced out of the company, was paid some 400,000 pounds in 1995. ($1=.6175 Pound)
