Granada Group Plc expressed optimism on Thursday about prospects for the sale of more than 20 British motorway service areas as it continues to dispose of assets acquired in its takeover of Forte.
Competition authorities have ordered British media and leisure group Granada to sell its 21 Welcome Break motorway sites by April because of monopoly concerns.
Granada acquired the business when it won control of hotel and catering empire Forte a year ago after a long and bitter takeover struggle.
"What we had was effectively about 18 players there who came in and showed interest and we've basically taken that down now to six/seven interested parties," Granada chief executive Charles Allen said in an interview when asked about the Welcome Break sale.
He said both trade buyers and financial players were among those in the running in a deal which share analysts believe could raise as much as 370 million pounds ($600 million).
Granada is in the process of selling off 17 luxury "Exclusive" hotels it acquired from Forte. Buyers have already been found for properties in London, Paris and Barbados.
The hotel sale could raise more than 800 million pounds but Allen made it clear that Granada could yet decide to keep hold of London's Grosvenor House, the largest and most valuable of the assets on the market.
Allen said Granada would only sell if it got "the right price" for the swish hotel. It is believed to be seeking a figure in excess of 300 million pounds for that one building.
He said that there was scope to double annual profits at the Grosvenor House to around 40 million pounds.
Granada also acquired the Meridien international hotel chain as part of the Forte deal. Allen said that Granada planned over the next few years to turn the operation into a pure management contract business.
The chain comprises more than 70 hotels, of which around 25 are owned and 50 are run on management contracts.
Allen said the eventual sale of the Meridien "bricks and mortar" was likely to be worth about 500 million pounds. ($1=.6172 Pound)
