British Sky Broadcasting appeared in pole position on Thursday as participants lined up for the race into the multi-channel digital television future.
A report in the Financial Times said that BSkyB, in which Rupert Murdoch's News Corp is the leading shareholder, had decided to press ahead with plans to launch a 200-channel digital satellite service into Britain in late 1997.
BSkyB is poised to order a million digital decoders from manufacturers at a cost of 250 million pounds ($405 million), the report added. BSkyB did not comment on the report.
BSkyB shares had added 0.5p to 580.5p by midsession on Thursday. Share analysts said the report was confirmation of what they had been expecting the satellite broadcaster to do.
The digital television age is about to dawn in Britain. Digital transmission will offer viewers a much greater range of channels, clearer pictures and the possibility of accessing interactive services such as home shopping.
Digital satellite services have been launched in the United States and a number of European countries. However, Britain is pioneering digital terrestrial television (DTT) -- broadcast from land-based transmitters to regular rooftop aerials.
The Independent Television Commission (ITC) will announce on Friday which companies have applied to run the DTT transmission networks or "multiplexes". DTT, offering some 36 channels, is scheduled to begin in mid-1998.
Each multiplex can carry around six channels and there are four multiplexes available. A further two multiplexes are already earmarked for use by the existing terrestrial broadcasters.
Carlton Communications Plc, Britain's largest terrestrial broadcaster, has said that it supports DTT and is expected to be among the applicants.
It may join forces with newspaper company Mirror Group for its application and would probably use the extra capacity to boost its pay television operations.
Competition could come from France's Canal Plus, Britain's United News &amp; Media and International CableTel Inc of the U.S.
Share analysts are intrigued to find out whether BSkyB will apply to run a DTT multiplex.
"They may see it as another market, reaching those people who don't want as many as 200 channels and also don't want a dish on the side of their house," said one.
Many in the media industry fear that DTT will not be able to compete effectively against BSkyB's 200 satellite channels, especially as BSkyB will be first into the digital market.
They are likely to cry foul if BSkyB tries to move in on the DTT world, claiming it would mean the company having a foot in two rival camps.
Viewers will need a digital decoder or "black box" to view digital services, whether they are delivered by satellite or terrestrial means.
BSkyB is believed to be in talks with a number of potential partners in an attempt to do a deal to subsidise the boxes and put them on the market for around 200 pounds, about half of the full retail cost.
