Leading British television companies BSkyB, Carlton Communications and Granada Group teamed up on Friday to apply to run digital terrestrial TV (DTT) services in Britain.
The formation of their British Digital Broadcasting venture, appeared to transform the prospects for DTT, previously dismissed as a "lame duck" technology.
British Digital Broadcasting has put in an application to run three DTT licences, offering 15 channels, including subscription channels from the BBC.
It faces competition from U.S. owned cable company International CableTel Inc, which has also put in an application for three of the four available networks.
The company is Britain's third largest cable operator and owns NTL, one of two major British transmission companies.
The BSkyB/Carlton/Granada/BBC venture plans three premium subscription channels showing top films and sporting action. Another 12 channels will be offered as part of a basic subscription package.
Shares in the three companies surged on Friday as markets welcomed the news. BSkyB added 21.5p to 602p, Carlton gained 21p to 540.5p and Granada added 12.5p to 890p.
DTT will broadcast from land-based transmitters to ordinary rooftop aerials. However, viewers will need a set-top decoder costing at least 200 pounds ($324) to receive the service.
There will be six digital networks or "multiplexes", each capable of broadcasting at least five channels. The first two have been earmarked for the existing, free, terrestrial broadcasters, the BBC and the ITV commercial network.
The other four will be awarded by the Independent Television Commission (ITC) watchdog body. The service is expected to be on the air by mid-1998.
Digital television offers more channels, clearer pictures and the possibility of accessing interactive services such as home shopping and home banking.
But DTT, with only 30 channels, had been seen as the poor relation to BSkyB's planned satellite version which will offer 200 channels.
BSkyB, in which Rupert Murdoch's News Corp is the leading shareholder, is expected to press on with its digital satellite launch in Britain later this year. DTT is seen as a complementary service.
"By plugging in one simple set top box, viewers will be able to see all the existing terrestrial channels, new free channels, the latest movies and the best sport," said Carlton chairman Michael Green.
Green will chair British Digital Broadcasting, and Carlton, Granada and BSkyB will each own one third of the company which unites Britain's leading commercial ITV companies with satellite pay operator BSkyB.
If successful in winning the three licences, the shareholders have agreed to meet between them a peak funding requirement of up to 300 million pounds. The company is expected to be profitable within five years.
($1=.6172 Pound)
