British pay television operator BSkyB said on Wednesday that it believed its planned 200-channel digital satellite service would prove a hit with viewers.
BSkyB, the dominant force in British pay TV, confirmed that it would proceed later this year with the launch of digital satellite into this country.
It said that the plan was not affected by its new digital terrestrial television (DTT) alliance with leading commercial broadcasters Carlton Communications and Granada Group .
The three have teamed up to form British Digital Broadcasting and apply for licences to run DTT networks when the 30-channel service comes on air in Britain in mid-1998.
"BSkyB is positioning itself to become a key player in digital," chief executive Sam Chisholm told a news conference.
"Digital satellite is going to be the primary driver (of the new technology) as it offers such a wide range of services," Chisholm added.
BSkyB, in which Rupert Murdoch's News Corp is the leading shareholder, earlier said pre-tax profit rose 26 percent to 133.7 million pounds ($214.4 million) in the six months to end-December, up from 106.3 million a year ago.
It reported record subscriber growth of 434,000 in the last three months of last year and now has over six million customers in Britain and Ireland.
BSkyB shares continued their surge of recent days as markets welcomed the digital developments. BSkyB closed 29.5p higher at 622.5p, its best level for over three months.
BSkyB said it expected shortly to confirm an order for up to one million digital satellite decoders from four manufacturers as it gears up for an autumn launch.
It plans to work with partners to offer interactive services such as home shopping and home banking as part of the digital satellite package.
Chisholm said a new company would be formed to subsidise the digital satellite decoder so that it could retail for around 200 pounds. A decoder is needed to view any digital service.
He did not name the members of the company, but BSkyB is reported to have had talks with British Telecommunications, Japanese electronics company Matsushita and bankers HSBC.
BSkyB remained optimistic about the prospects for digital television in Germany, playing down the initial slow take-up recorded by Kirch Gruppe's DF1.
"If you can get it right, it's a hell of an opportunity," said Chisholm, noting that there are some 37 million German-speaking households in Europe.
BSkyB agreed last year to take a stake of up to 49 percent in DF1 but is yet to invest any money in the venture.
DF1 was launched last July but recent reports suggest it has only attracted 20,000 subscribers. Chisholm said that DF1's slow take-up was partly the result of market confusion.
DF1 has been locked in a war with Premiere, another German pay-TV venture. Kirch owns 25 percent of Premiere but has fallen out with partners Bertelsmann and Canal Plus, who hold the remaining 75 percent.
Bertelsmann and Canal Plus want to develop Premiere into Germany's main digital television outlet but Kirch is backing its own DF1 for that role. ($1=.6237 Pound)
