PolyGram, one of the big five powers in the world music industry, on Wednesday reported lower 1996 earnings but said it believed sales growth in the sector was set to recover strongly after stalling last year.
"We do not believe the music business to be a mature industry," PolyGram president and chief executive officer Alain Levy told a news conference, adding that he believed sales could grow at an annual rate of more than five percent.
Levy said the $40 billion global music market had reached a plateau in 1996, when it grew by only three percent after several years of double-figure increases.
But he said that he felt the problem was a shortage of good record releases rather than the end of a business cycle. "I think the issue is an issue of creativity. The music makes the market," he said.
PolyGram has a strong-looking release schedule for 1997, with albums planned by U2, Elton John and Van Morrison.
PolyGram, Bertelsmann, Sony Music, EMI and Warner dominate the global music business, accounting for more than two-thirds of sales.
Levy was speaking after PolyGram announced an almost 18 percent decline in earnings following a restructuring carried out in response to the slowdown in music sales.
The music and film company's 1996 net income after tax and extraordinary items fell to 608 million guilders ($327 million) from 741 million in 1995. It took a post-tax charge of 114 million guilders as it reorganised its music operations.
Its dividend was held at 0.95 guilders per share.
Levy said PolyGram expected to resume earnings growth in 1997 but would not specify by how much.
The results topped market forecasts and PolyGram shares surged 6.50 guilders to 89.80 on the Amsterdam bourse.
As part of the restructuring, the company said it was cutting around 550 jobs, an increase on the forecast of 400 job losses made when the move was announced last October.
Chief financial officer Jan Cook said the restructuring would pay off in two or three years, the staff cuts trimming the annual wage bill by some 50 million guilders.
PolyGram is revamping its Motown unit, moving the famous soul music label's headquarters from Los Angeles to New York as it seeks to recreate its heyday of the 1960s and early 1970s.
It is reorganising its European music distribution and marketing and restructuring its classical music division.
PolyGram music increased sales by five percent to 7.95 billion guilders but operating profit fell three percent to 1.11 billion.
The PolyGram Filmed Entertainment (PFE) unit, set up  five years ago, crept into a two million guilder operating profit in the second half of last year. Full-year operating losses fell to 35 million guilders from 68 million in 1995.
But Levy said the unit would not make a profit in 1997 because of the costs of setting up a distribution operation in the United States and a move to bigger budget films.
PFE has won 14 Oscar nominations this year for films such as Fargo, The Portrait of a Lady, Sleepers and Trainspotting.
PolyGram is listed in Amsterdam and New York, with many of its senior executives based in London. Dutch electronics giant Philips Electronics NV owns a 75 percent stake in it. ($1=1.857 Guilder)
