Channel 5, the British terrestrial television channel gearing up for launch next month, is confident of winning a five percent share of UK viewing by the end of the year, chief executive David Elstein said on Tuesday.
"We're confident we can deliver five percent of total viewing by Christmas this year," Elstein said as Channel 5 presented its programming schedule.
The exisiting ITV commercial network has an audience share of over 35 percent. However, its annual programme budget of 600 million pounds is much bigger than the 110 million core figure earmarked by Channel 5.
"Channel 5's audience will grow as ITV's declines," said Dawn Airey, Director of Programmes. She promised "intelligent, stylish and popular" shows from a channel that is hoping to be a hit with the young consumers sought after by advertisers.
Channel 5 is  owned by a consortium of British firms Pearson and United News &amp; Media plus Luxembourg broadcast group CLT and US investment firm Warburg Pincus.
It will go on air on Easter Sunday, March 30, having delayed its launch by three months in order to give it more time to complete the task of retuning the nation's video recorders.
It has employed an army of retuners to visit millions of homes across Britain to prevent its signal from interfering with video playback.
Elstein said that Channel 5 should be available to around 40 million people -- just over 65 percent of the population -- at launch in March.
But he said this should grow to 45-46 million, or around 85 percent of Britons, by the end of the year as an extra broadcasting frequency comes into operation.
However, he conceded that as many as two million of the 18 million households covered may need to buy new aerials or aerial extensions to pick up the signal clearly.
Major areas of Britain will not see the new commercial channel, the first to be launched in this country since 1982. The Scottish city of Glasgow and parts of Wales and the south-west will miss out but Channel 5 hopes to fill in some of the gaps by securing carriage on cable and satellite systems.
Channel 5 plans what it calls a "stripped and stranded" schedule. Behind the jargon lies an attempt to make it easier for viewers to know what is on at a particular time.
A "stripped" show runs on consecutive days, at the same time each day while a "stranded" show rotates with other similar shows in the same slot each day.
Channel 5 will show a daily soap at 1830, its main evening news will be at 2000 and it will have a film at 2100 every evening. Films lined up include Speed, Independence day and Mrs Doubtfire.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 8793
