Leisure group Rank Group Plc said on Thursday it planned to create 3,000 full-time jobs in Britain this year as it completes a radical restructuring.
Rank, which operates the Hard Rock Cafes around the world, said the outlook for its businesses was promising after a year in which an exceptional charge of 232 million pounds ($375 million) badly hit profit.
Profit before tax in 1996 fell to 65 million pounds from 515 million the year before. However, the 1995 figure was boosted by a 236 million pound exceptional gain.
Rank raised its net dividend by eight percent to 17 pence per share and said operating profit before exceptional items was 13 percent higher at 290 million pounds.
In early trading on Thursday, Rank shares, which have underperformed the market by some 20 percent over the past year, added 12p to 427p.
Chief executive Andrew Teare, who took the job last April, said that Rank was well placed after a financial restructuring and a decision to focus on four divisions -- Hard Rock, Holidays, Leisure and Film and Entertainment Services.
"These changes, together with the benefits of our investment programme and the generally favourable economic climate, provide a promising outlook for Rank," Teare said.
He said that Rank planned to sell its film distribution unit, which has a catalogue of classic British films dating back to the 1950s as well as some more modern American movies.
The unit also has a British distribution operation, run as a joint venture with Castle Rock-Turner of the United States, and an international sales arm.
Newspapers have speculated that the sale might raise up to 150 million pounds but Teare indicated he thought some of the figures in the press were on the high side.
Rank said it would be creating the 3,000 jobs by opening new bingo clubs, pubs, night clubs, holiday centres, cinemas and a leisure centre at sites around Britain.
Operating profit at three of Rank's four core divisions showed double-figure growth. The exception was holidays, where profit fell one percent as margins came under pressure at the Resorts USA campground and timeshare business in the United States.
The exceptional charges related mainly to a 148 million pound property value writedown, plus a loss on disposals and charge for restructuring.
Comparisons with last year were further complicated by a change in the way Rank accounts for its remaining 20 percent interest in Rank Xerox, its office equipment joint venture with America's Xerox Corp.
Rank repeated that it planned to sell the stake when a suitable opportunity arises.
($1=.6184 Pound)
