British leisure group Rank Group Plc said on Thursday that it planned to open a further 36 Hard Rock cafes internationally over the next three years.
The expansion programme for the themed diners will be launched in July and cafes will open at the rate of one a month until the year 2000, the company said.
Rank, which last year reunited the Hard Rock brand worldwide, said the outlook for its businesses was promising after a year in which an exceptional charge of 232 million pounds ($375 million) badly hit profits.
Profit before tax in 1996 fell to 65 million pounds from 515 million the year before. However, the 1995 figure was boosted by a 236 million pound exceptional gain.
Rank raised its net dividend by eight percent to 17 pence per share and said operating profit before exceptional items was 13 percent higher at 290 million pounds.
The company, which is in the process of a radical restructuring, said that it expected to create 3,000 jobs in Britain this year as it opened new pubs, cinemas, holiday and leisure centres and bingo clubs.
The news was welcomed by British National Heritage Secretary Virginia Bottomley, who saw it as a further boost to the nation's thriving tourist industry.
"This is excellent news for Britain and underlines the tourism industry's role as one of our major job creators and wealth generators," she said.
Rank shares, which have underperformed the market by 20 percent over the past year, added 19.5p to 434.5p.
Share analysts said that the price had been bolstered by Rank's plans to ask its shareholders for permission to buy back up to 10 percent of the company's stock.
Chief executive Andrew Teare said that Rank was well set after a decision to focus on four divisions -- Hard Rock, Holidays, Leisure and Film and Entertainment Services.
"These changes, together with the benefits of our investment programme and the generally favourable economic climate, provide a promising outlook for Rank," Teare said.
Rank last year won outright control of the Hard Rock brand worldwide when it bought the cafes and brand rights owned by Peter Morton, one of the joint founders of the chain in 1971. Ownership of the brand had previously been split.
There are plans this year to launch a television series based on the brand and a new Hard Rock Records label has also been announced.
Teare said Rank planned to sell its film distribution unit, which has a catalogue of classic British films dating back to the 1950s as well as some more modern American movies.
Newspapers have speculated that the sale might raise up to 150 million pounds but Teare indicated he thought some of the figures in the press were on the high side.
The exceptional charges related mainly to a 148 million pound property value writedown, plus a loss on disposals and charge for restructuring.
Comparisons with last year were further complicated by a change in the way Rank accounts for its remaining 20 percent interest in Rank Xerox, its office equipment joint venture with America's Xerox Corp.
Rank repeated that it planned to sell the stake when a suitable opportunity arises. However, Teare told analysts that he had not yet discussed the sale with Xerox. ($1=.6184 Pound)
