Pearson Plc chief executive Marjorie Scardino began to reshape the British media and leisure company on Friday as she sold its 10 percent stake in Hong Kong broadcaster TVB for 111.1 million pounds ($180.1 million).
The stake in TVB, Hong Kong's leading television broadcaster, has been bought by Shaw Brothers (Hong Kong) Ltd and associates.
The disposal is the first major strategic move by Texan Scardino since she took over at Pearson last month.
"Our commitment to the growth of our businesses in Asia/Pacific is as strong as ever, but we have decided that this investment is no longer effective in developing either our television business or our other interests in the region," Scardino said.
Pearson acquired the stake in TVB two years ago for 106.2 million pounds and has received dividends of 3.5 million pounds on it.
Share analysts were pleased that Scardino had made an early move in her attempts to improve the focus of the business and said that Pearson had done well to recover its investment.
"It's obviously a blow to Greg Dyke," said one, referring to the head of Pearson's television arm, adding that Scardino appeared to have reversed part of his strategy.
There has been speculation that Dyke, a well-known figure in the British media world, may shortly part company with Pearson.
Dyke said that the investment had given Pearson great insight into the television business in Asia.
"However since we made the minority investment Pearson Television's strategy has evolved to concentrate on programme making and larger broadcast roles," he added.
Pearson shares stood unchanged at 764.5p after the announcement.
Debt rating agency Moody's said on Friday it was downgrading Pearson. Moody's said that this reflected its view that Pearson's debt protection measurements -- weakened by recent acquisitions -- would not recover to previous levels near term.
Scardino, the first woman to head a leading British company, has promised to improve Pearson's profit performance.
The company has a clutch of big-name assets such as the Financial Times newspaper and Penguin Books but has failed to secure an adequate return on these.
Analysts say that the company lacks focus and have predicted that Pearson may sell its Tussauds leisure unit and its stake in merchant bank Lazards.
The Scardino era got off to a bad start when the company announced last week that improper accounting at Penguin USA would force it to make a charge of up to 100 million pounds against 1996 profits.
Pearson said the problems dated back five years but had come to light only very recently. ($1=.6168 Pound)
