Shares in British media group EMAP Plc tumbled about three percent on Monday after the company said it was losing managing director David Arculus to television and newspaper firm United News &amp; Media .
Arculus, 50, who joined EMAP in 1972, will move to United News on April 7 as chief operating officer. His responsibilites there will range from consumer publishing through television to trade magazines and exhibitions.
"David Arculus has demonstrated a sure touch as a builder of media businesses. His experience and proven record make him a valuable addition to the team," United chief executive Clive Hollick said.
United said the move completed the management team it has built since its three billion pound ($4.9 billion) merger with television and financial services group MAI last year.
United shares rose 17p to 704.5p after the announcement while EMAP fell 25p to 787.5p.
EMAP has been one of Britain's fastest growing businesses in recent years, selling out of its original regional newspaper base, and expanding its British local radio operations and its consumer magazine interests at home and in France.
But it was hit last year by a row over corporate governance which resulted in the ousting of two non-executive directors.
Chairman Sir John Hoskyns at that time played down talk of a boardroom rift between Arculus and chief executive Robin Miller over who would succeed him.
Share analysts said the departure of Arculus was worrying, coming so soon after last year's upheaval.
"The fact that Arculus is leaving is slightly disturbing," said Nick Ward of Credit Lyonnais Laing, noting however that it was impossible for a company to predict staff changes.
"But the place will not fall apart without him," Ward added, saying that EMAP was known for its strong divisional management.
Analysts also pointed out that the fall in EMAP shares came after a strong run which has seen them rise from 730p in December when the non-executive directors were removed.
EMAP's Miller said the company's board had not yet decided on who will succeed chairman Hoskyns when he retires next year.
Miller, who joined EMAP in 1965 as a reporter on Motor Cycle News, said there had been differences with Arculus but the partnership had worked well overall.
Arculus, EMAP managing director since 1990, said he was delighted to be joining United, a company whose businesses include British commercial television stations, two national newspapers and a trade exhibitions arm.
"I got offered a job about three times the size of the one I was doing at EMAP," Arculus told Reuters. His 1995 pay package was worth some 250,000 pounds but he would not be drawn on how much he would earn at United. ($1=.6142 Pound)
