The battle for UK digital terrestrial television (DTT) licences is a David and Goliath contest pitting three of the country's biggest broadcasting groups against a little known cable company.
DTN, owned by Nasdaq-listed International CableTel, finds itself up against the might of pay television giant British Sky Broadcasting and ITV companies Carlton Communications Plc and Granada Group Plc.
But International CableTel chief executive Barclay Knapp has not yet raised the white flag as Britain's Independent Television Commission (ITC) considers the two bids.
"We are presenting ourselves as the ones that win on the merits," Knapp said in an interview on Wednesday.
"We are going to create an environment for new British programming to proliferate and to very aggressively exploit the interactive services component," he added.
Knapp believes that the successful launch of DTT is the best way to challenge BSkyB's dominance of UK pay television.
He also maintains that major programme makers and suppliers should not be left to run broadcast networks.
DTT signals are broadcast from land-based transmitters to ordinary aerials but viewers need a set-top box or decoder to view what is broadcast.
Digital compression improves sound and picture quality and means that more than 30 channels can be picked up. The technology permits a link to interactive services.
DTN and the rival British Digital Broadcasting consortium are each bidding for the same three blocks of frequencies, capable of carrying some 18 channels.
The ITC decision on the award of the licences is expected around May and DTT would begin in the spring or summer of 1998.
BSkyB plans separately to launch digital satellite services with up to 200 channels into the UK late this year and DTN questions its commitment to making the terrestrial version work.
International CableTel, the company behind DTN, has almost all its operations in the UK, where it is the third largest cable operator and also owns the NTL transmission network.
It believes its skills in programme packaging and marketing make it the ideal candidate to run DTT frequencies. Knapp points to International Cabletel's success in securing take up of around 40 percent in some of its cable franchise areas.
"Sports and movies are good for the first 20 percent in take-up but the two remaining factors are the breadth of choice and pricing," he said.
International CableTel breaks its programme packages down into tiers such as news or natural history to bring on board those not tempted by soccer or Hollywood blockbusters.
He believes that customers could be offered a limited package of say five extra DTT channels for around six pounds per month to get them to sample the multi-channel future.
"People don't want to dive right in, they just want to get their feet wet," he said.
