British pay television giant BSkyB Plc, a key part of Rupert Murdoch's News Corp international media empire, on Thursday staked its claim to a lead role in the development of digital television in the UK.
"Our clear and unambiguous aim is to be in the vanguard of the digital era," BSkyB deputy managing director David Chance told a Financial Times conference on New Media and Broadcasting.
BSkyB, the leading force in British pay television with some 5.5 million subscribers, plans to launch 200-channel digital satellite services into the UK later this year.
BSkyB, one of the corporate success stories of the 1990s in Britain, is 40 percent owned by Murdoch's News Corp.
Murdoch this week threw down the gauntlet to U.S. cable companies when News Corp sealed an alliance with EchoStar Communications Corp to offer satellite services to compete with the cable providers.
The venture, expected to operate under the American Sky Broadcasting (ASkyB) name, will offer as many as 500 channels of digital TV, Internet services and local broadcast TV signals to markets across the United States.
News Corp also has important satellite television operations in Asia, such as Star TV and JSkyB, a joint venture in Japan which is expected to begin full service next year.
Back in Britain, BSkyB is also seeking to expand into digital terrestrial television (DTT).
It has joined forces with UK commercial television giants Carlton Communications Plc and Granada Group Plc to apply for licences to run DTT services.
Their British Digital Broadcasting consortium faces competition from DTN, owned by Nasdaq-listed cable company International CableTel, for three key DTT licences.
Britain's Independent Television Commission (ITC) is expected to announce a decision on the licences around May.
DTT, broadcast from land-based transmitters to standard television aerials, is expected to begin in mid-1998 and offer a total of around 30 channels.
Chance said that he hoped that neither UK nor European regulators would oppose British Digital Broadcasting if it were awarded the DTT licences.
"Eight years ago we led Europe in multi-channel TV," Chance said. "We are probably the last in Europe to launch a digital platform...It isn't the time for a handbrake to be applied."
"We are behind and we need to get on with it."
Digital television offers extra channels, improved sound and picture quality and the potential to access interactive services such as home shopping and home banking.
A digital set-top box or decoder is required to view digital channels and a rooftop dish is required to pick up the satellite version. Cable companies are also planning a move to digital.
Digital take-up has been slow in a number of countries, notably in Germany, Europe's largest television market.
Chance said that for digital to succeed it must offer attractive programming at affordable prices and be simple for viewers to understand and use. ($1=.6146 Pound)
