Newcastle United FC, one of England's top soccer teams, will make its stock market debut in April in a flotation valuing the club at almost 200 million pounds ($325 million), broker NatWest Markets said on Friday.
NatWest said the offer price will be in the range of 120 to 135 pence per Ordinary share, valuing premier league Newcastle United at between 172 and 193 million pounds.
The offer is expected to raise 47.4 million pounds net and trading will begin on April 2. Ten percent of the shares are to be made available to the public rather than institutions.
Newcastle is the latest in a growing number of British soccer clubs to join the stock market. The value of listed clubs has soared over the past year as investors seek to cash in on the game's current boom.
A lucrative contract with pay television giant British Sky Broadcasting Plc has helped to transform the game, enabling clubs to recruit top foreign stars and to upgrade once crumbling stadiums.
English champions Manchester United have provided the model on and off the pitch, building a business valued at over 400 million pounds in the six years since flotation.
"The directors believe that Newcastle United has reached a stage in its development where it will benefit from the opportunities that derive from being a listed company," said Sir Terence Harrison, who has been appointed non-executive chairman.
Sir Terence is chairman of building company Alfred McAlpine Plc.
Newcastle, which has invested 50 million pounds since 1992 in recruiting players like England captain Alan Shearer, Frenchman David Ginola and Colombian Faustino Asprilla, said around 21 million pounds would be used to repay borrowings.
A further 12 million pounds will be used to pay for future instalments of transfer fees for current players and up to 10 million pounds to fund proposed training and youth team development facilities.
Newcastle had an operating loss of almost 24 million pounds in the year to July 1996 after transfer fee and associated costs of 29.8 million pounds. But it posted an operating profit of 7.6 million pounds in the first half of this year.
Cameron Hall, the family holding of millionaire Newcastle backer Sir John Hall, will retain a 57 percent stake in the club after flotation.
Sir John is to remain as chairman of Newcastle United FC -- the soccer club rather than the overall business -- and has said he will focus his energies on developing a centre of excellence for young players.
Newcastle have gained a reputation in recent years for playing exciting soccer but have yet to be rewarded with major trophies. They last won the English league title 70 years ago. ($1=.6140 Pound)
