Britain's Yorkshire-Tyne Tees Television Holdings Plc, a likely bid target for rival broadcasters, said on Tuesday it believed any offer would have to be at a hefty premium to its current share price.
YTT chairman and chief executive Ward Thomas told a news conference that he believed a bid from northern neighbour Granada Group Plc was "extremely likely".
Granada has built up a stake of 27 percent in YTT, the ITV commercial television broadcaster to northern cities such as Leeds and Newcastle, and has long been expected to mount a bid.
That speculation has pushed YTT shares up by some 80 percent over the past 14 months to their current level of around 12.50 pounds ($20.07), giving the company a value of around 800 million pounds, including warrants.
But Thomas suggested any realistic bid would have to be pitched at around 17 pounds per share.
"I say 17 pounds to Gerry (Granada chairman Gerry Robinson)," Thomas told Reuters in a telephone interview.
"It's a conversational gambit," he added.
United News &amp; Media Plc, which already operates ITV franchises for southern and eastern England, is another potential predator, with a stake of some 14 percent in YTT.
Thomas was speaking after YTT announced a 40 percent rise in 1996 pre-tax profit to 30.2 million pounds. It paid a total dividend for the year of 18 pence per share, against 14 in 1995.
YTT shares were down 7-1/2 pence at 12.40 pounds at 1430 GMT.
Thomas said that YTT's profitability could be greatly enhanced if it succeeded in its campaign to have its annual licence fee reduced from an annual 66 million pounds and improved its share of ITV advertising income.
YTT is urging a return to a special duty on advertising, which was originally introduced in 1961 but later scrapped.
Thomas argued that the duty should be applied to all broadcasters including pay television operator BSkyB and the Channel Four commercial station, both currently outside the licence fee system.
Thomas called YTT's 1996 share of ITV advertising revenue disappointing after it fell to 10.3 percent of ITV income.
It is in talks with Laser, its advertising sales agency, to market the whole of northern England as a single region. The fact that Laser is owned by Granada, the ITV broadcaster in north-west England, could facilitate this move. ($1=.6228 Pound)
