Anglo-Dutch publishing group Reed Elsevier Plc said on Wednesday that currency factors were likely to depress this year's earnings after the company recorded an 11 percent profit rise in 1996.
Reed Elsevier co-chairman Nigel Stapleton told Reuters the strength of sterling would, if maintained, "drag down" headline earnings by five percent this year. Earnings figures for the combined businesses of Reed Elsevier are expressed in sterling.
Pre-tax profits in 1996 rose to 805 million pounds ($1.3 billion) from 723 million on turnover from continuing operations up to 3.38 billion pounds from 3.21 billion. Share analysts had forecast profits of between 808 and 821 million pounds.
Analysts said that the strong pound was likely to restrict earnings growth to single figures this year and they mentioned a likely profit figure of around 870 million pounds.
Reed International Plc, the British arm of the business, proposed a two-for-one share split to take effect in May.
London-listed Reed shares were down 18-1/2 pence to 1,155p at 1520 GMT, while Elsevier NV shares in Amsterdam dipped 1.10 guilders to 31.40.
Analysts said the company's performance had fallen slightly short of expectations and that Reed shares had risen more than 10 percent over the last two months on bid speculation.
For shareholders in Reed the full-year dividend was raised by 11 percent to 27.2 pence per share. Elsevier shareholders will receive 0.76 guilders per share, a 29 percent increase.
The company noted that currency conversions meant that Elsevier results and dividends were helped in guilder terms.
"It's good news for Elsevier and bad for Reed," said co-chairman Stapleton. "(But) the two share prices are linked so much that Elsevier should pull Reed up with it in some respects."
Stapleton said the 1996 figures reflected a "solid performance" right across the group. They followed a four percent earnings dilution resulting from the company's 1995 consumer business divestment programme.
Reed Elsevier sold consumer businesses, such as local newspapers, in order to focus on the provision of information in fields like science, business and the legal profession.
Stapleton said a "big deal" such as Reed's $1.5 billion purchase of U.S. on-line information supplier LEXIS-NEXIS in 1994 would be "nice but not necessary".
His co-chairman Herman Bruggink told analysts in Amsterdam that Lexis-Nexis was stepping up its efforts to expand outside its U.S. base and targeting Europe in particular.
Reed International said its proposed share split would be put to the vote at its annual general meeting in April, to take effect the following month.
It gave no reason for the split, but companies often opt to split their stock in the belief that the process makes their shares more liquid or tradeable. ($ = 0.629 British Pounds)
