British newspaper publisher Mirror Group Plc said on Thursday its 1996 profit rose six percent to a record level and that it was ploughing savings from lower newsprint costs back into its titles.
"We are trying to enhance our papers rather than cutting the cover price," chief executive David Montgomery said in a telephone interview.
"All the main newspaper groups are heavily subsidising cover prices in one way or another at the moment...We do not think this is the way to build a business," he added.
A newspaper price war has been fought in Britain since 1993, Rupert Murdoch's News International newspapers leading the way with price cuts and special promotions.
Montgomery said that the price of newsprint -- the material on which newspapers are printed -- had fallen some 20 percent from 1996 highs. The Mirror's newsprint bill last year came to more than 130 million pounds ($210 million).
The group's flagship Mirror newspaper is Britain's second-top selling tabloid, behind News International's Sun.
Mirror's 1996 pre-tax profit rose 6.6 percent to 82.2 million pounds, before exceptional items. Total dividend was increased by 12.5 percent to 4.5p per share.
Mirror Group shares came off 5.5p to 211p by 1115 GMT in a generally lower London market.
"The group is in a good financial position to make prudent investments for the future and to continue its strategy of creating a more broadly based media group," the company said.
Mirror Group has interests in cable television and a stake of around 20 percent in Scottish Television Plc, the commercial terrestrial (ITV) broadcaster to central Scotland.
Losses from the developing Live TV cable channel fell from 10 million to around eight million pounds in 1996.
Mirror Group has a 46 percent stake in Newspaper Publishing, the company which produces the Independent and Independent on Sunday broadsheets and Montogomery said there were no plans to dispose of this.
The two newspapers reported circulation rises in February, the first signs that they may be pulling out of a sales slump.
Newspaper Publishing operating losses were 43 percent lower last year and Montgomery said that cost savings from combined operations meant the impact was "negligible" to Mirror Group.
The group said it had an exceptional gain of 19.4 million pounds in 1996, generated by the resolution of a number of property-related issues and the sale of STV's stake in fellow regional broadcaster HTV.
An exceptional tax credit of 9.1 million pounds was included in the 1996 accounts after a settlement was reached with the Inland Revenue on corporation tax payable for 1991-1994. Profit after tax increased to 83.1 million pounds, from 82.4 million pounds in 1995. ($1=.6228 Pound)
