Investors in Britain's growing band of listed soccer clubs have recently experienced that sinking feeling all too familiar to long-suffering fans.
Shares prices have fallen faster than a relegation-bound team as the euphoria surrounding potential earnings from sources like pay-per-view television gives way to more sober analysis.
The sector has lost around 30 percent in the last six weeks or so, smaller clubs such as premier league strugglers Southampton and first division Sheffield United among the biggest losers.
However, even English champions Manchester United have seen their share price fall from a January high of 737p to its current level of 630p, this despite continuing success on the pitch at home and in Europe.
Share analysts who follow the financial fortunes of the clubs point out that these falls must be seen in the context of spectacular rises of 200 percent and more since early 1996.
Their view is that investors are backing a winner if they stick with the big clubs but that people should think twice before putting money into clubs outside of soccer's elite.
"We believe a derating of the smaller clubs is inevitable and could be marked. These are the footballing bubbles that will fade and die," UBS analysts Guy Feld and Julian Easthope wrote in a recent report on what they call "UK Football Plc".
"In England, Premier League status will be essential, and the cost of being outside it will increase, because of the increasing concentration of TV revenues at the top end of the game," they added.
Pay-per-view television is seen as a major benefit to only the creme de la creme of the British and European game.
UBS selected a top 10 UK soccer franchises, featuring listed clubs Manchester United, Leeds United, Glasgow Celtic and Tottenham Hotspur.
Two more of their tips, English premier league clubs Newcastle United and Aston Villa, will join the market shortly.
Analysts expect heavy interest in both those clubs, given their strong fan base and established position among the most successful teams in the country.
Analyst Nick Batram of Greig Middleton agrees that share prices of some of the smaller clubs could fall further.
But he believes that clubs can make money outside the premier league, providing they do not overstretch themselves.
"They have to look at being profitable in the lower divisions rather than gambling on getting in the Premier League," he said.
"Millwall is unfortunately a good example of what happens when you speculate on promotion," he said.
Second division Millwall were forced to call in the administrator in January after running up debts of 10 million pounds ($16 million).
The south London club had signed players on lucrative contracts in a bid to join the 20-club premier league elite but ran into financial problems when the club went down rather than up at the end of last season.
