Shares in United News &amp; Media Plc climbed to record highs on Friday after the British television and newspaper group reported a 12 percent profit rise in the first year since a merger effectively doubled its size.
A media heavyweight was created last year when United News, publisher of national newspapers The Express and Daily Star, joined forces with commercial television and financial services group MAI in a three billion pound ($4.8 billion) deal.
The enlarged company said 1996 profit before tax and exceptional items rose 12 percent to 290.2 million pounds. Earnings per share increased 15 percent to 40 pence.
"I think we have delivered at the top end of expectations against the agenda we set ourselves at the time of the merger," chief executive Clive Hollick told Reuters.
Share analysts also gave Hollick and his team their seal of approval. United shares added 25.5p to 766p by 1600 GMT after earlier hitting a post-merger high of 769p.
Several analysts increased their forecasts for 1997 profits, which are seen in a range between 310 and 335 million pounds.
"The review of the businesses following the merger has been completed, with adjustments to the portfolio in some areas and changed operating strategies in others," said Hollick, who moved across from MAI.
United said savings as a result of the merger and subsequent restructuring were expected to reach 43 million pounds a year by 1998. It took an exceptional charge of 56 million pounds last year, mainly stemming from the merger.
The company has been active on the disposals and acquisitions front, spending more than 750 million pounds last year as it bought exhibitions group Blenheim and a 29.9 percent stake in regional television broadcaster HTV .
It recouped around 300 million by selling a finance company, a legal publisher and local newspaper interests.
United, which operates commercial television (ITV) franchises in southern and eastern England, said operating profit from its broadcasting and entertainment division rose by 36 percent to almost 60 million pounds.
Profit from the business services unit increased by 38 percent to 100.5 million but the contribution from financial services fell slightly to 51.1 million.
Earnings from consumer publishing dropped 7.5 percent to 81 million after a 31 million pound increase in paper costs.
Hollick said restructuring of the national newspapers should bring annual savings of 15 million pounds, some of which would be ploughed back into the titles.
The mid-market Daily and Sunday Express titles have been relaunched as a combined seven-day operation in a bid to end a long-term sales decline.
United said trading in early 1997 was "well in line with expectations". It is paying a final dividend of 15.5 pence per share, bringing the total for the year to 23.5 pence, an increase of two percent. ($1=.6228 Pound)
