Pearson Plc's new chief executive Marjorie Scardino promised on Monday to improve the financial performance of the media and leisure group but said she would bring "evolution not revolution".
Pearson posted 1996 operating profit of 181.3 million pounds ($289 million) after a 100 million pound charge for improper accounting at its Penguin USA trade book publishing unit.
Leaving aside exceptional items, profit before tax rose seven percent to 251.8 million pounds. The total dividend was increased to 18 pence per share from 16.5p.
Scardino, a Texan who in January became the first woman to head a leading British company, noted that she had only been in the job 49 days and that she was in no position to unveil a "new Pearson" to assembled journalists. "Decisions will be made speedily not hastily, it will be evolution not revolution around here," she said.
"Whatever else we do, we are going to work hard on improving the financial performance of the business," she said.
Scardino said Pearson, owner of the Financial Times newspaper, television production houses and Penguin books, had stellar assets but not all of them had performed well.
She said that underlying revenue growth of no better than six percent per annum over the past five years was "clearly not very exciting". Performance targets are to be better defined and incentive schemes for employees geared towards these.
She said "there had not been enough joy and not enough sweat" in the past among employees about the company's results.
Pearson shares fell 14p to 760p in a generally lower market. Share analysts said the Pearson presentation had been rather light on specific details.
They believe that Pearson will hold on to its television and Tussauds leisure interests despite speculation it would sell them. However, it may dispose of its holdings in the Lazard investment banking houses in London, New York and Paris.
Pearson also announced that it would invest up to 100 million pounds over the next five years in extending the Financial Times newspaper and brand internationally.
New print sites are to be established in Italy and Singapore but the main thrust of the expansion will focus on the United States. Financial Times editor Richard Lambert will be moving to New York for a year to oversee the editorial development.
Finance Director John Makinson said that he did not expect Pearson to increase the 100 million pound provision to cover the problems at Penguin USA, which date back to 1991.
The problem comes from unauthorised discounts given to customers in return for early payments and have been blamed on "one rogue employee".
"We are comfortable with that provision," Makinson told Reuters in a telephone interview. "The 100 million pounds is to cover all known and foreseen eventualities," he added. ($1=.6281 Pound)
