John Major's Conservatives can no longer rely on the loyal support of much of Britain's press to help deliver the votes needed to secure a fifth successive election victory, editors and political analysts say.
"It's the Sun wot won it," Rupert Murdoch's top-selling tabloid trumpeted after Major's ruling party defied the opinion polls and secured a slim 21-seat majority in 1992.
Traditionally pro-Conservative newspapers, some 70 percent of Britain's press, threw their full weight behind Major five years ago, rubbishing opposition leader Neil Kinnock at every turn and warning voters not to trust Labour's promises.
"If Kinnock wins today will the last person to leave Britain please turn out the lights," was the Sun's election day message, illustrated with a front-page picture of the Labour leader's head framed in a lightbulb.
But media watchers believe that Major is unlikely to enjoy such unequivocal support against Labour's Tony Blair in an election which the prime minister announced on Monday would be held on May 1. Labour has a big lead in opinion polls.
"It won't be possible for the Sun to be as enthusiastic about Major and negative about Blair as they were about Major and Kinnock last time around," said Ian Hargreaves, former editor of the Independent newspaper.
"They have poured so much crap on Major's head that it wouldn't be possible to back him enthusiastically and retain credibility with their readers," added Hargreaves, who now edits the left-leaning New Statesman magazine.
Kinnock was portrayed as volatile and untrustworthy by much of the press in the last campaign. Blair is a media-savvy moderate who has taken his party to the centre ground since becoming leader in July 1994 and is a harder target to attack.
Major's battle to keep his party together over future relations with the European Union has reduced his standing among the pro-Conservative newspapers, many of which demandi a stronger anti-European line.
"It would be inconceivable and a mistake for the Sun not to deliver its vote but it might not be done with the rasping clarity we have come to know and love," Hargreaves added.
"I would expect the Sun to be pro-Tory but I think the tone may be that of a 'plague on both your houses'. I think that might be something you see in quite a bit of the press."
POLITICAL BIAS
British newspapers wear their political sympathies on their sleeves, not only writing trenchant editorials but also slanting their news coverage in a way that amazes many foreign readers.
The support is important as newspaper circulation remains high in Britain. The combined circulation of the national dailies has been in gradual decline but still tops 14 million each day.
Among the mass-market tabloids, the Daily Mirror and its Scottish sister the Daily Record were alone in backing Labour in 1992. The Daily Mail and the Daily Express both stuck to their customary pro-Conservative line, as of course did the Sun.
Among the broadsheet "quality" press, Murdoch's Times and Canadian Conrad Black's Daily Telegraph both backed the government while the Guardian supported Labour and the Independent lived up to its name by remaining broadly neutral.
Most surprising of all was an election day editorial in favour of Labour from the Financial Times, the daily staple of business people.
Blair understands the power of the press and provoked controversy in 1995 when he accepted an invitation to address a conference organised by Murdoch's News Corp in Australia, the media magnate's homeland.
The Labour leader has dined with several newspaper proprietors and editors who have reacted with warm words to Blair. But Blair's press secretary Alastair Campbell still believes he is "dealing with a press that basically wants to do us in if it can".
MURDOCH'S INFLUENCE
Murdoch's influence over the British press is hard to overstate, his News International arm controlling around 35 percent of the market through its ownership of the Sun, the Times and Sunday titles News of the World and Sunday Times.
"Labour are haunted by the Sun 'light-bulb' front page and are determined to avoid a repetition of that," said Andrew Jaspan, former editor of Britain's Observer newspaper, commenting on Blair's efforts to build bridges with Murdoch.
There has been speculation that some of the News International stable may come out and back Blair.
Campbell says the Sun and the Daily Mail, often called the voice of Middle England, are the most important papers for his party but he is cautious about the chances of their endorsement. "I don't think even the most zealous right-wingers in those papers want to get back to where they were with Neil Kinnock," he said.
"Having said that, I've always said that if we could actually win the endorsement of a paper whose endorsement we didn't have at the last election, that would be a huge bonus." The mid-market Express, known as a "Conservative party cheer leader", is one possibility. United News &amp; Media, the paper's parent company, is now controlled by Labour supporting peer Lord Hollick, nicknamed "The Red Baron".
ABILITY OF MEDIA TO SWING VOTES IN DOUBT
Despite the anecdotal evidence and the Sun's claims, there is some doubt about the extent to which newspapers are able to affect voting patterns although opinion polls show readers of the Telegraph, Times and Sun are increasingly turning to Labour.
"It does look as if the tabloids are able to swing people and the Sun seems better at doing this than the Mirror," said Bill Miller, politics professor at Glasgow University.
"Mirror readers are more likely to be politically committed whereas the majority of Sun readers are not political animals and more open to influence," he said.
But Miller, who has studied the effects of newspapers on voting, said the importance of the press can be overstated.
He notes that the Sun, for example, sells only four million copies in a nation of 35 million voters.
"There is a net influence -- perhaps a swing of one percent which last time would have made the difference between Major's majority and a hung parliament."
But he said that this was not enough to affect the 15 to 20 percentage point lead which Labour holds in most opinion polls.
"If you want to annoy an incoming government you must expect to bear the consequences. It may be that the classic Tory tabloids realise this is not the election for them," he said.
