Pearson Plc's new chief executive Marjorie Scardino, the first woman to head a major British company, vowed on Monday to improve the financial performance of the media and leisure group.
Pearson announced a 1996 operating profit of 281 million pounds ($451 million), a rise of eight percent, before taking a 100 million pound charge for improper accounting at its Penguin USA trade book publishing subsidiary.
Finance Director John Makinson said that he did not expect Pearson to have to increase the provision to cover the problems at Penguin USA, which date back to 1991.
"We are comfortable with that provision," Makinson told Reuters in a telephone interview. "The 100 million pounds is to cover all known and foreseen eventualities," he added.
Makinson dismissed a report in the Sunday Times newspaper that the charge could double as a result of legal action by book retailers in the United States.
Pearson increased its full year dividend to 18p from 16.5p. The company's shares slipped 9p to 765p in early trading although the figures were broadly in line with market forecasts.
A great deal of market attention focused on the plans of Texan Scardino, who took the reins at Pearson in January.
She acknowledged that the company's profit performance must improve but gave few clues as to which parts of the business could be sacrificied in her drive for focus.
Among Pearson's assets are the Financial Times newspaper, a number of television production companies and a leisure arm which includes London's Madame Tussaud's waxworks museum.
"The major immediate changes under new management at Pearson will be the ones of style and focus on performance. As time goes on, we may change the business we're in too, as we work toward being first in a few important markets," Scardino said.
"But we won't be selling things just to be tidy. We'll be selling things where the move will make the company more valuable for our shareholders -- of today and tomorrow."
The leisure operations and a 50 percent stake in London merchant bank Lazard Brothers have been seen as possible candidates for disposal.
Scardino said greater emphasis would be based on performance measures for the operating companies. She also said that running the company as an integrated media group would create considerable scope to increase revenues and reduce costs.
Pearson also announced that it would invest up to 100 million pounds over the next five years in extending the Financial Times newspaper and brand internationally.
New print sites are to be established in Italy and Singapore but the main thrust of the expansion will focus on the United States. Financial Times editor Richard Lambert will be moving to New York for a year to oversee the editorial development.
Pearson added that the group had made a satisfactory start to the current year with operating profits in line with expectations. ($1=.6228 Pound)
