Newcastle United season ticket holders were rewarded for their loyalty on Monday when the English premier league club said only those regular fans would be able to buy shares in a flotation.
Initial interest in the listing appeared to confound the sceptics who suggested that the London stock market's enthusiasm for soccer stocks was waning.
The prices of listed clubs have fallen heavily in recent weeks. First division Charlton Athletic is trading at a heavy discount to its offer price after joining the junior Alternative Investment Market on Friday.
Share analysts said that Newcastle's status as one of the elite of English soccer and a squad boasting talent such as England captain Alan Shearer was bound to tempt investors.
Each Newcastle season ticket holder who has applied for stock will be allocated 370 shares, an investment of 500 pounds ($805), when the club joins the stock market next week.
Newcastle made 15 percent of the placing available to individuals, the remainder going to large institutions. The level of demand meant that ordinary members of the public who are not season ticket holders missed out completely.
The offer price has been set at 135p, capitalising Newcastle at 193 million pounds and making it the third largest English soccer stock after Manchester United and Chelsea.
Former European champions Aston Villa, one place below Newcastle at fifth in the premier league, moved a step closer to the market on Monday when shareholders approved flotation plans.
The Birmingham-based club is aiming to raise 15-20 million pounds in a flotation valuing at in excess of 120 million. The flotation is expected before the soccer season ends in May.
Leicester City, a newly promoted premier league team who have reached this year's League Cup final, are also reported to be considering a flotation.
Soccer club owners have recently cashed in on the game's popularity by joining the stock market. The move allows clubs to raise finance to fund stadium redevelopment and enables directors to spread ownership more widely and see a return on their own investment. ($1=.6215 Pound)
