Britons resigned to spending Easter at home in front of the television will at least have extra entertainment this year with the new Channel 5 station which goes on air on Sunday night.
The station is the first commercial terrestrial channel to launch in Britain since Channel 4 (C4) in 1982. But C4 has a remit to cater for minority tastes while Channel 5 will go head to head against the powerful ITV commercial network of regional broadcasters.
"Channel 5's audience will grow as ITV's declines," Dawn Airey, Channel 5 Director of Programmes, said last month. She promised "intelligent, stylish and popular" shows from a channel hoping to attract advertisers seeking to target young consumers.
Channel 5 is aiming to fill in the areas its terrestrial signal cannot reach by securing carriage agreements with BSkyB, and the cable companies.
Satellite and cable subscription channels have multiplied in Britain in recent years but only around 25 percent of households take them, limiting their appeal to advertisers.
Britons are television addicts, spending an average of almost four hours in front of the set every day. But will they find anything they want to watch on the new channel?
Operating on a limited budget, the station has set itself apparently modest initial viewing targets.
Its chief executive David Elstein, who was hired from pay television giant BSkyB, has said he believes the channel can win a five percent audience share by the end of the year. ITV, by contrast, has a share of around 35 percent.
However, Channel 5's core programme budget is only 110 million pounds ($175 million), against 600 million for ITV.
The licence-funded BBC, which supplies the other two "free to air" UK channels, spent a total of 1.1 billion pounds on its television operations in 1995/96.
Channel 5, owned by British media groups Pearson Plc, United News &amp; Media, European broadcaster CLT-Ufa and U.S. investment firm Warburg Pincus, has already had its share of problems before going on air.
Its major headache was the need to retune millions of video recorders in homes up and down the nation to avoid interference from its signal. That exercise has cost an estimated 150 million pounds, three times the original forecasts.
Channel 5 delayed its start date from January after the allocation of an extra broadcast frequency increased the workload on its army of retuners.
Little more than 60 percent of Britons are likely to be able to receive the service when it goes on air on Sunday. But this figure should increase to around 85 percent of the population by the end of the year as the extra frequency comes into use.
However, as many as two million of the 18 million homes reached could require a new or upgraded television aerial in order to get a decent picture.
Channel 5 plans a daily soap at 6.30 p.m. and its main evening news will be at 8 p.m., to avoid competing with the bulletins on BBC 1 and ITV.
That early news bulletin clears the decks for a daily feature film in the 9 p.m. slot. Extra money has been added to the core programming budget to secure movie deals and films lined up include Speed, Mrs Doubtfire and Independence Day.
The channel has also secured the rights to the Poland-England World Cup soccer match on May 31.
The consensus in the industry is that Channel 5 is likely to establish itself once the teething troubles are overcome. Its prospects are enhanced by the fact that it is getting into the market before multi-channel digital TV becomes a reality.
"It has got a whole set of problems such as retuning and coverage and it is entering what is now a much more competitive market," said Kip Meek, of media and telecommunications industry advisers Spectrum Strategy Consultants.
"But it is a new terrestrial channel and as such it should be able to make money."
