British national newspaper publisher Mirror Group Plc defied a steep rise in newsprint costs to post a small profit increase on Wednesday.
Pre-tax profit before exceptional items in the first six months of the year rose by 2.9 percent to 39 million pounds ($60.6 million). This came despite an increase of 18 million pounds in the cost of newsprint -- the material on which newspapers are printed.
"Mirror Group has outperformed other newspaper companies in absorbing a 35 percent increase in newsprint costs, maintaining high levels of marketing investment in the brands and still producing an increase in profits," chief executive David Montgomery said.
"The quality of these results confirms Mirror Group as an efficiently run media business now capable of further expansion by deploying its core skills," he added.
Exceptional credits of 12.9 million pounds were realised, principally from the settlement of property related issues.
Interim dividend was increased to 1.35p from 1.2p.
Market reaction was positive, Mirror shares adding 5.5p to 207p by 1210 GMT after earlier hitting 210p.
Mirror Group's flagship title is the tabloid Daily Mirror, Britain's second-top selling newspaper. It also has a major stake in The Independent broadsheet and has recently branched out into cable television.
Finance Director John Allwood said that cover price rises had helped to boost circulation revenue by 11 million pounds while advertising revenue was up by around five million.
The group forecast that the price per tonne of newsprint should decline to 475 pounds in the second half of the year from 520 pounds in the first six months.
It said its annual newsprint bill could climb as high as 131 million pounds in 1996, an increase of 20 million pounds, and noted that the pricing trend remained uncertain. The Mirror's Television arm had losses of 4.2 million pounds, stemming from start-up costs at its Live TV local cable service.
Live TV's offbeat style, including programmes such as topless darts, has earned it hefty criticism but the company said it was an under-valued asset.
It said that a recent independent assessment had valued the company at up to 90 million pounds and added there were no plans to dispose of it.
Live TV is connected to 1.45 million households -- 94 percent of all UK cable homes. It has special local affiliates in central London and Birmingham with plans to add the cities of Liverpool and Edinburgh by the end of the year. ($1=.6430 Pound)
