Channel 5, Britain's new commercial television station, said on Monday it was delighted with its launch after initial figures showed that five of its first night shows attracted a million viewers or more.
An estimated 2.3 million Britons tuned in when the station was launched on Sunday by chart-topping band The Spice Girls.
"We are delighted by the figures given that the weather was so good and some people are still tuning in their sets to pick us up," said Channel 5 spokeswoman Sally Osman.
Initial figures from the BARB monitoring service give Channel 5 a 5.8 percent share of viewing in the 6 p.m. to 10.30 p.m. slot.
The channel, the first commercial terrestrial station to launch in Britain since 1982, has a limited budget and has set itself a target for an audience share of five percent by the end of the year. It has styled itself "modern and mainstream" and is focusing particularly on the under-35s.
ITV, the dominant commercial television network, hit back by pointing out that its long-running Coronation Street soap had 11.6 million viewers for its Sunday evening episode. It said it had retained its traditional dominance of the ratings.
Channel 5 has transmission problems to overcome and is so far available in only six out of 10 British households.
It hopes to boost coverage to around 85 percent of the UK by the end of the year after an extra broadcast frequency comes on stream. It aims to fill in the gaps through carriage agreements with cable and satellite companies.
It was given a guarded welcome by the British press. "Although the station's news output should be distinctive the mix of soaps, imports, comedy and films is close to what is already on offer elsewhere," the Times wrote in an editorial.
But the newspaper said that the channel's low budget need not result in low quality.
"There are obvious opportunities for savings in modern programme making. If that space is creatively exploited by Channel 5 then it should be able to secure for itself a deserved place on the nation's screens," it added.
Channel 5 is owned by British media companies Pearson and United News &amp; Media, plus European broadcast group CLT-Ufa and U.S. investment firm Warburg Pincus.
It is the third commercial terrestrial channel after the ITV network and Channel 4. The two BBC channels are funded by an annual licence fee levy. The newcomer also faces competition from some 40 or so cable and satellite channels, to which around 25 percent of British households subscribe.
Channel 4 has a remit to cater for minority tastes so Channel 5 will compete directly with ITV for the mainstream terrestrial audience.
ITV has an average audience share of around 35 percent and its annual programming budget of 800 million pounds ($1.3 billion) far outweighs the 110 million pounds which Channel 5 plans to spend.
($1= .6124 Pound)
