Shares in Newcastle United Plc scored a premium to their flotation price on Wednesday when the Premier League soccer club became the latest team to join the London Stock Exchange.
Newcastle, floated at 135p, had added 6p to 141p by 1145GMT in heavy trading.
The club, based in northeast England and home to stars such as England captain Alan Shearer, Frenchman David Ginola and Colombian Faustino Asprilla, has a market capitalisation of just over 200 million pounds ($330 million).
Soccer club stocks rocketed in value last year but there has been a sharp correction in recent weeks, with the lesser lights of the Premier League and First Division clubs hit hardest.
Euphoria over potential income from pay-per-view television has evaporated, and the increasing supply of soccer club stocks has allowed investors to pick and choose more carefully.
However, clubs are still queueing up to join the market. Bolton Wanderers, poised for promotion to the Premier League, will be floated later this month following a 22 million pound agreed takeover by a company called Mosaic Investments.
Mosaic, which manufactures bar and catering products, is to rename the enlarged group Burnden Leisure Plc and plans to develop it into a sports and leisure business. The name is taken from Bolton's Burnden Park stadium.
Share analysts had expected the Newcastle flotation to prove popular as it gives investors access to one of the glamour clubs of the English game.
Only season ticket holders and club employees were allocated shares after the 15 percent retail tranche in the offer was heavily oversubscribed. The remainder was taken up by institutional investors.
Share analysts believe that Newcastle is well placed to benefit from soccer's financial growth. But they note that it still has work to do before it can claim to be on a par with the elite trio of Manchester United, Liverpool and Arsenal. Of those three, only United are listed on the main market.
"Newcastle have great ingredients with strong local support, a developing brand and a reputation for the kind of exciting soccer which attracts television audiences," said analyst Nick Batram of Greig, Middleton.
"The next stage is to turn that into profits and for a lot of people the jury is still out -- they want to see the company deliver."
Newcastle have spent 50 million pounds on players over the past five years, bankrolled by millionaire property developer Sir John Hall. Hall remains chairman of the football club but has not joined the board of the parent company where his son Douglas holds a controlling stake.
The investment has transformed the club from an ailing first division team into a Premier League force, although a major trophy has so far proved elusive.
Those transfer costs mean Newcastle has reported an operating loss in each of the past five years, although it was profitable in the six months to January of this year.
Bolton, in north-west England, were one of the 12 founders of the English Football League over a century ago.
They have languished in the lower divisions of English soccer for much of the past 20 years but believe that promotion to the Premier League and a move to a new 25,000-capacity stadium give them a sound basis for the future.
($ = 0.606 British Pounds)
