British television and newspaper group United News &amp; Media posted a profit rise of more than 20 percent on Thursday and said it had made significant progress since a merger earlier this year effectively doubled its size.
Pre-tax profit before exceptional items from the group totalled 151.9 million pounds ($236.2 million) in the six months to June 30, against last year's restated figure of 125 million.
Market reaction to the figures was broadly favourable, United shares closing 5p higher at 710.5p.
The figures were the first since a merger between United News &amp; Media and television and financial services group MAI. The merger, completed in April, created a company with a market capitalisation of more than three billion pounds.
The group owns British national newspapers The Daily and Sunday Express and Daily Star and operates commercial television (ITV) franchises in southern and eastern England.
Share analysts said that extensive restructuring meant that most of the merger benefits would not feed through until next year and some complained that the results were unnecessarily hard to decipher.
"There are huge exceptional items and I think the progress will come next year but the jury is still out," said one, reflecting a general sentiment. "They're spending a 100 million pounds to reshape the business and it will be a long payback."
Chief executive Lord Hollick said that a review of the group's businesses would be completed by the end of the year.
"This year's accounts will tell the full story," he said.
Reviewing the merger, chairman Lord Stevens said in a statement: "One-off costs will be significant and to date amount to 56.4 million pounds".
United will take an 82 million pound profit on the sale of specialist legal publisher Tolley in its full year figures. It is also seeking buyers for some 50 local newspapers in southern England and Wales, a sale that could raise 50 million pounds.
On the debit side, it will take a charge in the second half of 32 million pounds for the reorganisation of Express newspapers. It also faces costs of up to 30 million pounds from its share in Britain's new Channel 5 television station.
The merger spawned an unlikely management team of Stevens and Hollick, dubbed "The Odd Couple" by the British press.
Hollick, formerly MAI's managing director, is a staunch supporter of the opposition Labour Party, while Stevens' Express newspapers reflect his backing for the ruling Conservatives.
United last week announced a plan to put the Daily and Sunday Express titles under a seven-day editorial team in an attempt to halt a long-term decline.
Hollick said the newspapers had been "starved of investment" and vowed to plough 10 million pounds back into Express annually in each of the next three years. ($1=.6430 Pound)
