British television and newspaper group United News &amp; Media reported a profit rise of more than 20 percent on Thursday and said it had made significant progress since a merger earlier this year effectively doubled its size.
Pre-tax profit before exceptional items from the group totalled 151.9 million pounds ($236 million) in the six months to June 30, against last year's restated figure of 125 million.
"This has been a period of significant progress. We achieved an increase in profits of over 20 percent, and the strategy outlined at the time of the merger is being implemented effectively," said chairman Lord Stevens.
"There will be further initiatives in the second half to improve our operating performance and to strengthen and develop our products and franchises," he added.
The merger between United News &amp; Media and television and financial services group MAI, completed in April, created a major media company with a market capitalisation of over three billion pounds.
The enlarged group owns British national newspapers The Daily and Sunday Express and Daily Star and operates commercial television (ITV) franchises in southern and eastern England.
The merger spawned a management team of Lord Stevens and MAI's Lord Hollick, a duo dubbed "The Odd Couple" by the British press.
Hollick, now United News chief executive, is a staunch supporter of the opposition Labour party while Stevens' Express newspapers reflect his backing for the ruling Conservatives.
Hollick told Reuters on Thursday that United News aimed to complete a review of its portfolio of businesses by the end of the year. "We have set a fairly fast pace," Hollick said of the first few months of life with United.
Hollick noted that the performance was "at the top end of expectations" but market reaction to the figures was cautious.
United shares added 9.5p to 715p in early business but gradually retreated to stand only 1p firmer at 706.5p.
The large number of exceptional items stemming from the company's reorganisation prompted the caution. Turnover was moderate as many traders sat things out while their media analysts discussed the figures with the company.
Reviewing the merger, chairman Lord Stevens said: "One-off costs will be significant and to date amount to 56.4 million pounds".
United will include an 82 million pound profit on the sale of specialist legal publisher Tolley in its full year figures. It will also take a charge in the second half of 32 million pounds stemming from the reorganisation of Express newspapers.
The Daily and Sunday Express titles are to be produced by a single editorial team, the first genuine experiment with a seven-day-a-week operation in the British national press.
Hollick said that the newspapers will be given time to close the circulation gap on mid-market rival The Daily Mail. The once-mighty Express sells some 1.2 million copies while The Mail has circulation of above two million all through the week. ($=0.6430 Pound)
