The UK government on Monday threatened to scupper a bid by London Clubs International for rival casino group Capital Corp when they passed it to competition authorities.
Consumer Affairs Minister John Taylor said the 190 million pound ($310 million) hostile bid raised competition concerns in relation to the London casinos market. He referred it to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission (MMC).
London Clubs, which operates seven casinos in the British capital, said it was disappointed by the decision.
"We believe that the arguments which we submitted to the Office of Fair Trading (OFT) provided sound evidence that there were no adverse competition issues," said London Clubs chief executive Alan Goodenough.
The MMC has until July 7 to decide on the issue. The referral means the bid automatically lapses.
London Clubs said its board would meet to consider future action. It could come up with a fresh bid if the MMC clears the proposed acquisition of Capital, which operates Crockfords and the Colony Club for high rollers in the swish Mayfair area of London.
A merged company would have controlled almost two-thirds of London's 1.7 billion pound casino market.
Shares in Capital Corp fell 15.5p to 184.5p after the bid was scrapped. They had stood at 171p on February 14, the day before the bid was tabled. London Clubs came off 6.5p to 402p, having risen from 385p during the bid process.
London Clubs had been offering 47 of its shares for every 100 in Capital Corp in its all-paper offer. Share analysts had forecast a sweetened offer from London Clubs.
Capital Corp chief executive Alan Hearn welcomed the MMC referral, repeating that the bid was too low.
"The referral enables us to focus on developing further the group's valuable business, without the distraction and expense of a hostile bid," he said. "I welcome the opportunity to demonstrate to shareholders the significant value we can create as an independent company."
Hotel and gaming company Ladbroke Group Plc, which has four London casinos, had been mentioned as a possible rival bidder for Capital Corp. There had also been speculation that leading British leisure company Rank Group Plc, which has 31 casinos, could enter the fray.
British casinos are increasingly attractive investments as the government relaxes rules on membership and drinking hours. There are also proposals to allow new clubs to open at some 20 sites.($ = 0.611 British Pounds)
