Hewlett-Packard Co. Monday announced price cuts of up to 41 percent for its computer workstations in a bid to win back market share for its products.
Analysts said the move was aimed at reversing recent gains by rival Sun Microsystems Inc. in workstations, the powerful desktop computers used in technical and engineering work.
"This price cut is the opening salvo in determining how competitive they're going to be," said Joe Ferlazzo, analyst at Technology Business Research in Hampton, N.H.
The price cuts range from 27 percent to 41 percent. For example, the price for the higher-end HP Visualize Model C180 equipped with a 20-inch colour monitor was slashed by 32 percent, to $34,995 (corrects price from $43,995) from $51,500.
At the lower end, the price of the HP Visualize Model B132l was cut to $6,795 from $11,500, the company said.
The new pricing corresponds with Hewlett-Packard's plan to make its workstations more like personal computers by trimming expenses and passing on expected savings to customers.
The strategy is aimed at rivals such as Digital Equipment Corp., Silicon Graphics Inc. and especially Sun, widely regarded as the low-cost producer of workstations.
Sun Microsystems raised its market share to 41 percent in the workstation business in 1996, more than its three nearest competitors combined, as the overall workstation market shrank by 1 percent to $15 billion, according to data from International Data Corp, a market research firm.
Managers at Hewlett-Packard's workstation operations said the new pricing was aimed directly at its competition.
"It is a very significant change," said Andrew Allison, publisher of the newsletter Inside the New Computing Industry.
"HP has not heretofore been a price leader or expressed the intent to be a price-performance leader."
But Hewlett-Packard's move was unlikely to go unnoticed by rivals in the fiercely competitive sector.
Executives at Sun Microsystems, which cut its prices last quarter, told analysts last week it was prepared to make further aggressive price cuts in the power workstation market it now dominates.
"Sun is the low-cost producer," said Allison. "Sun is in the best position to deal with this issue and I would expect Sun to respond to HP's moves."
