A senior Clinton administration adviser said Friday electronic commerce over the Internet could become the world's largest trade category within the next decade if it did not become over-regulated.
Ira Magaziner, senior advisor to President Clinton for policy development, said in a keynote speech to an Internet Tax Policy Conference here the Internet must remain a free market for electronic commerce to take off.
"If we get the right kind of environment in place, we can accelerate this growth so that in a five- to 10-year time frame, trade across the Internet will actually be more than any other category of trade," he said. "If we do it wrong, we could spend 30 to 40 years trying to undo bad policy."
The Clinton administration last month proposed a global electronic commerce framework and put forth a draft policy which proposes making cyberspace a duty-free zone, with no new taxes and minimal governmental regulation.
"One of the reasons we wanted to move quickly is we wanted to pre-empt what we saw as bad policy already being thought about," said Magaziner, who said he knows of a dozen countries contemplating slapping duties on the Internet.
Magaziner, who organized the task force on health care which failed in its bid to introduce sweeping health care reforms in Clinton's first presidenctial term, said the White House wanted to be "completely open" in its developing its initiative.
The draft document is posted on the Internet at the White House home page (http://whitehouse.gov). The administration is collecting responses and hopes to issue a final version of the policy paper in March, the Clinton adviser said.
Magaziner said intellectual property protection was a key issue, along with fair use, liability and privacy, and he said the government's policy towards encryption, which has been sharply criticized here in Silicon Valley, is still evolving.
"We want to preserve the Internet in its somewhat anarchic form...," he said of the White House position. "The economic potential is tremendous, and what we in government must do is make sure we don't mess it up or interfere."
