Silicon Graphics Inc. said it will launch a new line of computer workstations Monday as the company moves to fend off the threat of increasingly high-powered personal computers.
The new line of Octane workstations fills out the broadest revamp ever of Silicon Graphics' product line. It includes a powerful new design aimed at bolstering its No. 3 position in the market for workstations running the Unix operating system.
The Mountain View, Calif.-based company discussed its new products in interviews ahead of Monday's formal release.
Silicon Graphics will also shave the prices of its Indigo2 Impact 10000 workstations by up to 22 percent as it aims to position the line between its entry-level O2 machines, introduced in October, and the new Octane models.
The powerful machines are typically used by engineers in intensive number-crunching tasks ranging from oil exploration and molecular modeling to flight simulation, computer-aided design and video and television.
The new Octanes share many of their components with the company's new supercomputing design unveiled in October and feature technology that greatly increases the speed with which data moves between its components.
"What SGI has done is eliminate most of the chokepoints, and you get the full effects of most of the microprocessor" that is the heart of the computer, said David Weisberg, publisher of the newsletter Engineering Automation Report in Englewood, Colo.
Weisberg and industry analysts said such performance was important to Silicon Graphics' effort to fend off the threat to its traditional high-end graphics markets by increasingly powerful PCs built with Intel Corp. microprocessors running Microsoft Corp.'s Windows NT operating system. Shipments of the computers based on what analysts have dubbed the "Wintel" PC architecture surpassed traditional workstations for the first time in 1996, according to preliminary data from International Data Corp.
The market research firm said Wintel-based systems grew 38 percent worldwide to 831,000 units. With revenues rising 16 percent to $3.7 billion while sales of traditional Unix workstations declined, International Data said it expects Windows NT-based systems to continue gaining share in 1997.
Weisberg said he was concerned that Silicon Graphics, along with Sun Microsystems Inc., has chosen to shun Windows NT and adapt a Unix-only approach despite the fact many newer software developers favor Windows NT.
"Silicon Graphics is, in effect, eliminating some of the very good software vendors," he said. "If they don't make some type of a move to support Windows NT by the end of the year, 1998 could be a very difficult year for Silicon Graphics."
Drew Henry, product line manager of Silicon Graphics' power desktop line, said that with the design used in its O2, Indigo2 and Octane systems, Silicon Graphics can "sell levels of performance that are well above levels of performance that you're going to get out of a Wintel system."
About half of the new Octanes, which Silicon Graphics plans to start shipping by the beginning of March, are expected to be sold through third parties, he said.
International Data analyst Karen Seymour said the Octane's new design, or architecture, would give it "headroom" for future high-end performance and help it gain market share. But she said it was not likely to challenge the position of first-place Sun Microsystems and No. 2 Hewlett-Packard Co..
"I think the most critical aspect of this announcement is going to be SGI's ability to execute," she said.
Silicon Graphics last week said delays in stepping up production of new computer models hurt financial performance in its December quarter despite strong demand for new products which pushed its orders to record levels.
Pricing for the Octane systems starts at $24,995, the company said.
The new prices for Indigo2 machines, which take effect Feb. 1 and include up to a 33 percent reduction in memory and storage upgrade prices, reduce the price of its lower-end Indigo2 Solid Impact to $19,995 from $24.995.
