The full-service Internet travel agency Premier Travel said it will launch a new site on the World Wide Web on Wednesday to make it easy to surf the Internet for airline tickets.
Ken Orton, president of Preview Travel, said in an interview the company has already sold more than $5 million worth of airline tickets and vacation packages through its services on American Online Inc since May this year.
"This is a utility built for consumers," Orton told Reuters, noting that the service aims to provide the travelling public with "an unbiased look at what's available".
"People are voting with their credit cards," he added. "People who know they want to buy an airway ticket want to go the shortest distance (to obtain it)."
Up to now, Premier Travel has offered vacation packages and tickets through America Online, itself an investor in Premier with a stake of less than 20 percent of the travel agency, and on its Web site at  http://www.vacations.com.
The new service, at  http://www.reservations.com, enables customers to design their own travel plan, order tickets using their credit cards, and have them delivered within two days.
Orton noted this service largely revolved around specific details, such as fares and schedules, while its other holiday package-oriented businesses are geared to use multimedia capabilities to sell entire vacation deals.
The airline ticketing system will enable travellers to book tickets 24 hours a day, seven days a week, and enable them to store up to five different profiles with preferences, such as seating priorities, class of service and meal requests.
Individuals can keep separate profiles for business trips and for use with family members or when traveling alone.
Preview Travel said it has invested heavily in research and development to introduce the service both on the Web and on America Online, where it is available under the keyword "reservations."
Orton said that as of September 18, it will become America Online's primary airline ticketing service, displacing EasySaabre, the electronic ticketing service pioneered by AMR Corp's American Airlines.
Orton said the company's existing online travel service has been averaging $50,000 to $100,000 in tickets daily, with great peaks in usage during last month's fare wars.
"During the fare wars we did very large numbers," he said, noting the rush to buy tickets had aparently flooded airlines' own reservation agents with inquiries.
Although the company has online competition and is a long way from matching the size of sales by EasySaabre, which according to industry executives last year sold in excess of one million tickets worth an estimated $300 million, Orton said its technology has the capacity to exceed that amount.
"We could get bigger than EasySaabre using our present architecture," Orton said, adding the company is also engaged in a co-promotional deal with Netscape Communications Corp to appear on Netscape's "destinations" button.
The Netscape home page is the most heavily-trafficked site on the World Wide Web multimedia section of the Internet.
Preview Travel is a 12-year-old company which has specialised in travel-related television programming and which began offering services on the Internet in 1995.
Investors in  the privately-held company include America Online, Landmark Communications, US West Corp's US WEST Interactive Services group and the Menlo Park-based venture capital firm Kleiner Perkins Caufield &amp; Byers.
