Undeterred by recent market worries over the networking sector, Cisco Systems Inc chief executive John Chambers said he continued to see the industry's overall business growing at a brisk clip in 1997.
"We see a very good market at 30 to 50 percent growth for the forseeable future," Chambers told Reuters in an interview after a conference call with analysts in which he repeated Cisco's goal of outperforming the market's growth.
Cisco's second quarter results narrowly beat Wall Street estimates, rebuffing market talk on Tuesday of a shortfall.
Cisco reported that net income rose nearly 62 percent to $339.5 million in its second quarter to January 25 compared with $209.7 million a year earlier. Net sales rose 73 percent to $1.59 billion from $918.5 million a year earlier.
Analysts said Cisco's pro forma net income of $351.9 million, or $0.51 a share, excluding an acquisition-related writeoff and a net gain from sale of an investment, topped First Call's mean analysts estimate of $0.50 a share and roughly equalled Wall Street's $0.51-$0.52 "whisper number."
Chambers said the firm expected to acquire another 10 to 12 companies in its current year. "Almost every market segment has opportunity for internal products, joint development projects with our partners and acquisitions," he told Reuters.
Cisco shares, which had ended the Nasdaq market session down 1-1/8 at 67-1/8 before the results were released, slid as low as 64-1/4 in after-market trade. Some analysts attributed the decline to concerns the company's post-exceptional $0.49 a share earnings number had fallen short of expectations.
Analysts said Cisco executives in their conference call had addressed concerns over a possible slowing in the market, sparked by comments attributed to rival 3Com Corp.
Several analysts said they saw no sign that any December sluggishness observed by 3Com had a major impact on Cisco's business.
"I think it was another good solid quarter from Cisco. No hint of any problems," said Paul Saunders of Van Kasper &amp; Co.
Chambers said a shortening of order lead times -- down to one to three weeks now from eight to 12 weeks previously -- meant quarterly shifts in results may be more pronounced. He repeated previous comments that "sometime in the future, we'll see a quarter that is in single-digit growth."
Analysts said sequential growth in revenues from one quarter to the next -- such as the second quarter's more than 10 percent rise from the first fiscal quarter -- would still provide sharp year-on-year increases.
A second quarter gross margin of 65.3 percent surprised some analysts who had been expecting price competition to cut into margins. But Chambers said: "Our overall guidance is over time...margins will continue to go down."
"There will be a few (quarters) up, but I think most of them will be down, hopefully just slightly."
Smith Barney analyst Therese Murphy noted Cisco's third quarter tended to be weak, but saw no reason to be "any more cautious than we normally would be in the April quarter."
Chambers did not see any fundamental industry change, and continued to target growth above the industry rate while taking advantage of further consolidation, she said.
