Intel Corp., the world's biggest maker of computer chips, said Tuesday its workers received about $820 million in cash bonuses, profit sharing and retirement pay for the company's record year in 1996.
"The average employee received a minimum of about 33 percent payout over their base salary for the year -- about four months of extra income," Intel Chief Operating Officer Craig Barrett told reporters in a conference call.
For an entry-level hourly worker earing $25,000 a year, the combined package of added compensation and benefits for last year amounts to roughly $8,000 extra, Intel said.
"We think it's also been a phenomenal benefit to our shareholders by motivating our employees to do the best possible job they can for our shareholders and our customers," said Barrett, who will become Intel's president this spring.
Intel said the $820 million in 1996 cash profit-sharing and retirement contributions exceeded the company's total 1981 revenues and was roughly equal to its 1991 net income.
Profits at the Santa Clara-based semiconductor company, which supplies the microprocessors used in four out of every five personal computers shipped, last year soared to $5.2 billion as revenues hit $20.8 billion.
Barrett said he did not begrudge employees any of the extra benefits from contributing to record results, and the company now plans to make all its employees eligible for stock options beginning with its next plan, which starts in April.
"This outstanding year would not have been possible without the remarkable efforts of Intel employees around the world," said Barrett, heir apparent to Intel CEO Andy Grove.
Intel ended 1996 with a workforce of around 48,500.
Separately, Intel Chief Financial Officer Andy Bryant told an investment conference in New York City that Intel remained on track in the first quarter to meet its financial targets, as personal computer unit sales continue to grow.
The stock of Intel closed up 12.5 cents at $151.75 on the Nasdaq market, where it was third most heavily-traded.
Barrett said the company last year paid out $214 million, or the equivalent of 26.9 days' salary for each Intel employee, under the Employee Cash Bonus Program. All employees receive the cash profit-sharing in six-month installments.
In 1996, the company also extended its Employee Bonus profitability-based program to all employees. The plan, based on growth in Intel earnings and achievement of an employee's business group goals, paid out a total of $360 million.
A one-time bonus marking Intel's record-breaking year paid $1,000 to each U.S. employee and a locally adjusted figure to each non-U.S. employee, or a total of $45 million.
Intel said that for the ninth consecutive year it contributed the maximum allowed by law to its employee retirement program, or 12.5 percent of employees' pay -- a figure which totaled about $200 million.
Intel has sought to build one of the corporate world's most innovative compensation and benefits packages as a way of attracting top employees and to reward them for contributing to the company's long-term growth and profitability.
Intel, whose shares have vaulted 180 percent in the past year despite moribund results at many rival semiconductor companies, said it was one of only a small number of companies to have instituted an across-the-board options plan.
Even the lowest-level hourly workers will receive options to buy a minimum of 50 shares in a five-year plan in which the employee gains one-fifth of the allotment each year. Barrett said Intel also spends roughly 6 percent to 7 percent of its payroll, or around $150 million, on employee training each year to help employees advance in their careers.
Barrett said Intel's generous compensation plan and the hardships at other companies resulted in lower jobs turnover last year. He declined to specify the exact turnover rate, but said "We're in the relatively low single-digit range."
