Hewlett-Packard Co. stock surged in heavy trading Wednesday, a day after the computer and printer maker reported surprisingly strong first-quarter profits that were its highest in eight years.
Morgan Stanley &amp; Co., Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette and Goldman Sachs &amp; Co. upgraded their ratings on the company's stock and raised earnings estimates amid renewed confidence in the company's growth and cost management prospects.
Hewlett-Packard rose $7.375, or nearly 13 percent, to close at $56.875 on the New York Stock Exchange, where it was the most active issue on volume of more than 9.1 million.
The stock traded as high as $57.50, just shy of its record high of $57.63 reached last spring.
Late Tuesday, Hewlett-Packard reported profits of $912 million, or 87 cents a share, on revenues of $10.3 billion in its first quarter ended Jan. 31. In the year-ago period, it earned $790 million, or 75 cents a share, on revenues of $9.3 billion.
Analysts had expected earnings per share to be unchanged.
"Nearly all of the positive earnings surprise was driven by improved gross margins," NatWest Securities said in a report, echoing comments by other analysts citing Hewlett-Packard's strong asset management controls during the quarter.
HeWlett-Packard said gross profit margins rose to 35 percent in its first quarter, up by more than 2 percentage points from 32.8 percent in the fourth quarter.
Hewlett-Packard Chief Financial Officer Bob Wayman said Hewlett-Packard pared inventories by 8 percent in its first quarter while revenues rose 11 percent to $10.3 billion, a sharp contrast to the prior year when inventories grow 54 percent, or twice as fast as its 27 percent revenue growth.
Analysts said they were cheered by the company's ability to trim its cost of sales across virtually all its businesses -- a process which company executives said would remain a key focus.
"That's why we and a number of other people consider them the best-managed company in the (computer industry) group," said John Jones, industry analyst at Salomon Brothers.
Jones said he had upgraded his earnings per share estimates by 6.6 percent to $3.25 from $3.05 for the fiscal year ending in September 1997, and by 4.3 percent to $3.65 from $3.50 for fiscal 1998 and reiterating the firm's "buy" rating on the stock.
"I think there's upside in their numbers, but at this point I'd like to see us get through the next quarter," Jones said. "We've got one more tough comparison and then the numbers get a lot easier."
Hewlett-Packard fell short of expectations in the final two quarters of fiscal 1996 after two blockbuster quarters, and management cautioned analysts again Tuesday that its second quarter will be measured against 33 percent revenue growth a year ago.
"The exceptional growth that they had last year is really having a negative impact on them," Jones said. "Right now, people are basically comfortable with this being a 15 to 18 percent growth company."
NatWest also raised its 1997 and 1998 earnings estimates and continued to recommend accumulating Hewlett-Packard stock, which it said was very attractive at current levels and could reach $66 within in 12 months.
Goldman Sachs, which had previously rated Hewlett-Packard's stock "outperform," put it on the brokerage's recommended list and raised its 1997 earnings estimate to $3.25 from $3.00.
