E*Trade Group Inc President and Chief Executive Christos Cotsakos said the company continues to increase its subscribers by eight to ten percent per month, with some days at higher rates.
We are growing between 8 and 10 percent a month, Cotsakos said in a presentation to investors at Robertson, Stephens &amp; Co's Tech 97 Agenda investment conference.
E*Trade is fresh from its initial public offering in August 1996. The company's stock closed up 2-3/4 at a record closing high of 22-1/8, after reaching an all-time mark of 22-7/8 earlier in the day.
Investors and analysts said a deal with Microsoft Corp in which E*Trade's share trading service will be integrated into Microsoft's online investment service, investor.com, had helped boost the shares.
Like many of the companies presenting here, analysts see strong rationale for continued growth for specific companies like E*Trade as the Internet space expands and draws businesses onto the World Wide Web.
There's a lot of momentum behind them, Robertson Stephens &amp; Co analyst Catherine Baker, who covers Internet service and commerce sectors along with information companies, said of E*Trade.
While the Palo Alto-based electronic brokerage company has been averaging 550 new accounts a day representing about $10 million in assets, Cotsakos said the company has had at least one day when it signed up 1,200 new customers with assets of $22 million.
Cotsakos noted that the company's percentage of total daily retail share trading volume had risen from 1/10 of 1 percent in 1995 to 0.7 percent of daily volume.
E*Trade processes some 7,000 daily transactions over the Internet, which represents approximately half its total volume, with telephone calls making up around a quarter of volume and the rest coming from direct dial modems and from gateways such as America Online.
E*Trade earlier announced it had struck a deal with Microsoft Corp in which customers of Microsoft's Microsoft network MSN and its Microsoft Money product will be able to access E*Trade for trading.
Cotsakos said E*TradeFs customer assets have risen from $800 million two years ago to $3 billion currently, a compound annual growth rate of 208 percent.
He also noted that investors that sign up with E*Trade trade on average around 25 times a year, o roughly six times more than usual investors using a discount broker.
Cotsakos said E*Trade will be adding further news services as well as upgrading its telephone services with voice recognition technology. The company also plans to expand to Japan, Taiwan, Hong Kong and Britain this year.
Cotsakos declined to discuss upcoming financial results. Baker said, however, that she estimates E*Trade's revenue could be $1 to $3 million ahead of projections in its current quarter, or 10-15 percent above expectations.
Baker's estimate for the current, second fiscal quarter had been for the company to report $0.07 a share profit on revenues of $27 million.
Baker said the upside surprise would track with currently strong market trading volumes, adding the company's growth would track well as long as the overall stock market continues to be strong, driving volumes up.
The analyst said the most important strategic move for E*Trade now would now be to add trading of mutual funds.
Nearly 400 companies are due to make presentations at the Robertson Stephens &amp; Co. technology conference in presentations spread over five days this week. ((sam.perry@reuters.com, Palo Alto Bureau 415 846 5400))
