While Internet stocks have taken center stage in the investment arena alongside such high-tech stalwarts as Intel Corp and Cisco Corp, many investors are wary about what 1997 will bring.
Tech sector stocks have sagged amid uncertainty over the 1997 market outlook.
With growth of the PC market expected to moderate further despite a strong business upgrade cycle, investment in technology stocks is shifting somewhat towards value investing from momentum players,  according to some investors and analysts at the annual Robertson Stephens &amp; Co. technology conference here.
"People are still suffering from too much money  and too much volatility and they're not sure when it's all going to stop," said Keith Benjamin, a Robertson Stephens senior research analyst covering Internet media content and services companies.
Investors also said they are being more selective than a year ago, when Internet stocks were the rage and bankers joked that you could write "Internet" on a dollar bill and take it public for $10.
"Investors are looking for stable revenue streams here, annuity-type businesses," said one investor for a European fund.
Some investors also expressed frustration at the process of sifting through myriad business plans -- some 70 of the more than 350 companies presenting here this week were Internet related, many taking the center stage over more established firms.
"I don't think they have any idea what their business plan is," said another investor, shaking his head as he left the room after a presentation of one well-known Internet startup.
"There are very few opportunities and so much money out there looking for them," said Robert Herwick, head of Herwick Capital Management, noting the recent sell-off in networking stocks could also have repercussions for shares of hot chip-makers supplying the communications market.
Many of these fast-growing companies had held their value last year despite the slump in the rest of the semiconductor sales at the time amid a flood of new semiconductor capacity and Herwick says investors may even be experiencing a bottoming of high tech sentiment now.
Despite some bullish comments about spot prices of 16-megabit computer memory chips by companies like Micron Technologies Inc., which said this week spot prices for the chips have risen 50 percent in recent weeks, executives remain cautious.
Micron's chairman, Steven Appleton, warned that although markets exaggerate the up and down cycles of the semiconductor business, it is folly to ever believe these swings will disappear.
Likewise, Herwick said some semiconductor executives are worried about further capacity coming on-line despite the apparent efforts of Korean chipmakers to curb output, and this could impact pricing for the next-generation  64-bit memory chips in the second half.
Several of the Internet companies stressed, as they had in their initial share offering documents, that they have limited operating histories and are focused foremost on gaining market share and revenues.
"There's one thing on our minds, and that's revenue," said Bruce Wilson, executive vice president of CyberCash, Inc., at a presentation late Thursday.
Further consolidation is expected in the Internet space.
The on-line chat company iChat noted in its presentation here that 99 percent of all Internet traffic is already commanded by less then one percent of all sites, and others said this concentration is only expected to increase.
Forrester Research CEO George Colony said he expects many leaders in existing physical markets will successfully enter and dominate the on-line world as well, over time.
Referring to Amazon.com, the Seattle-based Internet bookseller which currently runs one of the hottest Internet merchant sites, Colony said established companies may yet come to dominate space.
"Do you think three to four years from now Amazon.com will be a major brand?" he asked in a panel discussion this week. "I call them Amazon.toast."
In an apparently unrelated decision, Amazon.com, the company, canceled its presentation at the conference, Robertson Stephens announced. ((sam.perry@reuters.com, Palo Alto Bureau 415 846 5400))
