Separate divisions of Hewlett-Packard Co. will Monday unveil new products executives say will reduce the difficulties and costs of owning and operating computer networks.
The products, which HP representatives said are geared to ease computing systems management while also reducing costs, include manageability tools and new additions to the company's HP Vectra line of business computers.  
The Palo Alto-based company is also launching a second generation of its HP NetServer E series server devices for small and medium-size businesses which typically have little or no computer systems management staff.
Computer servers are the machines which tie together networks of computers and other devices, such as printers and centralized data storage.
In an additional announcement, HP's printer division said it is adding to its HP OfficeJet "all-in-one" line of machines which combine in one device tasks such as printing, scanning, copying and fax capabilities.  
HP said its HP Vectra personal computer models will now come loaded with TopTOOLS, a new management tool provided free which enables systems managers to handle configuration, security and a variety of other tasks from any location on a computer network.
TopTOOLS is part of a series of enhancements HP is preparing in an effort to reduce the cost of operating networked personal computers, which some research studies have estimated can cost up to $12,000 a year to run.
The tool has a broad range of features, including the ability to remotely configure and upgrade systems, handle security features and keep an inventory of their PCs.  
HP said it will also provide a sweeping upgrade of its HP Vectra personal computer lines, including models equipped with Intel Corp.'s Pentium processors with MMX technology, enhanced 10/100 Base-T LAN interface and 4.5 gigabyte Ultra SCSI hard disk drives.
Its new high performance XA Pentium Pro processor HP Vectra PC models, for example, will begin at an average selling price of $2,624 for 200 Megahertz models, for example, or $3,583 with the Ultra SCSI drive.  
New models of the HP Vectra VL line will include a 64- bit graphics engine and new S3 Trio64 V2 video controller for enhanced graphics. The line in various configurations will range in price from $1,235 to $1,871, HP said.
The HP Vectra VA PCs will incorporate manageability features and have average prices of at $1,827 to $2,221 and the HP Vectra VE personal computers are to be value priced with expected prices in the $1,050 to $1,200 range.
HP also said it will launching the second generation of its NetServer E Series, the E40 model, just six months after it introduced the line last September.  
HP faces stiff competition from Compaq Computer Corp. in the space, but still reckons the top market competition is use of a generic personal computer tilted on its side and configured as a server.
For this reason, HP is adding features to make the E 40 models, priced at $2,160 to $2,630 and available on April 1, extremely simple to use for a company which may have no internal systems management staff.  
Elaine Lennox, worldwide E-Series product manager at HP's Network Server Division, said the machines include a simple alerting mechanism for problems and contain a remote console for resellers to fix problems remotely.
"We only tell you when there's a problem," said Lennox, adding each unit will be shipped with Novell Inc.'s IntranetWare for Small Business pre-installed so it can be activated using a key code if a customer wishes to add the network operating system.  
HP's printer business said it is launching its OfficeJet 500 printer-fax-copier-scanner which can print black text at speeds up to four pages a minute and color documents at a rate of a page a minute.
The new machine, expected to be available in May, are targeted at the small office, home office market and are expected to cost around $500 in the U.S. market.
HP said it will continue to sell its OfficeJet 300 for a reduced price, about $400 in the United States.  
HP is also introducing a professional multifunction printer, the OfficeJet Pro 1150C color printer-copier- scanner for about $1,000.
The product can print black text at speeds up to eight pages a minute and mixed text and color documents at speeds up to four pages a minute, with copy speeds only slightly slower. It can scan color images in 10 seconds.
HP is also introducing a 14-inch liquid crystal display (LCD) flat-panel PC monitor, which is expected to ship in April at an average U.S. selling price of $2,419.
The sleek monitors are more energy efficient than cathode ray tube devices and are particularly useful in areas where workspace is limited, HP said. ((sam.perry@reuters.com, Palo Alto Bureau 415 846 5400))
