Netscape Communications Corp will on Monday map out a vision on how companies will be able to use its products in the future to coordinate activities between themselves and customers, partners, suppliers and distributors.
While much of the hype surrounding the advent of the World Wide Web has been devoted to new media opportunities, the area with the biggest payback involves a vast network of secured interconnections between companies using Internet technology.  
Internet analysts and investors in the technologies now expect the market for this variety of electronic commerce to far outstrip even their most upbeat projections for expansion of merchandising and advertising over the Web.
And for software providers such as Internet pioneer Netscape, the market could be even larger than the $10 billion that independent research firms are projecting the Intranet software market may grow to be by the year 2000.  
Marc Andreessen, Netscape's co-founder and senior vice president of technology, has been talking since the middle of last year about the prospective new market for these so-called "Extranets" -- external networks of interlinked corporate Intranets.
"Extranets could actually be bigger than Intranets. We'll see," Andreessen told Reuters. "The reason is because if there's 10,000 Intranets out there, then there's 10,000 squared possible connections between them, every one of which is going to involve software."  
"Right now, if a company wants to build an Extranet between two Intranets, they have to do a lot of work at the network level," Andreessen said.
With Netscape's software, companies can provide partners with access to parts of their Intranet, making it easier to communicate on projects, he said.
Netscape, which supplies the world's most popular Internet browser, hopes to develop what it calls "Crossware" -- on-demand software applications that run across a multitude of networks and operating systems.  
Netscape said its own next-generation products -- a client's software for computer users dubbed Mercury and a suite of server products codenamed Apollo -- will be available in early 1998.
The announcement is part of a flurry of product introductions expected this week at the industry's Internet World trade show in Los Angeles, and weeks before the final release of Netscape's Communicator package of Internet software, incorporating browsing, electronic mail and group collaboration features.  
Netscape also hopes its Actra Business Systems joint venture with a division of General Electric Co, will help build products for business-to-business and business-to-consumer markets.
Actra is releasing products before mid-year which will enable electronic data interchange over the Internet, Andreessen said.
In a bid to seed this new market, Andreessen said Netscape plans as early as this summer to release a new development tool codenamed Palomar to help developers build crossware applications.
For Netscape, the potential Extranet market could be a huge boon. It also promises to be no cakewalk, with rivals Microsoft Corp and International Business Machines Corp's Lotus Development Corp reaching into their own deep pockets to compete aggressively in the field.
But Netscape hopes to continue to push its leadership role in Internet software and has lined up partnerships with more than 35 companies around a core set of standards for Extranets.
