Sun Microsystems Inc. will Tuesday announce its entry into the supercomputing systems market long dominated by Cray Research, which was acquired by Silicon Graphics Inc. last year.
Sun executives said in interviews ahead of the Tuesday announcement that their new Sun Ultra HPC servers, or computers that manage the flow of data in a network, will offer better price performance than Silicon Graphic's Origin 2000 and International Business Machine Corp.'s RS6000 SP.
Industry analysts said the move could make Sun an aggressive new player in a market that has been changed over the last decade by new massively-parallel computers that use lots of small processors to work simultaneously on different parts of a problem in order to reach a solution more quickly.
"It's revolutionary for them," said Dataquest analyst Jerry Sheridan. "It presents a competitive environment. SGI is a strong competitor in the technical arena."
Executives at Sun, which bought part of Cray's computing business from Silicon Graphics as part of the Silicon Graphics-Cray deal, said Tuesday's announcement was the first of a series of developments aimed at boosting Sun's share in the high performance computing market from virtually nothing last year.
Sun noted International Data Corp. projects the market for the world's most powerful computers, used for everything from nuclear weapons and environmental modelling to aerospace and automotive design, will hit $5.6 billion by 2000.
"We're leveraging into the markets where we've been traditionally successful -- that is the markets of the technical, engineering and scientific user," said Jamie Enns, manager of product marketing at Sun Microsystems Computer Co.
Sun's ultimate objective is to have a stake similar to the estimated 30 percent to 50 percent of the market now held by Silicon Graphics, he said. "This is a five year programme."
Enns said the core product is based on the Enterprise Server 3000 to ES 6000 line of products Sun introduced in April 1996 and adds supercomputing features. Sun said the U.S. list price for the systems will range from $43,745 to more than $2.5 million.
