The great Internet gold rush may be over, some high-technology industry executives say, but they see a silver lining: continued growth for leading high-tech companies.
"The Internet gold rush is over. We've had this big phenomenon, but there's not a lot of gold there," Frank Gill, executive vice president and general manager of Intel Corp.'s Internet and Communications Group, said in an interview on the eve of Wednesday's Spring Internet World 97 conference.
Gill is one of five keynote speakers at the Los Angeles conclave, which is expected to produce a blizzard of new product announcements from Internet start-up companies, many of them based in California's Silicon Valley.
In additon to Intel's Gill, top executives from computer makers Apple Computer Co., International Business Machines Corp. and Digital Equipment Corp. are expected to speak at the conference.
The Internet start-up explosion reached its peak nearly a year ago, when some Internet companies changed the rules of raising money in stock markets, where three years of profitability were considered a prerequisite for going public.
Yahoo! Inc., for example, went public at a valuation that peaked in initial trading at over $1 billion on its first day of trading despite less than a year of full operating history and no assurance of profits in the foreseeable future.
Despite the brakes applied to the Internet public offering market last summer, venture capital investment continues at a strong pace and major corporations are now going onto the World Wide Web, which continues to grow at a rapid clip.
Start-ups with innovative products -- including technology that "pushes" news and software content to users instead of making them go out and get it and so-called intelligent agents that help sift through the huge mass of data on the Internet -- are expected to flock to the conference floor hoping to flaunt their wares.
"I don't think the number of start-ups will slow down (but) their dreams for (stock) valuations will be more realistic," said Gill, who is due to address the conference Thursday.
Now people are "hunkering down" to focus on providing value to consumers and value to business, Gill said, adding that Intel itself has invested in smaller companies with pioneering technology and sought to foster new technologies, such as modems that run on cable televison systems and making telephone calls over the Internet.
Gill sees JamTV, a new online music network developed with Digital Entertainment Networks, as an example of new Internet capabilities which also drive demand for higher-performance computers.
For Intel, he said, the Internet is a "wonderful opportunity" because it could drive demand for more PC sales.
The Internet World conference will be the next battleground in the war between Internet pioneer Netscape Communications Corp. and software giant Microsoft Corp. for leadership in the Internet software market.
It also will give Apple Computer Chief Executive Gil Amelio another chance Wednesday to spell out his struggling company's Internet strategy, which he has said is core to its turnaround efforts, just two days before he is due to announce further layoffs in a fresh restructuring.
Whatever the plight of individual companies, industry executives at a conference held near San Francisco Tuesday said they saw no slowdown in Internet demand.
"We've seen over 300 percent growth in our backbone in 1996," said Robert Hagens, director of MCI Communications Corp.'s Network MCI Service, referring to the company's core Internet service lines.
