Four publicly traded startup companies formed to help computer users surf the World Wide Web are now fighting it out in a battle that promises to circle the world at high speed.
Since the flurry of their initial public offerings this spring, all four -- Yahoo! Inc., Excite Inc., Infoseek and Lycos Inc. -- have been busy trying to establish a beachhead on the Internet.
At issue is a solid shot at establishing leading brands for years to come for serving as the gateway to help people weave their way through the Internet's extensive, but still unruly, World Wide Web.
The stakes are high for establishing navigation hubs which could be "the ultimate power brokers" at the center of major traffic flows on the Internet, said John McCarthy, director of research for interactive technology strategies at Forrester Research.
He also said the fledgling companies need to offer more than the initial scattershot Web search approach he said was akin to "a drive-by shooting."
"Users are getting more sophisticated and they need more than just pointers," he said.
McCarthy and others involved in the industry expect those who are successful in the next 12 to 18 months to attract even greater attention, and perhaps even acquisition offers, from the industry's largest players.
"Oracle, Microsoft and Netscape are not going to stand by and watch," McCarthy said.
All four of the newly public firms are developing and improving personal services by providing a sort of custom electronic front page on the Internet and most are looking overseas as well as to domestic deals to expand their reach.
For its part, Yahoo! -- started two years ago by two Stanford University graduate students -- has focused sharply on developing and extending its brand name, developing sites for three U.S. metropolitan areas and in Japan. Yahoo! also expects to launch country services for Britain, Germany and France in the next few weeks.
At an industry conference Monday, Yahoo Chief Executive Tim Koogle said the company was seeking to build on its lead in market share and advertising by spreading Yahoo's brand internationally and in a variety of services.
"You come to Yahoo! to find information and consume it," he said. "The brand is important. Technology is important, too, but people don't want to have to care about that."
While customers are most interested in ease of use, the companies have their eyes on the potentially billions of dollars in advertising that may find a home on the Internet.
Infoseek President Robin Johnson, whose company has developed speedy new Ultra search technology, said there was upwards pressure on advertising rates, currently at around $21 per thousand views.
Excite President George Bell, whose company launched a service this week using technology that updates a personalized service based on an individual's usage patterns, said ultra-customized services could one day produce highly-targeted ad rates of up to $200 per thousand views.
Koogle said a projected $2.5 billion in Web advertising by the year 2000 -- some 1 percent to 2 percent of estimated total advertising spending, was not unreasonable.
How much of that will flow to navigation companies and their ability to continue to attract the eyes of computer users still remains a critical question.
Koogle said a 20 percent to 30 percent share for the sector's ability to provide "a share of eyeballs" may be possible.
