Hewlett-Packard Co. jumped solidly into the Microsoft Windows NT camp on Wednesday, saying it would "aggressively integrate" the operating system into its computers and spend tens of millions of dollars on joint strategies.
HP Chairman and CEO Lewis Platt, appearing at a news conference with Microsoft Corp Chairman and CEO Bill Gates, said the companies would work together on a broad range of products and services aimed at reducing computing costs.  
At one time Hewlett-Packard dismissed Windows NT, designed for the servers that run computer networks. Platt said customer demand was behind the decision to embrace it.
"It's all built around input from our customers," he said in a news conference at HP's corporate headquarters in Palo Alto.
Support for Windows NT -- only one aspect of the collaboration announced by the companies -- corresponds to HP's plan to develop a new processor with Intel Corp capable of running both NT and Unix software.  
HP's warming to Microsoft could cause some discomfort to the company's partners, especially Netscape Communications Corp, Microsoft's Internet arch-rival. HP forged an alliance last May with Netscape to help companies build Internet-based internal networks on Unix and NT systems, analysts said.
"Our strategic direction is to provide choices and interoperability between choices," said one HP executive, called on by Platt and other HP executives to answer a question on whether HP will continue to support Novell Inc.'s directory services, as announced last week.  
HP executives have stressed that the company wants to stay clear of the battles raging between Microsoft and Silicon Valley companies such as Sun Microsystems Inc.
But David Tremblay, an analyst at Computer Intelligence/ Infocorp, said the next year may bring confusion for HP's customers if, for example, its neutrality prevents HP from making firm recommendations on software suppliers.
The deal also strikes a blow for HP rival Digital Equipment Corp, which has worked with Microsoft on Windows NT for five years. Digital's speedy Alpha chip is the only 64-bit microprocessor that currently runs NT.  
"The strength of HP is really quite impressive," Gates said in response to a question about how the deal may affect Microsoft's alliance with Digital. "We've got a lot of breadth here."
The demand for services and support for NT now exceeds what has been available on the market before the deal with HP, which has a wide array of reseller partners, Gates said.
"Digital's jumping up and down about NT, but they're not exactly blowing the doors off of it," one analyst said.  
The growth of Windows NT is building steam, according to Gates, who showed a slide in which sales of Windows NT Server licenses were approaching 250,000 in the fourth quarter of 1996, up from around 150,000 in the first quarter last year. "HP is pragmatic, if nothing else," said Scott Miller, an analyst at Dataquest. But he cautioned that HP faced a challenge as it drew more technologgy from partners such as Intel and Microsoft, making it more difficult for the company to "own the customer" as closely as in the past.
((sam.perry@reuters.com, Palo Alto Bureau +415 846 5400))
