Netcom On-Line Communications, Inc. on Monday unveiled a new multi-tier pricing policy, with price points ranging from $24.95 to thousands of dollars a month.
Netcom said it would "grandfather", or maintain current customers, at the present $19.95 flat rate, but will introduce a "fair usage" policy which will over time limit these users from hogging bandwidth at peak hours, for example.  
Netcom Chairman and CEO David Garrison told Reuters in an interview the company continues to grow very rapidly, and expects the pricing plan to boost revenues.
"Our company continues to grow very rapidly," he said ahead of the announcement. "We think that (the new pricing plan) will result in increased revenues above where we would have gotten."
"We were operating profit positive in the fourth quarter in the United States operations and we would expect to continue that way," he said.  
But he added that "We don't expect to see the full impact of this until the third and fourth quarter of this year."
The $24.95 a month Netcomplete Advantage service provides 28.8 kilobits per second access along with an extra mailbox, blocking software, financial and anti-virus software.
Netcomplete Advantage Pro adds premium support and access to online research libraries for $29.95 a month.
Both services have a $25 set-up fee.  
Among its business services, which Garrison said could range up to monthly fees in the thousands of dollars, are new Web hosting services priced at $125 a month with a one-time $150 set-up fee.
Garrison said the company was seeking to show "leadership in a business that's sort of gone haywire."
He said the pricing plan was developed after collating responses from more than 25,000 subscribers. "It was important that somebody lead the industry away from this craziness," he added.
The largest U.S. consumer online service, America Online Inc, raised a rage of protest and lawsuits after it announced a $19.95 a month flat fee Internet access plan and couldn't keep up with demand for access.
Garrison said the company's research provided an answer of "a resounding no" to whether it could provide a "successful business that is $19.95, has unlimited access, unlimited usage and quality service."
Garrison said the Netcom plan is geared towards active Internet users who frequently combine the Internet usage with their business day and require access from work, home and on the road. ((sam.perry@reuters.com, Palo Alto Bureau 415 846 5400))
