Sun Microsystems Inc. and its heavyweight partners Wednesday launched a series of initiatives aimed at making its Java software perform more speedily on devices ranging from "smart cards" to supercomputers.
The announcements by Sun and Java partners like computer power International Business Machines Corp., software giant Microsoft Corp. and Web browser leader Netscape Communications Corp. came at the second annual JavaOne software developers' conference in San Francisco.
Analysts see Java -- a computer language which promises to enable programmers to write one piece of software that can run on many different systems -- as a technology that will eventually creep into pretty much every company's computers.
Sun said it would introduce a stronger Java for Microsoft's dominant Windows operating system this summer and would further enhance Java's performance and security by the end of the year.
The company, which before Java was best known for its computer workstations, said it also had devised Java variants optimized for devices ranging from large data center computers to smaller, hand-held machines and even pagers and cellular phones.
On the hardware side, Sun announced licensing and partnership agreements with companies like Japan's Toshiba Corp. which will put semiconductors designed around Java in a variety of devices from cellular phones to television set-top boxes, navigational devices known as global positioning systems and the aircraft electronics known as avionics.
A previously announced version of Java software that will run on older personal computers using Microsoft DOS will be dubbed JavaPC and will be available this fall for less than $100 for machines using Intel 486 and Pentium microprocessors.
The company estimates JavaPC will offer new life to some 180 million such PCs.
Java, unveiled just two years ago, has produced an awkward alliance among fiercely competitive rivals. Wednesday's proceedings at San Francisco's Moscone Center, which was packed by thousands of software developers, were highlighted by the usual industry controversy.
Down the hall from where Sun Chief Executive Officer Scott McNeally and other major Java figures were giving keynote addresses, Microsoft Chief Executive Officer Bill Gates was due to show off his company's Java work later in the day.
"Certainly, the center of the nuclear attack is going to be right here at ground zero in San Francisco," Gartner Group analyst David Smith said of the dueling speeches.
Sun hopes that by de-emphasizing individual platforms, especially Microsoft's Windows, it can level the playing field and extend sales of computer systems like its Solaris, which runs on the Unix operating system.
Gates, who is not used to playing second fiddle, and other industry players over time are expected to vie with Sun for leadership of the growing number of developers entranced by Java, now estimated at 400,000.
