Intel Corp. stock fell for the third straight day Friday on concerns that a series of upcoming price cuts could slow the company's momentum.
The stock tumbled $6.75 to $130.50, off a total of $16.125, or roughly 11 percent, since Tuesday.
The fall led the entire market lower, and analysts cited nervousness about Intel's first-quarter results, due after the market close on Monday. The earnings report will serve as a critical barometer of whether strong corporate earnings can keep underpinning stock values.
Industry analysts said Intel's quarterly price cuts on Pentium processors are expected to lead to slightly lower prices for personal computers. Some speculated that in expectation of rival chips, such as Advanced Micro Devices Inc.'s new K6, Intel will cut Pentium prices more than usual, from 25 percent to 30 percent.
"This continues to fuel normal PC demand," said Kimball Brown, an analyst with Dataquest Inc in San Jose, Calif. "This is the normal stuff that keeps stimulating the market."
According to First Call, which tracks Wall Street estimates, analysts expect Intel to report a first-quarter profit of $2.07 a share, up from $1.02 a year ago, when Intel posted net income of $894 million on revenues of $4.64 billion.
If Intel meets those expectations, it will be the second straight quarter in which the world's largest maker of computer chips has more than doubled its year-on-year profits.
An Intel spokesman said the company could not comment this close to its earnings report, but the company said in mid-March -- within two weeks of the close of the quarter -- that market fundamentals "remain very strong."
Intel executives told analysts in January they expect revenues to be around $6.4 billion, about even with what it reported in the fourth quarter. Gross margins -- the difference between revenue and the costs of goods -- are expected to be even with or below the fourth quarter's 63 percent.
Analysts said Intel's bellwether role -- it has recently made a habit of re-energizing flagging stock markets with particularly upbeat earnings reports -- is especially crucial given Wall Street's current moodiness.
Wall Street is particularly wary of the outlook for corporate earnings following the Federal Reserve's March 25 decision to raise interest rates and fresh speculation about chances of another rate increase based on Friday's report of underlying price pressures at the wholesale level in March.
"People are scared. Intel is one of the biggest holdings and they can still sell it at a profit," said David Wu, high-tech analyst at ABN AMRO Chicago Corp. "They're scared because tech stocks are going down. If technology stocks can't do corporate earnings, you can forget about the rest.
Analysts said the much-heralded "whisper" number for Intel is for it to make $2.15 a share, and that even $2.20 a share could be possible given another blow-out quarter.
But, one analyst cautioned, "anything less than $2.15 would not be good" for the market.
Market researcher Dataquest said last week that Intel will continue to dominate the personal computer industry, where its processors currently account for 95 percent of the market, although clone-makers will start to make inroads this year.
Intel spokesman Howard High said Friday the company will continue with its routine quarterly pricing changes, but that he saw no unusual changes in the upcoming pricing pattern from that to which the PC industry has grown accustomed.
"We do our price declines in a pretty predictable, orderly fashion," he said.
Analysts expect Intel to cut some prices when it unveils its new high-end Pentium II chip next month, and High said Intel's practice is to "move other products down a notch" to make room for the new processors.
"The movement is always in a relatively consistent direction, which is down. The rate is dependent on market conditions ... They (the pricing reductions) seem to have been pretty constant over the years," he added.
In February, Intel's pricing changes for its Pentium and Pentium Pro family of microprocessors ranged from no change at all to roughly a 34 percent decline, he noted.
Intel's processors range in price from around $100 for the lower-end, older models to over $1,000 for the highest-end chips.
