Apple Computer Inc. is seeking outside investment in its Newton computer unit and is looking for new homes for at least a dozen technology projects it recently decided to stop funding, the struggling computer maker's chief scientist said.
The unit responsible for the hand-held Newton computer was spared the axe in a restructuring last month despite speculation it would be closed.
Early versions of the highly touted Newton did not make the grade four years ago, but Apple Chief Scientist Larry Tesler said in an interview late Thursday that the unit's latest offerings have been getting rave reviews.
Demand for its new eMate, a version of the Newton in a stylish clamshell case with a keyboard for schoolchildren and costing around $800, is particularly strong, Tesler said.
A small group of Apple executives has been assigned to explore alternatives for increasing investment in the Newton business while Cupertino, Calif.-based Apple slashes spending elsewhere in a bid to return to profitability, he said.
Tesler declined to talk about individual companies which Apple may have approached and said he is not directly involved in the group's day-to-day efforts, but said the executives had entered the process with "an open mind."
The group was prepared to consider a broad set of options, he said, although he would not say specifically whether these could include a joint venture or some sort of manufacturing or distribution deal, for example.
"We are pleased by the reception for the eMate and looking at how we can increase our investment in it at the same time as we lower expenses of the company," he said.
Apple's lead scientist said talk of scaling back or exiting the Newton business, which made Apple a pioneer in the hand-held computer market despite its bumpy start, was off target at a time when "it's just hitting its stride."
In mid-March, Apple set out to cut spending by an average of 25 percent across the company while abandoning support for an array of technologies in its research labs.
Apple has said it would cut 4,100 jobs and take a $155 million restructuring charge in the second quarter ending March 31. Apple is due to report second-quarter results April 16.
Tesler said Apple was looking for ways to keep its discontinued work alive by licensing it, for example, to third parties "so these technologies can come to market."
"They're not ones that fit our business model, but they're ones that we think are good and ought to come to market," he said. "We have one or two dozen technologies that Apple has decided to discontinue and (it is seeking to farm them out) rather than seeing them wither."
Tesler declined to give details on what the technologies were, other than the outline given last month in the company's restructuring announcement. He said the method of seeking new sponsors to further develop and market the technologies would differ according to each.
Tesler was attending the Sixth International World Wide Web Conference in Santa Clara, Calif., where he made a presentation to a packed room on some of the newest technology for use in Apple systems.
