Apple Computer Inc.'s chief scientist said the company is seeking to generate outside investment in its Newton computer group, especially for its hot eMate product.
Apple Chief Scientist Larry Tesler also told Reuters in an interview here late Thursday that Apple is looking to find new homes for at least a dozen technology projects it recently decided to stop funding.
The Newton unit was spared the ax in last month's restructuring, despite speculation it would be scrapped.
Indeed, although early versions of the highly-touted Newton fell short of the mark four years ago, Tesler said Apple is getting rave reviews for its latest offerings.
Demand for its eMate, a version of the Newton in a stylish clamshell case with a keyboard for schoolchildren and priced around $800, was particularly strong, he said.
A small group of Apple executives have been charged with exploring alternatives to increase investment in the Newton business while the company is slashing spending elsewhere in a bid to return to profits, he said.
Tesler declined to talk about individual companies which Apple may have approached, and said he is not directly involved in the group's day-to-day efforts, but that they had entered the process with "an open mind."
The group was prepared to consider a broad set of options, he said, although he would not say specifically whether these could include a joint venture or some sort of manufacturing or distribution deal, for example.
"We are pleased by the reception for the eMate and looking at how we can increase our investment in it at the same time as we lower expenses of the company," he said.
Apple's lead scientist said talk of scaling back or exiting the Newton business, which helped Apple pioneer the handheld computer market despite its bumpy start, was off target at a time when "it's just hitting its stride."
In mid-March, Apple set out to cut spending by an average of 25 percent across the company while abandoning support for an array of technologies in its research labs.
Apple has said it would cut a total of 4,100 jobs and take a $155 million restructuring charge in the second quarter to the end of March. Apple is due to report its second quarter results on April 16.
Tesler said Apple was looking for ways to keep its discontinued work alive by licensing it, for example, to third parties "so these technologies can come to market."
"They're not ones that fit our business model, but they're ones that we think are good and ought to come to market," he said. "We have one or two dozen technologies that Apple has decided to discontinue and (it is seeking to farm them out) rather than seeing them wither."
Tesler declined to give details on what these further technologies were, other than the outline given last month in the company's restructuring announcement, and he said the method of seeking new sponsors to further develop and market the technologies would differ according to each.
Tesler was attending the Sixth International World Wide Web Conference in Santa Clara, where he gave a presentation to a crowded audience on some of the hottest new Internet technology for use on Apple systems.
Speculation that Apple might part with its Newton division re-emerged on Thursday after USA Today reported Apple was in talks with Sun Microsystems Inc. over the possibility Sun might buy the Newton unit.
The newspaper reported Sun could be a tough bargainer and said no deal was imminent. Neither Tesler, Apple nor a spokesman for Sun Microsystems would comment on the report. Sun said it does not comment on speculation.
Sun Chairman and CEO Scott McNealy said last week he would not comment on acquisition rumors, including those about Apple. He said that in general Sun will remain "opportunistic" in evaluating any deals that come its way.
Earlier this year Advanced RISC Machines Ltd. (ARM), which makes the speedy processors used in the Newton eMate and Apple's recently launched MessagePad 2000, said ARM was working with Sun's Javasoft unit to make an operating system based on Java technology run on the ARM platform.
((sam.perry@reuters.com, Palo Alto Bureau 415 846 5400))
