USWeb Corp Chairman and Chief Executive Joe Firmage on Monday said the fast-growing Internet services company had launched the second stage of its business plan, agreeing to acquire affiliates in six U.S. metropolitan areas.
Firmage, who started the Santa Clara-based company just 13 months ago, said the second phase of the plan called for the expansion of its corporate-owned operations. He said USWeb would also expand outside the United States, particularly in Southeast Asia and Japan, by the end of October.  
Next year, USWeb will concentrate on profitability, he said. "In January 1998 the focus is on leveraging what we built," Firmage said in an interview in Palo Alto.
He said the company was seeking to achieve economies of scale in the market for services related to building Internet sites and intranets -- internal corporate computer networks that take advantage of inexpensive Internet technologies.
Firmage said USWeb in its first phase succeeded in building a string of franchises in 54 locations in 26 states, including recent affiliates in Austin, Texas., Seattle, Pittsburgh, and Irving and Laguna Hills, Calif.  
The chief executive said USWeb had also succeeded in building a strong name and thus a currency for expansion. A recent study rated USWeb third among information technology executives for brand awareness, behind AT&amp;T Corp and MCI Communications Corp, he said.
Firmage said the company was close to arranging a second round of financing. Last year, USWeb raised $17 million from Softbank Corp of Japan and Crosspoint Ventures, which valued USWeb at $31 million, he said.  
Firmage declined to project the size of any new investment.
By next year, the company's expansion should help USWeb become "broad and deep and profitable," he said, declining to elaborate on expected profit margins.
Firmage said more than 50 percent of USWeb's business was "the $50,000 to $1 million range of companies setting up business-critical sites for department-sized operations.  
That work, and even much of the business of setting up enterprise-wide sites ranging in value from $500,000 to $3.0 million, is below the horizon of some of the bigger high-technology consulting firms, he added.
Firmage said Internet technologies accounted for an increasing share of the $20 billion information technology out-sourcing market.
The affiliates that USWeb is acquiring are in Washington, San Francisco, the New York City area, Orange County, Calif., Philadelphia, and Milwaukee.
Firmage declined to discuss when or whether the company may consider an initial public stock offering. But, he said, with the current moribund IPO market and declining share prices, "the private market is the place to be right now."
Meanwhile, acquisition offers the owners of its franchises a way of creating some liquidity in their holdings, he said.
"There's no question that this does open the possibility of liquidity," he said. "We have a liquidity path."
USWeb's operations now encompass some 400 to 500 people. The company will hold its semiannual affiliate meeting, known as Velocity, in San Francisco next week.
((sam.perry@reuters.com, Palo Alto Bureau 415 846 5400))
