The legal barrage by Netscape Communications Corp. against arch-rival Microsoft Corp. may end up dampening investors' enthusiasm for both stocks, analysts said on Wednesday.
Gary Reback, Netscape's outside counsel at Wilson Sonsini Goodrich and Rosati, has urged the Department of Justice to take immediate action against Microsoft for alleged violations of its 1994 consent decree and antitrust laws.
Separately, Tim O'Reilly, head of Internet publisher O'Reilly &amp; Associates, said he was recently approached by a Justice Department official asking about Microsoft's behaviour, perhaps indicating fresh interest in the matter.
Microsoft, which has weathered legal battles successfully in the past, has rebuffed the allegations, saying Netscape's claims are "full of wild and unsubstantiated statements."
The software giant went on the offensive Wednesday, accusing Netscape of failing to live up to its own promises that it would support open Internet standards.
"Netscape should take a good look at themselves in the mirror," said Brad Chase, vice president or marketing for Microsoft's Internet division, noting Netscape had blocked users of Microsoft's browser from parts of the Netscape site.
Nevertheless, analysts noted the market has a distaste for legal uncertainty, and investors were likely to start factoring in at least some degree of risk that the battle could escalate into a full-fledged government investigation or lawsuit.
"The legal risk is starting to get heightened on this," said Montgomery Securities analyst David Readerman, who covered Microsoft during Apple Computer Inc.'s failed five-year copyright lawsuit against the software giant.
Microsoft also was probed by the Federal Trade Commission and, subsequently, the Justice Department for five years until its July 1994 signing of a consent decree agreeing to alter the way it licenses operating system software.
That accord was viewed by some of its software rivals as having been lenient, and Netscape's lawyer asked the Justice Department in a letter released Tuesday to examine whether Microsoft was now using its control over computer operating systems improperly.
In both cases, analysts noted that the hint of further legal difficulties could dampen further advances in the companies' stocks as the market seeks to sort out the business impact, if any.
"We've been there with the Apple vs Microsoft and we've been there with the (Justice Department) and the experience is that these stocks tend to stall as the market tries to figure out what the risk is all about," said Readerman.
Microsoft stock closed up 12.5 cents at $123.50, while Netscape was unchanged at $37.25, both on Nasdaq.
Lawyers in Washington, D.C., said they doubt the Justice Department would find Microsoft had acted improperly, based on the charges leveled against the company by Netscape.
Mountain View, Calif.-based Netscape alleged through its letter to the DOJ that Microsoft had offered "clandestine side payments" and discounts on its operating system, and other inducements, to promote use of its own Internet browser.
The lawyers contacted by Reuters noted that while Microsoft dominates the PC operating system market with around a 90 percent share, Netscape has an estimated 80 percent share of the market for Internet browser software.
"In the browser category, Netscape is the elephant and Microsoft is the mouse," said Robert Skitol of Drinker Biddle &amp; Reath. "It's a bit of a stretch to call what Microsoft is described as doing a violation of the consent decree or a violation of antitrust laws."
