Netscape Communications Corp.'s lead antitrust lawyer has written the Justice Department urging it to take immediate action against Microsoft Corp. for what he characterised as "far-reaching, anti-competitive behaviour."
The letter demanding "immediate attention" was dated Aug. 12 and made available to Reuters Tuesday. It represents a further escalation of a battle of words between the rival companies that began earlier this month as they prepared to issue new versions of Internet browser software.
Gary Reback, the outside attorney representing Netscape, also suggested in the letter to Deputy Assistant Attorney General Joel Klein that the issue be turned over to the Federal Trade Commission for further investigation.
The eight-page letter accused Microsoft of having made written offers to computer makers, Internet service providers, large corporations and others providing for "either clandestine side payments, discounts on the Microsoft desktop operating system (Windows) or payments in the form of 'real estate' on the Windows 95 (opening) screen."
Reback says these inducements were made on condition that the parties involved would "make competitors' browsers far less accessible to users than Microsoft's own browser." A browser enables computer users to access the Internet's World Wide Web.
The letter said Netscape had "uncovered numerous additional steps that Microsoft has taken for the purpose of eliminating competition in the Internet software markets," including predatory pricing and bundling of products.
Microsoft spokeswoman Claire Lematta dismissed the letter, saying it "appears to be full of wild and unsubstantiated statements."
"It looks to us like a marketing document masquerading as a legal document," she said. "Netscape must be feeling the competitive pressure."
The legal clash comes at a critical point as both Netscape and the Redmond, Wash.-based software giant introduce new versions of their respective browsers, Netscape Navigator and Microsoft Internet Explorer.
Mountain View, Calif.-based Netscape, an early leader in browser technology, holds the lead in market share with an estimated 80 percent or more of the worldwide market.
But Microsoft, whose Windows systems are found in about 90 percent of personal computers, has moved quickly to gain an estimated 10 percent of the browser market and says more than 1 million people have downloaded its latest browser ,version.
That software, Internet Explorer 3.0, was formally introduced just a week ago. On Monday, Netscape launched the latest version of its browser, Navigator 3.0
Both companies have linked up with content providers to offer free trial subscriptions as a way of promoting their browsers. Analysts have said that Microsoft, which has thrown its marketing and financial clout into Internet products, has leveled the playing field with its latest software.
Microsoft and Netscape are also already well along the way to developing the next versions of their browsers.
Reback, a Silicon Valley lawyer known for spearheading past legal tussles with Microsoft, said the alleged practices went far beyond those which had been addressed in a consent decree reached by Microsoft and the Justice Department just two years ago.
"Microsoft's behaviour is, if anything, more anti-competitive and pernicious than the conduct addressed specifically in the decree," Reback wrote in the letter.
