Hewlett-Packard Co., seeking to extend its position as a leader in electronic commerce, said Wednesday it agreed to acquire VeriFone Inc. in a stock swap worth $1.18 billion.
Hewlett-Packard said VeriFone, a leader in electronic payment hardware and software, will be operated as an independent unit of HP. Verifone stockholders will receive one HP share for each VeriFone share, the company said.
The acquisition is a big step in HP's drive to develop products for what it calls the "on-ramps" and "off-ramps" of the information superhighway, a business that includes computer printers and scanners, where Hewlett-Packard already has a dominant market share.
In an intervew last week the company's top Internet executive, Ira Goldstein, said Hewlett-Packard aimed to become the information appliance supplier to the fast-growing market for Internet technology.
The Internet portion of the electronic commerce market alone is expected to reach $95 billion in the United States by the year 2000, according to research by International Data Corp.
HP said the proposed acquisition would combine its strength as the second-largest U.S.-based computer equipment company with VeriFone's leadership in electronic commerce. VeriFone had net revenue of $472 million in its 1996 fiscal year.
The acquisition price of about $1.18 billion was based on HP's closing stock price of $50.50 a share Tuesday. As of Monday, VeriFone had 23.3 million shares of common stock outstanding, the companies said.
HP's stock slipped by $1 to $49.50 in midday trading on the New York Stock Exchange, where it was one of the most heavily traded issues.
Verifone jumped $17.625, or 59 percent, to $47.75 in very heavy trading on the NYSE, after initially being halted, as investors priced in the value of the stock swap.
Redwood City, Calif.-based VeriFone, which was founded in 1981 and pioneered automated credit card transaction systems, has recently expanded to include conducting business over the Internet and "smart-card" products for homes.
Smart cards have imbedded computer chips that can store so-called electronic cash and other information.
Just last week, Citicorp's Citibank launched a pilot programme with VeriFone to test smart card use that will allow selected customers to download funds onto smart cards using devices in the home or office.
VeriFone estimates that its systems handled more than $520 billion of the $800 billion in electronic transactions conducted in the United States last year.
HP said the two companies' technologies complement each other, with HP's focus on Internet security technologies and major corporate markets melding with VeriFone's expertise in moving money.
"Central to HP's strategy to achieve this vision is the ability to move money securely from end to end over the Internet, an area VeriFone has pioneered through products and strategic relationships," HP Executive Vice President Rick Belluzzo said.
The companies' relationship also includes providing products for the Visa/MasterCard Secure Electronic Transaction protoco, which is beginning to roll out this year, for secure credit-card payments over the Internet.
