Hewlett-Packard Co., seeking to forge rapidly into the fast-growing area of electronic commerce, said Wednesday it agreed to acquire VeriFone Inc. in a stock swap worth $1.18 billion.
Hewlett-Packard said VeriFone, a leader in electronic payment hardware and software, will be operated as an independent unit of HP. Verifone stockholders will receive one HP share for each VeriFone share, the company said.
Forrester Research estimates the market for business to business electronic commerce will jump from $600 million last year to $66 billion in the year 2000, with consumer retail business rising to $7 billion from $530 million in 1996.
"When you talk about online commerce today, invariably you're talking about online payment. VeriFone is going to be the diamond in the crown in this area for some time to come," said Forrester Research analyst Karen Epper.
HP said the proposed acquisition would combine its strength as the second-largest U.S.-based computer equipment company with VeriFone's leadership in electronic commerce. VeriFone had net revenue of $472 million in its 1996 fiscal year.
The acquisition price of about $1.18 billion was based on HP's closing stock price of $50.50 a share Tuesday. HP's stock slipped by $1 to $49.50 in midday trading on the New York Stock Exchange, where it was one of the most heavily traded issues.
Verifone jumped $17.625, or 59 percent, to $47.75, also in heavy trading on the NYSE.
JP Morgan analyst Daniel Kunstler said the deal provides HP with some "lynchpin technologies" for electronic commerce, and although it will be slightly dilutive to HP's current fiscal year earnings, the impact should be less than one percent.
Redwood City, Calif.-based VeriFone, which was founded in 1981 and pioneered automated credit card transaction systems, has recently expanded to include conducting business over the Internet and using "smart-card" products for the home.
Smart cards have imbedded computer chips that can store so-called electronic cash and other information.
Just last week, Citicorp's Citibank said it will launch a pilot program with VeriFone to test smart card use that will allow selected customers to download funds onto smart cards using its devices in their home or office.
VeriFone estimates that its systems handled more than $520 billion of the $800 billion in electronic transactions conducted in the United States last year.
The acquisition is a further step in HP's drive to develop products for what it calls the "on-ramps" and "off-ramps" of the information superhighway, a business that includes computer printers and scanners, where HP is a dominant player already.
HP said the two companies' technologies complement each other, with HP's focus on Internet security technologies and major corporate markets, including its broad distribution channels, melding with VeriFone's expertise in moving money.
"Central to HP's strategy to achieve this vision is the ability to move money securely from end to end over the Internet, an area VeriFone has pioneered through products and strategic relationships," HP Executive Vice President Rick Belluzzo said.
The companies' relationship includes providing products for the Visa/MasterCard Secure Electronic Transaction protocol, which is being rolled out this year, for secure credit-card payments over the Internet.
Analysts noted that other firms, many of them fledgeling startups like Cybercash, in which VeriFone holds a 10 percent stake, are also competing in what they expect will be an explosive market for electronic commerce systems and services.
