Intuit Inc. said Monday it would swap its Intuit Services Corp. bill payment and bank services unit to CheckFree Corp. for $260 million worth of CheckFree stock.
Mountain View, Calif.-based Intuit, which pioneered personal and small business financial software, also launched a far-reaching initiative to accelerate adpotion of electronic financial data exchange and commmunications over the Internet.
Wall Street applauded Intuit's decision to trade its private network bank services business, which it acquired in 1994, for 12.6 million shares of CheckFree common stock. On the Nasdaq, Intuit rose $2.125 to $32.25 while Columbus, Ohio-based CheckFree gained $3.19 to $21.25.
Lehman Brothers analyst Michael Stanek said he believed Intuit had received "an excellent price" from CheckFree.
"By selling Intuit Services Corp., we believe that investors will breathe a sigh of relief as Intuit has decided to exit the transaction processing business and will begin to focus efforts on its front-end software products," he said.
Scott Cook, Intuit's co-founder and chairman, said in a statement that the original investment two years ago had enabled Intuit to provide a secure private network connection between customers and financial service providers.
But now, he said, rapid advances in the safety and reliability of the Internet have made it the central focus of Intuit's strategy.
"Our goal is to speed the adoption of electronic connections between individuals, small businesses and financial service providers," he said.
Intuit produces TurboTax, the best-selling tax preparation software; and QuickBooks, the most popular small business accounting software. Its Quicken program is the leading personal finance software.
Intuit, which has 12 million personal finance customers -- both individuals and small businesses -- said it would facilitate the growth of links across the Internet by coordinating an industry framework for electronic data exchange dubbed OpenExchange.
Intuit said it planned to put Internet connections into place for online investment next spring, with online banking and bill payment activities in the fall of next year.
CheckFree said its acquisition would expand its home banking and bill payment services to more than 180 financial institutions and more than 1 million customers.
CheckFree Chairman Pete Kight said he expected all major banking institutions to begin establishing electronic transaction capabilities within the next 12 months.
CheckFree said its open set-up enables financial institutions to offer home banking and payment using personal computers, touch-tone phones and the Internet.
The swap occurs as use of the Internet for online financial transactions, rather than private networks, shows signs of taking off after a period of modest penetration.
David Weisman, an analyst with Cambridge, Mass.-based consulting firm Forrester Research Inc., said the number of U.S. households doing online banking is expected to grow to 9.1 million by the year 2001 from 1.1 million today.
Intuit Service accounted for less than 3 percent of Intuit's revenues in fiscal 1996. Intuit said it was selling about 2 million CheckFree shares acquired in the transaction, which Kight said brings its holdings below 20 percent.
Separately, Intuit said its losses widened to $22 million, or 48 cents a share, in its fourth fiscal quarter ended July 31 from $1.4 million, or 3 cents a share, a year earlier. Revenues rose 26 percent to $91.1 million from $72.4 million.
The results include an $8 million acquisition charge, higher spending in customer service and technical support, and bill payment processing startup expenses at Intuit Services.
Cook said Intuit must invest in research and development and marketing to address the Internet, which is growing faster than first anticipated, and he expected lower revenue growth and a modest increase in operating margins in fiscal 1997.
"We will continue to run our business focusing on long-term results, not quarterly results," he said.
