Lower profits from base metals producers are clouding the otherwise improving corporate earnings picture for Canadian companies in the third quarter, analysts said.
Richardson Greenshields of Canada analyst Dunnery Best forecast "very substantial declines in earnings" for major base metal firms.
"I think almost everywhere else you're going to see improvements year-over-year," Best said.  
Canada's third-quarter earnings season kicks off when Alcan Aluminium Ltd reports on Thursday.
Best said he expected Alcan third-quarter earnings to fall to US$0.35 a share from year earlier US$0.61 a share, which came before an extraordinary loss of US$1.24 a share for an asset writedown.
"There's some concerns that the metal group may not exactly report the (expected) numbers," Griffiths McBurney analyst Greg Misztela said.  
Companies such as Inco Ltd, Noranda Inc and Falconbridge Ltd would likely see earnings declines, Best said. A likely exception was Teck Corp, which Best said "has a lot of coal in its production lineup and coal's been strong, so that will be the one offset."
Investors had anticipated disappointments, causing metal stock prices to slide after second-quarter earnings were hit by a drop in copper, nickel and other prices.  
Markets were rocked in mid-June by the news that Sumitomo Corp fired its head copper trader after he allegedly ran up a US$1.8 billion loss.
Analysts forecast that Canada's major banks would lead the pack in earnings gains. The banks are expected to report their results for the fourth quarter ended October 31 in early December.
"They'll have a very good year-over-year comparison. I think quarter-over-quarter won't be quite as good," said Royal Bank of Canada vice-president of equities John Kellett.  
The six big banks, including Royal Bank of Canada and Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, have posted a string of record profits in recent years.
Best said Richardson Greenshields had increased earnings estimates for Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce six times so far this year.
Consumer products earnings will also rise, analysts said.
Another strong area will be Canada's important gold sector, which was buoyed by firmer bullion prices.
Earnings at energy firms will be fueled by higher crude oil prices, analysts said.  
Retail firms will benefit from recent cuts in short-term interest rates by Canada's central bank, spurring consumers to borrow and shop. "Bit by bit the underpinnings are being put in place for a more confident consumer that would eventually lead to better times," Kellett said.
Some high-technology firms have said they would report losses in the upcoming quarter, including Gandalf Technologies Inc and Corel Corp, due to problems getting their products to market.  
Technology heavyweights such as Northern Telecom Ltd and Newbridge Networks Corp will see higher earnings, Best said.
-- Reuters Toronto Bureau 416-941-8100
