Several large-capitalization Canadian stocks could benefit, while others may be hurt when the Toronto Stock Exchange changes rules governing control blocks in its key 300 Composite Index on Friday.
Stocks such as Barrick Gold Corp, funeral home operator Loewen Group Inc and energy firm Petro-Canada should get snapped up by fund managers when the rules change, analysts said.
"Index funds, which try to match the weighting of the index, are going to have to scramble to buy X percent more Barrick shares...by Friday," said an analyst who declined to be identified.
The Toronto Stock Exchange, which handles more than 80 percent of Canada's equity trading, will increase the relative weighting of 30 stocks on Friday by raising the level of control blocks to 20 percent from 15 percent.
The change will take effect at the start of trading on Friday.
Relative weighting describes the impact a stock or sub-group has on the overall TSE 300 Composite Index.
A control block is a group of shares owned by a single entity. Control blocks are not considered part of a stock's weighting because these shares cannot freely trade in the market.
Under the new rules, the federal government's 18.26 percent holding in Petro-Canada Inc will be included in the company's overall float. Petro-Canada's will therefore see its weighting rise to 1.22 percent from about 1.03 percent.
The TSE is changing the definition of a control block to comply with Ontario Securities Commission reporting rules, said Tara O'Donnell, director of derivative markets management.
The Ontario Teachers' Pension Plan Board, one of Canada's biggest pension fund managers, will need to make some changes, said Zev Frishman, manager of quantitative products.
Teachers' has almost C$45 billion in assets with a third of its money in Canadian equities.
"I cannot go into specific numbers or anything like that, but in essence we will have to, to some extent, adjust positions," Frishman said.
Barrick will likely be one of the stocks snapped up, analysts said.
Barrick, which is 15.7 percent owned by Trizec Hahn Corp, will now be weighted based on 100 percent of its shares from 84.3 percent. As a result, the world's third largest gold producer will see its relative weighting in the TSE 300 increase to 3.28 percent from 2.84 percent.
Loewen's weighting will jump to about 1.74 percent from about 0.64 percent, after a control block held by chief executive Raymond Loewen and his wife is included.
Ontario Municipal Employees Retirement Services (OMERS) said it expected the control block changes to have little impact on its funds.
"You have to remember that the actual changes relative to the market overall are quite small," said Tom Gunn, senior vice-president of OMERS' investment division.
The list of 30 affected stocks also includes gold producer Franco-Nevada Mining Corp Ltd, Quebecor Printing Inc, publisher Hollinger Inc, energy firm Gulf Canada Resources Ltd and Shaw Industries Ltd.
Others are Astral Communications Inc, BC Sugar Refinery Ltd, CCL Industries Inc and Co-Steel Inc, Corel Corp, Cognos Inc, Cinram Ltd., Edper Group Ltd and First Marathon Inc and Tee-Comm Electronics Inc.
