A small but growing number of Canadians intend to raid the electronic halls of the Internet for holiday gift-buying instead of strolling through local malls, according to a new survey.
Three percent of Canadians with access to the worldwide computer network said they planned to buy a gift using the Internet, a Deloitte &amp; Touche Consulting Group survey said this week.
"It's 3 percent. It's much more than zero, one or two," said Augustin Manchon, a retail and consumer business consultant.
About 3 million Canadians will have access to the Internet by year-end, according to Michael O'Neil, senior vice-president of marketing research firm International Data Corp.
Once they are on the net, Canadians will have access to some 700 electronic malls, Manchon said.
Jason Zandberg, Pacific International Securities Inc. analyst, said that online shopping is starting to evolve. However, "it's not going to replace walking to a store and buying something."
Many people still like to feel the items they buy.
Recently International Business Machines Corp. unveiled partnerships to develop an Internet retailing outlet that would include a Web site for Canada's largest department store chain, Hudson's Bay Co..
Americans are more progressive than Canadians when it comes to online shopping but not by much, Manchon found. "(Interest is) still slightly under the U.S. but it's not bad for the first or second year," Manchon said.
Manchon also said that up to half of the people who have access to the Internet, estimated at 40 million worldwide, have already bought something using their computers.
And more retailers intend to take advantage of this increasing Internet use, the survey found.
Thirty percent of retailers said they're going to invest in the next few months in Internet-related technologies whereas only 16 percent said that last fall.
"So that's a dramatic increase," Manchon said.
Popular shopping items online tend to be electronic goods, which consumers like to comparison-shop, price-sensitive products and everyday purchases such as toothpaste and cleaning powders, Manchon said.
Companies such as Wal-Mart Stores Inc., the United States' largest retailer, have used the Internet to collect research about customers and test new products before installing them on their shelves.
Manchon also said Canada's retailers were expecting a better holiday season compared to last year's dismal showing. "The optimism is growing from month to month," Manchon said.
"It shows in the numbers of several retailers that we know," Manchon said. "We can confirm that numbers of many of them are going up, slowly."
