Heavily weighted bank stocks pushed the Toronto Stock Exchange to stronger territory at Monday's close, despite the fact that more issues fell than climbed.
The TSE's key 300 composite index gained 34.61 points to end at 5952.41, a little shy of its recent record close of 5966. Turnover was 94.1 million shares worth C$1.4 billion (US$1.04 billion).
"At the end of the day, it was only the banks and the utilities," said John Kellett, Royal Bank's vice-president of equities. "When the banks do well, it certainly gives a good tone to the market."
Declining issues edged out advancing ones 486 to 473. Another 288 traded flat.
Bank stocks soared ahead of year-end results, which will kick off with Bank of Montreal earnings on Tuesday. Canada's big six banks are forecast to unveil record profits for the third year in a row.
And analysts consider Canadian bank stocks still undervalued compared to U.S. issues.
"Today I think really what happened was U.S. banks were really on wheels," Kellett said. "Suddenly Canadian banks, which already had gone a long way, looked good."
The important bank sector led eight of Toronto's 14 sub-indices higher, gaining nearly 3.3 percent. Transports, consumer products and utilities followed.
The key gold group and base metals lost the most ground.
Among the hot stocks, the nation's second largest bank Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce rose C$2.25 to C$59.60 on 640,000 shares. The Royal Bank of Canada, the largest, gained C$2.10 to C$48.75 on more than one million shares.
Weakness in gold bullion prices in both London and New York hit gold stocks. However, Bre-X Minerals Ltd., which still embroiled in an ownership dispute over its huge Busang gold discovery in Indonesia, lost more ground due to the uncertainty. Shares fell C$1.35 to reach C$22.55.
Biotechnology firm Biovail Corp. International rose C$2.25 to C$40 in light trading after news that it settled patent litigation with Elan Corp. Plc after Elan had alleged infringement of drug patents by Biovail. Biovail, which also announced that it would list on the New York exchange on December 12, said it and Elan agreed to various cross-royalty payments on some current and future products.
Convenience store company Silcorp Ltd. rose C$0.15 to C$18.40 after news that it signed a definitive deal to buy the assets of Becker Milk Co Ltd. Alimentation Couche-Tard Inc. said it extended its takeover offer for Silcorp to December 23.
