The Toronto Stock Exchange closed weaker in heavy trading on Tuesday, hit by plunging gold stocks and a sell-off on Wall Street.
The TSE's key 300 Composite Index lost 44.24 points to finish the day at 5940.73. The Dow Jones Industrial Average in New York fell nearly 80 points to 6442, its largest loss in a single day since a 161-point drop in mid-July.
Toronto was also dragged down by its heavily weighted gold index, which fell 2.7 percent in the second day of a retreat.
"A dominant theme in Canadian markets today is gold," noted RBC Dominion Securities analyst Dunnery Best.
Turnover was brisk at 119.7 million shares worth C$2.1 billion (US$1.6 billion), Toronto's fourth highest trading value ever.
Analysts said Wall Street was submerged under a wave of profit-taking as investors decided to lock in profits and sell some stocks following recent gains.
All of Toronto's 14 sub-indices lost ground except for media and transportation. Golds led the weaker side, followed by conglomerates, base metals and utilities.
Gold stocks fell after bullion prices slipped in both London and New York.
Declining issues beat out advancing ones 575 to 424. Another 292 traded flat.
More losses may be seen ahead because investors will sell poorly-performing stocks to realize tax losses after a spectacular year, said Josef Schachter, fund manager and Schachter Asset Management Inc president.
"They usually plan on liquidating during this period of time, so they offset the gains they booked earlier in the year," Schachter said.
Shares in Bre-X Minerals Ltd., halted at the end of the day, were active today. Earlier the stock rose C$0.95 to C$18.70 on more than five million shares before the gold prospector announced it increased the resource calculation of its Busang gold discovery in Indonesia by 10.4 million ounces of gold to 57.3 million ounces.
Barrick Gold Corp. is still in the midst of negotations with Bre-X over ownership of the deposit. The Indonesian government set a December 4 deadline for a deal between the two.
Placer Dome Inc. and other miners said said they would challenge Barrick for control of Bre-X's discovery by pressuring the Indonesian government to allow competing offers.
However the Indonesian government said on Tuesday it was expected confirmation tomorrow of a deal between Bre-X and Barrick. It did not mention other potential partners. Barrick fell C$1.70 to C$37.85 and Placer dipped C$0.45 to C$30.60.
Potash Corp. of Saskatchewan surged C$5.05 to end at C$108.50. The fertilizer firm told clients it planed to riase domestic potash prices in mid-February.
