The Toronto stock market ended weaker in brisk trading on Wednesday, pulled down by investor profit-taking in every sector except for surging golds.
The TSE's key 300 Composite Index dropped 30.08 points to 5910.65, losing ground for the third day in a row.
Since Monday the 300 index has fallen 106 points or more than 1.7 percent.
"The market is a little shaky right now, and I imagine there's some people taking profits," said MMS International analyst Katherine Beattie. Market players sold stocks to reap profits after big gains earlier this year.
Trading was brisk with 111.3 million shares changing hands worth C$1.8 billion.
"Another one of those middle-cycle corrections," said ScotiaMcLeod senior vice-president Fred Ketchen. "I expect this to be short-lived."
Ketchen said he expected Toronto to continue to rise since investors have nowhere to turn. Fixed income markets generally provide lower returns than equities, especially since Canadian interest rates have fallen dramatically this year.
The important gold sector rose nearly three percent today, which prevented a further decline in the index. The other 13 sub-indices were led lower by conglomerates, media, transports and banks.
Declining issues beat out advancing ones 581 to 428 while 272 were left unchanged.
Among the active stocks were Bre-X Minerals Ltd. and Barrick Gold Corp. Bre-X jumped C$1.30 to C$20.20 on more than five million shares.
Bre-X said today that it and Barrick have made some progress on an ownership deal over Bre-X's huge Busang gold discovery in Indonesia. The Indonesian government, which advised a joint venture between the two, has not yet extended today's deadline.
Barrick stock rose C$1.45 to C$39.30.
Northern Telecom Ltd. fell C$2.50 to C$84.30 in brisk dealings after news that delays in testing software would stall the roll-out of a personal communications network for Sprint. Officials said Nortel would not sustain a material financial impact from the delay.
Biovail Corp. fell C$2.35 to C$35.85. Partner Forest Laboratories Inc. said it would reduce inventory levels but Biovail said it would not affect inventories of its flagship hypertension drug Tiazac.
