Despite the Toronto Stock Exchange's steep decline this week, analysts expect Canada's biggest equity market to resume its upward march and continue outperforming Wall Street in the New Year.
Early on Friday, Toronto's key 300 Composite Index posted its largest intraday drop in nine years, losing 171 points or almost three percent to 5670.
It was Toronto's biggest intraday fall since a 176.5 point slide on October 22, 1987, a few days after the Black Monday market crash of October 19, 1987.
The index has slid from a record of 6018 on November 28.
Toronto stocks recovered partly by Friday afternoon, when they were down 40.55 points to 5801.20.
Toronto's losses on Friday were sparked by comments late Thursday by U.S. Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan that were interpreted as suggesting that U.S. equity markets may be overvalued.
Profit-taking also hit Toronto stocks this week as investors cashed in on recent spectacular gains.
Montreal-based investment adviser Ron Meisels forecast more weakness in the next few weeks, before a return to strength.
"I think Toronto will probably outperform New York in the first quarter of 1997," Meisels said.
Meisels said Toronto stocks traditionally outpace Wall Street in the late stages of a bull market as investors flock to Toronto's natural resource sector.
This year's boom has been fueled by U.S. economic growth and declining interest rates that prompted low returns on bonds and other fixed-income instruments, analysts said.
Toronto's key index has jumped almost 28 percent this year, versus a 23 percent gain by New York's Dow Jones Industrial Average.
Meisels said Toronto should also benefit later this year as Canadians make their annual contributions to tax-sheltered pension funds, many of which include mutual funds.
"There's an enormous amount of mutual fund money being committed to the market," ScotiaMcLeod's director of investment research Jim Doak said.
In the near term, Toronto could extend this week's 4.3 percent decline, some analysts said.
"I think we're looking at at least a (total) 10 percent correction," said MMS International analyst Katherine Beattie.
