She once jokingly thought of calling her autobiography "Fascist Bitch," and now Canadian journalists are wondering what epithet to use as she plays an expanding role in the country's largest newspaper empire.
British-born Barbara Amiel, the wife of Hollinger Inc. chairman Conrad Black, is an accomplished journalist who counts many fans in Britain, where she writes a rightwing shoot-from-the-hip column for the Daily Telegraph, the centerpiece of the Hollinger empire.
Although she honed her craft in Canada, she makes many Canadians bristle by standing out from the mass of generally liberal journalists. She says she has never managed to reap the accolades she desires from Canadians, the ones she routinely receives from the British.
A sought-after London party guest, Amiel now is in the Canadian spotlight through her position as vice president of editorial in her husband's newspaper empire. Hollinger added a majority shareholding in Southam Inc., the country's largest daily newspaper chain, to its media stable, substantially boosting its control to more than 40 percent of the industry.
The move left some Canadians worried about Hollinger's influence on their media and many Southam journalists fearful for their jobs as Black's well-known road to profits often involves cutting newspaper staff.
HUSBAND CAN SPEAK FOR HIMSELF
At a recent conference of journalists in Ottawa, Amiel, a former Toronto Sun editor, was repeatedly asked about Black's intentions. She replied that he could speak for himself. But she added, "I think the Southam papers ... have not done their best but have terrific potential."
Amiel, who still writes for Maclean's magazine, hesitated when asked if she was treated differently in Canada than abroad. "I think Canada's been very good to me. I became editor of a newspaper, (former editor) Peter Newman gave me a column in Maclean's magazine, how many people have got that? You can't complain."
But then she added, "I've never, although one always wants it, had the recognition of my peers that I've had in England, but then maybe I didn't deserve it in Canada."
Television personality Alan Edmonds, an admirer of Amiel who disagrees with her views, said Canadians have refrained from praising Amiel's talents because of her rightwing bias. "In the years that she was in Canada ... the prevailing mindset in the media was in the opposite direction."
Edmonds said other journalists were jealous of the openings that came her way. "She's used her undoubted feminine attraction to ... create opportunities to use her undoubted superior intellect."
In person and in print, Amiel has a knack for sparking debates. For instance, she once wrote that Quebec's moves toward independence, culminating in a narrow 1995 defeat for the separatists, could be blamed on Canada's liberal elite, which promoted multi-culturalism, thereby strengthening French-Canadian nationalism.
CASTIGATING LEFTWINGERS
Her columns have castigated Ontario's former leftwing government, led by the New Democratic Party, for allegedly being swayed by special interest groups like the disabled. She also wrote that Ontario, which gave homosexual couples the same rights as heterosexual ones, had weakened the family.
Canada's most widely read satirical magazine, Frank, noted "a favorite theme in her columns is the insidiousness of self-pity, that the poor should get on with their lives and quit carping about it." And columnist Allan Fotheringham once observed, "Barbara Amiel, otherwise known as Mrs. Conrad Black, can take out any opponent in the world and eat them for breakfast. As she does regularly in print."
Amiel has even joked about her reputation, saying she thought about calling her surprisingly frank 1980 autobiography "Fascist Bitch," a name suggested by irate readers. Instead the book was titled "Confessions."
Now in her mid-50s, the much-married Amiel began her path at the tender age of eight at a "grotty little newspaper" in her hometown of Hendon, England. Her parents divorced, her mother remarried and her new Canadian stepfather dragged his new family back home. Amiel, used to fine surroundings, ended up in Hamilton, a gritty steel town in southern Ontario about 40 miles (70 km) from Toronto.
Before her 1991 marriage to Black, she was married to student Gary Smith, philosopher George Jonas and cable magnate David Graham, with whom she returned to England in 1985.
In 1993 well-known Canadian author Margaret Atwood published "The Robber Bride" about a scapel-assisted femme fatale named Zenia. The Canadian rumor mill identified Amiel as the model for Zenia, but she denied it.
