China's move at the weekend to make the yuan convertible under the current account is cause for celebration among traders and businessmen, but Beijing's goal of full convertibility is still far off, analysts said on Monday.
News that the yuan had been made convertible under the current account from Sunday was little more than the final seal on a long process of currency liberalisation, but would be welcomed by traders and investors alike, they said.
"This announcement is more symbolic than substantial... because foreign and domestic investors have had easy access to swap centres and foreign exchange banks," said one investment analyst in Shanghai who declined to be identified.
The formalisation of increased convertibility was welcome and was also a vital step in China's long-delayed application for entry to the World Trade Organisation (WTO), said Adam Williams, chief representative of Jardine Fleming in Beijing.
"It's cause to celebrate," Williams said. "This is not full convertibility, but it's a fair step towards it... It's good for everybody."
State media has quoted central bank governor Dai Xianglong as saying December 1 marked formal Chinese compliance on current account convertibility under the International Monetary Fund's (IMF) Article VIII.
Article VIII is an undertaking to refrain from imposing restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current international transactions, or from engaging in discriminatory currency arrangements.
Current account convertibility covers payment for trade in merchandise and services such as shipping, banking and tourism, as well as private transfers -- although analysts said currency conversion by ordinary Chinese remained restricted.
The analysts said China had long since dismantled the main barriers to IMF recognition of current account convertibility, leaving only technical issues to be resolved in recent weeks.
Beijing's move mainly signalled its confidence in the yuan's stability -- with foreign reserves at more than $100 billion -- and in the new-found efficacy of its macro-economic controls, said a Chinese analyst at a foreign bank in Beijing.
The official Xinhua news agency has quoted government experts as predicting stability for the yuan, arguing that the decision to boost convertibility reflected the smooth running of China's new currency exchange system since January 1994.
While China had come a long way in loosening controls on its currency, the final goal of full convertibility was still a distant one, the analysts said.
Central bank governor Dai told Reuters in a recent interview that China still needed a "fairly long period" before making the yuan convertible under the capital account and there was no timetable for doing so.
"The next step is convertibility on the capital account, which I would say is a fair way down the road yet," said one Beijing-based foreign analyst.
Beijing was concerned that large flows of funds could upset financial and stock markets and wanted to avoid a Mexican-style currency crisis, said a Western banker in Shanghai.
"Many capitalist countries in Asia, like Taiwan and South Korea, have foreign exchange controls so it is understandable for China to keep stringent foreign exchange controls," he said.
