A ministerial conference of Mekong River nations on Friday agreed to push forward cross-border cooperation to build a prosperous future for the once war-torn region.
Growing trust among the six nations of the Greater Mekong Sub-region (GMS) would allow huge investment in what was being dubbed the "last frontier of economic development", said Bong-Suh Lee, Asian Development Bank (ADB) vice president.
"We can expect such investment to grow rapidly and reach a target of at least $1.3 billion by the turn of the century," Lee told a news conference after the meeting in China's southwestern Kunming city.
Ministers of Burma, Cambodia, China, Laos, Thailand and Vietnam agreed at the conference to pursue development of infrastructure projects aimed at knitting together a region long divided by bitter distrust and war.
The ministers approved work to map out strategies for the next 25 years of development along the mighty Mekong River.
The ADB, which backs the GMS programmes, had prepared $300 million in loans ready for investment in the region over the next three years, Lee told the conference.
Far greater sums would be needed to finance crucial projects such as a road connecting Bangkok to Phnom Penh and Vietnam's Ho Chi Minh City, said Gunther Hecker of the ADB's transport and communication department.
"The $300 million is the trigger element for others to follow," Hecker told Reuters. "We lay the seeds."
Lee said at least $9 billion would be needed to finance transport and telecommunications projects in the region, home to around 230 million people, and added that the private sector was appearing more willing to contribute.
"I have heard from many private investors that probably the GMS is the last frontier of economic development," he said.
Investor enthusiasm is relatively new to much of the Mekong River region, which was riven for decades by conflicts over ideology and borderlines.
China and Vietnam clashed repeatedly in the 1980s after a bloody border conflict in 1979.
Vietnamese troops fought Khmer Rouge guerrillas in Cambodia through the late 1980s while fighting was far from rare among many of the region's other borders.
GMS meetings had been vital in building trust in the region, conference participants said.
Priority GMS projects include a Kunming-to-Bangkok highway, a fibre-optic cable telecommunications loop through Laos, Vietnam and Cambodia and action to curb deforestation on the Mekong's upper reaches.
Ministers at the conference said the ADB should continue its role as organiser of regional projects but agreed on the need for closer coordination with other potential investors from the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and other nations.
How coordination would be organised was not decided in detail, but observer Finn Nielsen of the World Bank said huge funding requirement in the region meant there was little chance of a turf war breaking out among development investors.
"There are more projects here than the ADB, the World Bank or anyone can handle, so that isn't a problem," Nielsen said.
