A sprawling new copper production group in China's southwestern Yunnan province is planning to boost minerals output in the nation's "kingdom of non-ferrous metals", senior company officials said on Friday.
Yunnan Copper Industry (Group) Co, which opened for business this month after the merger of Yunnan's biggest copper mines, bureaux and a major smelter, had mapped out a five-year plan to increase production, said general manager Zhou Paixiang.
Metals officials had ordered the group's creation to boost efficiency and make metals exploitation a bulwark of the economy in Yunnan, one of China's poorest provinces, group president Zou Shaolu told Reuters.
"Minerals resources are very rich here," Zou said in an interview. "This is the 'kingdom of non-ferrous metals'."
Output of electrolytic copper would be raised to 150,000 tonnes a year by 2000, increasing from 90,000 tonnes last year, said Zhou, the general manager.
The group's mines would wrest about 60,000 tonnes of copper ore a year from Yunnan's mountains, up from 45,000 tonnes, he said.
"Formation of the group will improve distribution of resources and personnel and bring the strengths of the companies into play," said Zou, the president. "We have to find ways to raise productivity, together we are stronger."
The shortfall between mine output and demand at its smelters would be made up by buying on the domestic and international markets, Zou said.
Copper imports for the smelters were expected to reach an annual 50,000 tonnes or more by 2000, he said. The Yunnan group already accounted for about one-ninth of China's copper output, he added.
Managers said copper would remain the core business of the sprawling group, which also mines minerals such as gold, silver and zinc and makes consumer goods ranging from traditional furniture to soft drinks.
The group's 3.14 billion yuan ($378 million) assets included hundreds of subsidiary companies, with only about one-half of its 34,000 employees involved in copper production.
The group would try to progressively spin off many of its ventures and would also move to reduce the heavy burden of its welfare commitments, Zhou said, adding that medical costs for its employees were a major expense.
The group's diversity helps protect against price fluctuations in the copper market, he said.
Copper prices slumped after the disclosure of huge trading losses by Japanese trading giant Sumitomo Corp, though they have since recovered some of the lost ground.
The Yunnan group planned to raise gold production to five tonnes a year in 2000 from three tonnes currently, boost silver output to 150 tonnes from 100 tonnes, zinc to 20,000 from about 10,000 tonnes and sulfuric acid to 300,000 tonnes from about 200,000 tonnes, managers said.
Shortages of capital were a major difficulty and the group was in talks with foreign companies to create possible joint venture projects, Zhou said.
"We have made some connections with foreign firms but so far we have no fixed plans," he said without giving further details.
