China said on Sunday it expected to reach formal agreement with Tokyo on the details of Japan's latest batch of huge yen loans but warned that politics should not be allowed to get in the way of economic aid.
A Japanese mission long delayed by diplomatic tensions reached basic agreement with Chinese officials last month on the projects to receive 180 billion yen ($1.6 billion) earmarked for the first year of Tokyo's 1996-2000 soft loan package.
Talks on the loans had been stalled for months, after disputes over territory, history and China's nuclear testing programme chilled ever-sensitive ties, Japanese sources say.
"Japan and China plan to sign a formal contract on the implementation of the 1996 yen loans," the official China Daily Business Weekly said in a front-page report.
The newspaper did not say when the loans would be finalised but quoted officials of the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation as warning politics should not be allowed to intrude on Sino-Japanese economic relations.
Some Japanese were trying to use financial assistance to put political pressure on China, but such action was unacceptable and would bring no benefits to Tokyo, it quoted Yu Zhensheng of the ministry's foreign financing administration as saying.
"China is against political conditions attached to economic cooperation," Yu said. "We hope the two sides will make joint efforts to promote the healthy and steady development of Sino-Japanese economic ties."
The loans, scheduled to total 580 billion yen between 1996 and 2000, were a crucial part of the economic relationship, he said.
Soft loans from Tokyo are widely seen in China as an unofficial form of reparation for the damage inflicted by Japan's imperial army as it raged across the nation between 1931 and 1945.
Sino-Japanese ties have in recent years been strained by differences over nuclear testing, a visit by Japanese Prime Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto to a shrine to his nation's war dead and a territorial dispute over islands in the East China Sea.
Japan, the only nation to have suffered atomic attack, last year froze grant-in-aid to China in a largely symbolic protest against Beijing's nuclear testing programme.
The far larger yen loans were not officially affected by the nuclear protest, but the November mission was the first since China conducted a nuclear test in May 1995 and Japanese sources say the two issues had been privately linked.
Propaganda barrages in Chinese state media keep wartime memories fresh and officials rush to condemn all possible signs of resurgent Japanese militarism, but diplomats say Beijing is keen to avoid threatening a vital economic relationship.
Japan had promised 1,610 billion yen worth of loans between 1979 and 1995, accounting for 40 percent of the total foreign government loans promised to China during the period, China Daily Business Weekly said.
The loans themselves have been a source of dispute, with the rise in the value of the yen in 1994 and 1995 sending their cost soaring. That prompted Chinese complaints and demands to be allowed to repay in U.S. dollars.
Tokyo refused, but the yen's later decline has blunted the issue as a potential source of conflict, and both sides have in recent months shown new willingness to restore amicable ties.
($1 = 113 yen)
