China showered the World Trade Organisation (WTO) with bouquets and blame on Tuesday, saying the body Beijing has long sought to join was important, but that it neglected poorer nations.
A meeting of the WTO's 128 member states in Singapore this month had taken a lopsided approach to differing international needs, said Foreign Ministry spokesman Shen Guofang.
"This meeting finally reached a common understanding, but at the same time we should realise that the result of this meeting was not balanced enough," Shen told a news briefing.
"It mostly reflected the relations and interests of the developed countries," he said.
Shen's comments came after the official China Daily newspaper published a front page report that suggested that after years of frustrated efforts to gain entry to the WTO, Beijing's enthusiasm was fading.
"Accession or not, China has become indifferent and doesn't care any more," it quoted Wu Jiahuang, director general of the customs administration's tariffs department, as saying.
Wu compared China's decade-long bid for entry to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) and current attempts to join the WTO that succeeded it to a "sunken boat" and an "ailing tree", the newspaper said.
Western diplomats said Wu's comments were more a reflection of differing internal views on the importance of the global economy than a signal of a shift from Beijing's oft-stated desire for a seat in the world trade club.
Asked about the China Daily report, Shen said it did not necessarily reflect Beijing's formal position.
"We still feel the World Trade Organisation is a very important international organisation, although of course if China is not taking part then we should say it is incomplete," he said.
Beijing seeks to join the WTO on the favourable terms accorded to developing countries. But some members -- with the United States the most vocal -- argue that China's economy is too powerful to be given such treatment.
Beijing says it must be allowed a relatively long transition period to prepare key industries for the fierce foreign competition they would face under the WTO's freer trade rules.
China's leadership had concluded that negotiations with WTO members on its entry terms were politically tainted, Wu said.
The high-profile publication of Wu's downbeat views on WTO accession could be aimed at signalling that China was in no hurry to make concessions on terms, but was more likely an expression of internal differences, said one Western diplomat.
"They have their different interest groups in China, just as we have," he said. "There are those who are charged with administering the tariffs and taking in the receipts and those who have a longer-term perspective on the whole thing.
"It doesn't change the basic fact that those who are charged with representing China in this matter do give us a different impression," he said.
Assistant Minister of Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation An Min was quoted on the inside pages of the China Daily as saying early entry could boost investment.
"Optimistically speaking, the problem could be solved next year," An said.
