After years of efforts to gain entry to the World Trade Organisation (WTO), China no longer cares whether it joins the global trade body, Tuesday's China Daily quoted a senior customs official as saying.
"Accession or not, China has become indifferent and doesn't care any more," the official newspaper quoted Wu Jiahuang, director-general of the customs administration's tariffs department, as saying.
Western diplomats in the capital said Wu's comments were more a reflection of differing internal views on the importance of the global economy rather than a signal of a shift away from Beijing's oft-stated desire to join the world's trade club.
Wu compared China's decade-long bid for entry to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), and the current attempts to join the WTO that succeeded it, to a "sunken boat" and an "ailing tree", the China Daily said in a front-page report.
Beijing is seeking to join the WTO on the favourable terms accorded to developing countries, but some members -- with the United States most vocal -- argue that China's economy is too large and powerful to be given such treatment.
China's leadership had concluded that negotiations with WTO members on its entry terms were politically tainted, Wu said.
The high-profile publication of Wu's views on WTO accession could be aimed at signalling that China was in no hurry to make concessions on terms, but was more likely an expression of internal differences, said one Western diplomat.
"They have their different interest groups in China, just as we have," he said. "There are those who are charged with administering the tariffs and taking in the receipts and those who have a longer-term perspective on the whole thing.
"It doesn't change the basic fact that those who are charged with representing China in this matter do give us a different impression," he said.
Customs officials declined to comment on Wu's remarks, but officials of the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation (MOFTEC) said they represented a personal opinion and China's formal stance was unchanged.
MOFTEC's more cheerful view of WTO accession was reflected in the inside pages of the China Daily, which quoted assistant minister An Min as saying early entry could boost investment.
"Optimistically speaking, the problem (concerning China's WTO membership) could be solved next year," An said.
China says it must be allowed a relatively long transition period to prepare key industries for the fierce foreign competition they would face under the WTO's freer trade rules.
It was unrealistic to demand that China open its markets too wide too soon, the official People's Daily newspaper on Tuesday quoted MOFTEC Minister Wu Yi as saying.
Market opening was a gradual process that required economic stability and prosperity, she said.
Tariffs chief Wu said Beijing was puzzled by the actions of developed countries such as the United States, European Union members and Canada that slapped quotas on Chinese textiles but refused to allow China time to protect its key industries.
"In their anxiety to carve out markets in China, chief WTO member countries have ignored China's rightful reasons to protect its national industries," he said.
China had been able to expand international trade to 44 percent of gross national product by 1995, despite a decade of fruitless efforts to join GATT and the WTO, he said.
