More than 250 Chinese citizens have called on Beijing's top military leaders to take tough action in a dispute with Tokyo over a group of islands in the East China Sea, a petition organiser said on Sunday.
Beijing should send Chinese forces to the disputed Diaoyu Islands, known in Japan as the Senkakus, to destroy a makeshift lighthouse built there by a right-wing Japanese group in July, organiser Tong Zeng said in a telephone interview.
"We are calling for troops to be sent to get rid of the Japanese lighthouse," Tong said. "Japan has violated our territorial integrity...we are very angry."
The rare petition was addressed to Jiang Zemin, Chinese president and chairman of the Central State Military Commission, and to other top military leaders. It had been signed by 257 ordinary citizens, Tong said.
Petitioners included officials, retired servicemen, workers and students, he said.
Tong is a leading anti-Japanese campaigner in China whose high-profile approach led authorities to confiscate his passport and order him to leave Beijing temporarily during last year's 50th anniversary of the Japanese surrender.
Beijing and its arch-rival, Chinese Nationalist-ruled Taipei, both claim the Diaoyu Islands, which are located about 300 km (190 miles) west of Okinawa and 200 km (125 miles) east of Taiwan.
Tokyo says the uninhabited group has always been part of Japan.
The dispute over the islands' ownership flared in July after the Nihon Seinen-sha (Japan Youth Federation) moved to buttress Japan's claims by building an aluminium lighthouse on one of them, prompting howls of protest from China's state media.
"The Chinese side must take strong and concrete action to protect our nation's territorial integrity," the Chinese petitioners wrote in their appeal to Beijing.
The military should immediately remove the five-metre (16-ft) Japanese lighthouse, or at least should send warships to protect any Taiwanese or Hong Kong groups who attempted to destroy it, they said.
While China's Communist Party-controlled media quickly condemns any perceived signs of resurgent Japanese militarism, Beijing has in the past suppressed unofficial protests against Tokyo and campaigns for Japanese compensation for war victims.
Petitions to parliament judged hostile to the government have often prompted the detention of signatories, but Tong said the Diaoyu petition was a private move by ordinary people that would be welcomed by the Beijing leadership.
"There is nothing wrong with this action, this is to protect China," he said. "I think the government could not but welcome it."
