A Chinese dissident who spent years in jail after the 1989 pro-democracy demonstrations in Beijing has sent a rare open letter to parliament calling for legislation to hold back a rising tide of official corruption.
Former magazine editor and historian Bao Zunxin said he had written to the National People's Congress, or parliament, last week to push for tougher anti-corruption laws.
Legislation was needed to force more openness and fuller disclosure of officials' private assets and existing laws were inadequate to cope with endemic graft, the 58-year-old dissident said in a telephone interview.
"Without an end to corruption, there will not be a day of peace in our country," Bao wrote in his letter, a copy of which was faxed to news agencies by the Information Centre of Human Rights and Democratic Movement in China.
"Corruption has seeped into every level of the government, and requiring only officials above the county level to declare their property is far from enough," he wrote.
Petitions to parliament, always a risky venture for China's tiny band of dissidents, have in the past been either greeted with stony silence or followed by the detention of signatories.
Bao, who spent more than three years in prison for his role in the 1989 Tiananmen Square demonstrations that were bloodily crushed by the army, said he could not guess what the reaction to his letter would be but it was impossible to be optimistic.
Public security officials took Bao from his Beijing home in July for a week-long "tour" to Qingdao in eastern China after discovering he had granted an interview to a French reporter, he said.
Some dissidents see demands for action against corruption as a rallying call that can strike a chord among a populace bitter at the wealth and privilege enjoyed by some senior officials.
Anger at leaders and bureaucrats who use their power to amass wealth in China's new market economy helped send hundreds of thousands of Beijing residents into the streets in support of the 1989 student-led demonstrations in Tiananmen Square.
Many Chinese say graft has since spread even more as economic reforms continue to weaken social controls and multiply profit-making opportunities for those with political clout.
Bao's open letter follows a July appeal to parliament from leading dissident Liu Xiaobo for speedy legislation to curb corruption in the state media and to loosen the ruling Communist Party's monopoly on news.
Beijing has repeatedly declared war on graft, calling it a scourge that threatens the very basis of communist rule, but many Chinese say the campaigns have had only limited success.
Short-term actions such as the on-going "Strike Hard" anti-crime campaign were not enough to clean up China's government, Bao wrote in his letter to parliament.
"Corruption, especially systemic and all-pervasive corruption as in China, cannot be stopped with a short period of "Striking Hard'," he wrote.
"An effective system of (property) declaration should be made available to the public through legislation, and should have legal authority, openness, transparency and supervisory mechanism," he wrote.
