A Burmese minister has urged Tokyo to release a multi-billion yen loan suspended after the bloody suppression of Burma's democracy movement, but Japanese officials said curbs on lending were still in force.
Planning and development minister Brigadier General David Abel called on Japan to restart support for the upgrading of Rangoon's airport that was suspended in 1988 after the military bloodily crushed a pro-democracy uprising.
Speaking after a conference on regional cooperation held in China's southwestern Kunming city, Abel told reporters Japan's Overseas Economic Cooperation Fund (OECF) had itself proposed restarting the loan, worth over 20 billion yen ($185 million).
"We have signed an agreement with the OECF for them to continue the loan," Abel said on Saturday. "They proposed it, so they should agree it."
Some Japanese officials have long hoped to step up financial assistance to Burma, one of southeast Asia's poorest nations, but OECF officials said on Saturday that curbs on lending to the nation's ruling military junta remained in force.
"This (loan) was stopped due to the political situation in Burma in 1988," said Kenzi Yoshida of the OECF's operations department.
"The situation remains the same, it remains suspended," Yoshida said, adding that under government guidelines the state-backed fund had banned all new loans to Rangoon.
Differences of opinion over how to deal with Burma formed an unspoken backdrop to the Kunming meeting of ministers from the Mekong River region, which ended on Friday.
Ministers from six nations -- Burma, China, Cambodia, Laos, Thailand and Vietnam -- attended the conference but the meeting was backed by Asian Development Bank, which is funded and managed partly by western nations.
The leader of Burma's democratic opposition, Aung San Suu Kyi, is spearheading a campaign for sanctions to heap pressure on the ruling State Law and Order Restoration Council (SLORC) -- raising pressures in the west for economic action against the military rulers.
Western anger at the SLORC was fuelled in May when it detained more than 260 members of Suu Kyi's National League for Democracy (NLD) and in June following the death in a Rangoon jail of Danish honorary consul James Nichols.
A number of major Western firms have in recent months cut or scaled back investment in Burma following intense lobbying by activists protesting against its human rights record.
Burma's neighbours in the seven-country Association of Southeast Asian Nations have rejected calls for sanctions, favouring instead a policy of "constructive engagement" toward Rangoon.
Japan had last year considered resuming yen loans to Burma following the release of Nobel Peace prize Laureate Suu Kyi from almost six years of house arrest and suggestions that Rangoon would begin paying its debt arrears, Yoshida said.
Such ideas were shelved when suppression of the democracy movement continued and the arrears were not paid, he said.
"Both things have to be resolved," he said, adding Japan remained involved in only a few small-scale projects in Burma's electricity generation and transmission sectors.
