Chinese President Jiang Zemin on Wednesday greeted future Hong Kong leader Tung Chee-hwa with a pledge of support and a vow not to tread on Hong Kong's right to autonomy after the British colony returns to Beijing rule.
The appointment of the tycoon who will lead Hong Kong from July 1 next year marked the dawn of new age, Jiang told reporters during a meeting with Tung in Beijing's Great Hall of the People.
"Of course, I will support him," Jiang told reporters. "This is indeed the start of a new era."
Tung, a shipping magnate who will become Hong Kong's first Chinese chief executive after more than 150 years of colonial rule by London, was in Beijing to meet leaders after his formal appointment on Monday by Premier Li Peng.
Jiang assured Tung that Beijing would stand by the terms of its Basic Law, which gives the territory a large degree of autonomy as a Special Administrative Region of China, the official Xinhua news agency said.
"In dealing with the question of Hong Kong we will strictly act in accordance with the Basic Law, and will never interfere in affairs belonging to the scope of autonomy of the Special Administrative Region," Xinhua quoted Jiang as saying.
Tung's first visit to Beijing since his appointment is being closely watched by Hong Kong residents keen to know more about his plans for the post-colonial adminstration and to learn whether current senior civil servants will keep their jobs.
Tung, who has urged Hong Kong's people to be sensitive to China's sovereign rights, has yet to give details of his plans for the post-colonial administration but has said he will discuss transition issues during the visit.
While China has said it will leave Hong Kong's free-wheeling capitalist system intact, it has made clear that the territory's leader's authority will have limits.
One of Tung's first tasks in the twilight of British rule will be to put together an advisory cabinet called the Executive Council and to decide which senior civil servants to keep -- a subject of much speculation among Hong Kong's boisterous media.
While interest has focused on Tung's intentions for current senior administrators, China said on Tuesday that it would make the final decision on important civil servants.
"For senior officials, they need the nomination of the top administrative official and to finally obtain appointment by the central government," Foreign Ministry spokesman Shen Guofang told a news briefing.
Jiang, who in January signalled that the tycoon was China's favourite for chief executive by singling him out for a warm handshake at a reception, said China would stand by to assist if the tycoon ran into problems.
"If the chief executive needs help from the central government when he meets with difficulties, the central government will be bound to render full support," he said.
China has hailed Tung's appointment as the fruit of its principle of Hong Kong autonomy, but the selection process was dogged by protests from democrats who accuse Beijing of using a hand-picked committee to stage-manage the choice.
Beijing's critics believe it is likely try to control Hong Kong and its 6.3 million people from behind the scenes after the five-star Chinese flag is raised over the territory.
