Chinese President Jiang Zemin on Wednesday greeted future Hong Kong leader Tung Chee-hwa with a pledge of support, saying the appointment of the tycoon turned chief executive designate marked the dawn of new era.
"Of course, I will support him," Jiang told reporters during a meeting in Beijing with Tung, who will lead the British colony after it returns to Chinese rule on July 1 next year.
"This is indeed the start of a new era," he said.
Tung, a shipping magnate who will become Hong Kong's first Chinese chief executive after more than 150 years of colonial rule from London, was in Beijing to meet senior leaders after his formal appointment on Monday by Premier Li Peng.
The visit is being keenly watched by residents in the territory eager to know more about Tung's plans for his first post-colonial adminstration and to learn whether current senior civil servants will keep their jobs.
Tung, who has warned Hong Kong's people to be sensitive to China's sovereign rights, has yet to give details of his plans for the post-colonial administration but has said he will discuss transition issues during his Beijing visit.
He declined to answer questions from reporters on the position of civil servants before beginning talks with Jiang in Beijing's cavernous Great Hall of the People.
It was Jiang who in January signalled that the tycoon was China's favourite for chief executive by singling him out for a warm, personal handshake at a reception in Beijing.
A 400-member, Beijing-controlled Selection Committee of Hong Kong residents last week made the choice official when a sweeping 80 percent majority of members backed the 59-year-old tycoon.
At a meeting at Beijing's Diaoyutai state guest house, Premier Li Peng gave Tung a certificate of appointment and congratulated him on his success. "This is indeed an historic moment," Li told reporters.
Earlier on Wednesday, Tung met Foreign Minister Qian Qichen at the guesthouse, but neither he nor Qian made any public comment.
One of Tung's first tasks in the twilight of British rule will be to put together an advisory cabinet called the Executive Council and to decide which senior civil servants to keep -- a subject of much speculation among Hong Kong's boisterous media.
While heated interest has focused on Tung's intentions for current senior administrators, China said on Tuesday that it would make the final decision on important civil servants.
"For senior officials, they need the nomination of the top administrative official and to finally obtain appointment by the central government," Foreign Ministry spokesman Shen Guofang said at a news briefing.
China has hailed Tung's appointment as the fruit of its principle of Hong Kong autonomy, but the selection process was dogged by protests from democrats who accuse Beijing of using its hand-picked committee to stage-manage the choice.
Beijing's critics believe it is likely try to control Hong Kong and its 6.3 million people from behind the scenes after the five-star Chinese flag is raised over the territory.
The Beijing-backed Selection Committee that chose Tung is now preparing for the selection on Saturday of a 60-member, "provisional legislature" with which China plans to replace the existing, elected legislature on July 1.
Hong Kong's colonial governor Chris Patten has condemned the new legislature as undemocratic and has vowed not to cooperate with it.
