Tsingtao Brewery built its reputation as China's king of beers earlier this century by catering to thirsty foreign invaders.
But analysts warn that after years at the top, a complacent Tsingtao today is seeing a new breed of invader -- this time in the form of nimble foreign beer makers -- eat into its once-impregnable market share.
The brewery in eastern China's Shandong province, which in 1993 became the first Chinese company to list on the Hong Kong stock exchange has "rested on their laurels for too long", said one Beijing-based beer industry analyst.
While Tsingtao has begun to respond to the threat from foreign-funded joint ventures and upstart domestic brewing groups, it still relies too much on its traditional brand-name prestige and is being out-advertised by thirstier rivals, he said.
Company officials at the brewery's home in the scenic port city of Qingdao -- formerly Romanised as Tsingtao -- say they feel the pressure but are ready to fight back.
"We don't feel there is a crisis," said general manager Peng Zuoyi, the head of a new management team appointed earlier this year to boost the brewery's prospects.
Tsingtao plans to boost production to 500,000 tonnes this year, from 350,000 tonnes in 1995, and hike annual output to 1.4 million tonnes by 2000, Peng told reporters at the brewery.
LIFE CAN BE HARDER IN A MARKET ECONOMY
Under communist China's old command economy, Tsingtao was a luxury commodity in chronically short supply. But Peng said the market economy and the arrival of foreign brands were taking their toll.
"Before the foreigners came to China, almost all the high-class restaurants and hotels had our Tsingtao Beer," Peng said. "In the market where we were once 100 percent, we now account for perhaps 70-80 percent."
Against the glamour of foreign beers, Tsingtao touts its unique heritage as the premier domestic beer in one of the world's fastest-growing markets.
The company was founded in 1903 and initially targeted thirsty Germans living in the port city that Germany had wrested from a weak China.
Company officials say the beer also thrived during the Japanese occupation before and during World War Two.
The decades of state control that followed the communist revolution of 1949 were a factor behind Tsingtao's later neglect of its home market, said Elizabeth Cheng, head of China research at HSBC James Capel in Hong Kong.
"Now with the new management, hopefully they will be able to do something more dynamic," Cheng said.
A LACK OF TRANSPARENCY
Growing competition is not the only worry cited by analysts, who have long complained about a lack of transparency at the brewery, which is still 44 percent state-owned.
In 1994, the brewery drew investor ire when it was found to have lent out the foreign currency proceeds of its share flotations at high interest rates instead of investing them in its core business as promised.
Peng said that problem was mainly a misunderstanding.
"In some ways Chinese methods are not quite the same as international ones," Peng said, adding that lack of a clear investment plan had caused Tsingtao to put its money elsewhere.
The 4,000-strong workforce of the group, which has assets of 3.0 billion yuan ($360 million), is another potential concern.
"They are vastly overstaffed," said the Beijing-based analyst, a view seemingly borne out by the relaxed approach of many workers observed during a recent visit to the brewery.
Tsingtao says it still has up to 2.4 percent of the Chinese beer market, although the Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU) said last month that the share was now likely below 2.0 percent.
While life as a listed company would never be as easy as it was under the command economy, the analysts said Tsingtao was too much of a national symbol to be allowed to fail.
Tsingtao is also one of 10 domestic brewing groups that have been promised preferential loans and conditions from the government to help them compete with joint venture breweries.
"(Tsingtao is) troubled, but they will survive," said the Beijing-based analyst. "They have very powerful backing... a lot of people do not want to see it go down the tubes."
