Hong Kong's leader-designate Tung Chee-hwa said on Thursday a series of meetings with China's top communist leaders had boosted his confidence in the future of the British colony under Chinese sovereignty next year.
Shipping magnate Tung also said he could foresee no problems in the territory that would require Beijing's help after the territory returned to China at midnight on June 30, 1997.
"At the moment I can see no problems that would require the special help of the central government," Tung told a news conference a day after Chinese President Jiang Zemin assured him of Beijing's full support after he takes office.
If such a situation were to arise, Tung said he would immediately ask for assistance from Beijing.
Jiang on Wednesday greeted Tung with a pledge of support and a vow not to tread on Hong Kong's right to autonomy after 150 years of British colonial rule come to an end.
The appointment of the tycoon turned chief executive designate to lead Hong Kong from July 1 next year marked the dawn of a new age, Jiang said.
Tung said he would return home with greater confidence in Hong Kong's future after his meetings in Beijing with Jiang and Premier Li Peng that set the communist seal of approval on his selection as Hong Kong's first leader of the post-colonial era.
China's leaders all stressed their sincerity in granting Hong Kong a high degree of autonomy under the principle of "one country, two systems", Tung said, referring to Beijing's pledge not to meddle with Hong Kong's capitalist system for 50 years.
"That gave me even more confidence in Hong Kong's future," he said.
Asked about the rank he expected to be accorded in China's communist or state bureaucracy, Tung stressed the unique position Hong Kong would hold after its return to China.
"I think I will not be ranked with anybody else because we are a special sitution," he said. "We are going to exercise a high degree of autonomy."
However, he urged Hong Kong's 6.3 million people to face the fact of China's decision to disband the territory's existing elected legislature after the handover and to replace it with its own appointed provisional body.
"The best way to minimise conflict is to recognise the reality of the provisional legislature," Tung said when asked how he would deal with potential conflicts caused by the existence of a Hong Kong-elected legislature as well as a Beijing-approved body in the run-up to the handover.
"There is a need for the provisional legislature to start meeting before July 1 because there is work that needs to be done in order to avoid a legal vacuum," he said.
Tung's first visit to Beijing since his appointment is being closely watched by Hong Kong residents keen to know more about his plans for the first post-colonial adminstration and to learn whether current senior civil servants will keep their jobs.
On the issue of civil servant appointments, Tung said this would be among his first duties when he returned, but gave no hint of his position or intentions.
"I do things rather methodically, step by step, and I will do that on this issue as well," he said.
Tung, who has warned Hong Kong's people to be sensitive to China's sovereign rights, has yet to give details of his plans for the post-colonial administration.
While China has said it will leave Hong Kong's free-wheeling capitalist system intact after the handover, it has made clear that the authoritiy of the territory's leader will have limits.
