China's top prosecutors have vowed to crack down on corruption among the ranks of leading officials in the government and ruling Communist Party, state media said on Tuesday.
The call for tougher action to curb growing official graft came as senior leaders considered whether to punish scandal-hit former Beijing Party boss Chen Xitong for dereliction of duty.
In the first 11 months of 1996, Chinese procurators had begun action in 77,611 cases of corruption, bribery and economic crime and had dealt with 33,879 cases, up 9.4 percent compared with the same period of 1995, the China News Service said.
"China's legal organs will make more efforts to deal with major embezzlement and bribery cases involving officials next year," the official Xinhua news agency quoted Deputy Procurator General Liang Guoqing as telling a conference in Beijing.
Prosecutors would focus on major corruption cases involving leading officials in the ruling Communist Party, government and law enforcement agencies, Liang said.
The number of graft cases involving more than 10,000 yuan ($1,200) was growing fast, said the China News Service.
On Monday, a top Beijing official said China's party leadership was considering whether to have disgraced capital party boss Chen Xitong charged for dereliction of duty.
"Viewing the situation from the case of Wang Baosen, he (Chen) can't escape dereliction of duty," Beijing Vice-Mayor Zhang Baifa told reporters in a reference to a former Beijing vice-mayor who committed suicide last year after coming under investigation for corruption.
Investigators had uncovered no evidence to show that Chen, one of China's most influential men until he fell from power in the corruption scandal, was guilty of more serious wrongdoing.
Beijing has repeatedly launched crackdowns on graft, which senior leaders have called a cancer that threatens the Communist Party's grip on power, but many Chinese say enforcement of anti-corruption measures at senior levels is patchy at best.
"Procuratorial agencies at all levels should at all times make dealing with major cases, especially those involving crimes by leading officials, the key point in pushing the deepening of the war on corruption," the Xinhua Daily Telegraph said.
Anti-graft vigilance would be essential in 1997, a key year for China's economic reforms, it quoted procurator Liang as telling the five-day conference of prosecutors in the capital.
Construction officials have said that as much as 10 percent of the cost of new buildings can disappear into the pockets of contractors. Pharmaceutical salesmen say many doctors are only willing to prescribe drugs if they are paid to do so.
Public perceptions of endemic graft have pushed Beijing to seek new ways to stiffen flagging moral and fiscal rectitude among officials, who have seen their formal salaries trail far behind the incomes of entrepreneurs and private sector workers.
From January 1 next year the Ministry of Public Security would for the first time begin requiring China's police to swear an oath of loyalty, discipline and honesty, Xinhua said.
"This... is a way of getting police to show respect for the responsibility they bear," the agency said.
The oath would include pledges of loyalty first to the Communist Party, then to the people and the law.
Officers would also vow to be honest.
