Beijing's young people jostled and barged their way into the Chinese capital's Catholic churches late on Christmas Eve, saying that for one night a year midnight mass was the place to be seen.
Fashionably-dressed young men and women stood on their seats in St Joseph's church in the downtown Wangfujing shopping district to watch the mass, while regular church-goers fled outside for refuge from the crowd.
Around 10,000 people were expected to visit St Joseph's throughout the evening, with more than 1,000 cramming into the church for the Chinese-language midnight mass, staff said.
Only a small fraction of the visitors crowding into the Chinese-language mass and buying crucifixes or battery-powered musical Santa Claus dolls at the church shop were Christians, said congregation members.
"There are very few devotees here," said one worshipper in her 70s who said she was a daily visitor to the twin-domed church, which was established in 1655 by an Italian priest.
"They are all non-believers -- they don't understand this at all, they just think it's good entertainment," said the worshipper, who declined to be identified.
"I just came for fun," agreed one young visitor. "I don't believe in God. In Beijing it is fashionable at the moment to come to church at Christmas."
Groups of affluent young men and women in their sharpest outfits lent the normally solemn church grounds an air more akin to that of one of Beijing's mushrooming nightclubs.
"Everyone was lined up, you know, just like at a disco dance," said one U.S. visitor.
Hours before midnight mass, hundreds of mostly youthful onlookers strolled among the wooden pillars of St Joseph's, which was last rebuilt in 1905 after a devastating fire.
Seminarians of the official communist-controlled Chinese Catholic church, known as the Patriotic Catholic Association, handed out religious tracts.
Beijing has an estimated 70,000 Catholics, out of about four million nationwide. All are banned from acknowledging the spiritual leadership of the Vatican, with which China has no formal relations.
Just round the corner from St Joseph's in the upmarket Taiwan Hotel a more commercially-oriented Christmas was on offer, with special menus, festive trees and a choir to greet guests with seasonal songs.
Christmas was catching on in China, said the youthful Santa Claus posted outside the hotel's main restaurant to serve up good cheer to potential diners.
But for this Beijing Santa, karaoke was a more important festive ingredient than roast turkey or crackers.
"I'll be at this until midnight," he said. "Then I think I'll head next door to sing a few songs."
While few of the young church visitors to St Joseph's admitted to any deep religious feelings, hospital worker He Haiying said the visit to mass had other more secular benefits.
"It's a chance to have an exchange with Western culture," she said.
While the influx of young pleasure-seekers was a clear sign of the more open approach to Christianity that has largely replaced the official hostility of the past, regular church-goers felt the crowds were a mixed blessing.
"There are too many people, there's no place to sit," said the 70-something St Joseph's parishioner. "We older people will come back in the morning for the six a.m. mass."
