Chinese authorities have closed down 12 illegal compact disc production lines in just two weeks, but Beijing still has far to go to conquer the nation's army of copyright pirates, officials and analysts said on Thursday.
Tough action to curb theft of intellectual property rights had netted more than 10 million counterfeit products in 1996 and had won recognition even in Washington, which in June took China to the brink of trade war over the issue, officials said.
Officials in booming southern Guangdong province had shut down 12 music and video disc production lines since December 10 as part of a national crackdown on pornography and piracy, said Wang Ziqiang of the National Copyright Administration of China.
"We have uncovered quite a few pirate production lines... Guangdong province has taken very effective steps," Wang told Reuters in an interview.
The crackdown on pirates and pornographers had had clear successes, the Overseas Edition of the People's Daily quoted Minister of Culture Liu Zhongde as saying.
"This year...we have seized more than 10 million illegal audio-visual products and dealt with 6,912 illegal work units," Liu said, adding that Beijing had also strengthened the market in legitimate audio-visual products.
U.S. officials said this week that there were indications that China was doing a better job of enforcing the Sino-U.S. copyright accord that averted a trade war in June, with plant closures and tougher controls on imports of illegal equipment.
Washington has long accused Beijing of doing too little to curb the lucrative pirating of U.S. intellectual property rights. Beijing says it has moved faster than any other developing nation to clamp down on the underground industry.
While China was moving in the right direction on intellectual property, the efforts of the last year appeared to have had little lasting effect on the roaring retail market in pirated goods, said one Western industry consultant.
Blockbuster Hollywood movies were readily available on pirated video discs for as little 20-30 yuan ($2.40-3.60) per film despite the high-profile national crackdown, said the consultant, who declined to be named.
"There are lots of places to buy discs," he said. "They are periodically raided, but afterwards the show goes on.
Pirate producers often had connections with local officials, making anything more than a cosmetic crackdown a potential battle of political wills between the central government and increasingly autonomous local authorities, he said.
Copyright official Wang said piracy was a problem found in most countries and was not something that could be eliminated by just a few years of tough action.
"The key point is the government's attitude to the problem," Wang said, adding that U.S. attitudes to China's copyright problems were far from even-handed.
"The (copyright) situation in some other countries is worse than here, but I don't think the United States is as strict with them," he said.
Officials have said Beijing plans to launch video rental counters in post offices as a way of curbing private rental shops that often offer cut-price pirate videos for hire.
($1=8.3 yuan)
