Chinese lawmakers on Friday called for the ruling Communist Party to tighten control over the nation's armed forces, saying new defence legislation was essential to bring law to the military.
Members of the standing committee of the National People's Congress had agreed to submit a draft defence law for approval by a full parliamentary session, the Xinhua news agency said.
"It must be made clear in the law that absolute party leadership over the military must be strengthened,' to ensure a correct political path for the People's Liberation Army (PLA)," the official agency quoted leading committee members as saying.
The three-million-strong PLA has for decades been considered the "gun" of the Communist Party (CCP), but analysts say leaders are keen to buttress their control in the face of concerns over the army's loyalty and its growing financial independence.
Beijing has tried to rein in the PLA's vast business empire and to strengthen the network of communist cadres charged with overseeing political education and policy among military ranks.
The 13-chapter defence law, which began to be drafted in September 1993, has reportedly been long delayed by high-level disagreement over the extent to which it should formalise the Party's leadership role.
The law is also expected formally to empower the military to crush rebellions and struggles for regional independence -- roles the army has already shouldered in the past.
"Most lawmakers expressed the view that formulation of the national defence law is crucial for the rule of law in the military field," Xinhua said.
Foreign analysts of the Chinese military say some army loyalties have been weakened by conflicting institutional interests, business activities and growing corruption.
Efforts to boost military loyalty by current party leaders -- few of whom enjoy the military credibility of their revolutionary forebears -- had been unrelenting since 1989, wrote analyst and scholar David Shambaugh earlier this year.
"No doubt the Party's efforts to ensure control over and gain the 'absolute loyalty' of the armed forces arise not only from the CCP leadership's own insecurities but also from the military's growing autonomy," Shambaugh wrote.
Concerns over the influence of the military's business activities were echoed by legislators reviewing the draft law.
The PLA should be banned from business for profit and military expenditure should be guaranteed by the government to make the armed forces concentrate on protecting state security, Xinhua quoted lawmaker Huang Yuzhang as saying.
Huang had also called for a commitment by China not to threaten the security of other nations to be added to the law to illustrate Beijing's policy of "active defence", it said.
Concerns that growing military power could herald future expansionism have risen among China's regional neighbours in recent years, as Beijing has moved to upgrade military technology and boost its power at sea and in the air.
China, which has in past decades fought fierce wars across several of its borders, says such fears are entirely unfounded.
The state should provide sufficient funds for the research and development of military technology and for more technicians to translate progress into combat power, Xinhua quoted PLA parliamentary deputy Cheng Shouliang as saying on Friday.
