China said Monday that it restrained inflation while maintaining strong economic growth in 1996 and it predicted it will do even better next year despite soaring government-sector losses and slumping individual incomes.
The State Statistical Bureau quoted preliminary 1996 figures showing China's gross domestic product grew at an estimated 9.7 percent to 6.8 trilliion yuan ($816 billion) while inflation fell to 6.0 percent from 14.8 percent.
Despite soaring losses in the state sector and falling incomes for many urban households, the statistics showed China's economy had returned safely to earth after a period of high inflation and runaway growth, bureau spokesman Ye Zhen said.
"The national economy maintained its rapid and stable growth, indicating a successful 'soft landing,'" Ye told a news conference in Beijing.
China will do even better in 1997, he said.
"Preliminary estimates show overall growth will continue with the same stability and high speed as this year," he said.
Annual economic growth in 1997 was expected to rise to 10.5 percent, while inflation -- which soared to a communist-era high of 21.4 percent in 1994 -- will stay at this year's level, Ye said.
China has set a target of 8.0 percent growth for 1996 to try to cool the economy, down from 10.2 percent last year and a sizzling 11.8 percent the previous year.
The 6.0 percent figure for 1996 retail price inflation, China's benchmark price index, was well below the government's 10 percent target for the year.
Consumer price inflation was estimated at about 8.3 percent, compared with 17.1 percent in 1995.
While some economists have expressed doubts about the accuracy of Beijing's inflation figures, it was clear that once-fierce price rises have been largely controlled, said Jason Kwok, chief economist at Citibank Hong Kong and China.
"It all tends to suggest that the macroeconomy is doing very well this year," Kwok said in a telephone interview.
Two recent interest rate cuts and China's second-half turnaround of an earlier poor export performance meant growth could edge up next year even without a loosening of Beijing's 42-month-old tight credit policy, Kwok said.
Stable growth next year was likely to receive an external boost from an expected upward trend in exports, which the statistical bureau said had powered China to an estimated $16 billion trade surplus in 1996, he said.
Beijing will keep the lid on credit growth and continue to put high priority on restraining price rises, Ye said.
