China's lumbering state firms are putting more effort into making products they can actually sell, but huge stockpiles of unwanted goods remain a blot on the economic landscape, officials said on Monday.
At the end of October the total amount of capital tied up in inventories of 380,000 enterprises across China had reached 540 billion yuan ($65 billion), 80 billion yuan more than at the beginning of 1996, State Statistical Bureau spokesman Ye Zhen said.
While some of the inventories were a result of normal production and marketing processes, much was "unreasonable", Ye told a news conference.
"Of the total 540 billion yuan in stocks, 150 billion yuan is unreasonable," he said but gave no details.
Many state-owned firms, long accustomed to mass-production for a command economy, have struggled to adjust to China's new consumer-led markets and continue to churn out millions of yuan worth of unsellable goods.
State media reported last week that excessive investment by enterprises in some industries had resulted in mountains of warehoused goods ranging from bicycles to wristwatches.
The stockpiles included about 1.5 billion unsold men's shirts -- about three shirts for every adult Chinese male.
Chinese officials say concentration of investment in certain industries has led to cut-throat competition resulting in losses, monopolies and local protectionism.
Beijing has vowed to curb blind investment by provinces in some industries, but economists say defiance from regional authorities will hamper the central government's efforts.
Ye said firms had progressively improved the quality of their investment in new production throughout 1996.
"Enterprises... are paying more attention to efficiency and to the quality and variety of their products," he said. "Blind production has been reduced."
The national sales rate for industrial products had risen to 96.27 percent in November from 93.04 percent in the first quarter, he said.
Large stockpiles held by state enterprises have compounded their difficulties in clearing interlocking "triangular debt" among firms unable to pay their bills to one another.
The value of "outstanding accounts", or funds owed, by 380,000 state firms had soared to 900 billion yuan by the end of October, up 100 billion yuan from the start of the year, Ye said.
He said state statisticians believed about one-third of the 900 billion yuan in debt was "unreasonable", apparently hinting that this might not be repayable.
($1=8.3 yuan)
