China on Monday crowed over an economic triumph in restraining inflation while retaining strong growth in 1996, and said it expected to do even better next year despite soaring state sector losses and slumping incomes.
China's gross domestic product was estimated to have grown 9.7 percent in 1996 to 6,780 billion yuan ($816 billion), with inflation slashed to 6.0 percent from 14.8 percent in 1995, the State Statistical Bureau quoted preliminary figures as showing.
Despite soaring losses in the lumbering state sector and falling incomes for many urban households, the statistics showed China's economy had returned safely to earth after a period of high-inflation runaway growth, said bureau spokesman Ye Zhen.
"The national economy maintained its rapid and stable growth, indicating a successful 'soft landing'," Ye told a news conference in Beijing.
China would do even better in 1997, he said.
"Preliminary estimates show overall growth will continue with the same stability and high speed as this year," he said.
Annual economic growth in 1997 was expected to rise to 10.5 percent, while inflation -- which soared to a communist-era high of 21.4 percent in 1994 -- would stay at this year's level, Ye said.
China had set a target of 8.0 percent growth for 1996 to try to cool the economy, down from 10.2 percent last year and a sizzling 11.8 percent the previous year.
The 6.0 percent figure for 1996 retail price inflation, China's benchmark price index, was well below the government's 10 percent target for the year.
Consumer price inflation was estimated at about 8.3 percent, compared with 17.1 percent in 1995.
While some economists have expressed doubts about the accuracy of Beijing's inflation figures, it was clear that once-fierce price rises had been largely controlled, said Jason Kwok, chief economist at Citibank Hong Kong and China.
"It all tends to suggest that the macro-economy is doing very well this year," Kwok said in a telephone interview.
Two recent interest rate cuts and China's second-half turnaround of an earlier poor export performance meant growth could edge up next year even without a loosening of Beijing's 42-month-old tight credit policy, Kwok said.
Stable growth next year was likely to receive an external boost from an expected upward trend in exports, which the statistical bureau said had powered China to an estimated $16 billion trade surplus in 1996, he said.
Beijing would keep the lid on credit growth and continue to put high priority on restraining price rises, Ye said.
Some economists have suggested Beijing's success in reducing inflation and the two cuts in interest rates this year signal an imminent easing of the credit crunch, which has thrown a heavy burden on the already struggling state enterprises.
About 75 percent of state firms were losing money and total losses in the government sector had soared to 69 billion yuan between January and October, a rise of 45 percent compared with the same period of last year, Ye said.
"Although the situation improved after the second quarter, in general the problems remain very serious," he said.
Per capita incomes in urban households had risen 3.4 percent in real terms to 4,380 yuan in 1996, but the figures hid an income decline for many families, bureau officials said.
Incomes had failed to keep pace with inflation in about 30 percent of households, although for some, the retirement or death of a main wage earner rather than macro-economics were the main culprit, they said.
($1=8.3 yuan)
