China's troubled relations with the United States should improve in 1997, but disputes over Taiwan, trade and the return of Hong Kong to Beijing rule could easily sour ties, state media and analysts said on Thursday.
After lurching from crisis to crisis throughout much of 1995 and 1996, Beijing and Washington were both keen to develop new stability in the cross-Pacific relationship by toning down differences, said a Beijing-based Western diplomat.
"There will still be problems... but if things follow their present trajectory, I would say you won't have quite such big ups and downs as over the last couple of years," he said.
The November meeting in Manila between Chinese President Jiang Zemin and his U.S. counterpart Bill Clinton and the prospect of mutual state visits had presaged a possible period of Sino-U.S. warming, said the official Guangming Daily.
"But because a number of serious differences still exist, this road to the recovery and improvement of relations will again not be smooth," it said in a commentary.
U.S. policy towards Beijing's island rival Taiwan, the return of the British colony Hong Kong and China's long-delayed entry to the World Trade Organisation (WTO) would be crucial issues, it said.
Chinese concerns were rising over Hong Kong, which will revert to Beijing's rule at midnight on June 30 after more than 150 years as a British colony, the Western diplomat said.
Beijing leaders were aware that any sign of a harsh approach to democratic opponents of their Hong Kong policies would cause a storm of protest in a U.S. Congress already suspicious of Chinese intentions, he said.
"They are starting to get very worried, because they realise the Americans are going to focus on Hong Kong and it is going to give Congress another stick to beat them with," he said. "It's pretty certain there's going to be a bit of friction involved."
A Chinese analyst on Sino-U.S. economic relations said Hong Kong's return could add fuel to disputes over China's swelling trade surplus with the United States by combining the former colony's exports with those of the mainland.
"After Hong Kong's return, there will be some clashes over this matter," said the analyst, who declined to be identified.
Taiwan continued to be a key stumbling block, he said.
Sino-U.S. relations plunged in March 1996, when China -- angry at attempts by Taiwan to break out of diplomatic isolation -- carried out missile tests and war games in the Taiwan Strait before the island's first direct presidential elections.
Washington responded by sending two aircraft carrier battlegroups to the area, an action that infuriated Beijing.
The United States appeared to have adjusted its approach to the Taiwan issue in recent months, urging Taipei to tone down its campaign for international recognition, the diplomat said.
The Guangming Daily said Washington was still not taking enough account of China's real situation in talks on its WTO entry, which Beijing says has been stalled by U.S. objections.
"The (WTO) entrance fee is too high," echoed the Chinese analyst, adding that China's automobile and pharmaceutical industries would suffer if forced to face foreign competition.
If Beijing and Washington continued to try to limit the impact of such disputes on overall ties, 1997 could bring needed stability to the Sino-U.S. relationship -- plus a possible exchange of presidential visits, analysts said.
"Hong Kong is the key, if something doesn't go wrong with Hong Kong I would say this will be a much better year than 1996, and probably than 1995 as well," the diplomat said. "They've been pretty bad years."
