China will retain controls over the price it pays farmers for grain even after reforms trumpeted as unifying the state-set price with that of the market, official media said on Monday.
Minister of state economic restructuring Li Tieying said last month China would this year unify the price for compulsory sales of grain to the state with market prices, a reform aimed at boosting the role of the market in the agricultural sector.
However, provincial authorities would continue to have the final say on the price they paid for grain, the Xinhua news agency on Monday quoted Wang Lingui of the State Grain Reserve Administration as saying.
"The purchasing price will be determined by governments at provincial levels on the basis of the market price," the official agency quoted Wang as saying.
Steep hikes in the official grain purchase price and falls in market prices caused by a record 480-million-tonne grain harvest in 1996 meant the time was right for reform, Wang said.
But he added that market trends would not be the only factors considered.
"The market price forms a principal basis for setting a purchasing price, but is not the only criteria," he said. "Therefore, the purchasing price should not necessarily follow the market price."
Grain traders said last month the difference between state purchase prices and market prices had narrowed to almost nothing, suggesting that merging the two would have little immediate impact.
But analysts said the government may be concerned that future bumper crops could force market prices down sharply, and in turn force farm incomes lower.
China's government has long paid lower-than-market prices for grain purchases to ensure state granaries are well stocked.
Beijing's communist leadership has for years tried to free grain prices, but all attempts have fallen foul of fears that uncontrolled rises could push food prices beyond the pockets of urban residents and spark social unrest.
A government spokesman last month voiced apparent unease about unifying state and market grain prices, saying farmers' enthusiaism for planting grain would be sapped if prices fell.
The annual state grain-collection quota of 50 million tonnes would remain unchanged under the planned reforms, allowing the state to guide grain production, stabilise the acreage sown and maintain stable grain price, Wang said.
"Meanwhile, building a protective price system, which will set a ceiling on the market price and the bottom line of the purchasing price, is a must," Xinhua quoted Wang as saying without elaborating.
The state price should be allowed to move over time to encourage farmers to hold on to their grain and so ease harvest-time pressures on state granaries, he said but gave no details.
