Microsoft Corp on Tuesday launched a Chinese version of its Windows NT 4.0 software, saying the network operating system was a vital advance for the U.S giant into China's infant but fast-growing software market.
Microsoft, which saw its return to official favour in China marred when anti-communist phrases were found in its Windows 95 programme in September, was determined to lead the nation's growing software industry, company officials said.
"The speed at which computing is taking off here is really incredible," Microsoft Greater China Regional Director Bryan Nelson told a briefing before the launch of Windows NT 4.0.
While still small by international standards and plagued by copyright piracy that was costing Microsoft millions of dollars a year, the Chinese market was developing quickly, Nelson said.
"The marketplace is maturing very fast, there's a long way to go but it's extremely exciting," he said.
Windows NT 4.0, which combines the Windows 95 interface with more powerful 32-bit software for networks of personal computers, would sell mainly to large Chinese and foreign companies operating on the mainland, company officials said.
The system, released alongside Microsoft's Workstation 4.0 and equipped with a Chinese version of its Internet browser, was a key addition to the China product range, Nelson said.
"Products like NT for us are absolutely vital," he said, adding that the local version of Windows NT 4.0, which works with the simplified characters used on the mainland, was a step towards tapping Chinese enthusiasm for the Internet.
"The Internet in China is red hot," he said. "There are so many projects... being done on the Internet and intranets that we can't service them all."
Microsoft's Internet applications would allow controls on access to particular sites on the worldwide computer network -- a sensitive issue in China where officials have said they are keen to block sites deemed politically hostile or pornographic.
"You could call it censorship... (but) there's nothing different in our Chinese product than in our English versions," said Microsoft Regional Marketing Director Fernando de Sousa.
Demand for ways to control Internet access existed in Western markets as well, he said.
Nelson said Microsoft's ties with Chinese officials had more than recovered after the discovery of phrases once favoured by Beijing's Nationalist rivals in Taiwan in the Windows 95 programme.
Microsoft, whose negotiations with Beijing were once described by a Chinese official as a trial of strength, saw its return to favour threatened by phrases such as "communist bandits" and "Taiwan independence".
The discovery of the phrases forced Microsoft to temporarily stop shipping the system and prompted angry articles in Chinese newspapers about the U.S. firm's cultural insensitivity.
"It was a challenging time... (but) the follow-up has been a closer relationship," Nelson said, adding that Microsoft and Chinese officials had taken just six days to resolve the issue.
The company had lost more in terms of market momentum than in the financial outlay needed to correct the software and issue free updates to previous buyers, he said.
While copyright piracy continued to be a problem in China, with unlicensed use running at up to 95 percent for some applications, Microsoft had seen some improvment in the domestic market, Nelson said.
The company had seen no progress from Beijing's clampdown on pirates who exported counterfeit goods, he said.
