China's war on destitution has been filling the pages of the state-controlled media, but the nation has little chance of meeting its target of wiping out absolute poverty by 2000, analysts said on Wednesday.
A week of banner headlines and front-page stories trumpeting the anti-poverty resolve of China's communist leadership reflected more the political importance of impoverished regions than real confidence targets could be achieved, they said.
Bringing new wealth to the 65 million Chinese struggling to survive with annual incomes below the 530 yuan ($64) official absolute poverty line was a vital state goal, state media said.
"We know that it's not particularly realistic. You can't just wave a wand and suddenly all these people just disappear," said a Western diplomat who specialises in poverty issues.
"They have had really good progress in the last five years but they haven't reached those targets -- and there doesn't seem to be a great deal of momentum built up to be able to meet those targets," the diplomat said.
State newspapers have packed their pages this week with months-old speeches and state resolutions, mixed with more recent reports of regional successes in easing the scourge of poverty in the nation's villages.
"Before the 21st century arrives, China will eliminate absolute poverty... The Chinese Communist Party will lead the people of the whole nation to cast off the stigma of destitution," said the Xinhua Daily Telegraph.
But in a commentary that accompanied the text of an October resolution on poverty, the official newspaper also appeared to reflect concern that high profile goals could be hard to meet.
China had been able to lift only an average of five million people a year from poverty over the last three years, less than half the targeted level, it said.
"If the pace of poverty alleviation in poor areas is not accelerated, that will mean the problem of feeding and sheltering around 40 million poor people will be carried into the next century," it said.
Even if all Chinese could be assured an annual income above the official absolute poverty line, the gap between China's urban haves and rural have-nots would linger for many years, said a Chinese agricultural development analyst.
"There is a lot of work to be done," he said, adding that poverty remained an issue in the areas around some of China's most prosperous eastern and coastal cities.
"Even in Beijing suburbs there are mountainous areas where the average income is still low," he said. "They are not poor by national standards but they are still far behind (urban residents)."
The Western diplomat said one reason for the high profile accorded to anti-poverty pledges by senior leaders such as President Jiang Zemin and Premier Li Peng was the need to placate local leaders in more backward regions.
China's inland provinces have long complained they are being left behind by booming coastal regions, prompting promises of a westward shift in investment to help them to catch up.
"On the political level I think (the publicity) is closely related to the issue of building up the western and central provinces," the diplomat said.
It was unclear what the political results of failure to reach the targets would be, she said.
