Britain's final departure next year from its colony of Hong Kong will be sealed with a handshake, a British minister said on Tuesday, confirming the two countries would share one final last symbolic embrace.
Beijing's top Hong Kong policymaker had indicated he was willing to join the British territory's last imperial governor at a ceremony to mark its return to China, said Jeremy Hanley, Minister of State at the Foreign and Commonwealth Office.
Chinese official Lu Ping's willingness to join Britain's Governor Chris Patten in the limelight appeared to signal new willingness to set aside differences in the run-up to the colony's return to Beijing rule on July 1, 1997.
"I had confirmation from Lu Ping this morning that he is looking forward to shaking the governor's hand at the handover ceremony," Hanley told a news conference in Beijing.
London and Beijing have long bickered over the arrangements for Hong Kong's mid-1997 transition to Chinese rule after more than 150 years, with disagreement over the handover ceremony once so entrenched that the prospects for a joint event seemed doubtful.
Beijing, infuriated by Patten's drive to expand democracy in the colony ahead of its return, has tried to limit Britain's role, while London is keen to leave in imperial style.
Britain in March signaled that a joint ceremony was in doubt, with diplomatic sources reporting that the main hurdle in talks was China's insistence that Patten should not attend.
Hong Kong government radio reported late last month that Chinese and British negotiators could reach an outline agreement on the ceremony by the end of September, just nine months before the end of London's rule.
A willingness to share the podium with the governor could reflect a muting of Chinese anger at Patten, who has long been the butt of scathing editorials in the Beijing media.
Lu Ping has frequently shown reluctance to meet Patten during visits to the colony, although he has often had conferences with other British and Hong Kong officials.
Hanley said differences remained to be settled on handover arrangements, but added progress had been made.
"We've had very useful discussions," he said.
"On the handover ceremony, the Chinese government agree that it should be grand, solemn and dignified, and fitting to the historical importance of the event," Hanley said.
Britain and China say relations have warmed in recent months, boosted by high-level exchanges and a May trade visit to Beijing by British Deputy Prime Minister Michael Heseltine.
Differences remained over China's determination to scrap Hong Kong's elected legislature, known as Legco, Hanley said.
"It is unnecessary for Legco, which has been duly elected, to be replaced before the end of its term in 1999," he said.
While Hanley called for urgency to resolve outstanding disagreements before the 1997 handover, China's official Xinhua news agency quoted Lu Ping as saying "minor differences" did not necessarily have to be ironed out before the day arrived.
"We will try our best to solve minor differences before the first of July, 1997. If some of the differences cannot be solved by that day, it doesn't matter," Lu said. "They can be resolved gradually by the Hong Kong people themselves."
