China on Thursday ordered two 747 airliners from U.S. aviation giant Boeing Co in a multimillion dollar deal that Washington's ambassador to China said was hastened by upcoming visits by U.S. congressmen.
The two jets would be powered by engines from Pratt and Whitney, a subsidiary of United Technologies Corp, and would be delivered in 1999 to Air China, Beijing's international carrier, officials of the China Aviation Supplies Corp said.
Closure of the $383 million contract, which follows the purchase of three 747-400s by Air China in July last year, had been hastened by imminent visits to Beijing of about 35 U.S. congressmen, said U.S. ambassador James Sasser.
"This Boeing contract is something that has been under discussion for some time," Sasser told reporters. "Clearly there was an effort to try to finalise this transaction on the eve of the visit of a number of senators and congressmen."
One official bipartisan delegation of around 22 U.S. congressmen is scheduled to arrive in Beijing next week for talks with Chinese officials that are expected to include touchy issues such as the Sino-U.S. trade balance and human rights.
Relations between Washington and Beijing have long been battered by disputes over trade, Taiwan, copyright piracy and China's human rights record, but both sides say ties warmed in the latter half of 1996.
Chinese efforts to ease Beijing's swelling and highly sensitive trade surplus with the United States were likely to provide a boost to U.S. exports to China, Sasser said.
"I think you will see over the coming months an effort on the part of the Chinese to make additional purchases of U.S. goods, in an effort to try to even up as much as possible the present trade deficit with the United States," he said.
The United States says it has a trade deficit with China, reaching nearly $29 billion in the first nine months of last year. Beijing insists that its customs figures show a surplus in favour of the United States.
The ambassador declined to give details of the deals likely to be agreed or to say which sectors might benefit most.
Some U.S. businessmen say high-profile sales are among the earliest casualties of Sino-U.S. diplomatic spats, and Boeing has in the past hinted that it has lost deals to European archrival Airbus Industrie for political reasons.
Boeing officials at the Thursday signing declined to comment on whether the 747 contract had been hastened by the recent thawing in cross-Pacific ties, but Regional Director for Aircraft Contracts Arthur Abel said the deal was heartening.
"We are just very encouraged and optimistic about our long term relationship with China," Abel told Reuters.
A Boeing statement said the two 286-passenger 747 Combis it would supply to Air China marked a strong vote of confidence in the U.S. planemaker from an airline that already operated 45 of its aircraft.
Officials of the state-run China Air Supplies Corp also welcomed the deal, although they identified the ordered aircraft as 301-seat 747-400s.
