Beijing's rare use of United Nations clout to stall the Guatemalan peace process was a clear signal of China's determination to punish rival Taiwan's small band of diplomatic allies, analysts said on Sunday.
"Beijing simply will not let anyone forget the price they will pay for supporting Taiwan," said one Asian diplomat.
"They (China) clearly want to make sure Taiwan's allies learn a lesson, and if they break ties with Taipei, all the better."
Beijing prefers to take a low-key approach to diplomacy at the United Nations, where it sees itself as a champion for developing nations, preferring abstentions to vetos on issues where it disagrees with the Security Council majority.
But to a leadership that has staked much of its credibility on its nationalist credentials, Taiwan is an issue so visceral that its usual diplomatic norms no longer apply.
The diplomatic anger that prompted China on Friday to veto a U.N. mission of 155 unarmed peacekeepers to disarm Guatemalan rebels was the product of Beijing's 48-year rivalry with the Nationalist-ruled island.
China has long worked to isolate Taiwan, which it has considered a renegade province since it became home to the defeated Nationalists at the end of a civil war in 1949.
Beijing sees diplomatic support for the island as backing for the splitting of China, or for Taiwanese independence.
The People's Daily, mouthpiece of China's ruling Communist Party, said Guatemala's warm ties with Taiwan left Beijing no choice but to exercise its U.N. veto to defend the motherland.
Guatemala had damaged China's territorial integrity, interfered in Beijing's internal affairs and hurt the feelings of the Chinese people, the newspaper quoted Foreign Ministry spokesman Shen Guofang as saying.
"We had no choice but to vote against the draft decision on peacekeeping," Shen said, adding that it was up to the Central American nation to resolve the situation.
"Let he who tied the bell on the tiger take it off," he said.
China has made clear it has no particular objection to the dispatch of a peace-keeping mission to Guatemala for three months to implement a U.N.-brokered accord agreed last month by the government and leftist rebels.
Guatemala's Taiwan ties alone were behind Beijing's decision to kill the mission, which was aimed at putting a final end to more than 36 years of war in which more than 100,000 people were killed and a further 40,000 "disappeared".
The Friday night vote left Beijing isolated 14-1 in the Security Council -- an ironic result coming just weeks after state media crowed over U.S. diplomatic isolation following Washington's use of its veto in a vote on U.N. leadership.
While China has long been considered a slumbering dragon at the United Nations, no issue is as likely to rouse the nation from its diplomatic quiet as Taiwan.
China has vowed to invade the island if it ever declares independence and has made non-recognition of the Taipei government the centrepiece of its international strategy.
The veto of the Guatemalan peace mission drew predictable fire in Taiwan, where the ruling Nationalist Party has long denied any dream of formal succession but says China must develop democracy before reunification can be considered.
"If Beijing pushes hard on Taiwan again and again, it will only push Taiwanese people farther away (from reunification)," the China Times newspaper said in its Sunday editorial.
"The United Nations will become the main site (for Beijing) to suppress Taipei's diplomacy," said the United Daily News. "The diplomatic war between the two sides is heating up."
