Foreign lenders owed money by members of China's chaotic investment trust house sector risk an unpredictable official response in the case of default or collapse, rating agency Moody's Investors Service has warned.
Regulators struggling to rein in wayward trust houses were unlikely to rush to rescue those that failed, the agency said in a report issued just days after the central bank announced the closure of one of China's largest investment firms.
The People's Bank of China, the central bank, announced last week it had shut down the China Agribusiness Development Trust and Investment Corp (CADTIC) because of serious illegal and irregular business practices that had caused it huge losses.
"Moody's believes that regulatory support for institutions in trouble... will continue to be unpredictable, and will overall be less likely to be forthcoming from the central bank in the future," the agency said.
"Where little public interest is involved, it is probable that the central regulators would not be active in encouraging or financing a rescue, preferring a default in an attempt to impose some order on an increasingly chaotic system," it said.
The central bank's lack of political clout in dealing with the trust houses, some of which were mere speculative vehicles for powerful institutional sponsors, had resulted in a selective approach to dealing with their problems, it said.
Foreign lenders had so far been mostly repaid after the reported closure of more than 100 non-bank financial institutions in recent months, but such a policy was far from guaranteed, it said.
China has yet to announce detailed plans for creditors to CADTIC, which was backed by the Ministry of Agriculture, but analysts have suggested that at least some foreign companies with outstanding loans might lose out.
The central bank said repayment priority would be given to domestic individual creditors, with other lenders to be repaid after the liquidation of what was China's biggest trust after the China International Trust and Investment Corp (CITIC).
CADTIC's collapse highlighted the difficulties Beijing faces in policing the financial sector while managing the transition from strict central planning to the new market-style economy.
Regulators were likely to take a more supportive approach towards problems among China's largest state banks than towards those encountered by the trust houses, Moody's said.
The big four state banks -- the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China, Bank of China, China Construction Bank and Agricultural Bank of China -- already received a great deal of government support on a daily basis, the agency said.
The banks would all be insolvent if their loan values were written down to reflect impairment, but resolution of this problem would require a complete restructuring of the state sector as well as bank recapitalisation, it said.
While China's other large commercial banks had much sounder finances, official support for them in the event of problems was uncertain, Moody's said.
Regulators could well tolerate the failure of a large bank if it was deemed to be the result of imprudence, illegality or incompetence, while struggling small banks were unlikely to receive any support at all, it said.
