Hainan Airlines plans to buy 10 airliners from Boeing Corp in the next two years in a major fleet expansion to be funded by bonds, loans and China's first public airline share issue, company officials said.
The regional airline, which is based in the southern tropical island province of Hainan, had already agreed on a basic contract with the U.S. planemaker for four 737-400s and three 737-800s, said airline chairman and president Chen Feng.
Hainan Airlines was also waiting for approval from China's aviation authorities to buy three Boeing 767 aircraft for around $60-70 million each, Chen told Reuters in an interview in the provincial capital, Haikou.
Delivery of both the Boeing 737s and 767s was expected to begin in 1998, when Hainan Airlines also planned to bring into operation seven new Metro 23 light aircraft from U.S. manufacturer Fairchild Aircraft Inc, company officials said.
"Next year we plan to take about 20 aircraft," Chen said. "It's big money... minimum $600 million."
The airline, which currently operates nine Boeing 737s and a handful of turboprops and executive jets, would take out options on a further three 737-800s, said chief economist Li Bing.
"We have hired a lot of new pilots," Li said.
Part of the cost of the new aircraft would be covered by the airline's planned issue of about 80 million foreign currency B shares to be listed on the Shanghai bourse in the first quarter of this year, company officials said.
The issue, originally scheduled for last year, is expected to make Hainan the first airline to list publicly on one of China's two domestic exchanges.
The airline hoped to list two million domestic currency A shares in Shanghai shortly after issuing the dollar-denominated B shares, raising at least $30 million, Chen said.
"The money we get for the shares we will certainly use for fleet expansion," said economist Li, adding that proceeds would also be directed toward training and recruitment and would be far from enough to cover major aircraft purchases.
The airline planned to issue $300 million in bonds in the United States to help to finance fleet expansion and expected financial support from the U.S. Export-Import Bank, said Chen.
Li said the airline, which is 25 percent owned by American Aviation Investment, a fund partially controlled by U.S. financier George Soros, was waiting for approval from China's aviation authorities before signing the 737 deal.
Company officials said the turbulent diplomatic relationship between Washington and Beijing could sometimes make buying U.S. jets a sensitive political issue, but such considerations were not expected to delay approval of the 737 deal.
Sino-U.S. ties have warmed sharply in recent months, bolstered by high-level contacts and a January visit by U.S. congressmen that U.S. diplomats said helped to hasten the sale this month of two Boeing 747s to flagship carrier Air China.
That deal was followed on Monday by Boeing's announcement of a $68 million order for two 737s from China's Yunnan Airlines.
Hainan Airlines officials said they had seriously considered buying from Boeing's European arch-rival Airbus Industrie but had been put off by the training and technical costs of a switch from the U.S. manufacturer.
