China and the United States began talks to hammer out their textile trade differences on Tuesday with both sides voicing optimism that agreement could be reached before a Friday deadline.
Washington and Beijing had a productive first day of a scheduled three days of talks aimed at extending a bilateral textile accord and resolving a dispute over U.S. penalties on Chinese exports, said top U.S. textile negotiator Rita Hayes.
"Very productive morning," Hayes said, adding that much remained to be done. "We still have lots of issues to resolve." "We are maintaining an optimistic attitude towards the prospects of these textile talks," Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Shen Guofang told a news briefing. "The resolution of this problem will be beneficial for both sides."
The 1994 Sino-U.S. textile pact had been scheduled to expire on December 31 last year but was extended by one month to allow the two sides to seek compromise on the terms of its renewal.
Washington and Beijing were also seeking to ease a dispute over Chinese exports of textiles via third countries that have prompted U.S. threats of multi-million dollar penalties and raised the spectre of a cross-Pacific trade war over the issue.
The Friday deadline for a renewed textile accord could not be pushed back once more -- but U.S. officials believed agreement would be reached in time, Hayes said before her talks at China's Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation.
"The deadline is January 31 and there are no more extensions, so we have to reach agreement," she told reporters, adding that sparring over textiles was not likely to lead to a trade conflict.
"We are in hopes that the consultations will continue the mood that they had in the previous consultations and that is that both sides are trying to get an agreement," she said.
Washington slapped $19 million worth of penalties on imports of Chinese textiles last September, saying Beijing was shipping textiles through third countries to evade quota restrictions.
China has threatened to retaliate by temporarily banning imports of some U.S. textiles, farm goods and alcoholic drinks but has delayed such action to allow time for further talks.
Chinese spokesman Shen said Beijing wanted to sit down to study seriously U.S. views on the textile debate.
"I believe that none of us, including the U.S. side, hopes to see a trade war," he said.
China's large textile exports to U.S. and European customers have long been a source of diplomatic dispute but have in recent years become especially sensitive for U.S. trade officials eager to reduce Washington's swelling trade deficit.
Sino-U.S. ties have been strained by disputes over issues ranging from trade to Taiwan to human rights, but tensions have eased greatly in recent months and U.S. diplomats have suggested Beijing is keen to do more to balance the trade books.
As negotiatior Hayes discussed textile issues, U.S. trade official Lee Sands was due in the Chinese capital on Tuesday for meetings expected to focus on Beijing's long-stalled entry to the World Trade Organisation.
Beijing has been vocal in blaming Washington for blocking its accession to the global trade club, which China wants to join on the favourable terms accorded to developing countries.
