U.S. and Chinese officials have made a productive start to textile trade talks that are the last chance to hammer out a deal before a Friday deadline, top U.S. textile negotiator Rita Hayes said on Tuesday.
Hayes met Chinese trade officials on Tuesday for the first of a scheduled three days of talks aimed at extending a bilateral textile accord and resolving a dispute involving United States penalties on imports of Chinese textiles.
"Very productive morning," she said, adding that much remained to be done. "We still have lots of issues to resolve."
The 1994 Sino-U.S. textile accord had been scheduled to expire on December 31 last year but was extended by one month to allow the two sides to hammer out their differences on renewal.
Disagreement over textiles was not likely to lead to a cross-Pacific trade war but the Friday deadline would not be changed, Hayes said earlier.
"The deadline is January 31 and there are no more extensions, so we have to reach agreement," she told reporters before beginning negotiations at China's Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation.
"We are in hopes that the consultations will continue the mood that they had in the previous consultations and that is that both sides are trying to get an agreement," she said.
Washington slapped $19 million worth of penalties on imports of Chinese textiles last September, saying Beijing was shipping textiles through third countries to evade quota restrictions.
China has threatened to retaliate by temporarily banning imports of some U.S. textiles, farm goods and alcoholic drinks but has delayed such action to allow time for further talks.
The two sides failed to reach agreement on the issue in talks in the United States last month. Washington said then it would re-examine its decision to reduce quotas for Chinese textile imports.
China's textile sales to the United States have long been a sensitive point for U.S. trade negotiators eager to reduce Washington's swelling trade deficit.
Sino-U.S. ties have been strained by disputes over issues ranging from trade to Taiwan to human rights, but both sides say tensions have eased in recent months.
U.S. trade official Lee Sands was due in Beijing on Tuesday for meetings with Chinese officials that were expected to focus on China's long-delayed entry to the World Trade Organisation.
