Chinese President Jiang Zemin on Wednesday called for tougher action to curb the spreading cancer of corruption, saying the war on graft was a vital struggle for the destiny of the nation and its ruling Communist Party.
The unity of Party and people was vital to bolster enthusiasm for developing China but was threatened by graft in communist ranks, the official Xinhua news agency quoted Jiang as telling the Party's Central Disciplinary Inspection Committee.
"The war against corruption is a serious political struggle for the hearts of the Party and the people and will affect the destiny of the Party and the state," said Jiang, who has staked much of his political credibility on curbing graft.
"On this issue our banner must be bright, our attitude steadfast and our work carried through with perseverance," he told a meeting of the disciplinary committee that was attended by Premier Li Peng and other leaders.
Corruption, almost unknown in China under the Stalinist rule of the late Chairman Mao Zedong, has boomed during nearly two decades of market-style economic reform.
China's top anti-graft official on Monday said Beijing had scored major successes in battling corruption in 1996 but called for greater efforts this year to fight abuses by officials eager to barter their bureaucratic clout for economic gain.
Disciplinary authorities had punished more than 116,000 people in 1997, up 14.3 percent from the year before, said disciplinary committee chairman Wei Jianxing.
More than 72,000 officials had owned up to using their positions to obtain better housing, with 74 percent handing over a total of 94 million yuan ($11.3 million) to pay for the housing, he said.
All too many of the Communist Party's 57 million members were forgetting its socialist traditions of gritty struggle and frugality, leading to increasing extravagence, waste and one-upmanship, said Jiang.
"The existence of such phenomena provides a hotbed that cloaks and allows the spread of even more serious problems of corruption," he said.
Analysts say Jiang, who in 1989 was plucked from his post as Shanghai party secretary to become anointed successor to paramount leader Deng Xiaoping, is anxious to win popular loyalties with his high-profile anti-graft campaign.
While the president and party chief has won some credit from the disgrace of corrupt officials as senior as former Beijing party chief and Politburo member Chen Xitong, many Chinese say results of the corruption crackdown have been patchy at best.
Party members at all levels had to do more to ensure honest government, Jiang told the disciplinary committee.
"Currently the situation of the war on corruption is still serious, the task of rectifying Party tendencies is still onerous and the development of the work uneven," he said.
China's communists should heighten their vigilance and build on their successes as they worked to modernise China, he said.
"The great success of 18 years of reform and opening and modernising construction strongly testifies that this party of ours is a good party," he said.
