China on Wednesday told U.S. President Bill Clinton not to worry about Chinese human rights and Hong Kong's future freedoms, saying Beijing's rights record spoke for itself and liberty in the British colony was assured.
Clinton said on Tuesday that Washington had made less progress than hoped in influencing Chinese rights policies and warned that Hong Kong's value to China might fall if liberties in the colony were lost after it returns to Beijing's rule.
"The national conditions of China and the United States are not the same and it is natural for different views on human rights to exist," said a Chinese Foreign Ministry spokeswoman in reaction to Clinton's comments.
The reaction -- exceedingly mild by Beijing's standards -- came as Chinese and U.S. officials met in the capital to discuss trade and human rights, issues that have long dogged the cross-Pacific relationship.
In its report on Clinton's remarks, China's official Xinhua news agency mentioned only the U.S. president's defence of his engagement policy towards China, and said nothing of his comment that liberty's advance in the authoritarian communist nation was inevitable.
Analysts said Beijing was determined to keep up the momentum of a recent Sino-U.S. rapprochement and would not allow it to be derailed by Clinton's remarks on Hong Kong and human rights.
Concerns over the future of the British colony, which reverts to China at midnight on June 30, were unfounded, the Chinese Foreign Ministry spokeswoman said.
China had guaranteed freedom for Hong Kong's people with its mini-constitution for the territory, the Basic Law, she said.
"Under the Basic Law the people of Hong Kong have full freedom and all democratic rights," she said. "There is no basis or need for doubt or concern about this."
China's own constitution and laws protected the rights of members of all its nationalities, she said.
"The efforts and achievements made by the Chinese government in this area are there for all to see," she said. "Anyone who is not biased will reach a fair conclusion."
A U.S. delegation arrived in Beijing on Tuesday for talks on human rights with Chinese officials, after a year in which almost all remaining members of the nation's tiny pro-democracy movement were either imprisoned or driven into exile.
The delegation was seeking concessions that could make it unnecessary this year for Washington to sponsor a U.N. resolution faulting China's rights policy, U.S. officials said.
A Western diplomat in Beijing said the delegation's arrival was a sign of Chinese and U.S. determination to bolster the recent warming in ties that has helped soften the impact of disputes over issues ranging from Taiwan to copyright piracy.
However, the delegation was unlikely to extract sufficient clear concessions from Beijing to make it politically viable for Clinton not to sponsor a critical resolution at the U.N. Human Rights Commission in March, the diplomat said.
Talks on issues such as human rights should take overall ties into account and should be carried out on a basis of equality, the Chinese spokeswoman said.
