China on Thursday slammed a plan by rival Taiwan to ship nuclear waste to North Korea, saying the scheme was a blatant attempt by Taipei to split the country and spoil Beijing's ties with its communist neighbour.
China was also concerned by the environmental implications of the January 11 contract under which Taiwan will ship up to 200,000 barrels of low-level nuclear waste to North Korea, Foreign Ministry spokesman Shen Guofang said.
"China's government and people express their resolute opposition to the actions of the Taiwan authorities," Shen told a news briefing in Beijing.
Taiwan's nuclear waste plan was a clear attack on Beijing's cherished goal of reunification with the Nationalist-ruled island, Shen said. China considers Taiwan a renegade province.
It was also an assault on China's diplomatic ties with Pyongyang, a Stalinist neighbour with which Beijing has for decades shared an alliance that Chinese propaganda has termed "as close as lips and teeth".
"(The Taiwan authorities') goal is also very clear: it is to destroy China's relations with the country concerned and obstruct the improvement and development of ties across the Taiwan Strait," Shen said.
Beijing has diplomatic relations with both Pyongyang and its arch rival Seoul, neither of which formally recognises Taiwan. North and South Korea are still technically at war after their 1950-53 conflict ended in a truce, not a peace accord.
While China says it cherishes its close alliance with cash-strapped North Korea, analysts say the relationship has been cooled in recent years by Beijing's ties with Seoul and by Pyongyang's reluctance to reform its moribund economy.
South Korea, which dropped diplomatic ties with Taipei in 1992 to formalise links with Beijing, has expressed concern that radiation from the Taiwanese waste could pollute the Korean peninsula -- a fear echoed by Shen.
"The technological demands of nuclear waste management are very serious," the Chinese spokesman said.
"If it is not managed properly or unexpected events occur it can pollute surrounding countries and regions," he said. "The Chinese side is highly concernced about this."
Taipei maintains the pact to ship low-level waste from Taiwan Power Co nuclear plants to North Korea complies with all international regulations and that shipments would be securely packed in steel barrels.
Despite escalating protests against the deal, Taiwan and North Korea forged ahead on Tuesday with preparations for an initial shipment of 60,000 barrels of waste.
Seoul and diplomatic ally Washington have long seen North Korean attempts to build a nuclear power industry as a potential cloak for the development of nuclear weapons that could shift the balance of power on the heavily militarised peninsula.
U.S. officials said this week said they saw no nuclear arms proliferation threat from the low-level waste shipments but signalled Washington was aware of Seoul's environmental fears.
