U.S. Secretary of State Madeleine Albright is to visit China in late February in a trip aimed at further improving ties that have warmed rapidly in recent months, the Foreign Ministry said on Thursday.
"China places great importance on this visit," Foreign Ministry spokesman Shen Guofang told a news briefing.
Albright would hold talks with Chinese Foreign Minister Qian Qichen and a wide range of issues was expected to be discussed, Shen said.
Albright's first visit as Secretary of State comes at a time when relations between China and the United States are warming swiftly, with U.S. Vice President Al Gore reported to be preparing to visit Beijing in late March.
U.S. President Bill Clinton met China's President Jiang Zemin at the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum in Manila last November and the two agreed on an exchange of presidential visits, the first since early 1989.
"A major topic of the meeting of the two foreign ministers will be how to push forward relations on the basis of the presidential meeting," Shen said of Albright's visit.
Former U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher came to China last November on a fence-mending visit that both sides hailed as a major step in repairing ties ravaged by disputes for well over a year.
The announcement of Albright's China trip coincides with a flurry of visits by U.S. officials to Beijing.
A U.S. human rights team led by Sandra Kristoff, the National Security Council's chief Asia expert, and including Peter Eicher, director of the State Department's Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labour, was to conclude two days of talks in Beijing on Thursday.
The U.S. team was in China on the eve of the release of Washington's annual worldwide human rights report that once again slams Beijing's record.
This year's report says that by the end of 1996 there were almost no active dissidents left in China who had not been jailed or exiled.
Officials said the team would seek concessions from Beijing on human rights that could make it unnecessary this year for Washington to co-sponsor a United Nations resolution critical of China's policy.
Albright has vowed to confront Beijing on its human rights record, trade issues and weapon sales abroad -- all thorns in Sino-U.S. ties -- but says relations between the two Pacific giants cannot be held hostage to any one issue.
China on Wednesday told Clinton not to worry about Chinese human rights and Hong Kong's future freedoms, saying Beijing's rights record spoke for itself and liberty in the British colony was assured.
Clinton said on Tuesday that Washington had made less progress than hoped in influencing Chinese rights policies and warned that Hong Kong's value to China might fall if liberties in the colony were lost after it returns to Beijing rule.
Senior U.S. trade official Lee Sands began talks in Beijing on Thursday to discuss China's delayed accession to the World Trade Organisation, long a source of cross-Pacific friction.
Beijing, which wants to join the global trade club on the favourable terms accorded to developing countries, has accused Washington of blocking its entry.
Top U.S. textile negotiator Rita Hayes was also in Beijing for talks to hammer out a new textile accord with negotiations seen extending right up to a Friday deadline for agreement.
