Washington's top textile trade negotiator said on Thursday talks with China on a textile accord were likely to stretch late into the night on the last day before a Friday deadline for agreement.
The two sides made progess but still had a long way to go on the third day of talks to renew their 1994 textile accord and resolve a dispute over U.S. penalties on Chinese exports, negotiator Rita Hayes told reporters.
Washington could make significant cuts to China's textile quotas if agreement could not be reached before the January 31 deadline, Hayes said before resuming the talks with officials at China's Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation.
"We still have a lot of issues, so that means a lot of work today, probably late into the night," she said. "We are not going to give China another extension because we have already given them another month."
The Sino-U.S. textile pact had been scheduled to expire on December 31 but was extended by one month to give both sides time to hammer out a compromise.
Washington and Beijing were also seeking to ease tensions in a dispute over Chinese exports of textiles via third countries, The United States has threatened multi-million dollar penalties and raised the spectre of a cross-Pacific trade war over the issue.
"I am always optimistic and I am in hopes that we will complete the round today... but that is something both sides have to work very hard on," Hayes said.
If an agreement was not reached in time, past practice showed that the United States could cut China's textile import quota significantly until a deal was struck, she said.
"I am in hopes that it won't come to that, China doesn't want it to come to that -- and certainly the States doesn't," she said.
In Washington, acting U.S. Trade Representative Charlene Barshefsky said on Wednesday the talks were proceeding fairly well.
Washington slapped $19 million worth of penalties on imports of Chinese textiles last September, saying Beijing was shipping textiles through third countries to evade quota restrictions.
China has threatened to retaliate by temporarily banning imports of some U.S. textiles, farm goods and alcoholic drinks but has delayed such action to allow time for further talks.
Textiles are just one of a range of issues dogging a Sino-U.S. relationship that has long been strained by disputes over topics ranging from trade to human rights to Taiwan.
Relations have improved dramatically in recent months, but many sources of potential dispute remain.
A U.S. delegation arrived in Beijing on Tuesday for talks on human rights with Chinese officials, after a year in which almost all remaining members of the nation's tiny pro-democracy movement have been either imprisoned or driven into exile.
U.S. trade official Lee Sands began talks in Beijing on Thursday to discuss China's delayed accession to the World Trade Organisation (WTO), long a source of cross-Pacific friction.
Beijing, which wants to join the global trade club on the favourable terms accorded to developing countries, has accused Washington of blocking its entry.
Sands declined to answer reporters' questions about the talks, but Hayes said a key U.S. requirement was further opening of China's protected markets.
"What we are asking China for is upfront market access, before they join the WTO," she said. "We are still working out those differences."
