China's jailing of leading dissident Wang Dan is clear evidence of the kind of abuse that this week led a U.S. report to condemn Beijing for its rights record, the former student leader's father said on Friday.
All nations had the right and responsibility to concern themselves with human rights in other countries, said Wang Xianzeng, whose son was last year sentenced to 11 years in prison for plotting to overthrow the government.
"In Wang Dan's case, I know... the human rights situation is very bad," Wang Xiangzeng told Reuters by telephone.
"If (the United States) is seeking the truth in its concern with the Chinese human rights situation, then that is as it ought to be," he said.
In an annual human rights report on 193 countries released on Thursday, the United States accused China of effectively silencing public dissent against the government by detaining, jailing or driving into exile all known dissidents.
This year's hard-hitting report was released amid a dramatic improvement in Sino-U.S. ties that have long been rocked by disputes over issues ranging from rights to trade to Taiwan.
Analysts say Beijing, which stayed silent on the U.S. report on Friday and has recently reacted with uncharacteristic mildness to U.S. concerns over human rights and Hong Kong, is eager to keep up the positive momentum in cross-Pacific ties.
The recent Sino-U.S. rapprochement last October survived Wang Dan's jailing after a four-hour trial that was denounced by human rights activists as a politically-orchestrated sham.
Wang Xianzeng said his son, a former leader of 1989 pro-democracy demonstrations that were crushed by the army, had done nothing to justify the harsh sentence meted out by judges of the Beijing Number One Intermediate People's Court.
"Nothing Wang Dan did...offended against the laws of China, as his parents we cannot agree with such a heavy sentence and we cannot accept the verdict," Wang Xianzeng said.
He said both he and Wang Dan's mother, 61-year-old museum researcher Wang Lingyun, planned to visit their son next month at his prison in Jinzhou city in China's Liaoning province.
Wang, who served four years in jail for his role in the 1989 protests in Beijing's Tiananmen Square, was still suffering from numerous medical complaints that could not be treated at his draughty jail in China's frigid northeast, his father said.
"(Wang Dan) suffers many illnesses...they can't cope with serious complaints although they can deal with small problems or colds," he said.
Wang Dan was one of China's most articulate political dissenters between his parole from the 1989 sentence until he vanished into detention in May 1995.
His jailing and the later dismissal of his appeal were part of a series of hammer blows last year that all but silenced China's tiny band of pro-democracy activists.
U.S. officials have said human rights remain an important influence on Sino-U.S. relations, but have made clear that no one issue will be allowed to derail warming ties with Beijing.
China was not the only target of the U.S. State Department report, which also found problems with the rights records of allies Turkey, South Korea and Germany as well as Russia, Indonesia, Haiti and Nigeria.
Wang Xianzeng said it was only right for the international community to take an interest in the human rights records of different nations -- adding such interest could be mutual.
"China can also concern itself with human rights in the United States, can it not?" he said.
