A World Trade Organisation (WTO) without China is a global trade body with a missing limb, but the world's most populous nation still must meet basic criteria before gaining entry, a British minister said on Thursday.
A robust approach could be taken to Beijing's application for WTO membership, Ian Lang, president of Britain's Board of Trade, told a news conference in the Chinese capital.
"A WTO without China would be a WTO with a limb missing," Lang said in an speech to Chinese and British businessmen that was released to reporters at the news conference.
"We very much support China's application to join the WTO. However, we also believe that China's accession must be on the right terms," Lang said.
"It has to be...on the same terms on which other countries have membership of the WTO," Lang told the news conference. "It is important not to dilute the strength of the WTO."
Beijing has been seeking to join the global trade body with developing country status, but some Western nations maintain that China's economy is too big to warrant such treatment.
"I understand the anxieties that China has, it...still feels it has a considerable way to go in some areas," Lang said.
"There are certain fundamental elements to approaching membership of the WTO that can be approached fairly robustly," he said. He cited trade transparency, market access, tariffs and legal structures as areas that needed further exploration.
A WTO working group will meet later this year in Geneva to try to negotiate a deal that would allow China's accession, but China said last month its prospects appeared bleak.
Lang said China and Britain were expected to sign a memorandum of understanding next month that would let Chinese companies list on the London Stock Exchange (LSE).
Many cash-strapped Chinese companies are keen to apply for listing on overseas markets, but Chinese securities officials say agreement with the LSE has been long delayed by disputes between London and Beijing over Hong Kong.
Some 20 Chinese companies are listed in Hong Kong while a handful are traded in New York.
Lang said Sino-British ties were continuing to warm following high-level exchanges this year.
Relations between Beijing and London have been tested in recent years by disputes over the mid-1997 return of Hong Kong, now a British colony, to Chinese rule.
