Former U.S. president George Bush called on Thursday for an end to U.S. trade threats against China, saying more dialogue was needed between Washington and Beijing to mend cross-Pacific ties.
The United States should give China permanent Most Favoured Nation (MFN) trade status to end the annual diplomatic battle over its renewal, Bush said in a speech at a seminar in Beijing.
"I am very concerned about the rancour that sometimes rears its head these days," he said. "There is too much China-bashing in the United States of America."
Some members of the U.S. Congress had little understanding of China and how to deal with Beijing, Bush said.
"Threatening China does not work," he said. "It might be good domestic politics in some quarters of the United States, but it does not bring about change, and it ought to stop."
Relations between Washington and Beijing have been badly strained this year by disputes over trade, copyright theft, nuclear proliferation and Taiwan.
Washington needs a strategic dialogue with Beijing to iron out differences before they become major disputes and to help stabilise a bilateral relationship that was of unsurpassed importance, Bush said.
"We can start by granting permanent, unconditional MFN for China," he told the Chinese and U.S. businessmen and officials in a speech salted with nostalgic references to his experiences as a diplomat in Beijing during the 1970s.
MFN give favourable tariff treatment to Chinese goods imported into the U.S.
Sino-U.S. ties chilled in March when Chinese missile tests off the coast of rival Taiwan led Washigton to send two aircraft carrier battle groups into the area in a show of force.
In June, the two sides narrowly averted a multi-billion dollar trade war over intellectual property theft in China, while alleged sales of Chinese nuclear technology to Pakistan and Beijing's fat U.S. trade surplus have also strained ties.
Both sides say relations have warmed in the last few months but Bush said more was needed, advising Beijing to value the contribution of U.S. businessmen in China -- a group that has long campaigned for better ties and permanent MFN.
"American business is China's best ally in reducing the misunderstanding and suspicions that cloud our relationship from time to time," Bush said.
