China and the United States signed a new textile agreement on Sunday in an eleventh-hour deal that ended the threat of a cross-Pacific trade war and was hailed by both sides as a breakthrough.
U.S. officials said their main achievement was gaining assured access for the first time to Chinese textile markets, adding that it also granted China a U.S. import quota slightly larger than the previous 1994 textile pact.
Millions of dollars in penalties slapped by Washington on Chinese imports remained in force under the deal, although Beijing had agreed to withdraw its threat of retaliation, top U.S. textile negotiator Rita Hayes said after the signing.
"For the first time the United States has market access with China... and this is something we felt very strongly about," Hayes told reporters. "It is now a situation that we have a level playing field."
The four-year textile accord was signed by Hayes and Li Dongsheng, China's chief negotiator and director of the trade management department of the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation.
Officials of both sides welcomed the deal, which was hammered out during negotiations that ran far beyond their original three-day schedule to become a gruelling six-day marathon topped by all-night sessions.
"After six days of hard work, the delegations have reached a rather ideal conclusion," said Chinese Foreign Trade Minister Wu Yi, who attended the signing ceremony.
Officials of both sides declined to give details of the accord, but Hayes said it would create U.S. jobs by allowing exports while slightly increasing China's U.S. import quota.
The talks focused on renewal of the 1994 textile accord and resolution of a dispute over U.S. penalties on Chinese exports, with market access for U.S. goods to China also a major stumbling block, officials said.
Breakthrough came during a one-day extension to the final deadline for renewal of the Sino-U.S. accord, which had originally been scheduled to expire on December 31 but was extended by one month to allow time to reach a compromise.
"I think this morning at the beginning we were unhappy with each other, but now we have become friends," U.S. negotiator Li told Hayes during the signing of the accord.
The accord ended the threat of a Sino-U.S. trade war, which had loomed after Washington slapped $19 million in penalties on Chinese imports last September, accusing Beijing of shipping textiles through third countries to evade quota restrictions.
China had threatened to retaliate by temporarily banning imports of some U.S. textiles, farm goods and alcoholic drinks but delayed the action to allow time for further talks.
After the signing of the textile accord, Beijing announced it was calling off its retaliatory measures, but U.S. negotiator Hayes said Washington's penalties remained in force.
"The transshipment charges that were made in September still stand as they did," she said without elaborating.
Access to China's huge and growing markets was also an issue in other Sino-U.S. meetings in Beijing last week.
U.S. trade official Lee Sands held two days of talks in the Chinese capital to discuss China's delayed accession to the World Trade Organisation, long a source of bilateral friction.
"The agreement is once again proof that China and the United States can settle their trade disputes through negotiations based on equality and mutual benefits," said negotiator Li.
