China and the United States signed a new textile agreement on Sunday in an eleventh-hour deal that narrowly averted a multi-million dollar cross-Pacific trade war and was hailed by both sides as a breakthrough.
"China has the largest share of the U.S. market and we now have a share of the China market," top U.S. textile negotiator Rita Hayes said after the signing ceremony.
The fifth Sino-U.S. textile accord was signed by Hayes and Li Dongsheng, China's chief negotiator and director of the trade management department of China's Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation, and welcomed by officials of both sides.
"After six days of hard work, the delegations have reached a rather ideal conclusion," China's Foreign Trade Minister Wu Yi said.
The marathon talks that included at least two all-night sessions and dragged right through Saturday night had focused on renewal of the 1994 textile accord and resolution of a dispute over U.S. penalties on Chinese textile exports.
Market access for U.S. goods to China had been a major stumbling block.
Breakthrough came during a one-day extension of a January 31 deadline for multi-million dollar penalties on China's exports, and it was clear disaster was only averted at the eleventh hour.
"I think this morning at the beginning we were unhappy with each other but now we have become friends," Li told Hayes before the signing.
The Sino-U.S. textile pact had been scheduled to expire on December 31 but was extended by one month to give both sides time to hammer out a compromise.
"This agreement eloquently demonstrates the common interests of the United States and China in developing trade and economic relations," state television quoted Li as saying.
Neither side gave details of the terms.
Washington slapped $19 million worth of penalties on imports of Chinese textiles last September, saying Beijing was shipping textiles through third countries to evade quota restrictions. China had threatened to retaliate by temporarily banning imports of some U.S. textiles, farm goods and alcoholic drinks but delayed such action to allow time for further talks.
Hayes had said issues at the forefront in the final rounds of talks were two major demands -- the U.S. market access package and a level playing field for the textile industry.
"The agreement was a good start to 1997 for cross-Pacific relations," said U.S. embassy charge d'affaires William McCahill. "This is a year of opportunity for Sino-U.S. relations."
"(The deal) augurs very, very well for the year and the years ahead," he said.
Washington could have made significant cuts to China's textile quotas if agreement had not been reached.
Market access was an issue in other U.S.-China meetings in Beijing last week.
U.S. trade official Lee Sands held two days of talks in Beijing last week to discuss China's long-delayed accession to the World Trade Organisation, a source of bilateral friction.
Beijing, which wants to join the global trade club on the favourable terms accorded to developing countries, has accused Washington of blocking its entry.
However, Chinese officials seemed pleased with the textile deal.
"The agreement is once again proof that China and the United States can settle their trade disputes through negotiations based on equality and mutual benefits, thus creating a stable environment for the long-term development of bilateral economic and trade ties," Li said.
