U.S. President Bill Clinton's commitment to pursue a deeper dialogue with Beijing in his State of the Union address is likely to reassure China that Washington is ready to take it seriously, analysts said on Wednesday.
The weight Clinton gave to boosting prickly cross-Pacific relations and his vow to visit China would be welcome signals from an administration that long appeared to put Beijing far down its list of priorities, said one Western diplomat.
"One of the things that has upset China about the Clinton administration is that it hasn't been treated as important enough," the diplomat said.
"The Clinton administration has now really realised the importance of Sino-U.S. relations," echoed a senior Chinese expert on U.S. policy.
"This year, it seems the Clinton administration plans to resolve Sino-U.S. problems and implement new policies," said the expert, who declined to be identified.
In his State of the Union address on Tuesday, Clinton said a deeper dialogue with China was vital for U.S. interests and vowed to exchange visits with Chinese President Jiang Zemin to boost cooperation and deal frankly with Sino-U.S. differences.
"An isolated China is not good for America," Clinton said. "A China playing its proper role in the world is."
The U.S. president's remarks came after months of rapid warming in a Sino-U.S. relationship that for years had been buffeted by diplomatic disputes over such issues as Taiwan, trade, copyright piracy and human rights.
The improvement in relations was bolstered by a series of high-level contacts, successful textile trade negotiations and by the charm offensive Beijing had aimed at members of the often-hostile U.S. Congress, the analysts said.
But weary diplomats in Beijing and Washington would have plenty of new worries to cope with in coming months, they said.
U.S. Secretary of State Madeline Albright's visit to China this month, while hailed by China as a boost to ties, would bring problems of its own if she followed through on promises to talk straight on Beijing's rights record, the diplomat said.
"If she has decided she's going to talk about human rights, the Chinese might not find it a very pleasant time," he said.
Washington's expected decision to back a motion condemning China for its rights policies at the United Nations Human Rights Commission in Geneva would also strain the new amity, he said.
"Those are the first few bumps that the relationship has to negotiate," he said.
Beijing was coming to believe that the Clinton administration was not the main source of U.S. opposition on such issues as human rights, the Chinese expert said.
"The Clinton administration doesn't want to pay more attention to the human rights issue, but it is under strong pressure from the U.S. media and Congress," he said.
The U.S. Congress was also the main stumbling block slowing China's entry to the World Trade Organisation (WTO), he said.
Beijing, which wants to join the global trade club on the preferential terms accorded developing nations, has long accused Washington of sabotaging its accession.
The Western diplomat said Beijing leaders were finally realising the importance of courting Congress, which China had for too long seen as no more than an equivalent of their own docile legislature.
Senior Chinese leaders have in recent weeks given visiting congressmen a warm welcome and the nation's propaganda machine has been relatively restrained in its reaction to a U.S. government report strongly critical of Beijing's rights record.
China's initially mild reaction to the report was a positive sign, the Western diplomat said. However he noted that Beijing had taken weeks to respond to a similar 1995 report and then unleashed a 7,000-word tirade blasting Washington.
Such a diplomatic broadside could still emerge to rock ties this year, but it was unlikely to be quite as long, he said.
