A state-sponsored group of Chinese academics has slammed a U.S. report that criticises Beijing for silencing dissent as a malicious and slanderous interference in China's internal affairs, official media said on Thursday.
The U.S. State Department 1997 report had violated the principles of the United Nations and ignored the progress China had made in protecting human rights, the official People's Daily quoted the scholars as concluding at a seminar in Beijing.
"The report is full of groundless accusations and intentional fabrications," the newspaper, mouthpiece of China's Communist Party, quoted Tian Dan of the China Society for the Study of Human Rights as saying.
"The United States government always 'reheats cold food', misleads public opinion and hopes to repeat its lies so often that they become true," Tian said.
The scholars' attack, which was carried by all major newspapers, was the first clear sign of Chinese anger at the January 30 U.S. report, which criticised Beijing for abusing basic freedoms and for wiping out overt political dissent.
China, which is eager to keep the momentum of the recent rapid warming in long-strained Sino-U.S. ties and has reacted with rare restraint to U.S. recent rights concerns, has yet to issue an official response to the State Department report.
All active Chinese dissidents had been jailed, detained or driven into exile in 1996, although there had been some widening of freedoms outside the political arena, the U.S. report said.
Both Washington and Beijing say relations have improved dramatically in recent months after two years of disputes over issues ranging from human rights to Taiwan to trade.
China's initially mild reaction to the U.S. report was a positive sign, but Beijing took 23 days to react to a similarily critical report last year and then unleashed a 7,000-word tirade that blasted Washington, a Western diplomat said on Thursday.
Such a diplomatic broadside could still emerge to rock ties this year, but it was unlikely to be quite as long, he said.
China's official Xinhua news agency quoted the scholars' seminar as saying the U.S. report's "malicious and slanderous" attack on Beijing's rights record had exposed its real aim of using the issue as an excuse to interfere in China's affairs.
The evidence provided in the report was mainly based on Western media reports, the statements of overseas pro-democracy activists and distortions of speeches of Chinese officials, Xinhua said.
Criticism over individual cases raised by Washington was factually wrong, it quoted the experts in rights, philosophy, history, law, social sciences and journalism as concluding.
The Chinese constitution had more articles on human rights protection than did the United States, while the U.S. judicial system lagged far behind in cracking down on crime and safeguarding citizens' freedoms, said Professor Dong Yunhu of the Chinese Communist Party's central academy.
"The U.S. government is not qualified to find fault with China in this respect," he said.
International human rights activists have long criticised China for its harsh treatment of dissent, its widespread of administrative detention without trial and its enthusiasm for executions as a means to deter rising crime.
Analysts say human rights will continue to be a major irritant in sensitive Sino-U.S. ties, despite attempts by both Washington and Beijing to ensure that the issue is not allowed to derail their recent rapprochement.
