U.S. Senators on Tuesday sharply criticized a new Securities and Exchange Commission rule forcing companies to disclose their use of derivatives.
Both the SEC and the Financial Accounting Standards Board have issued proposals to make companies disclose more about derivatives use following some high-profile losses on the complex instruments in 1994.  
Derivatives, financial instruments such as options and futures whose value is based on an underlying stock or commodity price, were involved in the bankruptcy of Orange County, Calif., and losses exceeding $100 million at Procter &amp; Gamble Co.
The SEC adopted its rules last month, while the FASB is still working on its proposal.
On Capitol Hill on Tuesday, senators took aim at both approaches, charging that the added expenses and complications would discourage companies from properly using derivatives to reduce risk.  
"One of my chief concerns when I came to the Senate in 1993 was whether we had too many unnecessary rules and regulations," North Carolina Republican Sen. Lauch Faircloth said at a hearing of the Senate Banking Committee's securities subcommittee. "I am concerned this may be the case with the SEC's new rule."
"At this juncture, I don't agree with the direction we're heading in," Faircloth added.
FASB is a private organization that makes accounting standards, but the SEC must approve its rules to make them binding on public companies.  
Senators questioned whether the the recent rule proposals adequately addressed the 1994 problems. While the rules focus on derivatives, the 1994 situations were caused not by the instruments but by the people in charge of those investments, Sen. Christopher Dodd said.
"I think what most of us concluded was the problem there was not the instrument but the human element," the Connecticut Democrat said.
And neither rule would affect Orange County, a municipal government not bound by most FASB or SEC rules, the legislators observed.  
"Interestingly enough, the regulation, as almost always happens, doesn't even apply to Orange County -- it applies to corporate America," said Sen. Phil Gramm, who presided over the hearing.
Gramm opened the hearing expressing his doubts about the rules. After hearing from industry representatives and SEC commissioner Steven Wallman, the Texas Republican said he was still worried.
"I'm not converted," Gramm said. "In fact, every concern I had at the beginning, I have even more now."  
Gramm was a prominent opponent of the accounting board in an earlier dispute over proposed rules on executive stock options.
In an unprecedented vote, the Senate passed a non-binding resolution in 1994 urging FASB to abandon the plan that would have required companies to reduce earnings to account for the value of stock options granted to executives. A few months after the vote, the board quashed the proposal.
That was the only previous time he took on the FASB, Gramm said after Tuesday's hearing. "I just never could figure out where they were coming from," he said.  
The Republican Congress has since passed a law allowing legislators to overturn agency rules directly, Gramm said. "I think we have the power in Congress to override the regulation if we decided to," he said, but added "I haven't made that decision."
Commissioner Wallman defended the new rules and said the SEC had made several changes from an earlier proposal to address industry complaints.
He denied the rules would discourage companies from properly using derivatives to manage and reduce business risk.
"Quite the opposite, the better investors understand the potential impact of market-sensitive instruments on their investments, the more likely it is that management will be able to engage in appropriate risk management," Wallman said.
--Aaron Pressman ((202-898-8312))
