Two members of Congress criticised the Federal Reserve Thursday for what they called its "woefully inadequate" record of hiring and promoting women and minorities.
Representative Henry Gonzalez and Representative Jesse Jackson Jr., in a letter to Fed chairman Alan Greenspan, said several discrimination lawsuits against the bank "show a clear need for reform."
The letter paired persistent Fed critic Gonzalez, a Democrat from Texas serving his 19th term in Congress, with second-term Illinois Democrat Jackson, son of the well-known civil rights leader.
A Fed spokesman declined comment.
One of the lawsuits, filed against the central bank in January by four black secretaries, may be expanded as 15 other current and former employees have asked to join the litigation, the two Democratic lawmakers said.
"As one of the nation's primary banking regulators, the Federal Reserve should serve as a model for the banking system it regulates," the two wrote to Greenspan.
"Despite being at the forefront in carrying out the nation's laws, we are concerned that the Federal Reserve's record of diversity in hiring and promotion is woefully inadequate."
The four black secretaries filed suit Jan. 21 in the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia on behalf of themselves and "all others similarly situated."
A black Fed researcher won a similiar suit against the bank in 1994, the Congressmen noted.
Gonzalez and Jackson asked Greenspan to assess the validity of the complaints and report if any action has been taken to address the alleged problems.
They did commend the central bank for increasing the number of women and minorities among the most highly paid Fed employees over the past three years.
In 1993, only one woman and one non-white were among the 35 top paid staff earning more than $125,000. Now, with 72 people making that much, 11 are women and five are minorities.
The hiring of additional women "is an important step in ending what appeared to be gender bias in the selection of top staff, but it is still below comparable government standards which are also too low," Gonzalez and Jackson said. Minority representation "remains poor."
