On the Internet, where new products come and go in the blink of an eye, time is said to move at "Internet speed."
But in the rarefied air of Congress, where legislation often moves at a glacial pace, few would equate "Washington time" with the speed of cyberspace. That may be changing, however, as Congress struggles to come to grips with the Net as a phenomenon with great potential for reaching voters.
In the 1996 election, exit polls showed more than one-fourth of voters were "wired" and about 10 percent primarily used online sources of information in deciding how to vote. Responding to the surge in Net use by voters, congressional Internet use also has skyrocketed by some measures.
At the begining of 1994, just a handful of lawmakers had posted home pages on the World Wide Web. Two years later, 222 representatives and 85 senators had Web pages. The Congressional Internet Caucus has 91 members, up from 60 in the last Congress.
Despite the flurry of activity, Congress will never be on the cutting edge, according to some who work in the capital.
"I expect Congress will always be one or many steps behind," Chris Casey, who helped set up the first congressional Web page for Sen. Edward Kennedy, told a briefing about the Web for congressional staff sponsored by the Internet caucus last week.
A question about when Congress would be "up to speed" on the Net brought peals of laughter from the audience of staffers.
BEYOND WEB PAGES
Nonetheless, some legislators have gone beyond posting simple Web pages and have integrated the Net into the most basic operations of their congressional offices. Rep. Anna Eshoo, a California Democrat whose district encompasses Silicon Valley, created a special area on her Web site to give constituents individualized information (http://www-eshoo.house.gov). A constituent sends Eshoo a query and receives a personal answer posted on a private part of the site accessible only to that individual with a password.
Sen. Pat Leahy, Democrat of Vermont, participates in live online chat sessions with school children in his home state with transcripts on his Web site (http://www.senate.gov/leahy). Leahy's office also is planning to start a newsgroup, a type of group mailing list on the Net, devoted to Vermont issues.
Almost all legislators accept electronic mail but most respond on paper through the mail. Leahy's office is one of the few that answer e-mail with e-mail, staffer Paul Mann said. Although some feared this might overwhelm the office with too many messages, "surprisingly it hasn't happened," Mann said.
For the co-chairman of the Internet Caucus, Rep. Rick White, the Internet is a key foundation of his media strategy.
"The first place we send any press release is to our Web page," White staffer Aaron Weissman told the Web information session. Even media staff for the Washington state Republican Party look to the Web site (http://www.house.gov/white) to find copies of a release to send to the media, Weissman added.
The Internet is also changing the way groups lobby Congress. The Citizen's Internet Empowerment Coalition set up a Web page to get Internet users to send e-mail to Congress on the issue of restricting obscenity on the Net (http://www.ciec.org).
But since legislators are most interested in hearing from voters in their own districts, the page looks up the e-mail address of an Internet user and guides users to send targeted messages. "We have a responsibility as advocates to educate Internet users," said Jonah Seiger of the Center for Democracy and Technology, which helped set up the coalition's site.
Much more remains to be done to educate users and legislators. While the text of bills is available online, some advocates want Congress to make more information available.
"There are broad sections of the electorate that are entirely uninformed about what our Congress does," Gary Ruskin, director of the Congressional Accountability Project, said. "So much of the problem is that it is very, very difficult to obtain in real time the core documents of our democracy."
Ruskin urged that Congress post an assortment of documents on the Web, including voting records, disclosure forms, testimony from hearings and draft legislation.
