Legislators continued to debate on Wednesday one of the most difficult issues related to U.S. financial sector reform, but little common ground emerged.
While most in Congress and industry now agree the Depression-era laws separating banking from other financial businesses should be eliminated, there is little consensus about going farther and allowing banks to combine with ordinary commercial firms.  
House Banking Committee chairman Jim Leach, who has previously opposed mixing banking and commerce, reiterated his opposition at a hearing Wednesday.
"The more you keep financial services separate from commerce, the better," Leach said in testimony before the Banking Committee's Capital Markets Subcommittee.
The Iowa Republican has introduced a bill that would allow minimal combinations among banks and commercial firms. On the other side, Rep. Richard Baker, chairman of the subcommittee, has offered a bill that would impose virtually no limits on such combinations.  
A possible middle approach, contained in a bill introduced by Rep. Marge Roukema, Republican of New Jersey, and Rep Bruce Vento, Democrat of Minnesota, would allow financial companies to conduct up to 25 percent of their business in non-financial activities.
Baker, republican from Louisiana, continued to back his approach at the hearing.
"With limited regulatory oversight and greater vigor, financial institutions can pursue consumer demand and can broaden activities," he said. "That should include commerce."  
Leach did offer some new nuances to his previous statements on the issue. He provided the subcommittee with charts prepared by the Federal Reserve outlining the hypothetical mergers permitted under various approaches.
For example, a 25 percent limit on non-financial activity based on total asset size would allow a large bank like Chase Manhattan to acquire all but six of the largest companies in the entire country. If Chase merged with a large securities firm like Salomon Brothers, the Fed data indicated it could acquire even Exxon Corp, fourth largest company in the country based on market value.  
A 10 percent limit would leave 18 companies out of Chase's sights or eight from a merged Chase-Salomon.
Based on the Fed's findings, Leach suggested that, if Congress does include a percentage-based limitation, the limit should be a portion of total capital.
"If it seems that modest investment experimentation should be granted banks, a basket that relates to capital rather than business activity might, at least initially, be more prudential and less market distorting," he said.
Looking at book equity values as a measure of capital, the Fed found Chase would be barred from acquiring the 74 largest companies in the United States under a 25 percent cap. Under a 10 percent cap, 215 large companies would be off-limits. ((--202-898-8312))
