A top federal regulator Thursday urged banks to be more careful in issuing credit cards as an industry group reported that late payments by consumers jumped to a record level at the end of last year.
The latest sign that consumers are overburdened with credit card debt came in survey by the American Bankers Association.
The group said that in the fourth quarter of 1996 late payments jumped to 3.72 percent of credit card accounts, the highest rate since it began tracking delinquencies in 1980 and up from 3.34 percent a year earlier.
The survey, in conjunction with earlier reports that personal bankruptices are at record levels and bank losses from credit card loans are growing, has bank regulators on edge.
Comptroller of the Currency Eugene Ludwig, whose office oversees almost 3,000 nationally chartered banks, said the problems, while still under control, raise concerns about the safety and soundess of banks.
"We are continuing to see signs of slippage in some areas that you and we must address now," he told a New York State Bankers Association meeting in Washington on Thursday.
"It is worrisome to consider that there was a 44 percent growth in credit card losses and a 50 percent increase in credit card delinquencies during the past year," Ludwig said.
Ludwig also noted that bank chargeoffs on credit cards "increased significantly" in January to 6.5 percent of the $220 billion of loans outstanding from 4.7 percent a year earlier.
"These statistics are particularly troubling given the current health of the economy," he said.
As a result, the Comptroller's office issued an advisory to banks on credit underwriting standards and portfolio credit risk management, Ludwig said.
"The role of the regulator is to take action before potential problems become real problems," Ludwig said. "Our goal is to remind national banks how changes in underwriting standards affect overall portfolio credit risk and to highlight the key component of an effective portfolio credit risk management process."
Tighter loan standards should prevent the problem from getting out of hand, but losses may grow further before the new standards have an impact, Ludwig said.
"Current losses likely represent weaker credits making their way through the pipeline," he said. "We can expect some continued losses, but hopefully we'll begin to see positive effects of those cautious underwriting decisions."
Bankers had expected that tighter credit standards put into place in recent years would already have started reducing losses.
"We are disappointed that the numbers didn't improve," American Bankers Association chief economist James Chessen said. "We had hoped that banks' tightening of credit standards over the last several years would have reversed the trend of delinquencies by now."
In the fourth quarter of 1996, 37 percent of banks reported tightening standards, a drop from 49 percent in both the second and third quarters of 1996, the association said.
Delinquency rates also ticked up on home equity loans, the group reported. The delinquency rate was 1.42 percent in the fourth quarter of 1996, compared with 1.29 percent in the previous quarter and 1.41 percent in the same period the previous year.
On auto loans, the delinquency rate was 2.03 percent in the fourth quarter of 1996, compared with 1.95 percent the previous quarter and 1.87 percent a year earlier.
Delinquent payments are defined as 30 days or more overdue.
