Privacy advocates warned Wednesday that the Clinton administration's latest proposal to modify controversial computer encryption export restrictions would trample on citizens' rights in cyberspace.
Encryption products scramble information and render it unreadable without a password or software "key."
Under a Clinton executive order that took effect Jan. 1, U.S. companies can export stronger encryption than previously allowed, but only if they promise to incorporate within two years features allowing the government to decode any message.
The strongest encryption, an increasingly important component of online commerce and global communications, cannot be exported unless it already includes a feature known as "key recovery" that allows the government to crack the code by gaining access to the software keys.
The administration's latest proposal, being circulated in the form of draft legislation, is designed to encourage companies to produce software with key recovery features.
The proposal also establishes the legal foundation for a key recovery system, criminalizing the improper disclosure of keys, for example.
Although domestic use of strong encryption is not restricted and the Clinton proposal affirms that policy, privacy advocates contended the government's "encouragement" would quickly devolve into a de facto requirement.
"The proposed bill would destroy any prospect of privacy and security on the Internet by opening a huge window of vulnerability to the private communications of Internet users," said Jerry Berman, executive director of the Centre for Democracy and Technology, a non-profit public interest group.
Under the proposal, the government would have "carte blanche" access to coded messages, Berman added.
Commerce Undersecretary William Reinsch, in testimony last week, said the proposal would not compel participation. "The administration has stated on numerous occassions that we do not support mandatory key escrow and key recovery, " he said.
Opposition to the Clinton approach continued to simmer elsewhere as well this week.
In Congress, where several bills have been introduced to gut the export restrictions, Republicans on the House Commerce Committee pressed administration officials for a defence of the current policy.
Committee Chairman Tom Bliley of Virginia and Representative Rick White of Washington sent letters asking for more information to the Commerce Department, FBI and National Security Agency, among others.
White already has endorsed one of the bills to relax the restrictions. "It's time to take a close look at the export restrictions that are in place," White said. The Internet should not be "stifled by federal regulations and ill-conceived public policies."
In the private sector, people in the software industry said they expected a high-profile application to export encryption from Sybase Inc. would be rejected soon. Some companies, including International Business Machines Corp., have received permission to export encryption under the current policy.
Commerce Department officials declined to comment on pending applications.
The export rules require that key recovery products allow government access to stored data, like a document saved on a computer hard drive, as well as live communications, like a telephone conversation or electronic mail message.
Encryption customers only want to buy products with key recovery for stored data, U.S. companies have argued. Allowing key recovery of live communications is a more complicated and expensive proposition, they said.
Sybase sells software that allows a computer user on a network to access a database of information located on another computer on the network. The company applied for permission earlier this month to export a product that allows for access to keys used to encrypt the stored information in a database.
But to enhance security, the Sybase programme also encrypts the communications over the network between the computer user and the database. The product does not provide access to the keys used to encrypt those communications, according to Tom Parenty, director of data and communication security at the Emeryville, Calif.-based company.
"We're doing nothing for communications because there is absolutely no customer demand or need for any kind of key recovery for communications," Parenty said. "What we are proposing is something that we can sell."
