The number of banks charging non-customers for using their automated teller machines doubled over the past six months, a consumer watchdog group said Tuesday.
About 45 percent of ATMs added the controversial surcharge, on top of the fee most consumers already pay their own banks for using another bank's machine, up from 23 percent in October, according to a survey by U.S. Public Interest Research Group.
The non-profit consumer advocacy group also found that the average fee had risen 20 percent to $1.15 from 96 cents.
"Banks aren't earning money the old-fashioned way. Instead, they're gouging consumers," Edmund Mierzwinski, program director for the group, told a press conference.
Two states, Connecticut and Iowa, have banned the practice of charging non-customers and 12 other states, along with the federal government, are considering similar legislation.
Mierzwinski endorsed those efforts and said consumers should avoid using machines that impose a surcharge.
The rise in fees followed a decision one year ago by the two largest ATM networks, Visa's Plus and Mastercard's Cirrus, to lift a prohibition on surcharges.
Banks defended the practice and said the additional fees helped pay for ATMs in new locations.
"The marketplace should decide the prices for ATMs, not the government," the American Bankers Association said in a statement. "Price controls will only inhibit innovation and put a halt to future ATM growth."
Banks added almost 17,000 new ATMs last year, a 13 percent increase, according to a survey by the publication Bank Network News. With surcharges now permitted, "ATM growth is accelerating," editor Don Davis said. "It's a better business to be in, so more people are getting in."
Big banks were more likely than smaller ones to impose a surcharge, according to the survey. Among the 300 largest banks, 53 percent of ATMs had a fee while only 40 percent of smaller bank ATMs and 6 percent of credit union ATMs charged a fee.
That could raise antitrust law implications if large banks banded together to impose fees and drive smaller competitors out of business, Mierzwinski charged. "Not only are big banks using their monopoly muscle to punish consumers with higer fees, but their strategy is to use the surcharge to hurt small banks and credit unions as well," he said.
Customers of small banks, which have fewer of their own ATMs, would likely have to pay a surcharge more often.
Banks say free-market competition is functioning properly. "Competitions is already keeping ATM pricing in check," the ABA said.
The consumer group said it surveyed 860 ATMs chosen at random in 27 states and the District of Columbia. The highest rates of surcharging were in the South, with 93 percent of Texas ATMs imposing a surcharge, 95 percent in Georgia, and 88 percent in Viginia and North Carolina, the group said.
((--202-898-8312))
