The rapidly evolving market for stored-value cards could be hurt by premature government regulation, one of the top U.S. bank regulators said in a report issued Wednesday.
An array of companies, including banks, credit card networks and others, are trying to popularize stored value or "smart" cards that carry electronic currency. But the cards have yet to catch on with consumers.
Federal Reserve Board, which regulates banks and runs the payment system used to tranfer hundreds of billions of dollars a day among financial institutions, evaluated possible regulation of smart cards under the Electronic Fund Transfer Act.
"Early regulation of electronic stored-value products could cause higher regulatory costs than later regulation," the Fed said in its report. Regulations could be costly for smart card providers and might arbitrarily favor one type of product over another, the Fed said.
"Given the limited experience with stored value products to date, it is difficult to assess the extent to which the benefits to consumers from any particular Regulation E provision would outweigh the corresponding costs of compliance," the report noted.
Regulation E sets out the Fed's rules for electronic funds transfers, including protecting consumers against fraudulent or mistaken transfers.
Sen Bob Bennett, chairman of the Senate banking Committee's subcommittee on financial services and technology who criticized an initial Fed plan to regulate smart cards, welcomed the report.
"For the first time, the Federal Reserve has carefully considered the cost of action as well as the potential cost of inaction with regard to the implementation of new regulations on the fledgling stored-value card industry," the Utah Republican said.
Last April, the Fed had proposed applying some parts of the funds transfer act to smart cards. But Bennett and others in Congress opposed that move and passed legislation requiring a report before any action was taken.
Early regulation could have some benefits, however, the Fed said. Government rules have "the potential to speed up development by promoting standardization and by removing uncertainty."
In any event, the market will probably grow slowly, the Fed predicted. "Widespread public acceptance of stored-value products, if it occurs at all, will likely develop slowly over many years," the report said. "Their introduction seems unlikely to change the fundamental nature of our current payment system in the near future."
David Jung, senior analyst at the market research firm Killen &amp; Associates, agreed. "We expect solid growth of about 25 percent a year but we don't see any break-out yet," Jung said.
Volume of smart card transaction is expected to grow from under one billion transactions this year to about 10 billion worldwide in 2001, Jung said.
Fairly soon, smart cards could be used to pay for everything from parking meters to magazines published on the Internet, Jung said.
((202-898-8312))
