The merger of Bankers Trust New York Corp. and Alex. Brown Inc. sends a clear signal to Congress that the nation's banking laws enacted amid the Depression have fallen hopelessly behind market trends.
"It's another example of the kind of progress that is being made in the market," said Karen Shaw Petrou, president of the consulting firm ISD/Shaw. "The industry is modernising even if Congress is lagging on modernisation legislation."
Legislators have argued for more than a decade about repealing the Glass-Steagall Act of 1933 -- enacted in the wake of the stock market crash of 1929 -- which prohibits banks from offering other financial services like securities or insurance.
The debate is still raging in Congress, but this time around the market may exert more influence. In the last year, federal courts and bank regulators have substantially diminished Glass-Steagall's reach.
"This is the most profound example that Glass Steagall is no longer on life-support systems; it's dead," said Larry LaRocco, a bank industry lobbyist and former congressman. "Now we need to move on and deal with the other issues."
One of the biggest controversies to be addressed is whether banks should be allowed to combine with non-financial commercial firms, said LaRocco, who is managing director at the American Bankers Association's Securities Association.
Bankers Trust said Sunday it would acquire Baltimore-based Alex. Brown in a stock deal valued at $1.7 billion.
In acquiring Alex. Brown, Bankers Trust was taking advantage of a move by the Federal Reserve last December to more than double the amount of revenue a bank securities subsidiary could earn without running afoul of Glass-Steagall's Section 20.
Bankers Trust Chief Executive Officer Frank Newman told reporters Monday that after the acquisition securities activity would constitute about 20 percent of revenues on a pro forma, or estimated, basis. That would have exceeded the previous cap of 10 percent but is permissable under the revised 25 percent cap.
Section 20 says a nonbank subsidiary of a bank holding company may not be "principally engaged" in non-permitted securities activity. Since 1987, the Fed has interpreted that to allow bank subsidiaries to do a limited amount of dealing and underwriting in a wide range of securities, including corporate stocks and bonds.
The law already permitted banks to deal in certain kinds of securities such as Treasury bonds and general obligation municipal bonds.
Initially, the Fed ruled that a subsidiary that derived less than 5 percent of its revenue from securities was permissible. In 1989, the cap was raised to 10 percent and in December the cap was raised to 25 percent effective March 6.
Fed officials declined to comment on the merger.
The merger also benefited from Fed actions to eliminate previously required barriers, known as firewalls, separating a bank from its securities subsidiary.
"While the deal wouldn't have been do-able at all without the revenue limit change, from a profitability standpoint the changes in the firewalls that have been made and have been announced are quite important as well," consultant Petrou said.
Removing the firewalls allowed banks to cut costs by eliminating duplication between the two activities while allowing additional benefits from the combination.
The relaxation of firewalls has drawn some criticism from Congress, where Sen. Lauch Faircloth, chairman of the Senate Banking Committee's Financial Institutions subcommittee, held a hearing questioning the move.
But the North Carolina Republican now seems satisfied with most of what the Fed has done or proposed. "We're going to entrust to the Fed that they'll continue to do the prudent thing," Faircloth's legislative director James Hyland said.
Faircloth's remaining concerns centre on two of the 28 firewall reforms proposed by the Fed in January, allowing a bank to buy investments underwritten by its securities firm for its own trust accounts and lending money to an investor to purchase underwritten securities, Hyland said.
