The Federal Reserve may not be taking adequate precautions to ensure that its technological systems and those of the banks it regulates will function properly in the year 2000, Senate Banking Committee chairman Alfonse D'Amato warned Monday.
After querying U.S. bank regulators on the year 2000 computer issue in February, New York Republican D'Amato said he was troubled by the answers he received from the Fed and the National Credit Union Administration (NCUA).
Problems are expected to crop up in computers and software that only record the last two digits of the year. Such a programme might treat the year 2000 as the year 1900, leading to serious miscalculations or even a system crash.
D'Amato also queried in February the Office of the Comptroller, which oversees national banks, and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. Both entities told D'Amato they had detailed plans to cope with the so-called millennium bug.
But D'Amato singled out responses of the Fed and the NCUA as raising concerns over whether they are "devoting enough attention and resources to solving the year 2000 crisis," D'Amato's office said in a release. D'Amato sent both agencies letters Monday asking for additional information.
"Congress expects detailed plans and concrete actions to prevent possible future catastrophes which could endanger the financial well-being of hundreds of millions of Americans," D'Amato said. "We can't wait around, timing is critical."
Estimates for fixing year 2000 problems in government and the private sector worldwide have ranged as high as $300 billion to $600 billion. Chase Manhattan Bank recently said in a routine filing it planned to spend $250 million on the problem over the next three years.
"We have no comment," Fed spokesman Joe Coyne said Monday. "We will, of course, answer the letter."
D'Amato said the Fed and the NCUA appeared to lack an aggressive plan of action for coping with the problem, failed to give an assessment about the scope of the problem in institutions they oversee, and did not explain how they would assist regulated institutions that might have a problem.
The Fed, which operates the nation's payment system moving $1 trillion a day among financial institutions, also failed to describe any steps it had taken to ensure that its own systems would be ready for the year 2000, D'Amato said.
