Former Federal Reserve chairman Paul Volcker on Wednesday tangled with lawmakers who opposed his view that banks should not be allowed to combine with commercial companies.
But neither side broke much new ground in the debate, one of the hottest controversies remaining as Congress tries to overhaul ageing U.S. financial laws.
Volcker may have set the tone when he began his remarks to the House Banking Committee by observing that he delivered almost the identical testimony at a similiar hearing in 1991.
"I could read that statement word-for-word and it would be totally relevant" on most issues being discussed, he said.
Volcker, a long-time opponent of mixing commerce and banking, pointed to recent experiences in Japan and Germany.
"I do not think that today many observers look to Germany or Japan for a model of an effective, innovative banking system," he said, "Quite the contrary."
That suited committee chairman Jim Leach, Republican of Iowa, also a longtime opponent of mixing banking and commerce. Rep. Doug Bereuter, Republican of Nebraska, announced at the hearing he would oppose such combinations.  
But advocates of legislation allowing some mixing questioned Volcker's evidence and conclusions.
Rep. Richard Baker, who has introduced a bill to allow unlimited mixing, said banks had been permitted to combine with commercial firms for most of U.S. history.
"This reflects that there is no principle or meaningful distinction between commerce and finance," the Louisiana Republican said.
Baker noted that Bankers Trust New York Corp, where Volcker sits on the board of directors, reported a profit of $62 million last year on an equity investment in an airline, asking: "Isn't that an investment in a commercial enterprise?"
"Banks are able to hold some equity investment in the course of underwriting and in the course of merchant banking, and Bankers Trust has done so at times," Volcker responded. "Had they extended beyond that, they would have one director who would protest."
Banks cannot hold a controlling stake in a commercial firm, Volcker added.
When Baker suggested that lawmakers would put similar limits on commercial holdings at consolidated financial firms, referred to as a basket approach, Volcker disagreed.  
One bill under consideration would allow financial firms to conduct 25 percent of their business in non-financial endeavors, although legislators have also discussed basing the basket limit on total capital as opposed to business activity.
The ban on control "is not a basket at all, it is a non- controlling interest and if it reached the point where it affected the fortunes of the bank, I'd worry about," Volcker said.
Later, Rep. Tom Campbell, Republican of California, said he was leaning towards allowing combinations of banks and commercial firms.
Representatives of the securities and insurance industries testified after Volcker and most favored allowing banking and commerce to mix.
"Such combinations are today part of the normal course of business for Merrill Lynch as well as other companies in our industry here in the U.S. and around the world," John Heinmann, the firm's chairman of global financial institutions, said.
((Washington newsroom 202-898-8312))
