The Clinton administration has crafted a plan to reform what many call outdated U.S. banking laws and will begin making its positions known over the next few weeks, industry officials said Monday.
The administration will formally unveil its plan when Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin testifies at a House Banking Committee hearing June 3, but details of the plan are expected to emerge as early as this week, the officials said.
Under Secretary John Hawke, a leading architect of the administration plan, is slated to speak here on Wednesday. In his speech, Hawke may indicate the administration's stand on mixing banking and commerce, lobbyists said.
"Mr. Hawke certainly won't do anything to upstage Rubin," one lobbyist in contact with the administration noted. "But we will hear generally where they are on some of these topics."
While most in Congress and the finance industry agree that the Depression-era barriers separating banking from securities and insurance should be torn down, there is little consensus about going farther and allowing banks to combine with securities and other firms.
The administration's position has evolved over the past several months. A task force on financial reform headed by Hawke initially recommended eliminating all barriers.
But the specter of Citicorp or Chase Manhattan merging with General Motors Corp. or Microsoft Corp. drew strong protests from House Banking Committee Chairman Jim Leach of Iowa, as well as prominent labour and consumer groups.
And during the spring, several Democratic senators, led by Paul Sarbanes of Maryland, wrote to Rubin to register their opposition to mixing banking and commerce.
Bowing somewhat to the criticism, the administration is now said to favour allowing limited combinations. Financial firms would be limited to a "basket" of non-financial activity, expressed as a percentage of total revenue or capital, some lobbyists said.
But the basket could be further limited by prohibiting combinations of the largest financial and non-financial firms. For example, one approach would be to bar the 1,000 biggest commercial firms from owning or being owned by banks.
Another difficult issue concerns regulating disparate financial businesses within a diversified firm.
Almost everyone favours "functional regulation," meaning that each activity of a firm would be regulated by the appropriate regulator. The Securities and Exchange Commission would regulate securities activities while state insurance regulators would oversee insurance sales, for example.
But debate continues about the level of federal intrusion in insurance regulation as well as the need for a top-level regulator to oversee entire firms.
While some favour setting the Federal Reserve at the top of the heap, the administration is expected to back a committee approach. The committee would be composed of representatives of the various functional regulators.
