Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin, outlining a plan to overhaul Depression-era laws governing the U.S. financial sector, said Wednesday the Clinton administration favored allowing banks to enter the securities and insurance fields.
"The old lines that separated insurance, securities and banking industries have increasingly blurred as new financial services and products have appeared," Rubin said in a speech here.
The highly anticipated administration proposal, originally expected in March, takes its place with several bills already introduced in Congress. "We look forward to working with Congress on this important initiative," Rubin said.
Increased competition in financial services should benefit consumers, generating savings of up to $15 billion a year, Rubin said.
The new proposal did not take a firm position on the controversial question of allowing banks to combine with non-financial, commercial firms.
"Because of the nature of the issues and the complete lack of consensus, we think the issue needs to be further debated by Congress before settling on a final approach," Rubin said.
Some lawmakers, along with smaller banks and consumer groups, adamantly oppose allowing banks to combine with commercial firms. But insurance companies and securities firms say they are already intertwined with non-financial interests and could not compete with banks if such combinations were not permitted.
Rubin outlined two possible approaches. Under one approach, some mixing would be permitted but limited and with the 1,000 largest non-financial firms excluded.
Under a second approach, no mixing would be allowed with banks but, as currently permitted, thrifts would be allowed to combine with  commercial firms.
If banks are allowed to mix with commercial firms, the reforms could take effect two years after enactment, Rubin said. If mixing is not allowed, the reforms could take effect in nine months.
The Federal Reserve should continue to oversee bank holding companies, while specific activities would be overseen by specific regulators such as the Securities and Exchange Commission and state insurance regulators.
Banks would be allowed to underwrite municipal revenue bonds. An exemption for banks in the federal mutual fund law, the Investment Company Act, would be narrowed.
