Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan urged lawmakers on Thursday to put off consideration of controversial proposals that would allow banks to merge with commercial companies, such as carmakers.
Instead, he said Congress should press ahead with more modest financial reforms that would knock down the 60-year-old legal barriers that prevent banks from affiliating with insurance companies and securities firms.
"Congress should widen the permissible range of affiliations for banking organizations in order to expand the choices for consumers and increase the efficiency of financial markets," Greenspan told the House Banking Committee.
Technology and free-market competition are blurring the boundries between financial and non-financial companies, but Congress can afford to wait, Greenspan said.
"Any wider authorization of banking and commerce should be postponed while we focus on financial modernization," he said. "Were we to move forward, it is truly irreversible."
Greenspan's position reflected an evolution of the Fed's view since February when he last testified on reforming the 1933 Glass-Steagall Act. At that time, Greenspan urged caution, but backed a transitional approach allowing limited mixing.
Since then, numerous lawmakers, small bankers and a host of interest groups, including consumer and labor organizations, have voiced opposition to allowing such combinations.
They complained that allowing a company like Microsoft Corp. or General Motors Corp. to own a major bank would diminish competition and could bias lending decisions.
Banking Committee chairman Jim Leach, an ardent opponent of mixing banking and commerce, said there was no public support for allowing commercial companies to own banks.
"I think that's going too far," the Iowa Republican said.
Rep. Marge Roukema, who has introduced a bill that would allow banking and commerce combinations, said she was disappointed by Greenspan's testimony.
Because savings and loans institutions are allowed to combine with commercial firms under current law, not including banking and commerce in new legislation leaves "an enormous loophole," said Roukema, Republican of New Jersey.
Analysts said Roukema's observation was critical to understanding why Congress has been unable to modernize bank law, despite repeated efforts over the past decade.
"It's already out there," said Karen Shaw Petrou, president of bank consulting firm ISD/Shaw Inc., referring to the savings and loan authority. "That's always been the stumbling block and if you take it away, people will get mad and Congress doesn't deal with that very well."
On Wednesday, Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin outlined the Clinton administration's bank plan, but sidestepped the controversial banking and commerce question. Instead, he offered Congress two alternatives -- one that would allow such combinations and another that would not.
