Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan urged lawmakers on Thursday to put off consideration of controversial proposals that would allow banks to merge with commercial companies, such as carmakers.
Instead, he said Congress should press ahead with more modest financial reforms that would knock down the 60-year-old legal barriers that prevent banks from affiliating with insurance companies and securities firms.
"Congress should widen the permissible range of affiliations for banking organisations in order to expand the choices for consumers and increase the efficiency of financial markets," Greenspan told the House Banking Committee.
On Wednesday, Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin outlined the Clinton administration's plan to allow banks to get into the securities and insurance businesses.
But Rubin sidestepped the controversial question of whether banks should be allowed to merge with commercial companies, instead offering Congress two proposals -- one that would allow such combinations, and another that would not.
Greenspan acknowledged that the barriers separating banks and commercial companies will eventually crumble with the continued advance of technology.
But he urged caution in knocking them down now, in part because of uncertainties over how that would affect the U.S. financial system.
"Any wider authorisation of banking and commerce should be postponed while we focus on financial modernisation," Greenspan said.
The administration plan would allow banks, securities firms and insurance companies to compete directly under a uniform set of regulations. That increased competition should benefit consumers, generating savings of up to $15 billion a year, according to Rubin.
The highly anticipated administration proposal, originally expected in March, took its place with several bills already introduced in Congress to overhaul the Glass Steagall Act of 1933. "We look forward to working with Congress on this important initiative," Rubin said.
Congress and the banking industry have been working to reform the law for more than a decade without success. But this year, previous opponents of reform have come to the table as regulators and courts have chipped away at the law and granted banks some new powers.
