The Clinton administration gave a solid boost this week to congressional efforts to overhaul antiquated U.S. banking laws but substantial hurdles remain, participants in the debate said.
On Wednesday, Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin outlined the administration's plan to eliminate the 1933 Glass-Steagall legal barriers separating banks from securities firms and insurance companies.
The administration plan was due to Congress by March 31 and the nearly two-month delay had some lobbyists fearing that the administration would avoid the tangled regulatory controversies and not submit anything.
Congress has sought to reform banking laws for more than a decade, but one interest group or another has always managed to block passage of legislation. In prior years, banks sought reform, while other financial firms opposed change.
Recently, courts and regulators have granted banks new authority, however. That brought insurance companies and securities firms to the table to seek a level playing field.
"There is renewed hope that the 105th Congress will tackle this difficult issue," said David Farmer, lobbyist for the Alliance of American Insurers, after Rubin's speech.
The action now shifts to the Banking committees in the House of Representatives and the Senate, where detailed reform measures will be drafted. Rubin will provide more details of the Clinton plan in testimony before Congress on June 3.
House Banking Committee Chairman James Leach said this week that drafting will begin immediately after that testimony and that he wants committee action completed by mid-June.
It is at the drafting stage where some past efforts to reform banking laws have foundered as competing interests fought over the details.
The new administration proposal ducked one of the most contentious issues -- whether banks should be allowed to combine with non-financial, commercial firms.
Instead of taking sides, Rubin offered two alternatives. Under one plan, banks would be allowed a limited amount of commercial activity, but the largest 1,000 commercial companies could not own or be owned by banks.
Under a second alternative, the current prohibition would be continued, but the current exception allowing savings and loans to be owned by commercial companies would also be maintained.
Several months ago, administration officials were discussing proposals to allow nearly unlimited mixing of banking and commerce. The apparent retreat left advocates of greater mixing fuming.
"Their recommendation is tantamount to surrender on the issue," Minnesota Democrat Rep. Bruce Vento said.
Vento and New Jersey Republican Rep. Marge Roukema introduced a bill in January that would allow banks to have a "basket" of commercial activity accounting for up to 25 percent of an institution's total business.
Another blow to Vento and Roukema's efforts came Thursday when Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan testified before the House Banking Committee.
Greenspan said Congress should eliminate Glass-Steagall now, but put off the banking and commerce issue for future review. "Any wider authorization of banking and commerce should be postponed while we focus on financial modernization," he said.
Now the banking and commerce issue threatens to derail their backing, said bank consultant Karen Shaw Petrou, president of ISD/Shaw Inc.
"The administration's plan is a decent baby-step," Petrou said. "But unsurprisingly, it's not the lightning bolt that transforms the debate."
Securities firms and insurance companies are involved in commercial activity, but want to get into banking if banks are allowed into their fields.
"If you don't allow banking and commerce, then you create obstacles for non-banks," Petrou said. "But somebody's twist or turn to solve that then creates another problem for someone else."
Even a small percentage limit on commercial activity would accommodate the largest non-bank financial companies, according to research from the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. released on Thursday.
Among the seven securities firms in the Fortune 1000, plus Goldman Sachs &amp; Co., none earned much more than 5 percent of their revenue from commercial activity in 1996, the FDIC estimated.
Only one of the five largest life and health insurers and one of the five largest property and casualty firms exceeded the 5 percent level, the FDIC said.
Four of the 10 largest diversified financial firms would exceed the 5 percent level, however. American Express derived 9 to 14 percent of its revenue from commercial activities, for example, and Marsh &amp; McLennan Cos Inc. had 28 percent of revenues from commerce.
