Scientists working on the next generation of the Internet are finding their first challenge is to convince a sceptical U.S. Congress to fund the project.
Rather than stumbling over new hardware or software, the next generation network has quickly run into several road blocks on Capitol Hill.
On Tuesday, scientists involved with the project, including President Bill Clinton's top science adviser John Gibbons, will try to soothe concerns at a Senate hearing.
Some lawmakers are worried that the project lacks focus and is not sufficiently different from a related university project known as Internet2.
The next generation Internet project, announced with great fanfare by Clinton during last year's presidential campaign, aims to send data at 1,000 times the speed of today's net. Higher speed and improved reliability could spur a host of new uses for the network, some with sound and video.
Clinton pledged the government would spend $100 million annually for five years to build the super high-speed network and promote its use.
The money was to come from reallocating existing research funds, but that plan is already in trouble. In April, the House of Representatives passed a budget for the National Science Foundation that specifically barred any spending on the next generation Internet.
The bill is awaiting action by the Senate and could be modified before going to the president's desk.
In May, 28 senators sent a letter to science adviser Gibbons complaining about the composition of the next generation Internet's advisory board. The senators, from both political parties but all from rural states, noted that the board's 20 members came from only eight states.
"Instead of a potentially major positive development, therefore, 'Next Generation Internet' and Internet2 becomes a significant source of concern for us," the senators wrote in the letter obtained by Reuters.
National Science Foundation officials are confident that the programme will go forward. "Next Generation Internet is a presidential initiative that will have a lot of congressional involvement," NSF spokeswoman Elizabeth Gaston said.
Congressional staffers said for the time being they remained confused about the administration's priorities. "Everyone I speak with tells me different things about what these programmes are supposed to do, and which agencies get which portions of the budget," one staffer said.
To some degree, the confusion reflects the changing fortunes of the Internet. While the original Internet, including connections to universities, was largely funded by government, this time around higher education and industry are more likely to foot some of the bill.
More than 100 schools have pledged to spend $50 million a year on Internet2, mainly for higher speed connections and switches. The schools are also seeking corporate sponsorship.
Less government involvement for building the plumbing frees up more resources for cutting-edge research, according to George Strawn, director of the NSF's division of networking and communications research.
"The first time around, the NSF sort of had to take the lead to diffuse it to all of higher education because there wasn't an industry yet," Strawn said. "Now that there is, as soon as it becomes cost effective we've got peddlers out there who will find higher education a receptive customer."
The original Internet began as a Defence Department project called ARPAnet to link far-flung computer centres. Funded mostly by the government until the mid-1980s, the net is now run almost entirely by private companies including MCI Communications Corp, Sprint Corp and BBN Corp.
Representatives from those companies gathered with other stars of the Internet community in Virginia two weeks ago for a "next generation" planning meeting. Some will return to Washington next week to explain the project to Congress.
