Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin goes to Capitol Hill on Tuesday to further explain the Clinton administration's bank reform plan, but lawmakers are likely to focus foremost on what the plan left out.
The Clinton proposal, along with several pending bills, would scrap the 1933 Glass-Steagall Act's separation of banking from other financial services.
On the contentious issue of going further and allowing banks to combine with commercial firms, however, the administration ducked.  
Instead, the Clinton plan unveiled by Rubin on May 21, offered two alternatives and left the hard choice to Congress.
"We think the issue needs to be further debated by Congress," the secretary said as he announced the plan.
Congress has debated overhauling antiquated U.S. banking laws for more than a decade without success and some analysts suggest the banking and commerce issue will sidetrack this year's attempts.
At Tuesday's House Banking Committee hearing, opponents of mixing banking and commerce led by committee chairman and Iowa Republican Jim Leach will try to steer Rubin to examine the risks of unlimited mergers.
Proponents, including subcommittee chairpersons Marge Roukema and Richard Baker, Republicans from New Jersey and Louisiana respectively, will take the opposite tack.
Under one of the two alternative outlined by Rubin last month, limited mixing would be permitted but excluding the 1,000 or so largest nonfinancial firms, measured by asset size.  
Bank holding companies could derive "some significant percentage" of their gross revenues from commercial activity under the approach, referred to as a basket limitation.
Under the second alternative, the current prohibition on mixing would be maintained but the current exception allowing commercial firms to own savings and loan institutions would also be maintained.
The administration chose to walk a fine line on the issue after Democratic legislators and traditionally Democratic labor and consumer groups came out against combining banking and commerce.
On Monday, other opponents including small bankers and agriculture groups issued a statement against even limited mixing of banking and commerce.
"Say NO to those who would undermine the world's strongest and most dynamic economic and financial system," the groups said. The 31 signers of the statement ranged from the National Bankers Association to the National Bakers Association.
Some lawmakers also plan to raise concerns at the hearing that portions of the Clinton plan contain loopholes that would render any limitations on banking and commerce irrelevent, staffers said.  
Any firm could own a thrift and establish a so-called wholesale financial institution. Wholesale banks could only accepts deposits over $100,000, would not be covered by deposit insurance, but would have access to the Federal Reserve's electronic payment system.
"The way the wholesale institution is structured would allow enormous activity," one staffer said. "It's a big loophole."
The notion of allowing savings and loans to continue operating under different rules than banks is also likely to draw some criticism.
Under legislation passed by Congress last year to recapitalize the savings industry's deposit insurance fund, the Clinton administration was directed to report on how the legal charters of the two industries could be merged.
((--202-898-8312))
