U.S. lawmakers redrafting a legislative proposal to modernize U.S. banking laws will rely heavily on the Clinton administration's reform plan, congressional staffers said on Wednesday.
But whatever provisions end up in the new draft, expected to be finished by Friday, the real battle will be fought when the House Banking Committee begins its formal consideration, or mark up, of the proposal currently scheduled for next week.  
"The goal here is to get in the (bill) those areas where there is general agreement," committee spokesman David Runkel said.
"The intent is to use as much of the Treasury (Department's) language as appropriate," Runkel said. The most controversial questions will be resolved as lawmakers offer varied amendments during the mark up, he added.
Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin unveiled the administration's plan to overhaul antiquated U.S. banking laws in a speech on May 21.  
In testimony on Tuesday, Rubin urged Congress to scrap the 1933 Glass-Steagall Act and free banks to enter other financial sectors like insurance and securities underwriting.
At least four major areas of disagreement remain that will be the focus of the scheduled June 11 mark up, staffers said. Some lawmakers want the mark up delayed at least a week, however, so the session could be delayed.
First, wide differences of opinion exist among legislators about whether financial firms should be allowed to engage in nonfinancial, commercial activities. The administration ducked the difficult question, offering two alternatives instead.  
Three earlier bills also each took a different approach and numerous alternatives have been floated in recent weeks. "You'll see it all at the mark up," one staffer predicted.
Also, the insurance industry is up in arms about provisions in the administration plan that may broaden a 1996 Supreme Court decision limiting state regulation of bank insurance sales. The bill would allow federal bank regulators to overrule state insurance authorities in some instances.
"This could have the effect of threatening the safety and soundness of the nation's insurance system," said David Pratt, senior vice president of the American Insurance Association.  
A third controversey sprouted from one of the administration's two "alternatives" on banking and commerce.
The plan said Congress could allow limited mixing or keep the current prohibition while also maintaining the present exception allowing commercial companies to own thrifts.
Under the second option, thrifts and banks would continue to operate under different federal charters. That outraged the banking industry, which thought it made a deal last year guaranteeing the charters would be merged.  
"A very critical piece if the puzzle will be that any financial reform measure specifically deals with the thrift charter issue," said Beth Climo, group director of financial industry affairs at the American Bankers Association.
"That is the fundamental thing that needs to be addressed," Climo said.
Another area of disagreement surrounds proposals to allow creation of so-called wholesale financial institutions, or "woofies." These bank-like entities could only take deposits over $100,000 and would not receive deposit insurance.
Some opponents of mixing banking and commerce fear that wholesale banks represent a significant loophole, since a commercial company could set up a "woofie."
Banking Committee chairman Jim Leach said earlier this week that he hoped to have the committee approve a bill and send it to the House floor by July 4.
But even if a majority of the banking panel can reach a consensus, the bill will be sequentially referred to the House Commerce Committee. That committee could then hold its own mark up or even stall the legislation.
((--Washington Newsroom 202-898-8312))
