The International Monetary Fund opened a site on the Internet Thursday providing information about the types of economic data available in 18 member countries.
"For a long time we have been trying to press countries to report to us on a more timely basis, more information, and based on good statistical systems," said Jack Boorman, director of the IMF's policy and review department.
The 1994-95 Mexican peso crisis highlighted the need for timely and accurate data about developing countries, Boorman told a news conference.
The site does not include the countries' actual data -- that may come later -- but it lists contacts for obtaining the information.
"Good statistical citizenship helps to inform markets," Boorman said. "The whole purpose of this system is to help that process, to make sure that markets are getting better data in a timely way."
The Internet address of the site is http://dsbb.imf.org. It lists information such as the frequency, schedule and types of economic and financial data released on a regular basis by the countries which have subscribed to the fund's "Special Data Dissemination Standard."
The countries on the site are Argentina, Canada, Denmark, Finland, Ireland, Italy, Malaysia, Mexico, the Netherlands, Norway, Peru, the Philippines, Singapore, Slovenia, Switzerland, Thailand, Britain and the United States.
By next week, information about another eight countries is expected to be added. Those countries are Croatia, France, Hungary, Japan, Poland, South Africa, Sweden and Turkey.
Another eight countries have subscribed to the data standard but are not ready to go online. Those are Austria, Australia, Belgium, Chile, Columbia, Iceland, Israel, and Lithuania.
The special standard is being phased in over two years. countries agreed to meet the standards by Dec. 31, 1998.
Discussions are continuing with other countries that have not yet agreed to subscribe, including Germany, said John McLenaghan, director of the IMF statistics department.
IMF officials said the site could eventually include direct links to countries' data or other kinds of information.
"We're starting something which, while it has a very specific content and frame at the present time, has potential for going in directions that none of us perhaps quite see at the present time," Boorman said.
