The number of consumers and businesses filing for U.S. bankruptcy protection continued a dramatic rise, hitting a record 335,073 in the first quarter of 1997, the American Bankruptcy Institute said Tuesday.
The first quarter total, the fifth straight quarterly record, was up 26 percent from 266,149 in the first quarter of last year, the non-partisan research group noted.
Consumers filed more than 321,000 of the first quarter petitions, about 96 percent of the total and a rise of 27 percent from a year earlier.
"The continued record pace of bankruptcies tracks the sustained growth in consumer spending and debt," said the group's executive director, Samuel Gerdano said.
After consumer filings surpassed the 1 million mark for the first time last year, the first quarter's pace "suggests that 1997 will surpass the 1996 record," he said.
The quarter's bankruptcy surge has already hit some consumer lenders.  Credit card giant Advanta Corp. shocked Wall Street when it reported a loss of 43 cents a share for the first quarter.
"Credit card debt is playing a big role in bankruptcy trends," said George Salem, banking industry analyst at Gerard Klauer Mattison &amp; Co. in New York. And bankruptcies, in turn, have been depressing credit card company profits, Salem said.
"It's like continuing to be punched and it's going to be a while before it stops," Salem said.  Card issuers are cutting back on lending and tightening underwriting standards, but the current problems result from loans made more than a year ago, he said.
Looking at the 12 months ended March 31, 1997, Hawaii had the largest increase in bankruptcies, with a 61 percent jump. The northern section of West Virginia followed closely behind with a 60 percent rise.
About 70 percent of consumers filed for a Chapter 7 bankruptcy, where unsecured debt is wiped out and the debtor is allowed to keep some property.
Some card companies maintain that more consumers should be forced to file for Chapter 13 reorganizations, where debts are not wiped out but must be repaid over several years.
Visa USA said this week that its analysis of bankruptcy petitions showed that mounting credit card debt was not responsible for the rise in bankruptcies.
"This analysis refutes the notion that bank credit cards are largely responsible for the increase," Visa USA Senior Vice President Kenneth Crone said.
Crone said the analysis showed people with an ability to repay some of their debts were filing for Chapter 7 bankruptcy. "People who can repay a portion of their debts should be required to do so," he said. "Until this changes, lenders and consumers will continue to foot the bill."
But consumer groups disputed the Visa findings and said excessive credit card debt was directly implicated.
"They are not making the correct comparisons," said Stephen Brobeck, executive director of the Consumer Federation of America. "The only two figures that really matter are the average income and average credit card debt of bankrupt people."
Among people who file for Chapter 7, the average income was about $20,000 and the average credit card debt was about $17,000, Brobeck said.
