Senate Banking Committee Chairman Alfonse D'Amato on Wednesday introduced legislation to prohibit banks from charging additional fees to non-customers who use their automated teller machines.
About 54 percent of all automated teller machines now impose a surcharge on non-customers, according to a survey by the General Accounting Office released by D'Amato at a congressional hearing.
"ATM's were supposed to reduce costs, and the savings could be passed on to consumers," the New York Republican said. "Now, banks are suddenly claiming that ATM's are no longer cost-effective."
"They have decided to soak consumers with multiple fees every time they need to take money out of their accounts," D'Amato said.
Consumer groups urged lawmakers to enact the ban. Surcharges pose a serious competitive threat to smaller banks, which have fewer automated teller machines, according to Edmund Mierzwinski, programme director at the non-profit U.S. Public Interest Research Group.
"If enough small bank customers switch accounts to big banks to avoid surcharges, then the big banks, facing less competition, will raise the fees they charge their own customers even more," Mierzwinski said.
After the hearing, banks denied the fees amount to double-dipping and argued consumers benefit from the proliferation of ATMs made possible by surcharge revenues.
"The marketplace is at work," said Ed Yingling, executive director of the American Bankers Association. "Consumers, not the government, should decide if they are willing to pay for the convenience of using ATMs at thousands of new locations."
If surcharges are banned, many newly installed machines would be shuttered, Yingling said.
Until last year, the two largest ATM network operators, Mastercard International's Cirrus and Visa USA's Plus, generally prohibited banks from levying surcharges on non-customers. Banks received a portion of the fee on such transactions charged by the customer's own bank.
Last April, Cirrus and Plus began allowing ATM surcharges, and the fees have rapidly proliferated. Fifteen states, including Texas, had previously allowed surcharges. More recently, Connecticut and Iowa have passed legislation banning surcharges.
The GAO found that about one-third of banks impose surcharges, covering 54 percent of all teller machines in the country. From the end of 1995 to February 1997, the number of ATMs rose 34 percent, while the number imposing a surcharge rose 320 percent, the GAO said.
The average surcharge was $1.14 in 1997, up from 99 cents in 1995.
Not all the senators at Wednesday's hearing favoured legislation banning surcharges. Sen. Lauch Faircloth, Republican of North Carolina, said he preferred allowing the market to set ATM fees.
"The ATM surcharge is a convenience fee," Faircloth said. "That convenience comes at a price."
