Young drug discovery group Vanguard Medica Plc said on Thursday it could wait longer than expected before seeking a fresh cash injection.
Vanguard floated on the stock exchange in May, raising 46.4 million stg to fund its pipeline, which includes migraine and kidney failure drugs.
"We said we'd be expecting to seek more finance in 1998, but we took in more money than we'd expected and may have scope for going on longer," commercial director Nick Heightman said in a telephone interview following interim results.  
Vanguard said on Thursday that its pretax loss in the six months to June 30 widened to 3.7 million stg from 1.8 million a year earlier, largely due to the cost of moving migraine drug VML 251 and anti-inflammatory drug VML 295 through trials.
Heightman, who joined Vanguard from drug giant Glaxo Wellcome Plc, said the company had expected to announce results of large-scale intermediate, or Phase II, trials on the migraine drug by July 1997.
"I think we are going to be able to do that in the first quarter, so we are about a quarter ahead," he said.  
Analysts say the migraine drug, which is being developed in cooperation with SmithKline Beecham Plc accounts for around half of Vanguard's current stock market valuation.
Some studies have shown it may be more potent than the current market leader, Glaxo Wellcome's Imigran, although Heightman said direct comparisons cannot be made for another 18 months.
He said another Vanguard drug, VML 252, which promises to tackle bone damage suffered by patients with severe kidney problems, is now "running neck and neck" with the migraine treatment.  
Although VDL 252 is currently in Phase I trials, Heightman said it is likely to progress more quickly through trials than the migraine drug.
"Its effectiveness is particularly easy to measure. You can quickly tell if you are having an effect," he told Reuters. Heightman believes both drugs could be on the market in the year 2000 if trials continue to go well.
Despite the positive news from the company, Vanguard shares dropped 5 1/2 pence to 495 pence on Thursday.  
Greig Middleton analyst Julia Dickson expressed surprise at the fall, saying the market "doesn't seem to understand the company."
"We think it is very cheap and I am surprised it is off," Dickson said, adding that the company's statement was "very positive" and Vanguard's meeting with analysts on Thursday showed drugs are progressing even faster than the company has officialy acknowledged.
Lehman Brothers' analyst Ian Smith said the "share price adequately reflects the value of the current portfolio, with some excellent opportunities," particualrly in migraine and kidney-related problems.
He said in the medium- to long-term, the value will depend on Vanguard's ability to attract further partnerships like that with SmithKline Beecham, a cornerstone of Vanguard's growth strategy.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
