BOC Group Plc launched on Thursday a breathable, liquefied version of air which could create temporary cold stores in minutes and provide super-cold conditions for testing aircraft engines.
BOC said the product, which is a mixture of liquid oxygen and liquid nitrogen, was the first gas of its kind that could be breathed safely and represented a major breakthrough.
Food retailers had already shown great interest in the gas, which would allow companies to turn anything from giant warehouses to small rooms into temporary chilled stores without using massive refrigeration equipment, it said.
"If you need a cold store for one day a week or two hours a day then there is some technology to do it," said BOC managing director of technology Deb Chatterji.
Possible uses for the gas, which was developed in Britain and the United States, were endless. "The only limit on this is the limit of our imaginations," he said, adding that annual sales could eventually "be north of 20 million pounds ($32.40 million) and south of 200 million pounds".
BOC had originally wanted to find a way of enabling refrigerated lorries to keep their loads cool over "multi-drop" deliveries, which meant finding a gas that someone entering the back of the lorry could breathe.
People cannot breathe liquid nitrogen, the current mainstay of refrigeration.
A number of companies including Air Products and Chemicals Inc of the U.S. are believed to have studied the complex storage problems created by liquefied air, which has a temperature of minus 191 degrees centigrade.
However, BOC is the first to launch the gas commercially.
It has already been tested on poultry farms, where it dramatically cut death rates caused by high summer temperatures.
BOC said it could eventually be used to air condition spaces like rock concert venues and to create extreme-temperature test chambers for the aerospace and other high-tech industries.
Britain is being used as a commercial test-bed for the gas, and BOC said it would make a decision about expanding production and overseas marketing at the end of the year.
--London Newsroom +44 71 542 7717 ($1=.6172 Pound)
