KS Biomedix Holdings Plc said on Tuesday that it was nearing a major breakthrough in the formulation of sheep monoclonal antibodies.
In an interview with Reuters, managing director Kim Tan said the tiny biotech group was "very close" to being able to create sheep antibodies artificially, a key step in a process which KS Biomedix hopes will lead to ground-breaking drugs for cancer and viral infections.  
Tan said he hoped that the second key step, humanising the artifically-created antibody by attaching it to part of a human antibody gene, would be achieved this year.
Scientists across the drug industry believe that antibodies, which are proteins produced by the body to fight off disease, could be used like torpedoes to carry cancer-killing drugs direct to cancerous cells. They would bind themselves to affected cells but leave healthy tissue alone.
KS Biomedix is pioneering development of sheep antibodies in place of the mouse or rat antibodies which are the current mainstay of research.  
Malaysian-born Tan, who has done much of the work himself, says sheep antibodies are much better at binding to targeted cells than mouse antibodies and promise to pack far more punch.
"We are saying that we think the mouse antibody approach is correct, but because mouse antibodies don't bind as tightly we think sheep antibodies will be better," Tan said, adding "perhaps 10,000 times better."
The technology receved a boost last October when Swiss drugs giant Hoffman-La Roche asked KS Biomedix to develop a sheep-based antibody for an as yet undisclosed disease area.  
Tan said he believed other companies would follow when the superior characteristics of the sheep product were demonstrated.
"We are making biological missiles that can carry a variety of payloads," Tan said. "It is like the Ariane rockets - we don't care whose satellite we deliver, we'll launch it and get it there."
Tan said the technology could revolutionise treatment of cancer, especially in comparison with the "machine-gun approach" of chemotherapy. He said that with antibody technology a cancer treatment could be administered "14 times in a week compared with once every two weeks for chemotherapy."  
KS Biomedix, which was founded in 1991 and listed on the Alternative Investment Market in January 1996, is initially targetting colon, breast and small cell lung cancer in cooperation with a number of British hospital and university research teams.
But Tan said the basic technology, which would be licensed to other drug companies, "is capable of hundreds of products," including combating viruses like hepatitis and HIV. Tan said KS Biomedix, which farms most of its research work out to academic researchers, was now looking for partners in this field.
Tan told Reuters that the company was unlikley to have to return to the market for further funding. He said he was confident that income from two drugs in Phase II trials, for rheumatoid arthritis and osteo arthritis, would help to fund the rest of the company's drug development programme.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
