The fate of Britain's Clyde Petroleum Plc hung in the balance on Tuesday as shareholders mulled over an improved 120 pence per share offer from predator Gulf Canada Resources.
There was some disappointment that the Canadian group had failed to come up with a knock-out punch, and there were signs that key shareholders who will decide Clyde's fate might wait to see if a rival bidder emerges in the next two weeks.
With Clyde's share price resolutely stuck at the 120 pence offer level in Tuesday afternoon trading, analysts said it seemed to be pulled two ways - by the possibility of another bid emerging and the suspicion that one or two large shareholders might accept Gulf's offer.
Gulf Canada's final proposal, which valued the Scottish exploration and production company at 494.6 million pounds ($793 million), represented a 14 percent improvement on its original 105 pence offer made on December 18, and a 42 percent premium to Clyde's share price before the bid was announced.
But the price was below the 125 pence per share many analysts had been expecting, and some said it had robbed Gulf Canada of the chance of pulling off a clear victory.
Clyde immediately rejected the latest bid, saying it was "worth a great deal more than this offer."
"I think I would recommend holding (the stock) on the possibility of another bidder," one analyst said.
Gulf Canada's president and chief executive officer J.P. Bryan however dismissed the prospect of a rival offer, saying there had not been "a sniff or a rumour" of a second bid.
"I can't see that anyone could possibly find justification for making a higher bid unless it is based on synergy or insanity," said Bryan, maintaining Gulf's line that it was paying a very full price for the British company.
Hopes of a white knight centred on North America, where the habit of valuing oil exploration and output companies on the basis of their cash flow multiples makes Clyde look very attractive. The oil sector is also relatively cash rich after years of cost-cutting.
"The phone lines across the Atlantic will be buzzing," said an analyst at a leading UK bank.
But he added that the struggle "is quite finely balanced now. There are a few shareholders who control a majority of the shares and of those one or two have been dithering about what sort of level they would find acceptable. This has certainly caught their attention."
He said some shareholders would be worried that if Gulf Canada's offer failed then Clyde's share price would slide back to around 90 pence, which Gulf Canada said on Tuesday was its true value.
Analysts said Clyde would now be working to persuade shareholders that they they could gain a better long-run return on their investment by sticking with the current management, who are seen as having turned the company around in recent years.
Meanwhile Gulf Canada, which sees Clyde offering it a "third leg" in the North Sea to add to its strength in western Canada and Indonesia, will be hoping that a rival bidder does not focre it to dig even deeper into its pockets.
--London Newsroom +44 71 542 7717
