Britain's biggest chemical company ICI said on Thursday that profits collapsed last year, but it set its sights on a more profitable future with plans to float its troubled tioxide operations on the stock exchange.
Profits before tax and exceptional charges dropped 37 percent to 603 million pounds ($967 million) in 1996 from 951 million a year before, while the dividend payout climbed 6.7 percent to 32.0 pence. Both figures were towards the bottom end of market expectations.
The company blamed the drop on sharp cyclical price falls in the overcrowded chlorine, titanium dioxide (tioxide) and polyester markets, higher oil prices and a stronger pound.
Some of the downturn was offset by a bouyant performance in the fast-expanding paints business, where operating profits jumped 60 percent to 171 million stg, and a steady performance in materials, which makes acrylics and polyurethanes.
Shares in the group reacted erratically to the results, rising briefly to a peak of 780 pence before slipping back 10 pence to 754-1/2 in late-morning trade.
Traders said upbeat forecasts on prospects for chemical prices and news of the Tioxide float were overshadowed by continued worries over the strength of sterling and disappointment over the full-year figures.
The results reinforced the group's determination to reposition itself as a producer of "light" chemicals like acrylics, polyurethanes and paints and to move away from the less predictable industrial end of the market.
A reshuffle of the board's responsibilites on Thursday signalled the change, and finance director Alan Spall told Reuters ICI would be "a very different company" by the turn of the century.
Spall said ICI planned to float the Tioxide Group, which is the world's second biggest producer of tioxide, a whitening agent for for paints, plastics, inks and fibres, in the next 18 months. The company is consulting advisors about its value, but Spall said its net assets totalled around $700 million.
"We are determined to reduce the proportion of assets and income from the heavy industrial end," Spall told Reuters.
"You can expect us to use every tool around to shift the portfolio," he added, including flotations, asset swaps, sales and acquisitions.
He said the entire chemical industry was in talks on swapping key assets and pointed to Wednesday's $30 million acquisition of a Puerto Rico paint company and last year's purchase of Bunge Paints in South America as the kind of move that could be expected. "There is a whole series of potential acquistions," said Spall.
ICI belieives that the downward spiral in key industrial chemical prices is now at an end. Spall predicted a "sharp" rise in tioxide prices this year, and said prices of olefins and chlorofins were now improving. "1997 chemical production and demand looks better...the balance will tighten," he said. ($1=.6237 Pound)
