Imperial Chemcial Industries Plc said on Thursday that it would "look at every creative opportunity" for reshaping its business, including flotations, asset swaps, sales and acquisitions.
In a telephone interview with Reuters following 1996 results and news of float plans for the Tioxide operations, group finance director Alan Spall said "You can expect us to use every tool around to shift the portfolio."
Spall told Reuters that ICI would be "a very different company" by the turn of the century.  
"We are determined to reduce the proportion of assets and income from the heavy industrial end," Spall said, while building up the group's strength in less cyclical areas like "polyurethanes, acrylics, performance chemicals and paints".
He said the "whole of the industry" is in talks on asset swaps and "of course ICI is part of that".
The finance director pointed to Wednesday's $30 million acquisition of a Puerto Rico paint company and last year's purchase of Bunge Paints in South America as the kind of move that could be expected. "There is a whole series of potential acquistions," said Spall.  
The group's dermination to transform its operations was reinforced by the 1996 results, with sharp falls in price for industrial chemicals like tioxide, chlorine and polyester undermining progress at the lighter end, notably paints.
"Post demerger (the spin-off of Zeneca Group Plc in 1993) we have been growing our lighter end disproportionately and we have seen some cyclical price pressure on the industrial elements," he said.
But he added: "What goes down also goes up, and what is important to look at is the underlying robustness of the porfolio improvement."  
He predicted a "sharp" rise in Tioxide prices this year, and said that generally in industrial chemicals "the fourth-quarter prices look like the bottom of what looks like a pause in the mid-1990s."
Prices of both olefins and chlorofins were now improving and "1997 chemical production and demand looks better...the balance will tighten."
In Europe Spall said he detected two important trends, with "volumes set to move upwards and destocking at an end in Germany."  
Spall said that since demerger output per employee had been growing by eight percent per year, but he added "we recognise we are not as good as the best in the industry".
He said an efficiency drive to improve productivity and profit margins would be fully in place by the end of this year. The programme had added 165 million stg to pre-exepctional pre-tax profits of 603 million stg last year, the finance director added.
--London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
