Peptide Therapeutics Plc, a tiny Cambridge vaccine discovery company, moved firmly into the big time on Monday after signing up its second major strategic alliance in under three weeks.
Shares in Peptide rocketed on news that Anglo-American drugs giant SmithKline Beecham Plc is to pay six million pounds up front for access to novel vaccines which could protect against allergic reactions ranging from mild hay fever to fatal food allergies.
The stock rose 14 percent or 46 pence to 375 in late trading. Peptide, which only floated on the stock market in November 1995, has seen its shares rise 63 percent since the start of the year. Shares in technology group BTG Plc, which signed over patents for the vaccine to Peptide on Monday, rose 17 1/2 pence to 480.
SmithKline, the world's biggest supplier of vaccines, is taking a 2.8 percent stake in Peptide for 3.6 million pounds ($5.88 million) and providing cash and licence payments of 2.4 million pounds. Peptide said it could receive another 24 million pounds from SmithKline, excluding any royalties on eventual sales.
SmithKline's seal of approval for Peptide's science follows another high profile coup late last month, when Medeva PLC agreed to transfer its know-how in developing oral and nasal vaccines to the company. Peptide is now working on non-injectable vaccines to block a range of infections such as typhoid, flu and food poisoning by the e-coli bug.
Yamaichi International analyst Erling Refsum said Peptide had "got some quite impressive partnerships. Medeva is not to be sniffed at and SmithKline is quite a big catch. It means they have validated what (Peptide) are doing."
The allergy vaccine was also backed by the British government last September in the form of 450,000 pounds development grant.
Peptide said it had already proved succesful in small-scale trials against food allergies, which were often lethal, and Peptide believes it could work against allergic forms of asthma and eczema as well as adverse drug reactions.
Peptide licensing director Nick Higgins, a key mover behind the SmithKline deal, told Reuters that several major companies had expressed an interest in the allergy vacccine, but SmithKline offered a stable, long-term alliance.
Higgins said the first allergy product could be on sale around the turn of the century.
Despite the flurry of recent deals finance director John Brown said there was room for other tie-ups, notably involving technology to allow rapid identification of protease inhibitors, which block enzymes crucial to a virus's ability to reproduce.
Protease inhibitors have been used successfully against the HIV virus, but Brown said "they clearly have many therapeutic possibilities," including tackling viral conditions like herpes.
A novel treatment for rheumatoid arthritis is also in early stages of development.
Yamaichi's Refsum said 400 pence "looks like a fair price" for Peptide shares, but he added that even this level "may be undervaluing the rate of progress they are making."
But another analyst said the share price "may be overcooked."
"This is a superb deal for them," he said, but added "it is going to take a long time to turn the interesting science into late-stage projects." ($1=.6120 Pound)
