Vaccine discovery group Peptide Therapeutics Plc said on Monday that there was still room for further product alliances, despite signing up two high profile deals in the space of three weeks.
In an interview after announcing an agreement with SmithKline Beecham Plc to develop allergy vaccines, Peptide finance director John Brown said "the area that is finding interest is protease inhibitors."
Peptide is developing technology to allow rapid identification of protease inhibitors, which block enzymes crucial to a virus's ability to reproduce.
Protease inhibitors have been used successfully against the HIV virus, but Brown said "they clearly have many therapeutic possibilities," including tackling viral conditions like herpes.
The agreement with SmithKline to develop Peptide's allergy vaccines follows a tie-up in January with Medeva Plc, in which Medeva licensed its know-how in creating oral and nasal vaccinations to Peptide.
SmithKline is to pay 6 million stg to Peptide immediately, including 3.6 million stg for a 2.8 percent stake in the group. Peptide said it could eventually receive up to 30 million stg from the deal, excluding any royalties on product sales.
SmithKline will take over Peptide's lead project, a vaccine which could prevent a range of allergic reactions from mild hay fever to often fatal food allergies, and has the right to any follow-up drugs.
"This is a validation of the company and the technology," said Peptide's licensing director Nick Higgins, a key player in the deal. "The term strategic alliance is rather over-used, but this really is a strategic alliance."
Higgins said a several companies had expressed interest in the allergy vaccine, which won backing from the British government last September in the form of a 450,000 stg development grant.
"The negotiations with SmithKline Beecham went very smoothly and one of the big pluses...was that they were not interested in just a single product arrangement but in this whole area," said Higgins. "For us that gives stability to the relationship. If you look at single product deals (with biotech companies) then if the product goes down the marriage breaks."
Brown and Higggins declined to be drawn on the timetable for developing the vaccine, which they said was now in the hands of SmithKline Beecham. One set of Phase II trials has been completed, with another set still to run. However Higgins said "I think you are looking at the end of the decade in terms of availability" on the market.
SmithKline has also acquired a right to develop a vaccine specifically targeted at rye grass allergy. Brown said Peptide should start clinical trials on this "shortly," after which SmithKline "will have an option to proceed" with further development.
--London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
