Avalon Oil Plc said on Monday that it had decided to look to London for funding of its oil exploration joint venture with FAO Gazprom because British investors were ahead of the U.S. in investing in Russian projects.
"The London investment community is probably five years ahead of the U.S. investment community when it comes to Russia," Avalon Oil chairman John Wieczorek told Reuters in an interview.
"We couldn't see any Russian ventures which have been taken public in the States."
Oklahoma-based Avalon said earlier on Monday that it intended to seek a listing on Britain's Alternative Investment Market (AIM) to raise funds for Stimul, a joint venture with a Gazprom subsidiary which will exploit oil reserves at Orenburg in southern Russia.
The U.S. company is believed to want to raise around 35 million pounds via a placing, which will finance its 49 percent stake in Stimul.
Avalon is following an increasingly well-worn path. Other companies such as Melrose, JKX Oil and Gas and Dana xxx have all become involved in projects to develop immense and largely untapped gas and oil reserves in the former Soviet Union, which some say could rival reserves in the Middle East.
Wieczorek said Gazprom, which accounts for nearly a quarter of the world's natural gas production, was keen to use Avalon's portfolio of new technology.
The two have been working together since 1993, and Stimul alrady produces 2,850 barrels of oil a day, which it hopes to booost to 18,500 barrels a day next year.
"Gazprom were attracted by access to western technology,"said Wieczorek. "They have a tremendous history of gas production but not oil production."
Avalon has already introduced different drawing fluids for the extraction of oil which do not damage the reservoirs, and is about to bring in its system of flow drilling, which limits damage during the drilling phase and allows production to start while drilling is going on. This will be the fist time the technique has been employed in Russia.
"You can produce more quickly and you are able to produce at a higher rate. It also reduces the cost of the well," said Wieczorek.
Without more sophisticated production methods the reserves at Orenburg, which Wieczorek said are similar in scale to the Nelson field in the North Sea, could not be exploited economicallly.
Under current plans Stimul will be able to exploit the site by drilling around 160 horizontal producing wells and 50 vertical wells over the next six years. The original Russian plans called for drilling more than 3000 wells.
Wieczorek said the Orenburg project would be "a jumping-off point for other projects in Russia."
He said the company had been looking at three other oil fields, one nearby and two in different regions of Russia. "I feel very confident that we'll be able to add these to our future agenda," he said.
Wieczorek said Avalon was unlikely to have to seek further funding beyond the initial placing.
"I don't think we'll have to come back for more because this programme should be cashflow positive in 1999, so from that point of view it should be self-funding," he added.
