Unilever Plc stirred up the entire chemicals sector on Tuesday with surprise news that it plans to sell most of its speciality chemicals businesses.
The announcement of the massive disposal programme, which analysts said could net up to five billion pounds ($8.17 billion) for the Anglo-Dutch group, sparked a rash of speculation about potential buyers.
The four businesses, National Starch &amp; Chemical Co, Quest International, Unichema International and Crosfield, had total sales of around three billion pounds last year and employ nearly 16,000 people in 35 countries.
Analysts said the move, which could free Unilever up for a major acquisition in its core food, detergents and personal product businesses, was well timed.
The company is taking advantage of a shake-up in chemicals as Europe gets to grips with overcapacity and increasing competition from the United States and Asia by swapping assets and disposing of non-core operations.
Businesses like Unilever's are particularly attractive, offering higher margins and less volatile performance than industrial chemicals. With profit margins of more than 14 percent, Unilever's businesses "are at the good end of the range," said Williams de Broe analyst Peter Cartwright.
Kleinwort Benson analyst Jeremy Chantry said: "This is a highly saleable and attractive portfolio." He added that the businesses were likely to be sold "in big pieces".
Another analyst, who asked not to be named, said U.S.-based National Starch, which makes industrial adhesives, resins and speciality starches, could fetch 1.3 to 1.5 times its annual sales. The Quest fragrances and flavourings business and the Unichema natural oils businesses, both based in the Netherlands, might be worth 1.5 times their annual turnover.
But Kleinwort's Chantry noted that "these are high margin businesses and some could be going for two times sales".
With no obvious buyer for the whole package, speculation centred on possible interest for the different segments.
Williams de Broe's Cartwright said industrial adhesives and resins could both be a target for Britain's Imperial Chemical Industries Plc, which wants to buy lighter chemicals operations and move away from industrial products.
Analysts said ICI, which has little debt, could also be interested in the petroleum and plastics catalysts business of British-based Crosfield.
Another analyst said National Starch could interest other U.S. firms. "A lot of the big processors in the States, like Cargill, make raw starch and haven't moved on into the value-added chain, which is what National Starch is in. Those big food processors may be interested in that," he added.
Quest is also in a sector seeing major rationalisation. Switzerland's Roche Holding AG spent $1.1 billion last week buying flavours group Tastemaker, paying more than 3.4 times Tastemaker's annual sales.
Another major player in the sector, International Flavors and Fragrances Inc of the United States, said last year it was not interested in buying another flavours company, but it could be attracted by Quest's investment in biotechnology.
Unichema, whose products include lubricants and ingredients for polymers, soap and skincare products, might be of interest to one of the five or six major players in this segment. They include Witco Corp of the United States and the German groups Henkel KGaA  HNKG-p.F and Degussa AG. --London Newsroom +44 71 542 7717
($1=.6120 Pound)
