British Biotech Plc moved to reassure its shareholders on Thursday after the surprise resignation of finance director James Noble.
"It is a smoooth transition and we believe we have a broad and strong management team," chief executive Keith McCullagh said in a telephone interview with Reuters.
"We have had a number of talks with our major shareholders and they are very confident about what's happening, as are our two brokers," he added.  
News of Noble's resignation, as the company prepares to launch its first products, came as a complete surprise to analysts who watch the company closely.
However McCullagh said Noble "has been considering his future for some time but his decision has only happened this week." He denied suggestions of tension at the top of the company, saying "it is an amicable departure."
McCullagh praised Noble's contribution to developing the business, which has gone from being a small research operation to stand on the brink of entering the FT-SE 100, saying he had "raised in excess of 300 million stg for the further development of the business and taken the major responsibility for developing relations with shareholders."
Noble has not yet taken another post, but McCullagh said he was considering a number of opportunities.
Some analysts believe Noble, who is 37, may want to use his skills in the kind of start-up operation which British Biotech was a few years ago rather than in the large international business it will become if its major drugs, notably cancer treatment Marimastat, succeed.
"His interests and skills are in corporate finance and investor relations and the management of that phase of growth. That is what he likes to do," McCullagh said.
He added that Noble's replacement would be "a more traditional finance director than we have had in the past."
The company would be using headhunters to find someone with "strong international operating experience for a major company which has a range of subsidiaries and which is building revenues and profits."
The chief executive said the decision on Thursday to name chief accountant and company secretary Anthony Weir as finance director of the group's UK operating subsidiary, British Pharmaceuticals Ltd, was to "emphasise that our financial management is continuing smoothly and soundly."
He also took the opportunity to deny a suggestion in the Daily Mail newspaper that British Biotech, which raised 143 million stg in a rights issue last year, could return to the markets for further funding.
"We have just under 200 million stg in cash reserves and that is a considerable amount of money," said McCullagh, adding that it had sufficient funds to commercialise its lead products.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
