Cambridge Antibody Technology Group Plc (CAT) said late on Wednesday that it expected to forge a major genetics alliance in the next 12 months.
In an interview with Reuters, chief executive officer David Chiswell said a link would bring together CAT's ability to use the body's own defenses against disease with the thousands of potential disease targets being unlocked by work to crack the genetic code.
"We will do at least one major new deal which will acquire targets...in the next 12 months," Chiswell said.
There has been speculation that CAT, which hopes to float on the stock exchange before the end of March, could forge a link with SmithKline Beecham Plc, which has established a strong position in breaking the genetic code, or genome, through a link with Human Genome Sciences.
But Chiswell declined to be drawn on the identity of any likely partner.
"It will be a genomics-element deal," he said. "Whether it's with a genomics firm or whether its with a pharmaceutical company with access to genomics we are leaving in the air."
CAT is pioneering work in human antibodies, which are produced by cells in the immune system to help combat invading substances like viruses and bacteria. Scientists believe antibodies could be used like missiles to target drugs exactly where they are needed in the body.
Other companies, like Britain's Celltech Group Plc, have concentrated on developing mice antibodies. Chiswell said CAT has effectively "captured" the hundreds of millions of variations in antibodies which the human body produces to protect itself.
CAT, which grew out of work conducted by the Medical Research Council, already licenses its technology to major companies including Genentech Inc, Eli Lilly &amp; Co chemicals  and Pfizer Inc.
Chiswell said CAT's techniques allow companies to test for potential antibody targets in a matter of days rather than up to six months with other methods.
"You give them a huge benefit in trying to get a handle on the function of any particular gene sequence...(perhaps) a ten- or a hundred-fold improvement in productivity in that particular activity."
But Chiswell has ambitious goals for CAT's own drug development programme, which is still in its infancy. CAT hopes to raise 30 to 35 million stg through its flotation, valuing it at 85 to 100 million stg. CAT plans to use the funds to develop over the next two years to the point where it can "put three or four new clinical programmes in place every year from 2000."
CAT is developing a human antibody drug with potential against rheumatoid arthritis with Germany's BASF AG, which is expected to start clinical trials in the next few months. A similar drug could be targeted against Crohn's disease, a poorly treated illness in the small intestine.
Both would compete directly with mouse antibody products being developed by Celltech and Centocor Inc of the United States, but Chiswell said CAT's product should prove to be more easily tolerated by the human body. Other programmes include drugs to improve the success of operations for detached retina and glaucoma, and Chiswell said CAT hoped to have antibody drugs for cancer and obesity in the clinic in 1998 or 1999.
--London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
