A buoyant SmithKline Beecham Plc played down talk of another mega-merger on Tuesday after posting a bumper set of profits for 1996 and unveiling a raft of new drug projects.
Pre-tax profits at the Anglo-U.S. group surged 14 percent to 1.545 billion pounds ($2.48 billion) last year, towards the lower end of analysts' forecasts, while sales climbed 13 percent to 7.93 billion pounds.
The company said it would have done even better but for the strong pound, which cut fourth-quarter pre-tax profits by 35 million pounds and the full-year figure by around 29 million.
Shareholders were rewarded with a 25 percent rise in the annual dividend to 17.85 pence, while shares climbed 14-1/2 pence to 896-1/2 pence in late afternoon trading.
Chief executive Jan Leschly said the results were a vindication of the company's strategy, including the move into gene-based drug discovery, high investment in research and development and the 1994 acquisition of Sterling Healthcare, which boosted sales of over-the-counter drugs.
"Our strategy is working," Leschly told reporters. In an echo of the independent line consistently taken by British rival Zeneca Group Plc, he added: "We feel we have the size that is big enough to compete and at the same time keep double-digit sales growth."
Underlining SmithKline Beecham's strength, he said five new drugs, all with potential to sell between 300 and 500 million pounds a year, had gone into late-stage clinical trials.
SmithKline Beecham is frequently touted as a potential merger candidate, not least because of the ambitions and track record of its management.
But Leschly, who presided over a spending spree by the group in 1994, ruled out any merger that did not boost the drug pipeline.
And he criticised the rationale behind last year's fusion of Swiss groups Ciba-Geigy AG and Sandoz AG as an example of scale without underlying growth. "If Novartis is going to be successful, it has to be based on products in the pipeline. It doesn't help just to make it bigger," Leschly said.
SmithKline's own prescription drug sales rose 14 percent to 4.76 billion pounds, with growth once again fuelled by products launched within the last five years.
Antibiotic Augmentin and fast-growing anti-depressant Paxil/Seroxat were the biggest selling treatments, both helped by new formulations and indications.
Sales of Augmentin rose four percent to 868 million pounds, while those of Paxil, which competes with Eli Lilly &amp; Co's blockbuster anti-depressant Prozac, rose 42 percent to 706 million pounds.
Finance director Hugh Collum told Reuters that Paxil, which is also prescribed for panic attacks, was likely to be the group's biggest seller by the end of the year, chasing Prozac's $2.3 billion annual sales hard.
At consumer healthcare, which sells a raft of products including Aquafresh toothpaste, health drink Horlicks and over-the-counter digestive drug Tagamet, sales jumped 17 percent. Anti-smoking patches and chewing gum Nicoderm and Nicorette were star performers, clocking up combined sales of 221 million pounds in their first year on sale.
Collum said diagnostics business Clinical Laboratories might now be back on track after running into trouble over changes in U.S. reimbursement rules. He added that a dispute with the U.S. government over alleged overcharging was likely to be resolved in the next couple of months. ($1=.6227 Pound)
