Anglo-U.S. drugs group SmithKline Beecham Plc said on Tuesday that it expected anti-depressent Paxil/Seroxat to take over as its best-selling drug by the end of this year.
In a telephone interview with Reuters finance director Hugh Collum said it was probable that Paxil/Seroxat "will be the biggest selling product by the end of this year."Sales of the drug, which competes with Eli Lilly &amp; Co's Prozac, jumped 42 percent last year to 706 million stg, gaining ground on SmithKline's current top seller, antibiotic Augmentin.  
"The added indication of panic disorder gives us added uniqueness" in comparison with Prozac, said Collum. Although he declined to give sales targets for Paxil, he said "we are very optimistic" and noted that Prozac sales were in excess of $2 billion a year.
The finance director also highlighted the Havrix hepatitis A vaccine, Hycamtin for ovarian cancer and anti-emetic Kytril as potential strong growth products looking ahead, together with combination vaccines like Infanrix.  
SmithKline does not expect drugs to flow from its DNA research link with Human Genome Sciences (HGS) until after the turn of the century, Collum said. But he noted the licensing arrangements on DNA-based drugs already in place with major competitors including Merck &amp; Co and Schering-Plough Corp and added "we are very optimistic. Looking back I think it was a very good investment decision."
Collum said he was "really very pleased" at the reduction in the group's stubbornly high debt levels, which came down to 1.64 billion stg at the end of 1996 from around 1.8 billion at the start of the year.  
However, he said that with capital expenditure expected to total around 550 million stg this year, debt levels would only "come down a bit" in 1997.
He said operating margins would continue to be affected by high research and development spending and marketing costs related to over-the-counter products.
Collum said he hoped the Clinical Laboratories operation, which has been hit by changes in U.S. reimbursement rules for diagnostic tests, was "back on track."
"We hope so. On the other hand there are still pressures on it. It is the third biggest in the U.S, we have a good geographical spread but it is still difficult," Collum said.
--London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
