Fast-developing vaccine discovery group Peptide Therapeutics Plc said on Tuesday it planned to target North America in its quest for further alliances.
In a telephone interview with Reuters following the announcement of full-year results the group's new chief executive John Brown said "what we want is big pharmaceutical companies andd the biggest concentration is in North Amercica."
Peptide said on Tuesday that Alan Goodman would step down as chief executive to spearhead the group's assault on North America.  
Peptide already has major deals with SmithKline Beecham Plc and Medeva Plc under its belt. It agreed in January to develop vaccines using Medeva's expertise in creating non-injectable drugs and earlier this month licensed its portfolio of allergy vaccines to SmithKline Beecham.
Despite these high profile agreements, which have seen Peptide shares soar this year, Brown said there was still plenty in the cupboard to attract new partners. He said there was "huge potential for our technology platforms," which include methods for discovering new vaccines and protease inhibitors, a class of drugs which help stop viruses from reproducing.  
Brown said the company would also be interested in finding partners to help develop early stage vaccines against Meningitis B and Respiratory Syncitial Virus (RSV), a breathing disorder which affects young children. Peptide is also looking at using peptides against rheumatoid arthritis and multiple sclerosis, and at using its vaccine technology for animal health.
Brown , said that Peptide, which floated on the stock market in November 1995, was now changing gear. "We are entering the third phase of the company. Phase one was the venture capital, pre-flotation stage and in phase two we built up the company and established a solid base."  
Peptide has built its Cambridge, England, headquarters up in the past 12 months to 77 staff from 28, and Brown said this could move to "between 90 and 100 over the next year."
Brown, who has relinquished the finance director's post to become chief executive, said the company was in a strong cash position, with 27.4 million stg of cash on its books.
"The burn rate may increase marginally this year to seven or eight million stg" from 6.5 million in 1996, Brown added.
--London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
