British drugs group Medeva Plc announced a strong rise in underlying profits on Wednesday and stressed its growing Americanisation with a decision to seek a listing on the New York Stock Exchange.
Pre-tax profits before exceptional items rose 31 percent to 103.5 million pounds ($167.4 million) in 1996, and shareholders were rewarded with a 20 percent rise in the dividend to 4.8 pence per share.
Medeva's shares, which have enjoyed a solid run this year, rose three pence to 283 pence in morning trading.
Headline profits were hit by an expected 65 million pound charge for last year's acquisition of the U.S. assets of defunct British group Fisons from Rhone Poulenc Rorer Inc.
Products from the business, based in Rochester, New York, helped to fuel a 30 percent rise in Medeva's sales last year to 332 million pounds.
However, analysts expressed some concern over slowing growth rates for Medeva's top-selling and most profitable drug Methylphenidate, which is used to control attention deficit disorder in children and young adults.
Sales rose 20 percent to 108 million pounds, but this was a marked slowdown from the previous year and Medeva warned that it faced increased competition in the tightly-controlled U.S. market.
The Rochester acquisition helped push the proportion of Medeva's operating profits contributed by U.S. operations to 86 percent last year from 79 percent, with sales increasing to 69 percent from 62 percent.
In a sign of its growing emphasis on the United States, Medeva announced that all its U.S. businesses would operate under the name Medeva Pharmaceuticals, and said it would switch its American Depositary Receipt (ADR) listing to the prestigious Wall Street New York Stock Exchange from the smaller American Stock Exchange.
Finance director Garry Watts told Reuters the decision reflected the strength of their American business and the fact that around 35 percent of Medeva shares were held in the United States.
"I think it is time that we were on the big board," he said.
Chief executive Bill Bogie said Medeva, which specialises in acquiring existing businesses and products, now had "a fully integrated sales force" in the United States.
He said the current force totalled 264 part- and full-time staff, but added that "the structure is there to grow to a thousand if you want to."
The impact of the restructured U.S. operation was already being felt by the Rochester products, Bogie said. Sales of the ten products totalled $77 million in the first six months of Medeva's ownership, compared to $100 million in the whole of 1995.
One of the strongest performers was appetite inhibitor Ionamin, used to treat obesity, although Medeva said sales slowed significantly at the end of 1996 following the launch of American Home Products Corp's rival Redux.
Nomura analyst Nick Woolf said the mood of an analysts' meeting with Medeva, which has fallen in and out of favour as investors struggled to understand its unique strategy, was "really quite positive."
"Especially with the Rochester products, where they have got some quite dynamic ideas in terms of sales and marketing, so that is quite exciting," Woolf said.
Outside the United States, Bogie said he was still interested in building up Medeva's position in Italy and Germany, but declined to say if he had acquisitions in mind. And he stressed Medeva's growing links with the biotech industry as a potent source of future products to sell via Medeva's expanding infrastructure. ($ = 0.618 British Pounds)
