British-based drugs group Medeva Plc said on Wednesday that the structure was now in place for further growth in the U.S. market, where the bulk of its sales and profits are made.
In a telephone interview with Reuters after publication of results for 1996, chief executive Bill Bogie said the U.S.-based Rochester business, bought last year from Rhone Poulenc Rorer Inc, was being turned into the group's "flagship."  
In a sign of its growing emphasis on the U.S. market, Medeva announced that all its U.S. operations would operate under the name Medeva Pharmaceuticals, and declared its intention of switching its American Depositary Receipt (ADR) listing to the New York Stock Exchange.
Bogie said the group now had "a fully integrated sales force" in the U.S. "This is very important progress. Behind that you can get a national sales force, and you can add to that when you like." He said added that the current sales force totalled 264 part- and full-time staff, but added that "the structure is there to grow to a thousand if you want to."  
After the acquistion of Rochester, which came with a portfolio of ten products, the proportion of operating profits contributed by U.S. operations rose to 86 percent last year from 79 percent, with sales increasing to 69 percent from 62 percent.
Bogie said he was "very encouraged" by the performance of the 10 Rochester products, with sales totalling $77 million in the six months of Medeva's ownership compared to $100 million in the whole of 1995. One of the strongest performers was appetite repressent Ionamin, used to treat obesity, although Medeva said sales slowed significantly at the end of 1996 following the launch of American Home Products Corp's rival Redux.  
Bogie said he expected to see "significant and sustained growth" from the Rochester products this year as the products emerged from relative neglect.
Finance director Garry Watts told Reuters that the decision to seek a New York Stock Exchange listing in the next two weeks reflected the strength of the U.S. business and the fact that around 35 percent of Medeva shares were held in the U.S.
"I think it is time that we were on the big board," he said.
Outside the U.S, Medeva is still interested in building up its position in Italy and Germany, although Bogie declined to comment on whether it had acquisitions in view.
The company said its French business had now achieved critical mass and become profitable following the addition of certain Rhone Poulenc assets there. The group has also enhanced its presence in Switzerland and Spain in the past 18 months.
Bogie said Medeva would also consider adding a sixth therapeutic category to the list of central nervous sytem, respiratory, vaccines, hospital products and gastroenterology.
"And we have opportunites in biotech where we are seen increasingly as a company that understands biotech," he said. Medeva has alliances with Chiroscience Group Plc, Peptide Therapeutics Plc and ML Laboratories Plc.
Bogie said Medeva continued to see behaviour-controlling drug Methylphenidate as a "long-term opportunity" despite the likelihood of increased competition this year from rival products.
The drug, given largely to children and young adults, continues to be the main profit engine for Medeva, andd saw sales rise 25 percent last year to 108 million stg.
--London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
