A rapid deterioration in Britain's science base is putting a question mark over future investment in the country's world-beating pharmaceutical industry, according to major companies.
Two of the biggest domestic players, Glaxo Wellcome Plc and SmithKline Beecham Plc, have issued veiled warnings that unless a rapid decline in the quality of graduate training and basic education is reversed they will be forced to site increasing amounts of research abroad.
"We may be looking at the demise of yet another historically successful industry," George Poste, SmithKline Beecham's chairman of research and development (R&amp;D), told Reuters. "I don't see how any society that does not keep up (scientifically) can become anything other than a second-tier nation. It is quite stunning and it is just not seen here."
At the root of concerns is the drive over the past 10 years to inflate the number of 18-year-olds going through higher education, which the companies say is stretching resources and forcing standards down across the board.
Michael Elves, Glaxo Wellcome's director of scientific and educational affairs, said that although the company could cream off the brightest of Britain's graduates, they arrived with disappointing levels of numeracy, literacy and computer skills.
Even more alarming for the skill-intensive industry is the lack of basic laboratory experience due to clapped out, antiquated equipment and sheer pressure of numbers. SmithKline's Poste said the need for "remedial training" of up to two years was acting as a hidden tax on the industry, which could add to the pressure to site future investment in the United States or the increasingly competitive Asian economies.
FIRMS INVEST HEAVILY IN SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH
Both Glaxo Wellcome and SmithKline have invested huge sums in Britain. Glaxo spent more than 700 million pounds ($1.13 billion) on its research centre at Stevenage, north of London, while SmithKline has poured 256 million pounds into facilities to be opened in April at its Harlow site to the east of the capital.
Poste said the investment was "an act of faith" that was in danger of not being repeated. SmithKline Beecham has already shifted its microbiology operations to the United States because of a lack of relevant skills, and there are fears that other key areas could follow.
"For our survival it makes sense to put our resources in the place where we can find the best," added Glaxo's Elves. "For a long time the UK science base was of high status and supplied what we needed, a pool of highly qualified world class scientists and technologists, but one has doubts now."
A larger slice of Glaxo's academic collaboration budget already goes abroad, reaching 27 percent last year from five percent in 1988/89.
The industry, which invests more than two billion pounds a year on R&amp;D, roughly equal to its trade surplus with the rest of the world, is sensitive to charges of special pleading.
PHARMACUETICALS - A 'SUNRISE' INDUSTRY IN BRITAIN
Peter Fellner, chief executive of the biotech company Celltech Group Plc, said: "We don't have too many sunrise industries, and we should make a fuss of those we do have. Pharmaceuticals and biotech is one area where we have done extremely well compared with other European nations."
Industry figures show that five of the current top twenty best-selling drugs internationally were discovered and developed in British laboratories, and Britain accounts for the lion's share of Europe's biotech industry.
While Britain's research eminence is under threat, the job of drug discovery is increasingly complex. Information technology, high-speed screening of chemical entities, robotics and the evaluation of genetic factors behind disease are revolutionising research. Zeneca Group Plc's director of research and development Peter Doyle said "the qualities demanded of people in new drug discovery are very much greater than when I joined 30 years ago. We expect a formidable array of skills and the ability to take on a whole lot of new skills."
POLITICIANS BLAMED FOR INDIFFERENCE
The big three companies all point the finger at indifference among politicians and a deterioration in higher education, which they say is suffering from a fall in funding per student and declining entrance standards as well as equipment shortages.
"University research conditions are appalling," said Glaxo Wellcome's Elves. "The present system was designed for five to eight percent of the elite 18-year-olds and is now being forced to take 30 percent. It can't work."
Poste, Elves and Doyle said funding needed to be more elitist, with costly equipment and laboratory training reserved for a core of excellence rather than being spread thinly. The companies hope for progress on the issue through the government-sponsored Dearing review of higher education, which is due to report later this year.
Glaxo Wellcome has proposed the creation of two-tier science degrees. Two-year bachelor degrees in scientific theory would be followed by specialised masters' courses providing practical training for smaller numbers.
Another issue the companies want addressed is the lack of courses for skilled technicians, which Zeneca's Doyle said had worsened with the conversion of the more vocational polytechnics to universities.
And they said action needed to be taken at schools. Science subjects have failed to keep up with a boom in numbers of students taking Advanced Levels, the passport to university entrance. Glaxo's Elves said the national curriculum "is too restrictive and divorces everything from reality."
"Success in science is not that different to success in sport," said SmithKline's Poste. "It requires great discipline and there are premier leagues and other leagues. If Britain wants to play in the premier league...somebody has got to grasp the nettle." ($1=.6173 Pound)
