Glaxo Wellcome Plc reported an 18 percent jump in 1996 pre-tax profit on Thursday but said it faced two lean years after its biggest-selling drug Zantac loses its U.S. patent in July.
Pre-tax profits at the world's number one prescription drugs company climbed to 2.964 billion pounds ($4.8 billion) from 2.505 billion, in the middle of analysts' expectations.
Sales rose nine percent to 8.341 billion pounds and shareholders were rewarded with a 13 percent rise in the dividend to 34.0 pence.
Despite a forecast of flat profits for 1997 and 1998 as a result of an anticipated plunge in sales of ulcer treatment Zantac, the group's shares ended the day 11-1/2 pence higher at 10.48 pounds, recovering from early falls.
Analysts said they were encouraged by the performance from the group's management, which is confident it can ride out the collapse of Zantac, the best-selling drug on which Glaxo built its international fortune.
Glaxo boldly predicted a return to double-digit sales growth in 1999, pinning its hopes on drugs for AIDs, asthma and migraine and promising 20 new product launches over the next four years.
SocGen's director of equity research, Paul Diggle, said Glaxo Wellcome had gone a long way to answering the question of whether it was "a becalmed giant that through patent expiries is going to be hard-pressed to grow...or a serious growth player which faces a bit of a dip."
BZW analyst Steve Plag added: "We think that by the end of 1998 Glaxo Wellcome will be one of the strongest drug companies in the industry."
Sales of Zantac slipped 14 percent last year as competition began to bite around the world but at 1.931 billion pounds they continued to make it the world's biggest-selling drug, a spot it has held since 1986.
The company said sales of Zantac in the U.S. market, which topped one billion pounds last year, could plunge by up to 80 percent in the first year of full competition.
"The tough period is mid-1997 to mid-1998, when Zantac will come under severe generic pressure in the U.S.," deputy chairman and chief executive Sir Richard Sykes told Reuters.
But he added: "If you take Zantac out, we have a 6.4 billion sterling business growing at 14 percent. That underlying growth is a very clear indication of the strength of the group going forward."
He said sales of Zantac fell by 324 million pounds last year, while a portfolio of newer products launched since 1990 saw sales rise by 650 million pounds to 2.0 billion pounds.
The group's top performers last year included its rejuvenated HIV and AIDs treatments, whose sales doubled to nearly 500 million pounds.
Retrovir and Epivir are cornerstones of new cocktails of drugs that have shown startling success in reducing virus levels, giving Glaxo a 57 percent share of the fast-expanding AIDs market.
Other big sellers included asthma drugs Serevent and Flixotide, which notched up combined sales of more than 500 million pounds, and migraine drug Imigran, which saw sales in the U.S. market alone leap by 69 percent last year.
Sales of the group's second-biggest product, herpes treatment Zovirax, which has already lost most of its key patents, were steady at 812 million pounds.
Despite persistent speculation that Glaxo Wellcome, formed after Glaxo's nine billion pound acquisition of Wellcome in 1995, would hit the acquisition trail again when debt levels allowed, Sykes said the pressure for mega-mergers had dissipated.
"The bigger companies get, the more difficult it is to buy them or merge, so the way forward will be much more looking at regional and local opportunities and building these as opportunities come along," he added. ($ = 0.620 British Pounds)
