The world's biggest prescription drugs company, Glaxo Wellcome Plc, announced an 18 percent leap in pre-tax profits Thursday but said life would be tougher after its best-selling drug loses its U.S. patent in July.
Pre-tax profits climbed to 2.964 billion pounds ($4.8 billion) from 2.505 billion ($4.04 billion), in the middle of analysts' expectations. Sales rose 9 percent to 8.341 billion pounds ($13.45 billion), and shareholders were rewarded with a 13 percent rise in the dividend to 34.0 pence.
Sales of Glaxo's gastric ulcer treatment Zantac fell 14 percent last year, but at 1.931 billion pounds ($3.1 billion) it continued to be the world's biggest-selling drug, a spot it has held since 1986. Zantac has single-handedly transformed Glaxo, which merged with rival Wellcome in 1995, into a huge international player.
Sales of its second-biggest seller, herpes treatment Zovirax, which has already lost most of its key patents, were steady at 812 million pounds ($1.3 billion).
Glaxo warned that the best it could hope for over the next two years would be to "at least maintain" its profits at the 1996 level.
"The tough period is mid-1997 to mid-1998 when Zantac will come under severe generic pressure in the U.S.," Deputy Chairman and Chief Executive Sir Richard Sykes said in a telephone interview.
But he added: "If you take Zantac out we have a 6.4 billion pound ($10.3 billion) business growing at 14 percent. That underlying growth is a very clear indication of the strength of the group going forward."
Sykes noted that sales of Zantac fell by 324 million pounds ($523 million) last year, while a portfolio of newer products launched since 1990 saw sales rise by 650 million pounds ($1.05 billion) to 2.0 billion pounds ($3.2 billion).
"Our responsibility is to grow those new products to maintain these two (sales) lines in balance as much as possible. It is a balancing act," he said.
The best performers included Glaxo Wellcome's rejuvenated HIV and AIDS treatments. Retrovir and Epivir are at the cornerstone of new cocktails of drugs that have shown startling success in reducing the levels of the virus in the blood to virtually undetectable levels, giving Glaxo Wellcome the lion's share of a rapidly expanding market.
"Today we have 57 percent of the AIDS market and I don't see why we won't continue to be a very major player," Sykes said.
Other big sellers included asthma drugs Serevent and Flixotide and migraine drug Imigran, whose U.S. sales leaped by 69 percent last year.
Despite persistent speculation that Glaxo Wellcome will get onto the acquisition trail again as soon as its debt levels allow, Sykes said there had been a clear dissipation of the pressures for mega-mergers. He said Glaxo Wellcome's future expansion was likely to be "incremental."
"The pressures of the early 1990s have changed somewhat in the big markets. The bigger companies get, the more difficult it is to buy them or merge, so the way forward will be much more looking at regional and local opportunities and building these as opportunities come along," he said.
