Britain's Courtaulds Textiles Plc on Tuesday reported a first-half loss after one-off charges and said that most of the 30 to 35 million pounds it plans to spend on restructuring will fall in the second half of 1996.
Courtaulds made a pre-tax loss after exceptional charges of 8.5 million pounds ($13.26 million) compared with profit of 6.4 million in the first half last year. Excluding exceptional charges, pre-tax profit fell to 600,000 pounds from 10.3 million.
In a telephone interview with Reuters, the group's new chief executive, Colin Dyer, said his aim is to move ahead quickly on reorganisation, which includes further disposals and creation of four product-led divisions, and get back to a "clean set of results."
The decline in profits was mainly in its fabrics division and resulted from weak demand in the U.S. and in continental European for lace, as well as reorganisation costs in Britain.
Dyer said the company is to shed jobs in Britain and western Europe and increase production in low wage economies, especially in Asia. "The most important thing is that we are attacking our problems and putting them right quickly," Dyer said.
Reorganisation into four clear divisions will allow Courtaulds Textiles to focus on its strengths and relieve managers of the burden of "firefighting," Dyer said.
Courtaulds has sold around half its hit list of a dozen problem businesses, with three disposals announced last week.
Dyer said in total the disposals will account for 160 million pounds of turnover, and those so far announced "must be getting towrds half." Talks on "one or two" remaining sales are "quite advanced," he added.
Courtaulds took a 9.1 million stg restructuring charge in the six months to June, and expects to generate cost-savings of 10 to 13 million pounds a year by 1998. Dyer said benefits "will be kicking in a bit this year, but significantly in 1998."
He declined to give exact forecasts for 1996 as a whole, but added that analysts' profit forecasts "are not far away on the full year." Analysts are predicting full-year pre-tax profit of between 34.0 and 40.6 million stg before exceptional items.
He also would not be drawn on whether the company will be able to continue to maintain its dividend. "We will take that half by half," he said. It held its interim dividend at 5.2p.
Dyer also signaled the group's intention of "moving the cost base from Britain and western Europe to lower cost manufacturing" and warned that opposition Labour Party plans to introduce a minimum wage in Britain would make matters worse.
"There will be job losses," Dyer said, but would not give further details. Courtaulds currently has operations in Britain, France, Germany and Spain, as well as Morocco and Turkey.
Dyer said the Far East offers clear advantages in terms of labour costs and access to raw materials. The group already operates in the Philippines and Thailand, where it makes stretch fabrics.
Turning to individual markets, Dyer said the U.S. is "a mixed bag," with fabrics "very strong" but lace "bumping along the bottom". "Britain is quite strong. All you read in the press about the feelgood factor is right," he said.
"The European scene is mixed. Germany and Italy are still poor but lace is showing signs of recovery in the second half," Dyer said, adding that "France is the deadest" market, with consumer spending flat. ($1=.6412 Pound)
