British speciality chemicals group Laporte Plc on Monday reported higher-than-expected annual profits, evidence that its recovery was firmly on track.
Laporte, whose value tumbled in November 1995 after a shock profits warning, said pretax profit before exceptional items rose 12 percent to 127.0 million pounds ($203 million) last year, beating analysts' forecasts of between 114.3 million and 124.0 million.
After exceptional charges, pre-tax profits were 78.7 million pounds, compared with 24.5 million in 1995.
Shareholders, who saw the dividend frozen at the half-year stage, received a five percent rise in the full-year payout to 24.25 pence.
The results provided an early boost to Laporte's shares, which were up 18 pence at 686-1/2 in mid-morning trade after touching a high of 696 pence.
Laporte, whose products supply a wide range of customers including the drugs, electronics and food industries, has undergone a major shake-up since chief executive Jim Leng took the helm in October 1995.
Leng, forced to issue a profit warning within weeks of taking charge, introduced sweeping management changes and launched a two-year restructuring programme which included selling around one fifth of Laporte's business.
In December, Laporte sold most of its European adhesives business, including Evode, to France's Elf Atochem for 110 million pounds, and Leng told Reuters that it had received "some initial expressions of interest" for its U.S. and Italian adhesives operations.
Laporte, which started 1996 with debts of 180 million pounds on its books, ended the year with net cash of 13 million pounds, putting it in a strong position to start buying businesses in more proftiable sectors like electronic chemicals and performance materials.
But Leng said it did not intend to rush into purchases, commenting: "It is not burning a hole in our pocket. We have got a business which is growing and we will carefully and analytically decide what we are going to do."
Leng said Laporte intended to take positions in international growth sectors which could not be entered easily by new competitors.
He added that Laporte was on target to achieve annual cost savings of 10 million pounds by the end of 1997 as a result of the shake-up of its operations in which 34 percent of its operating units were sold last year.
"It has been a good all-round performance.. every business division made positive cash flow contributions," Leng said.
Profit margins improved to 12.9 percent overall in 1996 from 11.8 percent in 1995.
"Our target is to get closer to 15 percent and we made some good progrss on that," Leng said, adding that he wanted to reach a position where "no business has less than 10 percent with the group at an average of 15 percent."
"We won't do that overnight and we won't get there this year," he added.
Leng expects raw material prices to be fairly stable this year but said sterling's strength "will dilute our progress".
"If fourth-quarter rates applied all year, it would affect profits and sales by 50 million and five million pounds, respectively," he said. "It is a big challenge for UK Plc." ($ = 0.625 British Pounds)
