The value of one of Britain's largest biotech companies plunged on Tuesday after regulators said they were unwilling to approve one of its lead drugs.
Shares in Scotia Holdings Plc dropped 23 percent, or 132 1/2 pence, to 437 1/2 pence after it said Britain's Medicine Controls Agency (MCA) was not yet willing to give marketing approval to Tarabetic, a drug aimed at relieving sensory impairment in diabetics.
More than 100 million pounds ($160.5 million) was wiped off the company's market capitalisation, valuing it at around 337 million pounds by the close of trading.
The MCA's Committee on the Safety of Medicines is believed to have questioned whether trials at 12 different centres showed Tarabetic, derived from Evening Primrose Oil, was sufficiently effective.
Although Scotia put a brave face on the announcement, saying that another MCA committee, the Medicines Commission, could still decide in its favour, the news added to market fears that the company would be forced into a rights issue in unfavourable circumstances.
Analysts said Scotia, which is developing a portfolio of novel drugs based on fatty acids and lasers, has around 18 months of cash left on its books.
The company's shares slipped sharply last month after Panmure Gordon analyst John Savin issued a sell note, warning that Scotia needed a major refinancing. He said then that "the success of this will depend on the outcome of the regulatory review of Tarabetic."
The diabetes product had been expected to gain marketing approval and go on sale in Britain in the second half of last year.
Panmure Gilbert analyst Robin Gilbert said he wasn't surprised by the rejection, adding that the drug had "been at the approval stage for much too long."
Gilbert said Scotia was "by no means a one product company," but Tarabetic had been one of its highest profile products. "Investors have been more hopeful about this one, and indeed the company has encouraged that," he said.
"Diabetes is an exceedingly difficult market, where many have failed," Gilbert added.
However, one of Scotia's strongest supporters, Yamaichi International analyst Erling Refsum, said concerns were overdone. Refsum said that even stripping out sales assumptions for Tarabetic, the company was "at least" 50 percent below his current market valuation of around 500 million pounds.
Refsum said an update by the company on March 25 on its laser technology treatment for cancer, known as Foscan, "could completely restore all of the price drop we have seen."
Refsum believes that Foscan, which is about to start clinical trials in the U.S. for treatment of head and neck cancer, "could be worth the entire market capitalisation of the company as it stands."
Nomura analyst Nick Woolf said the current slump represented a good buying opportunity.
"If ever there was a good time to buy biotech companies, it was when they had a setback," Woolf said.
Woolf still believes Tarabetic could win approval and achieve sales of up to 120 million pounds a year. He predicted sales of Foscan of up to 280 million pounds a year.
Investors in Scotia are used to a bumpy ride. Analysts said the group's previous star product, anti-cancer drug EF13, has proved disappointing in clinical trials, while its existing nutritional and drug products are in very competitive segments. ($ = 0.623 British Pounds)
