British clothing group Courtaulds Textiles Plc signalled on Tuesday that it plans to shift much of its production to cheaper Asian markets as it battles to return to profitability.
The company, which is behind a host of famous brands including Gossard lingerie and Jockey underwear, refused to spell out details but said the shift will mean job losses in Britain and western Europe.
It is to spend up to 35 million pounds ($54 million) restructuring its business and create four product-led divisions.
Exceptional charges helped push Courtaulds Textiles to a pre-tax loss of 8.5 million pounds compared with a profit of 6.4 million in the first half last year. Excluding exceptional charges, pre-tax profit fell to 600,000 pounds from 10.3 million.
The depressed state of Britain's clothing industry is expected to be underlined on Wednesday when Courtaulds' rival Coats Viyella Plc, which unveiled a shock 50 million pound restructuring charge in March, reveals its interim results.
Shares in Courtaulds Textiles closed five pence higher at 310p, but analysts were adopting a wait-and-see approach.
One analyst who asked not to be named said "...four or five years ago this was deemed the well-managed stock in the sector, the leading light." He added that Courtaulds is taking action late "...and they are paying the price for catching-up."
The group's new chief executive, Colin Dyer, said his aim is to move ahead speedily on reorganisation, which includes further disposals, and get back to a "clean set of results."
"The most important thing is that we are attacking our problems and putting them right quickly," said Dyer, who was appointed in June with a brief to shake-up the group.
He signalled his intention of "moving the cost base from Britain and western Europe to lower cost manufacturing," and warned that opposition Labour Party plans to introduce a minimum wage in Britain would make matters worse.
Dyer said the Far East offered clear advantages in terms of labour costs and access to raw materials. The group already operates in the Philippines and Thailand, where it makes stretch fabrics.
The decline in first-half profits was led by Courtaulds' fabrics division and resulted from weak demand in the U.S. and in continental European lace, as well as reorganisation costs.
Courtaulds has sold around half its hit list of a dozen problem businesses, with three disposals announced last week, and Dyer said talks on "one or two" of the remaining sales are "quite advanced."
Courtaulds took a 9.1 million pounds restructuring charge in the six months to June, and expects to generate cost-savings of 10 to 13 million pounds a year by 1998.
Dyer said benefits "will be kicking in a bit this year, but significantly in 1998."
He declined to give exact forecasts for 1996 as a whole, but added that analysts' profit forecasts "are not far away on the full year." Analysts are predicting full-year pre-tax profit of between 34.0 and 40.6 million pounds before exceptional items.
Most of the restucturing charge will hit second-half earnings. UBS analyst Chris Burbridge said the 30 to 35 million pound charge "was substantially greater than I'd anticipated." ($1=.6436 Pound)
