Britain's third-largest drugs company Zeneca Group Plc said on Tuesday that it broke a string of records in 1996, with sales topping five billion pounds ($8 billion) and profits surging above one billion pounds for the first time.
Pre-tax profits before exceptional charges rose 15 percent to 1.01 billion pounds, beating the most optimistic analysts' forecasts. After exceptional charges, pre-tax profit soared 58 percent to 975 million pounds.
Sales were up nine percent at 5.363 billion pounds, while the dividend was raised 13 percent to 35.0 pence per share.
Zeneca's booming share price broke briefly through the 19 pound barrier, touching a new record high of 19.38 pounds during the morning. However the stock, which has risen by around 40 percent in the past 12 months, was trading down 16-1/2 pence at 18.86 pounds later as analysts pondered their meeting with the group's management.
Chief executive David Barnes told Reuters the results showed the company was "in touch with" his ambitious target of doubling profits by the end of the century, but warned that spending on new products would restrain profits in the short term.
Last year Barnes set what he called "an inspirational target" of increasing earnings per share (eps) by an average of 15 percent between 1996 and 2000. Before exceptional items, eps rose 14 percent last year to a record 70.6 pence, and after exceptionals jumped by 90 percent to 67.8 pence.
The group's 13 percent rise in drug sales to 2.44 billion pounds dwarfed the six percent sales growth announced last week by its bigger rival Glaxo Wellcome Plc. Operating profits rose 10 percent.
Heart drug Zestril continued to be the group's best-selling product, with sales rising 10 percent despite increased competition. Sales of established prostate cancer treatment Zoladex jumped 31 percent, while newly-launched prostate treatment Casodex "exceeded expectations" with sales of 68 million pounds.
Sales at the agrochemical and seeds operations rose 10 percent to 1.68 billion pounds, while operating profits surged 56 percent to 224 million pounds thanks partly to sharply lower losses at seeds. Profits at the slimmed-down specialty chemicals arm also rose strongly, up 25 percent at 70 million pounds.
Barnes said Zeneca had a raft of new drugs and agrochemicals which "should be significant products by the time we come to 2001," when Zestril loses its patent protection.
He said Zeneca had won its highest ever number of new drug approvals last year, and announced that a new migraine drug, Zomig, won its first approval wordlwide in Britain on Monday.
Barnes said other promising products included the novel mild asthma tablet Accolate, which Zeneca said had sales of eight million pounds in its first few weeks of launch, schizophrenia treatment Seroquel and the fungicide Amistar.
The company expects its capital spending to rise above the 400 million pound level this year as it gears up for new production, while research and development spending is seen rising around 10 percent after topping 600 million pounds in 1996.
"In 1996 we essentially, through increased capital expenditure and R&amp;D, invested one billion pounds in the medium and long-term of the business, while making record profits of a billion pounds, generating cash and having an ungeared balance sheet," he told Reuters.
Barnes, whose contract as chief executive expires in 15 months time, would not rule out using the group's debt-free balance sheet to make a major acquisition.
"We are very alive to new product opportunities. We are alive to regional infill opportunities if they were to strengthen our business. If a good opportunity were to present itself by way of acquisition we would look at it, but here is no strategic imperative to do that. We have got strong organic growth," Barnes said. ($ = 0.623 British Pounds)
