The world's biggest business services group Rentokil Initial Plc announced sharp rises in 1996 sales and profits on Wednesday, but there were concerns that it relied heavily on newly-acquired BET for progress.
Rentokil Initial, formed last year through Rentokil's acrimonious takeover of British rival BET, said pre-tax profit jumped 48 percent to 318 million pounds ($505.8 million) while sales were up 168 percent at 2.34 billion pounds. The dividend rose 20.5 percent to 5.06 pence per share.
The results were restrained by a stronger pound, which took just over three million pounds off profits, and by a 16.4 million pound integration charge for BET. The charge included almost 1.5 million pounds paid to former BET chief executive John Clark, although the final payment is subject to a legal dispute.
Although profits were in line with analysts' forecasts, shares in the enlarged group dropped 5.6 percent, or 25 1/2 pence, in midafternoon trading to 432 1/2 pence.
Traders said there was disappointment at the performance of the core Rentokil operations, which failed to live up to their 14-year track record of delivering annual 20 percent sales and profits growth. Excluding BET, sales were up 15 percent and profits rose nine percent to 233.4 million pounds.
One trader said "they managed the 20 percent gain, although the contribution from BET is very substantial. People will be asking about their core businesses and wondering whether they would have made the grade without BET."
Chief executive Sir Clive Thompson admitted that "sales grew faster than profits for the first time" at the core business and accepted that managers had taken their eye off the Rentokil ball while integrating BET's 53 operations.
He noted that managers at one of the weakest performing divisions, Rentokil's famous UK pest control operations, had not moved as swiftly as usual to control costs when orders turned down.
"I'd suspect that was because management were focusing on other parts of the business.".
The company said it expected another integration charge in 1997 of "double digit millions, but not as high as 16 million pounds." It also warned that if sterling remained at current levels it would wipe 5 percent of its full-year profits.
Thompson told Reuters Financial Television that he did not expect any large acquisitions for the next two years while BET was digested, although he added that there was scope for "bolt-on" acquisitions in the core international businesses of hygiene and cleaning, pest control, security and textiles.
Sales of peripheral BET businesses are likely to be modest, totalling between 50 and 100 million pounds over the next year.
Rentokil Initial, whose services also include specialist waste disposal for hospitals and providing tropical plants for offices, also announced a two-for-one share split to make its stock more manageable for investors. The split is expected to take effect on May 16.
--London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
