International business services group Rentokil Initial Plc announced sharp rises in 1996 sales and profits on Wednesday, but there were concerns that the group relied heavily on newly-acquired BET for progress.
Rentokil Initial, formed last year through Rentokil's hostile takeover of rival BET, said pre-tax profit jumped 48 percent to 318 million pounds ($505.8 million) while sales were up 168 percent at 2.34 billion pounds.
The dividend rose 20.5 percent to 5.06 pence per share.
The results were at the bottom end of analysts' forecasts of between 317 and 335 million pounds, and shares in the company fell sharply in morning trading, trading down 5.7 percent or 26 1/2 pence to 431 1/2 pence.
Rentokil Initial, whose services include office cleaning, personnel, security, pest control and supplying plants, also announced a two-for-one share split.
It said the integration of BET, bought for 2.1 billion pounds, "had proceeded rapidly and successfully in line with plans."
However, excluding BET, sales were up 15 percent and profits rose nine percent to 233.4 million pounds, raising concerns that the company would not have lived up to its long-established reputation for delivering year-on-year earnings and sales growth of 20 percent without BET.
One trader said "they managed the 20 percent gain, although the contribution from BET is very substantial. People will be asking about their core businesses and wondering whether they would have made the grade without BET."
The company said the results had been affected by 16.4 million pounds of integration costs, focusing of management effort on BET's integration and adverse exchange rates.
Chief executive Sir Clive Thompson said he did not expect the company to make any more large acquisitions for the next two years while it integrated the 52 BET operations.
"I'd be very suprised to see us making major acquisitions for certainly under two years, and if we were to do so it would indicate that we had integrated the businesses extremely well," Thompson said.
However, Thompson said there were opportunities for "bolt-on acquisitions" in the core businesses of hygiene and cleaning, pest control and security "and I hope we'd be making those sorts of acquisitions."
Thompson said he expected to make a number of low-key disposals of BET operations over the next year.
"In the short term you'd expect to see a series, quite a number, of relatively small-sized disposals. In total terms over the next 12 months it might approach 50 to 100 million (pounds)," he said.
($ = 0.628 British Pounds)
