Britain's biggest textiles group Coats Viyella Plc announced a sharp fall in 1996 pre-tax profits on Thursday, reflecting continuing tough market conditions and the costs of an extensive reorganisation.
Pre-tax profits fell 42 percent to 94.4 million pounds ($150.8 million) last year, with a previously-announced 54.9 million pound reorganisation charge accounting for a large chunk of the decline.
But even excluding charges, profits slid eight percent as several key divisions, including the core thread operations, struggled to cope with poor demand and economic weakness in important markets including Europe, Brazil and Turkey.
Despite the drop in earnings Coats Viyella held its dividend payout per share steady at the 1995 level of 8.8 pence, even though this was well ahead of the group's earnings per share of just 6.7 pence.
Shares in Coats, whose products range from bedlinen to precision engineering components for mobile phones, rose 4 1/2 pence to 134 1/2 in late morning trading.
Over the past two years the stock has fallen 52 percent and underperformed the FTSE All Share index by 48 percent, according to Reuters 3000 data. The stock is currently 84 percent below its 1988 peak of 860 pence.
Neville Bain, who announced his intention to step down as chief executive of the group in May after nearly seven years, told Reuters the dividend payment was "a sign of strong confidence for 1997".
"The company is well placed to move ahead in 1997 and future years, although the extent of that does depend on some factors outside our control," including exchange rates and economic trends, said Bain.
Joining the growing chorus of complaints from British industry about the strong pound, Coats said the current level of sterling against the dollar could wipe between five and eight million pounds off pre-tax profits in 1997, while weak European currencies could hurt the competitiveness of British manufacturing.
A year ago the group announced a wide-ranging restructuring plan aimed at cutting costs and raising productivity, centred on the clothing, thread and home furnishings operations.
Bain said savings from the reorganisation were coming through faster than expected, with 12 million pounds notched up in 1996 and annual savings of at least 35 million anticipated by 1998.
The group's thread operations, which account for more than 40 percent of sales and over 50 percent of operating profit, reported a 10 percent slide in profits to 90.3 million pounds last year. Bain said the division, which supplies yarn and thread to the clothing, footwear and car industries, had seen a pick up in the last quarter.
Disruption from reorganising the clothing operation, which is a major supplier of Marks &amp; Spencer Plc, helped profits to fall 12 percent to 19.1 million pounds. Profits also fell at precision engineering, where volatile consumer electronics and automobile markets undermined strong sales growth.
An upturn in Britain's housing market helped to boost the home furnishings division, where operating profits rose 42 percent to 12.5 million pounds. Fashion retail, which includes the Jaeger and Viyella brands, also saw a solid performance.
Bain is to be replaced at the top by former McKechnie Plc chief executive Michael Ost, who is 52. "We agreed at the end of last year that this would be a good time to go," Bain said.
--London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717 ($ = 0.626 British Pounds)
