British textiles group Coats Viyella Plc is "well placed" for a recovery in profitablity, its retiring chief executive Neville Bain said on Thursday.
Bain told Reuters in an interview following publication of results that showed a sharp fall in 1996 profits: "We are poised for a period of growth from the base we have put in place." He added, "The company is well placed to move ahead in 1997 and future years, although the extent of that does depend on some factors outside our control," including exchange rates and economic trends.  
Bain said he felt now was the right time to stand down as chief executive after 6-1/2 years, and added that he hoped to take up other directorships and chairmanships.
"We agreed at the end of last year that this would be a good time to go," Bain said.
He said he would continue to be available to assist Coats Viyella. Bain said his successor, former McKechnie Plc chief executive Michael Ost, "has a very good track record, and he did not expect him to change the group's strategy.  
"This year's results, in difficult circumstances, are exactly in line with expectations and the trading statement that we made at the end of last year," said Bain. "Underlying profit is down by seven percent, which is a tad disappointing, but given the state of this industry that certainly would augur well in (comparison with) our peer group."
Bain said cost savings from the group's reorganisation, which led to charges of 54.9 million stg against 1996 profits, were flowing through faster than expected. Savings in 1996 totalled 12 million pounds against a prediction of 10 million stg.  
Bain said he was "confident" that savings of at least 35 million stg would be achieved in 1998.
He highlighted the performance of the group's home furnishings division, where operating profits rose 42 percent to 12.5 mllion stg, and the continued strength of fashion retail, which he said had built profits to 13.1 million stg in 1996 from around 2.0 million over the past five years.
But he said the performance of clothing, where profits fell 12 percent to 19.1 million stg, "was not satisfactory." He said the division had been affected by disruption from restructuring, which involves relocation of a number of operations.  
Bain said he was confident management "is doing the right things to secure greater profits into the future, but it is taking us a bit longer than anticipated." He added that group was looking for a "significant improvement" on the division's profit margins of between three and four percent.
The core threads division, where operating profits fell 10.4 percent to 90.3 million stg, had enjoyed a stronger fourth quarter after a weak first half, Bain said.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
