Shares in one of Britain's best-performing biotechnology stocks plunged on Friday after it announced that some trials linked to its main product could have been mishandled.
Scottish-based Shield Diagnostics Group Plc said parts of a U.S. clinical trial which it hopes will help prove that it has a blockbuster heart attack predictor on its hands had been mishandled and could produce "misleading conclusions."
Shares in Shield dropped 140 pence to 665 pence on the news. The stock had hit an all time high of 928 pence just ahead of the announcement, a gain of more than 560 percent since the start of the year.
The company is developing a diagnostic test for a blood-clotting agent, known as Activated Factor Twelve (AFT), which it hopes will be a much more accurate predictor of the likelihood of coronary heart disease and heart attacks than cholesterol levels.
Some analysts believe that the test is a potential blockbuster, which could easily overtake the $500 million a year spent on cholesterol tests.
Shield has been waiting for publication of a number of long-running surveys which are tracking the incidence of heart attacks and trying to establish links with different factors in the blood, including AFT.
A doctor involved in one major trial, the U.S. ARIC study, which has taken regular blood samples from 16,000 people over more than ten years, wrote to Shield on Thursday to say mishandling and storage of early blood samples could distort analysis of the results.
In an interview with Reuters, Shield's technical director Peter Foster said the company still expected to have test kits on the market this year.
"We don't see it as a problem at all and we will continue with our timetable for the commercialisation of the test," Foster said.
He said data from a British study of 3,000 individuals by researchers based at St Bartholomew's hospital in London "is there and getting stronger." Initial results from the St Bartholomew study published on February 21 added to "the body of consistent positive data from a number of clinical sites" which back the link between AFT and heart disease, Shield said.
At least one analyst however criticised the company for allowing its share price to race ahead when "they don't even know if the product correlates to a use that a regulatory authority would approve."
Thomas Geimer, biotechnology analyst at Henry Cooke Lumsden, added that "the product may be valid and be fine," but he said the problems with the U.S. trial showed the need for investors to be "very selective in this market."
