Specialty chemicals and minerals group English China Clays Plc (ECC) chief executive Dennis Rediker said on Monday the group had had "a fairly horrible year" in 1996, but was now placed to rebuild profitability.
In a telephone interview with Reuters, Rediker said "we have got a good understanding of the fundamentals of the business and put a management team in place that can take us to the next level of performance."  
Predicting a return to profitability in the first half of 1997 after posting a pre-tax loss of 42.9 million stg last year, Rediker also pledged to restore and improve on the group's historic margins in the core paper mineral and specialty chemicals operations.
He said management had "positioned the company to be able to have normal growth prospects," adding that "the proof will be in the pudding."
ECC, which provides kaolin and carbonates to paper manufacturers, said it was affected by "a background of severe volume decline in the paper market and the lowest point in the turnaround of the specialty chemicals business."  
Rediker said that profit margins in the European minerals business "held through 1996" with a strong recovery in the second half bringing the overall profit margin to 12.4 percent from 14.3 percent a year before. Operating profit fell 20 percent to 50 million stg.
However, weak paper markets and increased investments saw operating margins at the Americas/Pacific business drop 49 percent to $30.8 million, with profit margins dropping to 6.5 percent from 12.4 percent.  
Although he declined to give margin targets for the businesses, Rediker noted that "in the past we have had margins in the 12 to 18 percent range for Europe and nine to 13 percent for Americas/Pacific."
ECC is having to adjust to a switch from using higher margin kaolin, its main product, to lower margin calcium carbonates in paper production. Rediker said demand for kaolin for paper is likely to grow at only "one percent a year," although "it should be cash generative."
Rediker said other performance minerals for paints, ceramics and plastics had "good growth prospects."  
In specialty chemicals, whose customers also include the paper industry, operating profits fell 57 percent to $7.0 million, with profit margins declining to 2.5 percent from 6.0 percent.
Rediker said the business had been in decline "from 1995 to the middle of 1996." He added: "we have replaced all the management in that business and it is on a good trajectory."
Rediker said his aim was "to achieve industry norms in 1998," targeting profit margins of between 10 and 15 percent, which would exceed the division's previous best-ever performance of eight to nine percent.  
There has been speculation that ECC would sell the non-paper activities of its specialty chemicals operation Calgon.
Rediker said new managers at Calgon "were being effective at turning that around, and added that "all options" for its future were being looked at.
ECC said it was "likely" that 1996 marked the low point in its trading cycle. It said there had been some weakness in paper markets for minerals worldwide, but noted "a significant recovery" of mineral volumes to the north American paper industry.
A combined approach to selling minerals and chemicals to the paper industry was also helping to gain business, and the outlook for the performance minerals business was "encouraging," ECC said.
--London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
