British chemicals group Albright &amp; Wilson Plc said on Thursday that it planned to focus its business increasingly on emerging markets, with particular emphasis on South America, China and India.
"These are very important for the growth of Albright &amp; Wilson," chief executive Robin Paul told Reuters in an interview.
Paul, who steered the company back onto the stock market in 1995 after 17 years as part of Tenneco Inc, said expansion was likely to come through partnerships and the acquisition of majority stakes in partner companies where appropriate.
Last year Albright &amp; Wilson took a majority stake in an Indian partner, and is now stepping up its activities in phosphates and surfactants there. The company, which announced a 13.6 percent rise in 1996 pre-tax profits, also said it had appointed Gabriel Kow as president of its Asia Pacific operations. Kow joins the group from Glaxo Wellcome Plc.
"We continue to believe China is a very important region for Albright &amp; Wilson," said Paul, who said Kow had "a very good understanding of China and its markets."  
The company said 1996 produced "a satisfactory result in an environment that has offered little assistance in the various markets in which the group operates." Paul said rises in raw material prices, which added 40 million stg to costs in 1995, had stabilised, with just four million stg added to costs last year.
In the key phosphates business, which goes into products ranging from soft drinks to washing powders, sales rose eight percent to 361.1 million stg, including associate companies, but operating profits fell 7.5 percent to 47.0 million stg, with margins down to 13.0 percent from 15.2 percent.  
Albright &amp; Wilson is the world's largest producer of wet phophoric acid. Paul said phosphates had been affected by "a number of special factors" in 1996, including higher Chinese phosphorus prices and costs and distortions linked to capacity increases and refurbishment of plants in England and Mexico.
"These factors are largely behind us," said Paul. "Chinese phosphorous prices have started to come down compared to the middle of 1996." Demand was strong: "We are sold out in phosphates," he said.  
Paul said promised progress had been made in both the surfactants business, which supplies wetting and foaming agents for items like toiletries and detergents, and in specialty chemicals, whose products include flame retardants and chemicals for water treatment.
At surfactants operating profits leaped 76 percent to 14.1 million stg last year on sales of 309.0 million stg, with margins rising to 4.6 percent from 2.5 percent. Paul said the division was on target to achieve margins of between six and eight percent "by the end of this year."
At Specialties, where the group is targeting margins of 15 percent, operating profits rose 33 percent to 16.9 million stg on sales of 187.5 million, with margins improving to 9.0 percent from 6.6 percent.
Paul said the strength of sterling had little impact on 1996 results. In 1997 Paul noted that "some people are talking about a 10 percent (impact) on profits if these rates continue for the whole year," but he added that this did not take into account the company's efforts to contain costs and a beneficial impact from lower raw material prices.
The chief executive said the group was slightly ahead on its goal of generating 20 percent of sales from new products by 1998, noting the successful launch of a biocidem Tolcide THPS, during 1996.
Paul, who retires from the board in July, said the company wanted to "keep the option" of buying back shares. However he added "we believe we'll have other opportunites to use the strong balance sheet and cash flow rather than buying back shares, but we'll keep it under review."
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
