British engineering group Charter Plc made an agreed 378 million pound ($602.1 million) bid for the world's largest industrial ventilation and fan supplier Howden Group Plc on Friday, ending days of speculation.
Shares in Howden, which also supplied drilling and boring equipment for the Channel Tunnel, began to climb on Monday after news of a possible bid leaked into the press, forcing Charter to declare its hand privately to Howden's board.
Charter's offer values the Scottish company's shares at 128.5 pence each, which Charter said was 54 percent above Howden's closing price on March 14th, the last trading day before bid speculation seeped into the market, and 40 percent above Thursday's closing price of 91.5 pence.
Charter is paying 124.78 pounds in cash and offering three new Charter shares for every 115 Howden shares held. The company said it would issue around 7 1/2 million new shares as a result of the deal.
Charter chairman and chief executive Jeffrey Herbert, who has transformed the group from a mining-focused business to the world's leading welding company in the past three years, said Howden fitted his aim of having "three strong manufacturing businesses that are market leaders and this will be the basis of Charter's future growth."
The acquisition would lift Charter into a new league internationally, boosting its annual sales by nearly 60 percent to around 1.4 billion pounds. Shares in the company jumped eight percent, or 62 1/2 pence, to 847 1/2 as analysts welcomed the move, while Howden shares rose 35 pence to 128 pence.
Charter, which changed its name from Charter Consolidated in 1993, is now centred on the welding products operation Esab, which it bought in 1994 for 445 million pounds. Its second business is the Pandrol rail track equipment operation based in Britain and the U.S.
Herbert made clear that Howden's world-leading fan, pump and ventilation division, which makes fans up to 17 feet in diameter for industrial use including mines and tunnels, was Charter's prime target.
"The company has one gorgeous centre," said Herbert, "which is the Air and Gas Handling business." The division, which also makes cooling systems for aircraft and tanks, made operating profits of 26.6 million pounds in the year to April 1996 on sales of 328 million pounds, accounting for 72 percent of Howden's total operating profit and 69 percent of turnover.
Herbert said the other two divisions, which make drilling and boring equipment and packaging and handling equipment, would have to justify their value to shareholders and could be sold.
Charter believes Howden will enhance its earnings in the first full year of ownership. Herbert said his goal was to drive Howden's profit margins, which at 7.9 percent lag Charter's 10.5 percent, up to the level of its closest competitors, which are forty to fifty percent higher.
In its central ventilation operations, Howden's main global rivals are ABB Flakt of Sweden and Germany's Deutsche Babcock AG.
"Margins at Esab have improved two-and-a-half times since we acquired it," said Herbert. "Charter today is about world market-leading businesses, quite simply because market leaders earn larger margins than market followers. Howden is an exception because as a world leader it earns smaller margins than its competitors." ($ = 0.627 British Pounds)
