Tiny Scottish research company Shield Diagnostics Plc said on Monday it had moved closer to marketing a potentially world-beating test for predicting heart attacks and coronary heart disease.
Shield said studies showed that patients with coronary heart disease had 30 percent higher levels of a key clotting agent, Activated Factor Twelve (AFT), in their blood than healthy people.
Dundee-based Shield has developed the only known test for AFT, the first element in a cascade of reactions in the blood which can eventually result in heart attacks and heart disease.
It believes this will prove a much more accurate indicator of both conditions than the 500 million pounds worth of cholesterol tests taken every year.
Shares in Shield closed 40 pence higher at 690 pence, to show a net gain of 393 percent since the start of the year.
However, they continued to trade below the all-time peak of 928 pence reached just before news of problems with a patient-monitoring trial in the United States unnerved some investors on March 14.
The company says problems with the U.S. trial, which has monitored incidence of heart atacks in 16,000 people for more than a decade, would not affect the timetable for launching a general screening test and a simple test kit for use in doctor's surgeries.
Shield said it planned to make the test itself and then license it out on a semi-exclusive basis to large diagnostic companies and to drug companies who would use it to promote their products.
Talks with diagnostics companies, believed to include Abbott Laboratories Inc, are already under way.
Shield declined to predict sales for the test but said it could save health services and insurers hundreds of millions of pounds a year through earlier detection and prevention.
Chief executive officer Gordon Hall said caring for patients with cardiac disase in the United States alone cost $151 billion a year, including $118 billion on hospital care.
"Any process than can reduce this figure must be highly attractive to healthcare providers ...if five percent of cases were detected earlier and prevented, then over $7.5 billion could be saved," Hall said.
For now Shield is more than content to have its eye not just on the 500 million pound annual cholesterol test market but on a further 380 million pounds spent on other tests related to cardiovascular disease.
Yamaichi International analyst Erling Refsum, a long-standing supporter of Shield, said he calculates that every one percent gain in Shield's share of the cholesterol testing market is worth 60 million pounds on its market capitalization. Even after its price surge this year, the group is worth around 130 million pounds.
However, Shield continued to try to dampen more feverish expectations about the test's prospects on Monday.
"All we can say is that if you have high AFT, you are a high risk (of a heart attack)," said technical director Peter Foster. "We can't say that if you have low AFT there is no risk -- there may be other reasons (for a heart attack)."
Shield's caution may also stem from press and market criticism in recent week of the way it has handled news about the product.
One industry specialist said many investors had not been getting a straight story on the AFT test, leading to the share's underperformance last year.
The company ran into trouble in January when it published a newsletter on AFT which was not initially sent to the stock exchange. The newsletter sparked a sharp rise in the group's share price.
