Britain's Courtaulds Plc has set its sights well beyond the troubled viscose business, putting its faith in its new wonder-fibre Tencel, industrial coatings and plastic packaging.
Chief executive Gordon Campbell told Reuters on Wednesday that viscose and acrylics would account for a dwindling portion of sales in coming years as its other businesses expanded.
Campbell was speaking in his first major interview since taking the helm at the international chemicals group last July.
Courtaulds, which was the first company to produce a manmade fibre commercially in 1905, has suffered from a slump in demand for viscose because of changing fashions and increased competition from Asian producers.
Worries about viscose have weighed on its share price, helping force it out of the FTSE 100 last December.
Courtaulds shares, which closed at 363 1/2 pence on Wednesday, have fallen 35 percent from their 12-month high of 490 pence touched in October last year, according to Reuters 3000 data.
Campbell said there were tentative signs of a recovery in viscose. "But it is from such a lousy base, I'm not really celebrating," he said.
Last month the group closed 20 percent of its European viscose capacity, switching workers to a new plant for Tencel under construction at Grimsby in northern England.
Heavy investment in Tencel, a fibre derived from woodpulp which has attracted the attention of designers like Jean Paul Gaultier, Gianfranco Ferre and Christian Lacroix, is a cornerstone of Courtauld's growth strategy.
The company can sell every inch of the highly flexible fibre it can produce, and Campbell said sales should be close to $500 million a year by the end of the century.
But this would still be less than 10 percent of total sales. "We have to keep reminding people that we have growth prospects in areas other than Tencel, and that people don't think that Courtaulds is a combination of Tencel and viscose," he said. "It is Tencel, coatings and polymer products, all of which are capable of growing."
Campbell's other goals include lifting sales in Asia by 10 percent a year, raising sales at Coatings by five percent a year and doubling the proportion of sales derived from the packaging-oriented Polymer business to make it "a significant third leg" for Courtaulds.
Campbell said growth in Asia would be led by Coatings, where Courtaulds had world-leading positions in marine and yacht paints, visible on the P&amp;O luxury liner Oriana, and in aerospace sealants. It is also a major producer of powder coatings for consumer goods.
Despite a third of Courtauld's production capacity lying in continental Europe, Campbell backed a warning by Barclays Plc chief executive Martin Taylor about the dangers of Britain joining a single currency too soon.
"If you go in at the wrong rate then it could be a very serious long-term problem for Britain," Campbell said.
He said the argument over a single currency was a "stalking horse for the real debate" which was about political union.
