International chemicals group Courtaulds Plc said on Wednesday that its wonder-fibre Tencel, global coatings business and fast-growing plastic packaging operations would spearhead expansion in the coming years.
In his first major interview since taking the helm last July, chief executive Gordon Campbell laid out his plans for the group, including an increasing focus on fast-growing Asian markets and a determination to move on from its historic role as a major producer of viscose fibres.  
He also told Reuters that Courtaulds would play its part in the current global restructuring of the specialty chemicals business through asset swaps, joint ventures and possibly acquisitions.
He said Courtaulds was set on expanding Tencel, a highly flexible fibre derived from wood pulp, "as fast and as profitably as we can", with annual sales seen approaching $500 million by the turn of the century.  
But he added: "We have to keep reminding people that we have growth prospects in areas other than Tencel, and that people don't think that Courtaulds is a combination of Tencel and viscose. It is Tencel, coatings and polymer products, all of which are capable of growing."
Campbell's other goals include lifting the group's sales in Asia by 10 percent a year, raising sales at Coatings by five percent a year and doubling the proportion of sales derived from the packaging-oriented Polymer business to make it "a significant third leg" for Courtaulds.  
Campbell said growth in Asia would be led by the Coatings business, where Courtaulds had world-leading positions in marine and yacht paints, visible on the P&amp;O luxury liner Oriana, and in aerospace sealants. It is also a major producer of powder coatings for consumer goods.
"Marine is always the bridgehead into developing markets, because it is such a well-known and internationally-recognised brand... then we backfill behind that with our other coatings products," he said.  
Campbell said the company had enjoyed annual sales growth in Asia of 15 to 20 percent over the past five years. "The only reason I scaled it down to 10 percent (as a target) was because it is more difficult to grow at that rate from a bigger base," he added.
Polymers, whose products include toiletry and toothpaste packaging for giants like Unilever Plc and Colgate-Palmolive Co, accounted for less than 10 percent of Courtaulds' 2.30 billion stg sales in the year to March 1996, compared with nearly 50 percent for Coatings and 40 percent for fibres.  
"We ought to see it at least doubling over a period of time...Over five years might not be a bad period," said Campbell. He said growth would be largely organic, although Courtaulds would be interested in "small, strategically useful acquisitions" which expanded product range or geographic spread.
Campbell said the company was in negotiations with a number of countries in the Far East over the siting of a new production plant for Tencel, which will supplement factories in Alabama in the U.S, and Grimsby, England. He would not be drawn on the timing of an announcement.
"Various countries are attempting to attract us. We have three criteria: closeness to the market, country infrastructure ranging from political stability to whether the electricity supply is reliable...and financial incentives."
He said the costs of investing in Tencel will spark "a fairly sharp increase in gearing this year, but not to a level we feel concerned about".
He added that "the real measure" is interest cover, which is currently around five times. "We expect to be able to hold it at that," Campbell said.
--London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
