Textiles group Coats Viyella Plc, reporting lower first-half results, said on Wednesday it is confident it is on course for a bounce back to profit growth in 1997 as it puts a restructuring behind it.
The first 17.2 million pound chunk of reorganisation costs announced in March caused first-half pretax profit to tumble 34 percent to 47 million pounds ($73.09 million), with the remaining 38 million pounds of costs all to be charged against second-half earnings.
Chief executive Neville Bain told Reuters that "charges will be taken this year so 1997 will be put on a clean basis going forward" and predicted "a good return to profit" next year.
The announcement from Coats, whose products range from bath towels to precision engineering components, ended uncertainty about how the charges would fall.
An upbeat statement about prospects in key markets, in contrast with the gloomier tone of some competitors, helped to boost Coats' shares by 4-1/2 pence to 164 pence by late morning.
Bain said he is confident the group will achieve its cumulative annual cost saving targets of 10 million pounds in the second half of 1996, 25 million pounds in 1997 and 35 million in 1998.
But he said not all of this will reach the bottom line as the group spends money shifting an increasing amount of clothing production to lower-cost areas such as Morocco, eastern Europe and parts of Asia.
The reorganisation involves shedding 7,750 jobs, including nearly 3,000 in Britain.
Rival Courtaulds Textiles Plc announced on Tuesday that it is belatedly following Coats' lead in looking abroad to tackle continued margin pressures.
Coats' first-half operating profits on continuing operations slipped to 78.0 million pounds from 87.3 million, largely due to declines at its threads division, which produces thread for sewing and knitting and is the world's second-biggest zipper maker.
Bain said the decline was "largely due to Brazil and Turkey in the first-half of 1995 having exceptional levels of profits. We said at the time that was unsustainable."
Coats expects a "worthwhile" improvement in second-half results year-on-year before charges, with the key September to December period accounting for half its annual profits.
It said trading conditions "appear to be showing some signs of improvement", with a return of consumer confidence in Britain and normal weather patterns expected to help the second-half.
Bain said there was continued progress at its Jaeger and Viyella fashion retail chains, and the group's home furnishings business is struggling to keep up with demand caused by a "substantial" pick-up in the British housing market.
"The USA is picking up and we think it will good to us, especially in threads and engineering," Bain added, while demand in the rest of Europe is expected to remain mixed. ($1=.6430 Pound)
