Drug discovery company Chiroscience Group Plc said on Monday that its research alliance with ophthalmic specialist Alcon Laboratories Inc would allow it to test its leading drug programmes in a new therapeutic area.
In a telephone interview with Reuters, chief executive John Padfield said the link with the Nestle SA unit would also give Chiroscience access to Alcon's skills in rapid screening of potential new drugs.
Earlier the company said Alcon would put Chiroscience's library of compounds through its own high-intensity biological test system, retaining rights to develop any ophthalmic and optic drugs that resulted. Alcon is one of the world's biggest eyecare companies, making contact lenses and solutions as well as prescription drugs.
"Ophthalmology is an area of growing importance," Padfield said, which was likely to benefit from ageing populations in the developed world and increasing expenditure in developing countries. He said it was also a "niche area" with very few competitors.
Padfield said the programme with Alcon would focus on Chiroscience's work in MMP inhibitors, PNP inhibitors and PDE IV inhibitors.
Chiroscience is working on drugs for arthritis and cancer using MMP inhibitors, but Padfield said these may also prove useful in areas like corneal ulceration and recovery from eye surgery because of the role they played in healing wounds.
Padfield told Reuters that the group's lower profile work on inhibiting another class of enzyme, PNPs, could also receive a boost, with potential in corneal transplantation. Padfield said initial results suggested that PNP inhibitors could be more effective in helping prevent rejection of transplants than the current lead drug, cyclosporine, marketed by Novartis AG as Sandimmum.
A third major part of Chiroscience's novel drug programme involving the PDE IV enzyme, which is implicated in major inflammatory diseases like asthma and arthritis, could also be extended to inflammatory diseases of the eye.
Padfield said the agreement did not extend to the genetic research being conducted by Darwin Molecular Corp, the Seattle-based biotech company which Chiroscience bought in November 1996. But he noted work done by Alcon and the University of Iowa on isolating a gene linked to glaucoma, and said the two companies will "be able to talk about what we have in Seattle."
Padfield said access to Alcon's rapid-screening skills for new drugs would "offset some of the need to invest" in new technology. Chiroscience will have rights to all non-ophthalmic discoveries made through the alliance.
Padfield declined to disclose financial details of the arrangement, but said "most of the money" would come from product royalties and milestone payments. "There is a bit of cash up front," he added.
Shares in Chiroscience were up 7 pence at 371 in early afternoon trading.
--London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
