Britain's chemical industry predicted another three years of sluggish investment on Wednesday despite relatively strong market conditions, adding to worries about the country's investment record.
The Chemical Industries Association (CIA) said spending on new plant and equipment was barely changed last year at 2.15 billion pounds ($3.5 billion), and after taking inflation into account it actually fell by 0.6 percent.
This put Britain well behind its international competitors. Spending by French chemical companies rose seven percent last year, with U.S. spending rising 11 percent and the Netherlands by 13 percent.
The CIA said the outlook for 1997 was little better, with spending seen rising only five percent.
The downbeat forecasts contrasted with positive predictions about economic growth and future production levels, with chemicals output expected to grow by three percent this year and exports by five percent.
Nikko Europe analyst Philip Morrish told Reuters that global overcapacity in the industry and weak European economies were major factors behind lacklustre investment.
"The industry may also be hedging its bets about whether we are getting close to the peak of the (demand) cycle globally, and I think more importantly we have seen the industry making much better use of its plant and equipment," he added.
But the Confederation of British Industry (CBI) said weak investment levels were reflected across the British economy.
Douglas Godden, head of the CBI's economic policy group, told the CIA's investment intentions conference that business investment had staged a relatively weak recovery compared both with in the early 1980s and with some other countries, notably Japan, the United States and the Netherlands.
"Manufacturing investment has lagged even further in the last year or so, with companies' own investment intentions not being fulfilled," Godden said.
CIA director-general Elliot Finer said investment by the chemicals industry had been weak for four years in a row, despite strengthening economic growth and an excellent business climate.
"We must look for other explanations of this subdued business climate," Finer told the conference. "One factor is likely to be uncertainties about the UK's future membership of EMU."
Finer called for a delay in starting European economic and monetary union (EMU) to allow time for genuine economic convergence. But he said Britain had to be involved from the beginning if it was not to lose out on both domestic and overseas investment.
His call, which is unlikely to be heeded by the Labour or Conservative parties currently vying for power in the May 1 election, was backed by Chris Andrews, who heads the British arm of French chemicals group Rhone Poulenc SA.
Andrews said a major part of his time was spent trying to win investment for Britain. "I get the impression talking to many French colleagues that uncertainty about the UK position on EMU is worrying them, and can only act as some kind of discouragement to investment in the future," Andrews said.
($ = 0.615 British Pounds)
