Promising trial results published on Wednesday on a new drug for treating Hepatitis B have raised hopes that Britain's Glaxo Wellcome Plc may have another big seller on its hands.
The pharmaceuticals giant, whose best-selling ulcer drug Zantac is expected to be eaten up by generic competition later this year, said advanced studies showed that Lamivudine may reduce and even reverse damage to the liver caused by the Hepatitis B virus.
Shares in Glaxo Wellcome, which licensed Lamivudine from Canada's BioChem Pharma Inc in 1990, climbed 23 1/2 pence to 11.13 pounds ($18.04) in early afternoon trading.
Lamivudine is also the base for Glaxo Wellcome's increasingly successful AIDS drug Epivir. But analysts said questions remained about how effective Lamivudine would be with Hepatitis B, with detailed results from several other studies not expected until the end of the year.
However, any advance would be a breakthrough against a virus which doctors say is 100 times more infectious than AIDS and kills two million people every year.
The World Health Organisation estimates that 350 million people carry the virus worldwide. Passed on in a variety of ways including unprotected sex, drug use, contact sports and from mother to baby, it can lead to severe liver scarring and is responsible for 80 percent of cases of liver cancer.
In a ground-breaking move Glaxo Wellcome plans to file its first regulatory approval for the drug in Asia later this year rather than in Europe or the United States, reflecting the prevalence of Hepatitis B in the region.
Glaxo Wellcome told the European Association for the Study of the Liver on Wednesday that phase III tests of Lamivudine on 358 people with chronic Hepatitis B in Taiwan, Singapore and Hong Kong were "extremely encouraging".
It said 67 percent of patients who took a 100 milligram Lamivudine tablet every day for a year saw the condition of their liver improve compared with 30 percent who took a placebo. The number of people whose liver deteriorated was greatly reduced.
It also found that 16 percent of people taking the drug managed to stop the Hepatitis B virus from replicating in the blood compared with four percent who took a placebo.
More than 95 percent of Hepatitis B cases are estimated to be in the developing world. Authorities in China said last year that 120 million Chinese were affected by the condition and about 40 percent of these were pregnant women. Glaxo Wellcome said it had already held talks with the Chinese government on making the drug available there.
A spokesman said Lamivudine would also fit in with the group's strategy of becoming more focused on different regions, partly in recognition of the huge growth potential for pharmaceuticals and health care in regions such as Asia and South America.
But analysts said Lamivudine's focus on poorer countries made the issue of pricing the drug difficult to predict. It also raised the question of creating different pricing policies for rich and poor countries, a controversial move which Glaxo Wellcome is known to want to explore.
One analyst said sales estimates ranged from a couple of hundred million pounds a year to a billion pounds, reflecting uncertainty about how the drug will be marketed.
"From a scientific point of view this is a very exciting prospect (but) in commercial terms there remain questions on its sales prospects," he said.
SocGen analyst Alyson Coates said she had cautiously estimated sales of 150 million pounds for the drug by the year 2000 and peak sales of 350 million pounds a year.
But she said questions remained about whether Lamivudine would be more effective when taken together with other drugs, just as Epivir works better in combination, and on how resistant the virus might be to the drug in some people.
Glaxo Wellcome is one of a number of companies working on products for Hepatitis B.
SmithKline Beecham Plc is developing a version of its herpes treatment Famvir, and Germany's Boehringer Mannheim GmbH, Vion Pharmaceuticals Inc and Gilead Sciences Inc of the United States and Britain's Medeva Plc also have products in clinical trials. ($ = 0.616 British Pounds)
