Shares in British drugs company Zeneca Group Plc had another busy day on Friday as the bid rumour mill again started churning, overshadowing a key patent victory in the United States.
Zeneca shares climbed 35 pence to 18.55 pounds ($30.06) in late afternoon trading after a U.S. Appeals Court threw out a patent challenge to one of its top-selling drugs, breast cancer treatment Nolvadex.
The ruling, which follows a U.S. district court decision in Zeneca's favour a year ago, means that Canadian generic drug maker Novopharm Ltd will not be able to market a generic version of Nolvadex before Zeneca's patent runs out in 2002.
But analysts said the ruling was widely expected and pointed the finger instead at the Swiss magazine Cash for driving up Zeneca's shares.
Cash said Swiss giant Roche Holdings AG was about to announce an agreed takeover of the British group.
Stephen Putnam, analyst at Kleinwort Benson, said: "I think this rise has more to do with rumours about a Roche bid. I can't believe anybody thought there would be a different outcome (to the Novopharm appeal)."
In an unsourced article, Cash said Roche was planing to offer between 21 and 22 pounds per share for Zeneca, which it would then break up, selling off the agricultural chemical and specialty seeds divisions as well as Roche's own fragrances and aromas division.
Both companies, increasingly weary of the mounting bid speculation, again declined to comment. But London analysts laughed the suggestion out of court.
"Frankly, for 21 pounds they'd be lucky to get the agricultural chemicals division. I think the bidding would start at 30 pounds," said one analyst who asked not to be identified. "Zeneca is not interested and doesn't need to embark on a merger," he added.
Zeneca's patent victory against Novopharm has, however, strengthened its main attraction for any possible bidder -- its strong product portfolio.
Nolvadex is the world's top-selling breast cancer treatment, with sales of 2.7 billion pounds since its launch. Last year Zeneca sold 332 million pounds worth of Nolvadex, making it one of its biggest money spinners.
Zeneca began legal action against Novopharm in January 1995 after the Canadian company tried to get U.S. regulatory approval for a generic version of Nolvadex, also known as Tamoxifen Citrate.
Two other patent challenges for Nolvadex in the U.S, against Mylan Pharmaceuticals Inc and Pharmachemie BV, are outstanding. A third, against Lemmon Co, was dropped after Lemmon withdrew its marketing application.
Kevin Scotcher, analyst at NatWest Markets, said Zeneca's patent position was now much more secure as a result of the Novopharm ruling. "This case must strengthen their hand significantly in those other cases," he said.
Novopharm has been very active in legal challenges recently, last week successfully winning the right to market a generic version of one of the world's biggest-selling drugs, Glaxo Wellcome Plc's Zantac, from July.
