British Gas Plc, which is battling to clear away regulatory and contractual headaches before splitting into two companies, unveiled an expected sharp deterioration in half-year profits on Thursday.
The energy giant revealed a first half dip in historic cost net profit to 565 million pounds ($878.7 million) from 635 million a year before. Pretax profit fell to 926 million from 1.003 billion, and the company turned in a net loss of 8.0 million in the second quarter.
Beleaguered shareholders were offered some comfort, however, with the interim payout kept unchanged at 6.40 pence, but the group refused to make any promises until rows with the industry regulator Ofgas over price controls are resolved.
Last winter's bleak weather provided some relief for the embattled company as it prepares to face the final phasing out of its monopoly in 1998.
Prolonged cold weather added 218 million pounds to operating profits, more than offsetting steep declines at its industrial and commerical arm where competition and controversial "take or pay" contracts with gas producers continue to bite.
The company is also locked in a battle with Ofgas over a tough review of the prices it can charge customers.
Chairman Richard Giordano said talks on take or pay gas contracts, which oblige British Gas to pay well above market rates for the gas it buys, are now in a "realistic phase."
In a telephone interview, Giordano said these were a major factor behind losses at its industrial and commercial division, which widened to 180 million pounds from 50 million in the first half of 1995.
"The solution to the losses is for us to unhook from take of pay," Giordano said, although talks with producers were a gradual process.
"We are in intense negotiations now. We have said we will not do this in public and so both sides are keeping quiet," Giordano said.
The chairman also held out some hope on negotiations with regulator Ofgas on separate price reviews of its Transco and domestic energy businesses.
Giordano refused to be drawn on the crucial Transco review, but made clear British Gas has not yet slammed the door on an agreement. "There is nothing to say on this. We are still meeting with Ofgas," Giordano said.
Ofgas wants Transco to cut charges to gas suppliers by 20 percent in 1997 and then 6.5 points below inflation for four years. British Gas, which has until October 7 to respond, has warned that even these watered down proposals could have serious consequences for dividends.
Giordano was more upbeat about the domestic review, where Ofgas wants to fix price changes at five points below inflation. He said a resolution should be in place by "the end of September or the middle of October," adding "my guess is that we are closer to Ofgas and Ofgas is closer to us on that review."
Giordano said British Gas was preparing to beef up incentives to keep domestic customers loyal when the market opens fully to competition in 1998.
It launched a credit card on Wednesday which will allow users to save on gas bills. Other initiatives planned include offering illness or unemployment insurance to cover bills, and gas safety checks.
Progress towards a demerger into two separate companies, Transco International and British Gas Energy, is still on target for next spring, with a definite plan expected by the end of 1996.
London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717 ($1=.6430 Pound)
