British Gas Plc, which unveiled an expected sharp deterioration in interim profits on Thursday, is in a "realistic phase of negotiations" with producers over crippling gas supply contracts, chairman Richard Giordano said.
In a telephone interview with Reuters, Giordano said so-called "take or pay" contracts, which oblige it to buy gas at prices well above market rates, were a major factor behind growing losses at its industrial and commercial division.
"The solution to the losses is for us to unhook from take of pay," Giordano said.  
British Gas said progress on the contracts, which force it to pay around 20 pence per therm for gas compared to market rates of 10 to 13 pence, "is a gradual process."
"We are in intense negotiations now. We have said we will not do this in public and so both sides are keeping quiet," Giordano said.
He added that losses at the industrial and commerical arm rose to 180 million stg from around 50 million a year before as greater competition and costs related to the planned demerger kicked in. First-half results would have been worse but for a 200 million pound benefit from severe winter weather, he said.  
But Giordano said there was no sign of commercial and industrial losses accelerating in the second quarter from the first and stood by his forecast for full-year losses of "close to" 400 million stg at the division.
He also held out some hope on the other main headcahes for British Gas, talks with regulator Ofgas on separate price reviews of its Transco and domestic energy businesses.
Giordano refused to be drawn on the crucial Transco review but made clear British Gas has not yet slammed the door on an agreement. "There is nothing to say on this. We are still meeting with Ofgas," Giordano said.  
Ofgas wants Transco to cut charges to gas suppliers by 20 percent in 1997 and then 6.5 points below inflation for four years. British Gas, which has until October 7 to respond, has warned this could have serious consequences for dividends.
Giordano said the group will only be able give indications on dividend prospects when there is clarity on Transco.
But he was more upbeat about the domestic review, wehere Ofgas wants to fix price changes to five points below inflation. He said a resolution should be in place by "the end of September or the middle of October," adding "my guess is that we are closer to Ofgas and Ofgas is closer to us on that review."  
Giordano told Reuters British Gas is preparing to beef up incentives to keep domestic customers loyal when the market opens fully to competition in 1998. It launched a credit card on Wednesday, which will allow users to save on gas bills.
He said other initiatives planned include offering illness or unemployment insurance to cover bills, and gas safety checks.
Giordano said a pilot scheme in south-west England has seen the company lose only around 15 percent of customers to rivals, and noted that British Gas has "more freedom" to act than in the commercial market, where market share has plummeted because "our tariffs were locked up and our hands were tied."  
Giordano said British Gas's progress towards a demerger into two separate companies, Transco International and British Gas Energy, "are going ok. We are still on target for the Spring of next year."
He said the formation of the two exective boards has removed "the biggest hurdle."
"I'd guess that before the end of the year we'll have a definite plan for the media and shareholders," he said, adding: "Looking ahead if these managements do their job both (companies) should have a basis for prosperity."
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
