The soaring value of British medical devices company Biocompatibles Plc may be rushing ahead of itself, analysts said on Tuesday.
Shares in the company, which is concentrating its skills in biomaterials on applications in contact lenses and heart surgery, have soared by up to 98 percent since the start of 1997 and by 265 percent in the past year, touching an all-time high of 14.35 stg on April 11.
Although the shares have slipped back from this peak, trading at 13.60 pounds midafternoon on Tuesday, they have still outperformed the FT-SE All Share index by 68 percent since the start of the year, according to Reuters 3000 data.
The surge in value has been built on hopes for Biocompatibles' specially-developed lubricious material, which produces very little reaction with human tissues.
The product has so far led to the creation of a new type of soft contact lens, Proclear, which is targeted at people who suffer from dry eyes, and a coating for stents, which are inserted to expand furred-up arteries in the heart. Proclear, which has already been launched in Britain, won approval from U.S. regulators last week.
Some analysts, notably Yamaichi International's Erling Refsum, believe there is a lot more to come in the share price, which Refsum said could hit the 20 stg mark by the end of the year.
Refsum said the company is expected to sign three major licensing deals for its contact lenses, stents and a paint additives operation, all of which will help to drive sentiment. He forecasts pre-tax profits for the previously loss-making group of 17.5 million stg in 1998 after a small profit this year.
Refsum said that despite a number of competitors, Biocompatibles' phosphocoline-based coatings appear to give its stents strong advantages over rivals, particularly in reducing the risk of thrombosis.
Other analysts are more cautious, however. Nick Woolf of Nomura, who believes the shares are "probably looking quite expensive," said "the real value is in their stents business, and they have got to demonstrate that their product will deliver a demonstrable benefit," said Woolf.
Henry Cooke Lumsden analyst Thomas Geimer, who also believes the shares are overvalued at present, said in a recent note that "competitors are lurking round every corner."
Although Geimer believes the company will be able to achieve close to 10 million stg of stent sales this year, at 1,500 stg each, he said maintaining prices in a competitive market will be hard.
Nomura's Woolf added "it is not that we are negative" on the stock. "It is moving ahead too quickly."
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
