Shares in Anglo-Australian drugs and diagnostics group Cortecs International Plc could rise by more than 60 percent if news due shortly on one of its leading drugs is positive, analysts said on Tuesday.
Cortecs president Michael Flynn told Reuters he expected to announce the interim result of a key European Phase III trial on Macritonin, a new drug for treating the bone-wasting illness osteoporosis, at the end of next week or early the week after.
Flynn said that if the results "are positive, as we expect, they will be used as the pivotal data for the first applications for registration in Europe."
Cortecs has used its skills in developing oral versions of drugs to create a tablet form of calcitonin, which increases bone retention of calcium and slows the loss of bone mass.
Analysts believe oral calcitonin, to be taken once a day, will have strong advantages over the existing injected form of calcitonin and over a nasal spray version, Miacalcic, marketed by Switzerland's Novartis AG. The market for the existing drugs is around $800 million a year and is expected to grow strongly as population in the developed world ages.
"There is the potential for a lot of very positive news," Nomura analsyt Nick Woolf, who has issued a strong buy note on Cortecs, told Reuters.
Woolf said the shares could rise to 420 pence if the trial data was positive. "The shares could almost double if news is good. It is very important for them."
Shares in the company were up 19-1/2 pence at 256-1/2 in midday trading, but remain well below their March 21 high of 291 pence and their April 1996 peak of 450 pence.
"The stock has been moving down on no news other than people getting scared by what may come out," said Woolf.
But analysts said Cortecs had already established proof of principle for Macritonin, and has a number of international marketing partners lined up.
Yamaichi International analyst Erling Refsum also sees considerable upside to Cortecs' shares. He values the company's portfolio of drugs, which include oral insulin and chronic bronchitis products and an oral influenza vaccine, at around 1.5 billion stg compared with its current market capitalisation of just over 300 million stg.
Refsum said the calcitonin data, which will indicate the drug's ability to reduce bone destruction, should boost confidence in Cortecs, "because people are not confident about the company at the moment."
Refsum is particularly bullish about Macritonin, which he said could be "a billion dollar product if they have got it right, and I suspect they have."
Cortecs management believes osteoporosis products could become the largest class of drugs in the world, overtaking anti-ulcer treatments. Around 200 million mainly elderly people currently suffer from the condition in OECD countries, and the numbers at risk in the U.S. alone are expected to double over the next 25 years as the population ages.
Tom Geimer of Henry Cooke Lumsden added to the upbeat predictions on the share price. He said positive trial results on Macritonin would "fundamentally support values near 300 pence" but added that "as the shares have traditionally been a trading stock, we expect them to break 400 pence on positive news."
But Geimer added a note of caution on Cortecs, which has enjoyed a chequered career as far as investors are concerned, most notably an upset in 1991 involving trials of oral insulin in Korea.
"Cortecs is progressing nicely," Geimer said in a written commentary, but he added: "We advise investors to remember that Cortecs, despite its recent progress in the lab and clinic, still needs to prove itself in the market."
--London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
