When Pharmacia &amp; Upjohn Inc launched Caverject, an anti-impotence drug, it ordered the usual marketing programme and then, in line with a growing trend, it called Time magazine.
And Newsweek and Smithsonian and New Yorker and more than 50 other national publications and radio stations -- all of which are now engaged in a huge "consumer awareness" campaign about impotence, paid for by Pharmacia &amp; Upjohn.
Whether it is impotence, baldness, depression, schizophrenia, osteoporosis or allergies, U.S. consumers are being flooded with ads for health problems and often, in a departure from tradition, prescription drugs to cure them.
Spending on advertising on prescription drugs throughout the U.S. media topped $323 million in the first six months of 1996, compared to $356.8 million for the whole of 1995, according to Competitive Media Reporting, a market research firm.
"It certainly is a growing category for Time magazine and for news magazines in general," said Robert Pondiscio, spokesman for the Time Warner newsweekly.
Time broke new ground in the area this month with a 90-page special issue called "Frontiers of Medicine" almost fully underwritten by Britain's Glaxo Wellcome Plc, the largest drug manufacturer in the world.
The spread of direct-to-consumer prescription drug advertising marks a victory for drug companies, which fought for years with physicians and regulators opposed to it.
The American Medical Association, based here, still stands publicly against such advertising. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), after banning the adverts in the early 1980s, now allows them if they follow certain guidelines.
FDA rules explain why prescription drug advertisements sometimes identify a company and a drug but do not on other occasions.
For instance, Pfizer Inc is advertising its Zyrtec allergy drug in the main U.S. dailies. The ads show a picture of a smiling woman surrounded by wildflowers and weeds. Underneath is large-type text promoting the drug and off to one side is a 1,500-word "brief summary" in fine print about side-effects and dosages. The summary is required by the FDA because the ad mentions Pfizer's and the drug's names.
In contrast, one of Glaxo's many ads in the Time special issue is about how Olympic gold medalist Jackie Joyner-Kersee keeps her asthma under control with a "program" put together by Glaxo. A free telephone number is provided. Callers are automatically sent a complimentary "asthma control kit" from Glaxo.
No mention is made in the advertisement that Glaxo is a world leader in asthma medicines. Its Ventolin is an industry standard. Serevent was introduced a year ago and Flovent was just unveiled. Because none of these drugs is named in the ad, it does not have to include a brief summary of their attributes.
The FDA is talking with drug companies and broadcasters about how to handle radio and TV ads for prescription drugs. Some advertisements are broadcast, but so far remain much rarer than those in print.
These ads -- whether they name the drug or not -- are meant to raise consumers' awareness of new drugs and to reach doctors -- medicine's decision-makers -- through patients.
"The ads are effective in informing consumers of the availability of a drug. The action step is to suggest to the consumer that they consult their physician," said Dick Johnson, spokesman for Hoechst Marion Roussel, which is advertising its Allegra allergy medicine with pictures of a windsurfer skimming across an open field.
The ads seem to be working on the consumer.
In 1987, about 18 percent of U.S. patients initiated conversations with their physicians about advertised drugs. That figure was up to 51 percent in 1995, according to a study done by American Home Products Corp, which advertises Premarin for menopause and Effexor for depression.
"The ads create a more educated consumer and an educated consumer is more prepared to have an intelligent dialogue with the physician," said American Home spokeswoman Audrey Ashby.
Whether or not that dialogue leads doctors to write more prescriptions for advertised drugs, thereby boosting sales for the drug companies, is difficult to judge because the companies will not disclose such details.
No objective studies have determined if drug companies gain incremental revenues from advertising, but the companies' growing advertising budgets in themselves may be a sign of success.
"If these ads weren't working, why would they be doing them? Unless they were being forced to by competitors," said Stephen Scala, pharmaceuticals industry analyst with Cowen &amp; Co.
Advertising is a vital part of the over-the-counter drugs business, where the consumer -- not the doctor -- calls the shots. The kind of competitive pressures that drive over-the-counter markets may help explain the spread of advertising for prescription drugs, as well, Scala said.
But, he added, the role of consumers in a changing healthcare system are part of the answer, too.
"People are more knowledgable and aware and willing to learn about their treatments than they used to be," he said.
