The Food and Drug Administration is approving new drugs and medical devices at a rapid clip this year, heartening drug and device companies that have long criticised the agency.
In the federal fiscal year ended Sept. 30, the agency cleared for U.S. marketing 46 new drugs, up from 26 approvals in fiscal 1995, the agency said.
In the same period, 37 new medical devices were cleared, up from 27 the year before, according to a tally kept by Montgomery Securities, an investments firm.
"What you are seeing is the culmination of improvements in the review system that date back 10 years or more," said FDA associate commissioner for public affairs Jim O'Hara.
Even long-time FDA critic the Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America, or PHARMA, sounded congratulatory, albeit with reservations. "Improvments have been made in the last couple of years," said Jeff Trewhitt, PHARMA spokesman.
Two bills before Congress that proposed more flexible and shorter FDA new drug reviews died without action with the adjournment of the House and Senate last week, a sign that the agency's actions have blunted attacks from outside critics.
Drug and medical device industry analysts said faster FDA approvals are helping companies in both sectors by reducing their research and development risks.
A year ago, companies had complained that burdensome U.S. regulatory oversight threatened to drive U.S. drug and medical technology research to Europe, known for speedier reviews.
But a study released this spring showed the FDA's median review time for new drugs approved in 1994 and 1995 was 1.3 years, as fast as that of Britain and faster than those of France, Spain, Germany, Australia, Japan, Italy and Canada, according to the FDA. The study was conducted by the British-based Centre for Medicines Research, the agency said.
"In 1996, the U.S. is reviewing and approving ... faster than any other country," O'Hara said.
He credited internal reforms at the FDA largely to passage by Congress in 1992 of the Prescription Drug User Fee Act, which made more money available to the agency through a system of user fees imposed on companies.
Those revenues have paid for the hiring of more reviewers and upgrading of FDA information systems, he said.
