Outboard Marine Corp chief executive Harry Bowman talked Thursday with the principals of Greenway Partners -- Alfred Kingsley and Gary Duberstein -- who have bought an 8.5-percent stake for nearly $30 million in the manufacturer of boats and boat engines.
"It was really just a get-acquainted call," said Stan Main, spokesman for Outboard Marine, or OMC.
If Waukegan, Ill.-based OMC is anything like some other companies that Greenway has invested in, Bowman may soon get to know Kingsley and Duberstein very well indeed.  
Former associates of Carl Icahn, the two New York financiers specialize in buying shares in companies that are struggling, then pressuring managements for changes.
OMC does not know Greenway's intentions, Main said. He added, "All you can look at is their track record."
Known as a highly active shareholder, Greenway has sought a three-way break-up of Unisys Corp, the spin-off by Woolworth Corp of its profitable Footlocker division, and helped cause the 1994 sale of U.S. Shoe Corp.
"We're not bashful," Kingsley said in an interview, confirming that he has had one chat with OMC.  
The topic of discussion on the call was "the company and its operations," Kingsley said. He added, "We might have more conversations with them."
Of particular interest, Kingsley said, is OMC's new FICHT fuel injection technology, which the company said can reduce hydrocarbon emissions of two-stroke engines by 70-80 percent.
"It's true that for emissions standards, they have to do something. But I think that they've got an interesting engine here with other applications, in addition to the outboard motor area," Kingsley said.  
Asked if Greenway was happy with OMC's financial performance, Kingsley said, "The company's probably not satisfied with their performance."
OMC has made that quite clear in recent quarters and is taking steps to fix the situation, Main said. "There is a plan being developed," he said.
Investors have been waiting for improvements at OMC, but are beginning to lose patience, said Lehman Brothers analyst Harriet Baldwin. "It's likely Greenway's effect will be to bring more focus on management," she said.  
OMC makes Evinrude and Johnson outboard motors, as well as Chris-Craft and Four Winns boats. The company posted a loss in its third-quarter ended June 30 of $0.18 per share, compared to a profit of $1.39 per share last year. Quarterly revenues were $291 million, down from $329.6 million a year before.
Shares in the company were up 1-5/8 to 17-3/8 Friday after the Greenway stake was announced in a filing with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. A year ago, OMC shares traded in the low 20s.
Main said OMC is pursuing other markets for the FICHT system. "We are talking with people who make personal watercraft engines or motorcycle engines," he said.
In addition, he said OMC is taking cost-cutting steps. "We are looking very hard at our corporate overhead costs and expect some dramatic cost savings there," he said.
For example, OMC may consolidate administrative functions for its boat companies from six locations to one in Nashville, Tenn., Main said.
Reuters Chicago Newsdesk  312-408-8787
