Pall Corp and Memtec Ltd may have different reasons, but they seem equally determined to acquire Gelman Sciences Inc.
Analysts and arbitrageurs were reluctant to say whether that portends an all-out bidding war, especially after a rally in American Depositary Shares of Memtec on Thursday that reflected some doubt on Wall Street of Memtec's commitment.
Still, Gelman would nicely complement the operations of either suitor and will likely be hotly pursued by both, filtration industry analysts said.  
Shares in Ann Arbor, Mich.-based Gelman closed up 3 at 29 on the American Stock Exchange on the news that it was in discussions with Pall about a possible acquisition.
Gelman reached a definitive agreement on August 30 to be acquired by Australia's Memtec, which said Thursday it intends to proceed with the agreement.
"I don't think Memtec is going to back away," said Robert W. Baird &amp; Co analyst Walter Morris.
Memtec wants Gelman's sophisticated membrane technology to put Memtec into closer competition with East Hills, N.Y.-based Pall and Millipore Corp, Morris said. 
Pall -- much larger than either Gelman or Memtec -- wants Gelman to broaden Pall's medical and process businesses and "frankly, to eliminate a pesky competitor," Morris said.
Gelman sales in fiscal 1996 ended July 31 were $112 million, versus $103.5 million in fiscal 1995. Memtec sales in the year ended June 30 were $175 million, up from $145 million in fiscal 1995. Pall had revenues of $960.3 million in fiscal 1996 ended August 3, up from $822.2 million in fiscal 1995.
"Pall under chief executive Eric Krasnoff has been more acquisitive than under previous management teams," said Morgan Stanley &amp; Co analyst Mark Gulley.  
"If he does this deal, it will have been his third acquisition" since taking the helm at Pall about two years ago, Gulley said.
Krasnoff's acquisitions have tended to broaden Pall's presence in existing markets, rather than move it into new areas -- a pattern into which a Gelman acquisition would fit, said Fourteen Research analyst Anthony Ginsberg.
"There's good overlap ... They're in many of the same venues and markets," Gulley said.
Morris said, "Gelman is strategically important to both companies."
Arbitrageurs seemed to cast doubt Thursday on Memtec's contention that it plans to proceed with the Gelman deal by bidding up the Australian company's American depository shares as much as 3-5/8 in the morning. They lost ground in the afternoon to close up 1-15/16 at 28-15/16.
The rally in part was likely explained by short covering, arbitrageurs said.
Late Thursday, Gelman issued a statement saying it intended to pursue its agreement with Memtec, but also to talk with Pall and any other interested parties.
--Chicago Newsdesk 312-408-8787
