Wall Street hammered shares of Swedish-American drug giant Pharmacia &amp; Upjohn Friday after it said profits would fall far short of expectations.
The company said it expects earnings of about 44 cents a share for the third quarter, equal to year-ago results. Analysts had expected 10 cents more than that and hit the stock hard after the announcement.
The stock dropped as much as $6.50 before trading down $5.25 at $34.875 in late trading on the New York Stock Exchange. More than 18 million shares had changed hands by early afternoon.
The company blamed foreign exchange problems, pricing pressures and weak U.S. sales of older products for the shortfall. It also cited a sales force transition and "the usual short-term disruptions seen in a multinational merger."
Pharmacia &amp; Upjohn was formed by the merger of Sweden's Pharmacia AB and Kalamazoo, Mich.-based Upjohn Co. It formally began operations in November 1995.
"This clearly indicates that the merger is not going as smoothly as hoped. I think this is a wake-up call," said independent pharmaceuticals industry analyst Hemant Shah.
With few new high-margin products expected out of the pipeline for the next year or so, Pharmacia &amp; Upjohn had been hoping that the merger would produce cost savings and other synergies that would help it through the dry spell.
"The problem is, they're not realising synergies as they thought they would," said Mehta &amp; Isaly analyst Steve Lisi.
"They were hoping that through this merger they would realise synergies to ride this out ... We just don't know if they can do it," Lisi said. "They'll get through these next couple of years, but it's going to be ugly."
Pharmacia &amp; Upjohn Chief Executive John Zabriskie said the merger is producing benefits, including a 3,000 person reduction in the work force to date. The company also said it continues to expect $500 million in cost savings by 1998.
Earnings for the fourth quarter and full year are expected to top year-ago levels, buoyed by two new drugs, Xalatan for glaucoma and Camptosar for cancer, the company said.
But analysts were uncertain about the near-term outlook and said the company offers no firm guidance for next year.
"There's a cloud over the beginning of 1997," said Rodman &amp; Renshaw analyst Mario Corso.
