Merger synergies that were supposed to carry Pharmacia &amp; Upjohn Inc through a dry spell in its new product pipeline are not being realized as planned, raising questions about the drug giant's short-term future.
Shares in the barely one-year-old Swedish-American concern fell 6-1/2 to 34-7/8 on Friday after it said its third-quarter profits would be well below Wall Street estimates.
"This clearly indicates that the merger is not going as smoothly as hoped. I think this is a wake-up call for the company," said independent drug industry analyst Hemant Shah.  
Pharmacia &amp; Upjohn, formed through the merger of Sweden's Pharmacia AB and Kalamazoo, Mich.-based Upjohn Co, formally began operations in November, 1995.
"There's a cloud over the beginning of 1997. There's no earnings guidance," said Rodman &amp; Renshaw analyst Mario Corso.
In a conference call on Friday, the company said the merger is on track and cost savings of $500 million by 1998 are still projected. It said the merger has reduced the work force by 3,000 people to date. But the company earlier blamed "the usual short-term disruptions seen in a multinational merger" in part for its third-quarter earnings disappointment.  
"The problem is they're not realizing synergies as they thought they would," said Mehta &amp; Isaly analyst Steve Lisi.
Pharmacia &amp; Upjohn blamed the third-quarter earnings shortfall chiefly on currency translations. It said foreign exchange -- especially involving the Japanese yen, Italian lira and Swedish krona -- reduced quarterly sales by two percent and increased the cost of goods sold.
Limits to the company's currency hedging activities were blamed by the company for the foreign exchange hit. These inadequacies, coupled with an ongoing sales force transition, can be traced to the merger, analysts said.  
Merger programs are progressing, but the combination may never realize the synergies hoped for, Corso said.
That could compound another problem. Several of Pharmacia &amp; Upjohn's top drugs face competition from generic equivalents and few new products are in the pipeline, analysts said.
Xalatan for glaucoma and Camptosar for cancer are rolling out and could give the fourth quarter a boost. The company said it expects earnings for the fourth quarter and the full year to exceed year-ago levels. It also said it anticipates profit margin improvement through 1997.
But analysts were uncertain about the near-term outlook. They said the company offered no specific guidance on the conference call for 1997 earnings levels.
"They were hoping that through this merger they would realize synergies to ride this out ... We just don't know if they can do it," Lisi said. "They'll get through these next couple of years, but it's going to be ugly."
--Chicago Newsdesk 312-408-8787
