United Airlines said Thursday it ordered 51 new airliners valued at $4.4 billion from Boeing Co. and Airbus Industrie, and although the lion's share went to Boeing, one industry analyst said the European consortium scored a big victory over arch-rival Boeing.
United said it will buy 24 narrow-body A319 aircraft from Airbus. The order is valued at $900 million based on manufacturers' list prices, but United will likely pay much less thanks to special discounts.
United chose the Airbus planes over competing Boeing 737-700s and 737-300s after evaluating both, a UAL spokesman said.
"It certainly is a big win for Airbus," said Peter Jacobs, aerospace analyst at Ragen MacKenzie.
Boeing hardly walked away empty-handed, as United said it will buy 27 new wide-body planes -- 19 747-400s, six 757s and two 777s -- from the Seattle-based aircraft manufacturer.
The Boeing order is valued at $3.5 billion based on list prices. But again, United spokesman Joe Hopkins said, "We're not paying the retail price."
Jacobs said United may have won discounts from Boeing and Airbus of 10 percent to 15 percent off list price.
The new wide-body planes will replace older Boeings in United's fleet, said the airline, a unit of Chicago-based UAL Corp.
Boeing has been flooded with orders for new aircraft over the past 18 months. That may have made the manufacturer less willing to offer rock-bottom prices to beat Airbus for the narrow-body planes, Jacobs said.
"Boeing may have been more willing to walk away from an order than it would have been earlier," he said.
Airbus initially sold United a fleet of narrow-body A320s in 1992 by offering the airline deep discounts and an unusual walk-away lease arrangement.
"What that did was it got Airbus planes into the United fleet. That made this next decision for United easier," Jacobs said.
United will likely need to order another 100 narrow-body planes over the next seven years to update its fleet, he added.
United said the planes will be part of its "retire and replace" programme to update its fleet.
"By 2000, the programme is expected to generate more than $100 million in annual operating cost savings, reducing fuel, maintenance and labour costs," it said.
The programme will also ensure that United meets certain noise reduction requirements.
Delivery of all aircraft is scheduled to be completed by 2002, United said.
The carrier said it placed orders with United Technologies Corp.'s Pratt &amp; Whitney unit for engines for the Boeing aircraft and with International Aero Engines AG for engines for the Airbus jets. United Technologies owns 33 percent of International Aero Engines.
The Airbus A319s will replace United's older Boeing 737-200s, the airline and Airbus said. The new planes are configured to seat 126 passengers.
The A319 is a smaller derivative of the Airbus A320. United already operates 34 A320s and will take delivery of 16 more by the end of 1998, they said.
United joins German airline Deutsche Lufthansa AG as the largest airline customers for the A320 family, each with 74 planes.
Airbus Industrie is a consortium made up of French-owned Societe Nationale Industrielle, British Aerospace Plc, Daimler-Benz Aerospace, a unit of Germany's Daimler-Benz AG, and Construcciones Aeronauticas SA of Spain.
