Third-quarter profits for St. Jude Medical Inc were held back by several factors, including a missed heart valve sale to Iran, tax law changes and a dilutive acquisition, said chief executive Ronald Matricaria.
In an interview with Reuters on Wednesday evening, Matricaria also said St. Jude would not rule out possibly someday acquiring Cyberonics Inc, although a proposed merger of the two was called off by St. Jude on Wednesday.
"We're going to maintain our equity position in the company," Matricaria said.  
Although it owns 18 percent of Cyberonics, St. Jude said it will not exercise its option to acquire the remainder, as it had proposed doing earlier this year.
Matricaria declined to comment on analysts' speculation that St. Jude found problems with data from medical trials testing Texas-based Cyberonics' implantable device for treating epilepsy by stimulating the vagus nerve.
"I can't say anything about the data," he said. "The best thing I can tell you is if I had a son or daughter and they were on drug therapy and they weren't getting relief, the first thing I'd look for would be the Cyberonics device."  
St. Paul, Minn.-based St. Jude is the world's largest maker of heart valves and is a major producer of pacemakers and other medical devices. It reported third-quarter earnings of $0.44 per share, up from $0.42 per share from a year ago.
Matricaria said the heart valve business showed no growth in the third quarter because St. Jude failed to land a major order from Iran that it did get in last year's third quarter.
"The timing just wasn't in this quarter. It will probably be the fourth quarter or the first quarter next year. It didn't happen (in the third quarter), so it basically wiped out all of our unit growth," he said.  
Changes in U.S. tax law effecting St. Jude's operations in Puerto Rico cut earnings by about $0.02 per share in the third quarter, Matricaria said.
Recently acquired Daig Corp was St. Jude's fastest-growing unit on the quarter and reported sales of $11.5 million. But the Daig acquisition reduced earnings again this quarter by about 10 percent. Matricaria said he sees that level of earnings dilution continuing until mid-1997.
"For the third and fourth quarters this year and the first and second quarters next year, it will have a dilutive impact ...of about 10 percent," he said, adding Daig is expected to begin adding to profits in the third quarter of 1997.
Research and development spending remained about nine percent of sales in the third quarter.
Finally, Matricaria said St. Jude expects to begin regaining market share in the fourth quarter in the pacemaker market, where it has lost ground recently due to technological shortcomings in its products that have now been overcome.
--Chicago Newsdesk 312-408-8787
