Eli Lilly &amp; Co expects marketing and administration costs in the fourth quarter to be only slightly up or flat versus the year-ago level, marking a slowdown from a third-quarter jump of 6.5 percent.
The line item "may be up a couple percent, but certainly below the growth rates we showed in the third quarter," Lilly chief financial officer Charles Golden said in an interview.
Lilly's gross profit margin declined again in the third quarter, partly due to increased marketing costs for launching new products, such as the anti-schizophrenia drug Zyprexa.  
Zyprexa is one of a handful of new, higher-margin products that will begin to lift sales in the fourth quarter, but a margin trend turnaround is likely further off, Golden said.
"I think it's going to be sometime next year. I'm not sure it's in the next quarter," Golden said of improved margins.
Gross margin has declined for two consecutive quarters.
Other than that, analysts greeted Lilly's third-quarter results with a positive tone.
"I didn't see any real big surprises in these numbers," said NatWest Securities drug industry analyst John Lamberton.  
Lilly's third-quarter operating profits of $0.64 per share, versus $0.54 per share in 1995, were precisely in line with Wall Street expectations, said Deutsche Morgan Grenfell analyst Mariola Haggar.
The company said an 11-percent sales gain was led by the anti-depressant Prozac, the human insulin Humulin and increased revenues from the PCS Health Systems unit.
Shares in Lilly were up 1/2 to 69-1/4 on Tuesday after the Indianapolis-based drugmaker reported an 18-percent gain in third-quarter earnings over the year-ago period.  
In the fourth quarter, Golden said, Lilly will likely lose a small benefit to earnings per share stemming from a decline in outstanding shares versus the prior year. That benefit, caused by the split-off of Guidant Corp last year, boosted third-quarter earnings by five percent.
"We will lose that in the fourth quarter ... You're talking a penny or two per share," he said.
In the fourth quarter, the company will also lose a small boost to earnings from a lower tax rate that lifted third-quarter earnings slightly compared with the prior year.
--Chicago Newsdesk 312-408-8787
