Baxter International Inc said it expects to maintain annual gross profit margin in the 44 to 45 percent range.
"We'll definitely be able to stay, on an annual basis, in the 44 to 45 percent range," said chief financial officer Harry Kraemer in an interview with Reuters.
The Deerfield, Ill.-based medical products and services company also is still comfortable with the forecast it made in September that 1996 sales would be about $6.2 billion, although Kraemer suggested that figure could be low.  
"I would say that we're very comfortable with that number ... It could be higher," Kraemer said of the estimate.
Baxter reported third-quarter earnings on Wednesday of $0.65 per share, beating the consensus Wall Street estimate of $0.64 per share. Year-ago profits were $0.59 per share.
Sales for the quarter were $1.31 billion, compared to $1.26 billion a year earlier.
Foreign exchange translations reduced third-quarter sales by about $60 million, Kraemer said. "Despite the fact that our sales impact of foreign exchange was $60 million, we still exceeded the earnings estimate for the quarter," he said.  
Unfavorable currency exchange ratios continued to hit hardest in Japan, Kraemer said. "Going forward, we're assuming that it doesn't get better. If it does get better, then we have this strange thing called an upside ... But predicting foreign exchange is the first step to doom," he said.
After closing its acquisition of Switzerland's Immuno International AG, likely by the end of the year, Baxter expects 60 percent of sales and 75 percent of profits to come from outside the United States.
The company targeted 1996 cash flow of $500 million. In the first nine months of the year, cash flow was $457 million.  
Shares in Baxter were unchanged at 44 at midday.
On a segment basis, sales growth in the third quarter was strongest in Baxter's smallest business, cardiovascular medical products, and weakest in its largest business, the intravenous systems sector.
In cardiovascular, percentage third-quarter sales growth was in the high teens, led by strong sales gains in tissue heart valve and perfusion services, Kraemer said. The segment generated 14.5 percent of 1995's $5.05 billion in sales and is expected to remain in that range this year, he said.  
Percentage sales growth in the biotechnology segment was in the mid-teens, powered by growth in sales of Recombinate, a blood-clotting factor for haemophiliacs, and Gammagard, a therapy for patients with weak immune systems, Kraemer said.
Biotech provided 22.4 percent of 1995 sales, but is expected to jump to 32 percent after the Immuno acquisition.
Kraemer added that Baxter's development of a blood substitute product "continues to move ahead."  
The renal therapy business showed percentage sales growth on the quarter in the low teens outside the United States, while U.S. sales were down in single digits. The U.S. decline was caused by sales lost to Fresenius AG following its acquisition of the National Medical Care unit of W.R. Grace &amp; Co, Kraemer said.
The renal segment's percentage share of Baxter sales is expected to contract to about 22.6 percent this year from 25.5 percent last year, Kraemer said.
In the cash cow intravenous business, percentage non-U.S. sales growth was in the mid-single digits, while it was flat inside the United States, Kraemer said.
The IV business generates more than 50 percent of Baxter's cash flow and is feeling pressure from the continuing cost containment push in the healthcare industry, he said.
The IV segment accounted for 37.4 percent of 1995 sales. This year, that share is likely to fall to about a third of sales, based on Baxter sales growth estimates.
--Chicago Newsdesk 312-408-8787
