The growing attractiveness of the subprime auto lending market was underlined again Monday when Olympic Financial Ltd said it had received expressions of interest from more than one potential acquirer.
Olympic expects to get a formal acquisition offer "within the next several weeks," said spokeswoman Jennifer Weichert.
The company's stock price shot up 6-1/4 to 23-7/8 in heavy trading Monday amid speculation of a buyout.
"We don't have an offer on the table ... and we don't have a price," Weichert said.  
She also declined to identify those expressing interest in buying Olympic. But she said, "Generally the kinds of companies that would look at a firm like this are other finance companies or regional banks or a conglomerate."
Two major regional bank companies have waded into the subprime auto lending market via acquisitions in the past year. KeyCorp bought AutoFinance Group Inc last September, and Southern National Corp is in the process of buying Regional Acceptance Corp.
"It's partly the banks saying they want to recapture this market share," said Robison-Humphrey analyst John Coffey.  
Minneapolis-based Olympic, as with other subprime lenders, makes loans to borrowers with credit histories classified as weak or on the average- to lower-end of prime.
"These companies exist today because the banks have been unable to serve these markets ... and because you don't need to be a deposit taker to make auto loans," Coffey said.
Returns on well-managed subprime car loan portfolios can be strong and attractive to banks, he said.
Earlier this year, the Consumer Bankers Association warned of pitfalls in the subprime business and cautioned banks against jumping headlong into this growing market.  
Analysts said banks that could be interested in Olympic include KeyCorp, Norwest Corp and BankAmerica.
Also mentioned by analysts as a possible suitor was the GE Capital unit of General Electric Co.
Whoever the buyer, Coffey said, Olympic is "intent on selling this company."
He suggested the price could go higher than the $30 per share that other analysts set Monday as the likely top limit.
Trading volume in Olympic shares Monday was triple normal levels. "There's some people taking some bets that it's going to go," said Principal Financial analyst Bob Ollech.
-- Chicago Newsdesk 312-408-8787
