Freed from its slow-growing data storage and imaging businesses, Minnesota Mining &amp; Manufacturing Co. Friday reported a 16 percent jump in earnings for the third quarter.
The St. Paul, Minn.-based manufacturing giant -- sometimes seen as a mirror of the U.S. economy -- said net profits rose to $398 million, or 95 cents a share, in the quarter, from $344 million, or 82 cents a share, in the 1995 period. The year-ago quarter included earnings of $5 million, or 1 cent a share, from discontined operations.
Sales grew 7 percent to $3.62 billion from $3.37 billion.
The results surpassed analysts' average forecasts of 93 cents a share, according to First Call, which tracks estimates.
3M's stock jumped $2 to $73.25, helping to boost the Dow Jones industrial average, of which is it is a component.
"It's been a long time since 3M beat any kind of estimate," said PNC Institutional Investment Services analyst John Franck. "A lot of people were questioning whether this company could grow again."
3M served notice that it can grow with third-quarter sales up 7.5 percent and profits up 17.4 percent, analysts said.
"Now that they've spun off Imation, which was taking up too much of their resources and adding to earnings volatility, this is the 3M that most people expect when they invest in it," said Crowell Weedon analyst Douglas Christopher.
On July 1, 3M's data storage and imaging businesses began operations as an independent company, Imation Corp. The third quarter was 3M's first since the spinoff.
"They're not held back anymore by that business that's now called Imation," said Merrill Lynch analyst Robert Curran.
3M said it expected solid growth again in the fourth quarter.
If it can deliver successive quarters of big gains, the company's stock could move out of the realm of value stock funds and draw the attention again of growth stock investors, analysts said.
"3M is a little different from most companies ... They're PhD oriented so there's a lot of intellectual types up there, but they're building a powerhouse," said Franck.
3M makes thousands of products -- from Scotch tape, Post-it notes and air filters to diaper closures, flexible computer circuits and kitchen sponges.
"It can be said that their domestic business is something of an indicator of the economy as a whole because it's so diverse," said Merrill Lynch's Curran.
That portrayal is somewhat less accurate since the Imation spin-off, since key sectors of the economy are now absent from 3M's product line and more than half its business is outside the United States.
Still, said Franck, "You can probably take U.S. GDP (gross domestic product), multiply it by two and factor in whatever you want for inflation and you've basically got their sales growth rate ... If the economy is doing well, they do well."
The company's units in Japan, elsewhere in Asia, Latin America and Canada posted double-digit volume increases in the quarter while unit sales in Europe grew 7 percent, despite sluggish economies in many major European countries.
For the nine months, net income grew 6 percent to $1.14 billion, or $2.73 a share, as sales rose 4 percent to $10.61 billion.
