TheraTx Inc does not expect the federal government to implement new guidelines for certain key Medicare reimbursement rates until the summer of 1997, postponing until then any likely damage to the health care services concern's profitability.
"It's a government reimbursement change which is forthcoming. It will definitely pressure our earinings, there's no doubt about it," chief financial officer Donald Myll said in an interview.  
Like other companies that provide rehabilitation services to patients mostly in nursing homes, TheraTx has been waiting for two years for action from Washington on the reimbursement issue.
The company's stock has been depressed during that time by a market unjustifiably focused on one issue, Myll said following a presentation to investors at a Robinson-Humphrey conference here on Tuesday.
"At this point, I'd rather have bad news on salary equivalency than what we have now, which is no news," Myll said, referring to the issue.  
Public since 1994, Alpharetta, Ga.-based TheraTx operates 29 nursing homes and provides rehabilitation services on contract to dozens of other nursing homes companies. The firm also runs several occupational health clinics.
The rehabilitation division provides about 45 percent of revenues and offers three main forms of therapy: speech, occupational and physical.  
Most revenues in the rehabilitation area come from Medicare, the federal healthcare program for the elderly. The U.S. Health Care Financing Administration, which oversees Medicare, has been rewriting its reimbursement rules for speech, occupational and physical therapy since October 1994.
If HCFA proceeds with its latest set of reforms, TheraTx could see 1997 earnings come in flat to down compared to this year's level, Myll said.
Much remains to be determined, however, he said. Moreover, despite market concerns, the potential earnings hit from the changes is not large enough to hurt TheraTx seriously, he said.  
"There's no real threat. It's a one-time pricing issue.... The market has no clue on this," Myll said.
TheraTx on Tuesday reported third-quarter profits of $0.29 per share, up from $0.26 per share a year ago. The First Call consensus earnings forecast for the third quarter was $0.30 per share.
"The general performance of the company is on track. Whether (1996 per-share net) is $1.17 or $1.12 is not for me to say...but I would guess that analysts are probably going to revise their estimates downward because the third quarter was a couple pennies below the consensus," Myll said.
The First Call 1996 earnings estimate range is $1.15-$1.20 per share.
TheraTx shares closed Tuesday up 3/8 at 10-1/2.
