Cellex Biosciences Inc said it expects to report a strong fiscal fourth quarter ending September 30 and to move into the black next fiscal year.
In a Reuters interview, chief executive Richard Sakowicz said revenues this year will be "substantially up" from last year. "We're going to have a good fourth quarter," he said.
As of June 30, the company -- which records revenues when it ships product -- had $3.6 million worth of work in process.
The Minneapolis-based concern expects to turn a profit next fiscal year, said chief financial officer Mary Lore.  
Formed in 1983 at the beginning of the biotechnology boom, Cellex makes and markets two types of machines for growing cell cultures used by drug and biotech companies.
Cellex's original business is in perfusion systems in which cells grow for 35-45 days on hollow-fiber membranes contained in cases through which liquid nutrients, such as sugars and vitamins, flow to feed the cells and flush out their waste products. The company has 60-80 percent of the $10-$15 million world market for perfusion culture systems.
In December 1993 Cellex acquired LSL Biolafitte SA, a French maker of larger, old-style cell culture tanks.  
Unlike perfusion systems, tanks grow batches of cells in a nutrient bath that produces for a few days before the cells begin to degrade in their own wastes and have to be replaced.
Biolafitte has 10-15 percent of the $100-million world culture tank market. About 80 percent of Cellex revenues come from sales of the technologically better-established tank systems, with the rest from perfusion systems, Sakowicz said, adding that perfusion system sales are growing faster.
For the nine months ended June 30, tanks provided three-quarters of revenues totalling $10.7 million, up from $7.5 million in the year-ago period, he said.  
Cellex posted a loss of $0.75 per share in the nine-month period, compared to a year-ago $1.69 per share loss.
To boost weak tank sales in the United States, Cellex plans to open a U.S. tank factory, Sakowicz said.
"We'll also be introducing over the next six months a number of bench-top research systems for fermenters," he said.
The company gets about $1.5 million in annual revenues from sales of disposable hollow-fiber packets for its perfusion systems. That figure is growing about 35 percent annually, although most revenues still come from sales of long-lasting tank systems and spare parts.
Shares in Cellex traded off 1/8 Tuesday to 2. Once as high as more than $14 per share, Cellex was hit hard by the biotech sell-off of late 1994, Sakowicz said.
He said he sees signs of renewed investor interest in biotechnology. "As we grow the revenue base and pay down our debt and lessen our dependence on major custom systems, I think our whole operating performance is going to be much improved and much more predictable," Sakowicz said.
--Chicago Newsdesk 312-408-8787
