U.S. consumers are greeting the latest home computers -- faster than ever, but lacking new whiz-bang features -- with a collective yawn.
Major U.S. electronics retailers said Thursday that home PC sales were weak in October and analysts see few signs of a recovery without lower prices or a technology breakthrough.
"Everybody seems to have stopped buying PCs all of a sudden," said Janney Montgomery Scott analyst Terrence McEvoy.
Defying the downdraft are mail-order computer vendors and sellers of computers to business, which are both thriving.  
Their success reflects a shifting market, analysts said.
"The business today is less first-time buyers and more repeat customers," said Robertson Stephens analyst Edward Lee.
The pool of entry-level buyers is contracting and the PC industry increasingly relies on second- or third-time buyers, who are smarter than novices. Veterans look for vendors offering lots of peripherals, such as CompUSA Inc, or discount mail-order houses, such as Dell Computer Corp and Gateway 2000 Inc, analysts said.
That leaves generalists, like Best Buy Co and Circuit City Stores, to fight for a shrinking market.  
Eden Prairie, Minn.-based Best Buy, with 268 stores in 31 states, reported October sales were down 15 percent from a year ago on a same-store basis and said "the sale of personal computers was impacted by industry-wide weakness."
Richmond, Va.-based Circuit City saw an October decline in same-store sales of nine percent and cited "softness in the personal computer and ... consumer electronics categories."
Disappointing results were posted by Tandy Corp, owner of the RadioShack, Computer City and Incredible Universe chains. "Our results parallel the sluggish consumer electronics and personal computer retail market," Tandy said.  
"Demand is starting to dry up across the board," Lee said.
Best Buy shares Thursday fell 3-1/4 to 13 on the October report. Circuit City shares were up 3/8 to 34-7/8. Shares in Fort Worth, Texas-based Tandy were off 3/4 to 38-3/4.
At the same time, shares in Dell were up 1-1/2 to 88-5/8, while Gateway 2000 shares were up 3-3/4 to 52-3/4. Shares in computer and microprocessor manufacturers also rallied, with Intel Corp up 5-3/4 to 124-5/8 and International Business Machines Corp up 1 to 134-1/4.  
PC sales at this time last year were buoyed by promotions and the multi-media explosion. The home PC was transformed from a word processor into a high-quality game station and an educational tool for kids thanks to CD-ROM drives, speakers and soundcard packages and a bevy of new applications.
"Today, computers are faster than they were a year ago, but what does it do more?" Lee asked. "Demand is driven by applications and how it changes the typical consumer's life."
Savvy consumers could just be waiting for lower prices, of course, and analysts said if they keep dropping, there may yet be a holiday buying burst. But without some hot new features, the shopping season for PC retailers could be a cold one.
"When you've got Intel moving up five in one day and Best Buy moving down three the same day, that tells you something ... It's a tough business," said Securities Corp of Iowa analyst Pat Dunkerley.
Reuters Chicago Newsdesk  312-408-8787
