Baxter International Inc said on Wednesday it expects to record unspecified charges against earnings in the first quarter of 1997 on in-process research and development acquired through its purchases of Research Medical Inc and Immuno International AG.
The amounts of the anticipated charges have not been determined, said Michael Mussallem, Baxter group vice president, in an interview with Reuters.  
The Research Medical charge "will be substantial," Mussallem said. "When you start talking about half the transaction value, that's substantial."
He said the company expects to have a better grasp on the estimated charges by the end of January.
Baxter announced early Wednesday it reached a definitive agreement to acquire Utah-based Research Medical for about $236 million, or $23.50 per share, in a stock transaction.
At the same time, Baxter said it expects to close its purchase of Immuno in two to six weeks. Baxter agreed in August to buy Immuno for $715 million over three years.  
The acquisition had been delayed last month because it was not yet approved by the U.S. Federal Trade Commission and because of a postponed bond issue related to the deal.
In announcing the Research Medical acquisition, Deerfield, Ill.-based Baxter said in a statement it expects the purchase to be accretive to earnings in 1998.
In the interview, Mussallem said, "This is not going to be significantly accretive in 1998. It will be more significantly accretive beyond that."
The acquisition will dilute Baxter earnings through 1997 in decreasing amounts with each successive quarter, he said.  
"You're really talking about pennies here," he added.
Shares in Baxter, a U.S. healthcare products giant, were up 3/8 to 41-3/8 in midday New York Stock Exchange trading.
A maker of medical devices focused on heart surgery, Research Medical employs 270 people, mostly at its Salt Lake City base. No layoffs or transfers are planned, Baxter said.
Research Medical chief executive Gary Crocker will stay on with Baxter through a transition. "We'll see how long it goes beyond that, but we certainly welcome him," Mussallem said.
Under the acquisition agreement, Research Medical shareholders will get shares of Baxter worth $23.50 for each share of Research Medical. The Baxter stock will be priced as the average of the 10 trading days ending two days prior to the Research Medical shareholders meeting. No meeting date has been set, but is expected to come in the first quarter.
--Chicago Newsdesk 312-408-8787
