Monsanto Co. said on Monday it will spin off its chemicals business in a long-awaited and costly move that will allow the company to focus on its faster-growing agriculture, food and healthcare units.
Between 1,500 and 2,500 jobs will be eliminated in the transaction, causing the company to take a $400 million to $600 million fourth-quarter charge against earnings, it said.
"What they're trying to create is one company that's clearly focused on growth and one that's clearly focused on efficiency," said Smith Barney industry analyst James Wilbur.
St. Louis, Mo.-based Monsanto is a far-flung conglomerate whose varied products include Roundup weed killer, NutraSweet sweetener, carpet fibers, and drugs for treating arthritis and insomnia, as well as genetically engineered corn and soybeans.
Wall Street had long expected the giant company, which has about $8.9 billion in annual sales, to break itself up.
"It was a fait accompli," Wilbur said. "The market likes companies that are less diversifed."
The pared-down Monsanto will focus on its higher-profit margin agricultural, pharmaceuticals and biotechnology businesses, a spokesman said.
The new chemicals business will have to emphasize production efficiencies in a market subject to cyclical sales trends and intense global competition, analysts said.
"After careful consideration, we're convinced these businesses must operate separately to reach their maximum potential and thereby unlock significant value in both," Monsanto Chairman Robert Shapiro said.
Shapiro will head the post-spin-off Monsanto and Executive Vice President Robert Potter, who runs the chemicals business, will run the new company, still unnamed, Monsanto said.
The scope of job cuts coming with the spin-off has not been determined, but more details will likely be available by the end of January, a spokesman said.
Monsanto employs 28,500 people around the world. The anticipated cuts would reduce that headcount by 5 percent to 9 percent, the company said.
The tax-free spin-off proposed would create a new firm by the end of 1997. Current Monsanto shareholders would keep their Monsanto shares and get shares in the new concern as a special dividend, the company said.
Monsanto said its directors approved the spin-off.
The company also said the exact amount of the after-tax charge, which is to cover the costs of job reductions, asset and equipment write-offs, and consolidation of some manufacturing and offices, would be fixed at a later date.
Analysts estimated the one-time charge would total between 80 cents and $1 per share.
Monsanto, which reported 1995 profits of $739 million, or $1.25 a share, is expected to post per-share profits for 1996 of $1.50, according to First Call, which tracks analysts' projections.
Monsanto said in October it was considering options for its chemicals business, which had about $3 billion in 1995 revenues but is growing less rapidly than other units and is subject to more ups and downs.
"Chemicals would hurt the multiple of the company if they held onto it ... because the chemicals growth rate is not as high as the agriculturals growth rate and the earnings are more cyclical," said PaineWebber industry analyst Paul Raman.
The chemicals business -- making acrylic carpet fibers, plastic interlayers for glass, industrial phosphorus compounds and other products -- was shopped around for months, but no buyer was found, in part for tax reasons, analysts said.
Monsanto said the spin-off requires shareholder approval and clearance by government agencies and the Internal Revenue Service for it to be tax-free.
The spin-off is intended to be completed no later than the end of next year. Until then, the two companies will operate separately within Monsanto beginning early next year, it said.
Monsanto's stock slipped 37.5 cents to $40.75 in midday trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
