Aon Corp said Wednesday it expects to take a charge against earnings of about $100 million in the 1997 first quarter on its $1.23-billlion purchase of Alexander &amp; Alexander Services Inc.
In an interview, Aon Chief Executive and Chairman Patrick Ryan told Reuters, "There will be consolidating costs that will take place in the first quarter after we close."
Those costs will cause the charge, he said. "It's certainly going to be in the $100 million range ... It's a 'guesstimate' at this stage, but it's in that range."  
Ryan said Aon does not expect additional charges beyond the first quarter.
"But there is a fair value charge that will go into the deal cost," he said. "Space costs and corporate redundancies have yet to be determined ... So it's difficult to say at this point what will be a charge to earnings and what will be an increase in terms of the cost of the deal."
He added, "The charge is in that ($100-million) range. I can't get any more precise at this stage."
Chicago-based Aon would become either the largest or second-largest insurance brokerage through the deal, he said.  
How the post-acquisition Aon will size up against rival giant Marsh &amp; McLennan Cos Inc of New York depends on how the two companies' operations are counted, Ryan said.
"It's not apples to apples," he said.
Asked whether Aon would look to do further acquisitions, Ryan said, "We've got to digest these."
In October Aon completed a $250-million acquisition of Bain Hogg Group Inc from Inchcape Plc.
"The industry has been consolidating. Certainly, people have been expecting us to continue to be a leader in that. And we had announced that we intended to be," Ryan said.  
"We've made what we think to be two strategic and good acquisitions. Now we've got to put them together," he said.
Aon employs about 27,000 people. Alexander &amp; Alexander, based in New York, employs about 12,000.
"We're not in a position to comment on layoffs, other than to say that as you bring businesses together, there obviously will be some redundancies," Ryan said.
"There will be some redundancy at corporate and things like that that we have to identify," he said.
"Will all employees that are currently employed be employed down the road? That generally is not the case. But I don't think you should look for huge layoffs," he said.
Shares in Aon were up 3/8 to 58 and shares in Alexander &amp; Alexander were up 3-1/8 to 17-1/4 at midday on the New York Stock Exchange.
-- Chicago Newsdesk 312-408-8787
