Aon Corp. said Wednesday it agreed to acquire Alexander &amp; Alexander Services Inc. for about $1.23 billion, creating by some counts the world's largest insurance and risk consulting company.
Aon, a Chicago-based insurance holding company, said it will pay $17.50 a share, or about $790 million, for Alexander &amp; Alexander's common stock and about $437.5 million to holders of the company's preferred stock.
Layoffs and office closings are expected to follow the deal as Aon moves to cut cost, analysts said.
With offices around the world, Aon employs about 27,000 people; Alexander &amp; Alexander about 12,000.
"You have to assume every place there's an Aon office and an Alex office, one of them has got to close. And that's a lot of places," said Conning &amp; Co. insurance analyst Gary Ransom.
Aon Chairman Patrick Ryan said he could not estimate possible job cuts.
"I don't think you should look for huge layoffs," he said.
Alexander &amp; Alexander's stock jumped $3.125 to $17.25, while Aon rose $1 to $58.625, both on the New York Stock Exchange.
Alexander &amp; Alexander, based in New York, is the fourth-largest insurance broker in the world. It has operations in 80 countries, primarily the United States, Canada and Britain.
After its acquisition of Alexander &amp; Alexander, Aon will become either the largest or second-largest insurance broker in the world.
How it will size up against rival giant Marsh &amp; McLennan Cos. Inc. depends on how their operations are counted, Ryan said. "It's not apples to apples," he said.
Aon said it will begin a cash tender offer for Alexander &amp; Alexander's common shares no later than Dec. 16 and upon completion of the tender offer the purchase of the preferred shares will begin.
"Virtually everyone who watches the insurance industry has been expecting this deal," said Robinson-Humphrey insurance analyst Thomas Rosencrants.
"It's a fair price. A&amp;A has been struggling for 15 years. There will be tremendous economies of scale to come out of this as A&amp;A is folded into Aon," Rosencrants said.
Analysts said they would expect Ryan to head up the combined operations and Alexander &amp; Alexander Chairman and Chief Executive Officer Frank Zarb to step aside.
"I would have to assume that Frank Zarb would not be around," Ransom said.
The deal was approved unanimously by the boards of both companies, Aon said.
Over the past decade, the insurance industry has become increasingly competitive and insurers have been forced to hold down premium rate increases, which has put downward pressure on their profit margins.
"There's no end in sight to the 10-year soft market," Rosencrants said.
Competition has pressured companies to look for strategic alternatives and led to industry consolidation.
Aon in October completed a $250 million acquisition of Bain Hogg Group Inc. from Britain's Inchcape Plc. The Alexander &amp; Alexander deal likely caps Aon's acquisition drive for now, analysts said.
"The industry has been consolidating. Certainly people have been expecting us to continue to be a leader in that," Ryan said. "We've made two what we think to be strategic and good acquisitions. Now we've got to put them together."
Aon added that its offer was still subject to several conditions, including the tender and non-withdrawal of at least a majority of the voting power of A&amp;A's common shares, and various regulatory approvals.
