Aon Corp's acquisition of Alexander &amp; Alexander Services Inc looks like a good deal for both insurance giants and an even better one for American International Group Inc.
Aon will pay an aggregate of $1.23 billion for Alexander &amp; Alexander -- a price called reasonable by industry analysts.
Included in that amount is $317.5 million in cash for Alexander &amp; Alexander's Series B preferred shares, which AIG bought for $200 million in June 1994. "AIG made out pretty good on this," said Conning &amp; Co analyst Gary Ransom.  
An AIG spokesman declined to comment on the transaction.
Analysts had long expected Aon to make a major buy. Its purchase this fall for $250 million of Inchcape Plc's Bain Hogg Group unit, a third the size of Alexander &amp; Alexander, did not convince most analysts that Aon was through expending its $1 billion cash warchest. "Virtually everyone who watches the insurance industry has been expecting this deal," Robinson Humphrey analyst Thomas Rosencrants said.
"It's good for Aon. It's good for Alex, too. It gives them something better than what they had. Their (Alexander's) stock price looked like it was going to keep going down," Ransom said.  
Aon chief executive Patrick Ryan is expected to head up the combined operation, with Alexander &amp; Alexander chief executive Frank Zorb expected eventually to step aside.
"I would not be surprised to see Frank take a consulting role. I would not expect him to be involved to a great extent following the merger," Rosencrants said.
In an interview with Reuters, Ryan said Aon was attracted to the strategic fit offered by Alexander &amp; Alexander.
"They've got a great international business. They've got a wonderful consulting business that fits with ours. And they're strong in Canada, where we are quite small," Ryan said.  
Over the past decade, the insurance industry has become increasingly competitive and insurers have had to hold down premium increases. Profit margins have suffered in the process and industry consolidation has accelerated.
"There's no end in sight to the 10-year soft market," Rosencrants said. "A&amp;A has been struggling for 15 years ... Their only realistic alternative would have been to sell to Marsh &amp; McLennan (Cos Inc). But they've been such close competitors over the years that there could have been some cultural problems there."
Aon shares were up 1-1/4 to 58-7/8, Alexander &amp; Alexander was up 3 to 17-1/8, and AIG was off 2 to 109-5/8.
((--Chicago Newsdesk 312-408-8787))
