Increasing pressure from customers to hold down prices will keep a profit squeeze on U.S. medical device manufacturers in 1997, although the sector's biggest firms are expected to show healthy growth.
Other variables looming over the industry are the naming of a successor to departing U.S. Food and Drug Administration Commissioner David Kessler and Congress' mood on healthcare.
"Expectations are still for a positive environment from a Washington standpoint, but I don't think you can take that for granted," said Prudential Securities analyst Charlene Lu.  
After six contentious years, Kessler announced his resignation from the FDA last month. The White House has not named a replacement. "Questions like who replaces Kessler are going to have a big impact on whether new products get approved quickly," Lu said.
Congressional and White House sentiment on reforming the U.S. healthcare industry is lukewarm at the moment, but could reemerge as an issue, analysts said.
"Meanwhile, managed care marches on and that will have an impact," said Wasserstein Perella analyst Robert Dunne.  
Health maintenance organizations, hospitals and others that buy medical devices -- such as pacemakers, catheters and heart valves -- are squeezing device makers for lower prices. That has cut into profits and limited the growth potential of some companies, analysts said.
"You're going to continue to see greater and greater market pressures," Lu said.
In search of growth, many device companies are looking overseas and finding opportunity. "To grow the top line, you've got to move outside the United States," said Dain Bosworth analyst Rachael Scherer.  
Partly as a result, the sector's biggest firms -- those with global reach -- had the best 1996 and are widely expected to lead the pack again next year. Companies such as Medtronic Inc, Boston Scientific Corp and Guidant Corp are widely seen as market outperformers for 1997.
"I'm looking probably for 20 percent-plus earnings growth from them ... Those stocks will probably perform a little bit better than the market," Dunne said.  
Possibly less rosy is the general outlook for small device companies. Scherer pointed out that Nasdaq medical technology stocks severely underperformed the Standard &amp; Poor's 500 Stock Index this year, while larger listed issues topped the index, mirroring a dichotomy seen in other industries, as well.
"We're optimistic that Nasdaq med tech issues will outperform next year," Scherer said.
Smaller and mid-sized firms named by analysts as potential 1997 winners were Datascope Corp, Target Therapeutics Inc, Stryker Corp, Mentor Corp, and Nellcor Puritan Bennett Inc.
On the technology front, growth was expected to continue to be strong for stents, which shore up the insides of diseased blood vessels, and implantable defibrillators, which treat too-rapid heartbeat.
Key products expected next year from industry giant Medtronic include an atrial fibrillation device, a device for continually recording electrocardiogram readouts to help diagnose unexpected fainting, a new stent and an implantable drug pump for cancer patients, Medtronic said.
((--Chicago Newsdesk 312-408-8787))
