If the weather cooperates, U.S. retailers expect this weekend to cap a holiday shopping season that looks moderately better than last year's, despite being shorter by five days.
"This weekend is crucial," said Prudential Securities retail analyst Wayne Hood in Atlanta. "With the snow and cold weather, it's a little too early to tell. ... But on balance, it should be a better holiday sales season than last year."
Warmer weather is forecast for much of the country this weekend following a cold snap that rattled some regions.
A blast of arctic air slowed shopping earlier this week in Minnesota, the Dakotas, Iowa and Nebraska, said Susan Eich, spokeswoman for Minneapolis-based retailer Dayton Hudson Corp., which owns Target, Mervyn's and three department store chains.
Cold, wet weather in the Northeast dampened midweek shopping in the New York area, analysts said.
Snow fell Wednesday in Atlanta. And south Florida felt an unfamiliar chill Friday, but the retail impact was minimal. "It looks fairly good. ... Down here they're buying," said J.W. Charles Securities retail analyst Allen Roness in Boca Raton, Fla. The registers are ringing in California as well, where weather has not been a problem, said Robertson Stephens retail analyst Edward Weller in San Francisco. "It's going to be a reasonably good Christmas for American consumers and a very good one for retailers," he said.
He noted, however, that some sectors are outperforming others. Clothing sales are strong, reflecting perhaps the closings this past year of hundreds of apparel retailers, Weller said.
On the other hand, home computer sales continue to look anemic and prices are coming down fast. "Consumer demand for computers is, in technical terms ... poor," Weller said.
There are five fewer shopping days this year between Thanksgiving and Christmas compared with 1995. As a result, retailers have that much less time to meet their sales targets and consumers have that much less time to shop and compare.
"Everybody knew it going in. So they got the ads out early and put the decorations up early," said A.G. Edwards retail analyst Stephen Latz in St. Louis, where warmer weather is forecast for the weekend.
Staring down the barrel of a shortened season, retailers have begun some sales promotions, but last year's huge price markdowns so far are not being matched, Latz said.
"I don't think anybody has gone nuts like they did in past years," he said. "It's going to be the best season in the last few years, but those five fewer days are a lot to overcome ... That's going to be the story."
