After a tough year of slimmer profits and lower stock values, U.S. health maintenance organisations are expected to bounce back a bit in 1997.
Medical cost inflation is slowing and analysts see room for HMOs to raise premiums and restore some of the profit margin they lost this year. Still, the prognosis is cautious as the industry continues consolidating and faces controversy.
"It's not a super spectacular outlook, but it certainly looks better than 1995 and 1996," said Bear Stearns managed health care industry analyst Gary Frazier.
This year, medical costs, driven largely by higher prescription drug prices, rose faster than forecasts based on historical trends and left HMOs locked into premium rates that were too low to preserve profit margins. By early spring, the pinch was evident to Wall Street and HMO stock values from March to July declined sharply across the board.
Thirteen of the 16 largest publicly traded HMOs still have not regained first-quarter highs since the sell-off. The three that have are United Wisconsin Services Inc., Oxford Health Plans Inc. and FHP International Corp., which is being acquired by PacifiCare Health Systems Inc.
Good recovery has been experienced by PacifiCare, WellPoint Health Networks Inc. and Aetna Inc., while only modest upward reversals have been made by industry giant United Healthcare Corp., Humana Inc. and others. Still reeling from the debacle are Coventry Corp., Mid Atlantic Medical Services Inc. and Physician Corp.
"Questions about pricing and margins still hang over the industry," said Salomon Brothers managed health care industry analyst Robert Hoehn.
Medical cost inflation forecasts vary, but most analysts look for premiums to rise slightly faster than costs in 1997.
"The HMOs are starting to take some action by raising premiums, but the problem is they're really just catching up," said Peter Reilly, an actuary at the health care consulting firm of Milliman &amp; Robertson. "Premium increases have lagged cost increases significantly."
Whether HMOs are able next year to restore profit margins to the levels that Wall Street likes may have as much to do with their willingness to court public criticism as with their actual market power, suggested one industry observer.
"This has been a year characterised by scathing attacks on the industry with the implication that profits are being made at the expense of high-quality health care," said Doug Sherlock, editor of the industry newsletter Pulse.
With one eye on public relations and the other on the bottom line, some HMOs in 1996 may have intentionally let margins slip, Sherlock suggested. "One or 2 percent profit margins are less easy to attack than 9 percent," he said.
If the heat in state legislatures and elsewhere subsides, HMOs may feel they have room to move, or they may not, Sherlock said. "These companies still have ... all the bargaining power they need. It's really a situation of whether they choose to exercise it or not."
Based on a survey of 100 HMOs nationwide, Pulse projects the industry's aggregate medical-loss ratio to decline 1.5 percentage points next year, boosting profits slightly. The ratio, which measures how much HMOs pay out to cover members' medical costs, rose a hefty 4.2 percentage points in 1996.
More mergers and acquisitions are expected, as well. Of the more than 600 U.S. HMOs, only United and Aetna look to be truly national players, Hoehn said. "Everybody else has to either merge with someone or sell," he said.
