Holiday sales for top U.S. retailers so far look mildly disappointing, but Wall Street is withholding judgment on the season and retailing's fourth quarter profit outlook until all the scores are tallied.
"There's a lot of nervousness about retailers and what they're going to report. It's definitely taking a toll on the stocks," said UBS Securities retailing analyst Annie Erner.
Shares in most retailers fell Thursday after J.C. Penney Co Inc said fourth-quarter earnings would not meet expectations and November-December profit margins were thin.  
Dayton Hudson Corp also reported early holiday results Thursday that were less than exciting, following a Friday warning of lower holiday sales from  Nordstrom Inc. The reports put retail analysts on edge, but they remain confident that other big players, such as Sears Roebuck and Co, May Department Stores and Federated Department Stores, will meet or exceed expectations.
"My impression is that May did okay. Federated looks like they're on plan and for Sears, we're looking for a good fourth quarter," said Brown Brothers Harriman analyst Joseph Ronning.
Shares in all three companies fell Thursday, nevertheless.  
The only major retail stocks to defy the downdraft, which was aggravated by a broadly lower Dow Jones industrial average, were Toys R Us Inc and Saks Holdings Inc, reflecting good toy and luxury items sales, analysts said.
Bed Bath &amp; Beyond Inc, a smaller home furnishings seller, also made gains Thursday after reporting good same-store sales for December, offering hope to analysts of more positive surprises from specialty retailers.
No such hopes lingered for hard-pressed computer retailers, however, as shares in CompUSA Inc, Tandy Corp and Circuit City Stores Inc declined.  
Reflecting a broad slump in home computer sales, CompUSA said Thursday that second-quarter same-store sales rose 1.5 percent, letting down analysts who had expected three percent.
Doing substantially better than computer sellers are drugstores, which may be among the top performers in weeks ahead as retailers post fourth-quarter results, analysts said.
Rite Aid Corp on Thursday reported strong December same-store sales gains. Advances in non-pharmacy revenues signalled good holiday gift sales and pharmacy-side gains reflected the growing prevalence of third-party payor schemes for prescription drugs, analysts said.  
In addition, J.P. Morgan Securities analyst Mark Husson said, "The cough and cold season is beginning to warm up. So that's good for sales, too."
Among department stores and discounters, a big factor in the mixed holiday sales season was the fact that it was five days shorter than last year's due to a fluke in the calendar.
"None of us knew what this five fewer days would do ... to the mechanics of the season," said Morgan Stanley analyst Bruce Missett.  The net result was that most big sales gains were restricted by the shortened season, while mediocre showings were made worse by it, analysts said.
"You came out with a trend line not dissimilar to what we've seen all year, which is modest growth," Missett said.
((--Chicago Newsdesk 312-408-8787))
