Major retailers reported mixed results Thursday for the crucial holiday sales season, sparking a drop in their stocks on Wall Street.
The preliminary holiday reports by J.C. Penney Co. Inc., Dayton Hudson Corp., Carson Pirie Scott &amp; Co. and others are "further confirmation that the holiday was one of moderate growth," Morgan Stanley retailing analyst Bruce Missett said.
"There's a lot of nervousness about retailers and what they're going to report. It's definitely taking a toll on the stocks," said UBS Securities retailing analyst Annie Erner.
J.C. Penney said sales for the four weeks ended Dec. 28 were close to the Plano, Texas-based company's goals but that markdowns were higher than expected.
Total sales, including drug store sales, for the period were $3.6 billion, a 23.2 percent increase from the $2.9 billion in sales for the comparable period in 1995.
Same-store sales at J.C. Penney, not including drug stores, for the holiday period increased 6.2 percent over 1995. The company did not release dollar figures for same-store sales, which cover stores open at least a year.
The company also said it expected fourth-quarter earnings before charges would not meet Wall Street expectations and that profit margins for November and December were below planned levels.
J.C. Penney stock dropped $1.25 to $47.50 in midday trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
Dayton Hudson said same-store sales at its 65 department stores in the Midwest, 736 Target discount stores nationwide and 300 Mervyn's discount stores in the West and South were up 4.2 percent for the same period. The Minneapolis-based company did not give dollar figures.
"Results at Target and Mervyn's for the four weeks were on plan, while department stores sales were below our expectations," Chief Executive Bob Ulrich said in a statement. "With the shorter selling season this year, we planned our sales conservatively and generally met our plans for the season."
Dayton Hudson department store sales increased 0.3 percent, Mervyn's sales decreased 4.1 percent and Target sales rose 7.1 percent, the company said.
Dayton Hudson stock fell $1.375 to $37.875 on the NYSE.
Carson Pirie reported a 12.8 percent increase in sales to $194.1 million for the four-week period. Same-store sales rose 7.6 percent.
"The sales results during the 1996 holiday season were in line with my expectations," Chairman Stanton Bluestone said in a statement.
But the Milwaukee-based company, which operates 53 department stores and four furniture stores, said it expected five-week sales results for fiscal December will fall slightly below those for the five-week period ended Dec. 30, 1995.
Carson Pirie and Dayton Hudson expect to report five-week results next week.
Last Friday, Seattle-based Nordstrom Inc. warned that holiday sales would decline from year-ago levels and that earnings would be below Wall Street estimates.
The reports put retail analysts on edge, but they remained confident that other big names, such as Chicago's Sears Roebuck and Co., May Department Stores Co. of St. Louis, and Federated Department Stores, of Cincinnati, would meet or exceed expectations.
"My impression is that May did okay. Federated looks like they're on plan and for Sears, we're looking for a good fourth quarter," said Brown Brothers Harriman analyst Joseph Ronning.
A big factor in the mixed sales performance for the holiday season was the fact that it was five days shorter than the previous year since the Thanksgiving holiday was later.
"None of us knew what this five fewer days would do ... to the mechanics of the season," said Morgan Stanley's Missett.
The net result was that most big sales gains were restricted by the shortened season, while mediocre showings were made worse by it, analysts said.
"You came out with a trend line not dissimilar to what we've seen all year, which is modest growth," Missett said.
Carson Pirie's stock dropped 25 cents to $25 on the NYSE. Among other retailers, Sears dropped $1.25 to $44.75 and May fell $1.25 to $45.50, both on the NYSE.
