Major retailers reported mixed results for the crucial holiday sales season Thursday, sparking a drop in retail stocks.
The preliminary holiday reports by J.C. Penney Co. Inc., Dayton Hudson Corp., Carson Pirie Scott &amp; Co. and others are "further confirmation that the holiday was one of moderate growth," Morgan Stanley retailing analyst Bruce Missett said in an interview.
J.C. Penney said sales for the four weeks ended Dec. 28 were close to the Plano, Texas-based company's goals but markdowns were higher than expected.
Total sales, including drug store sales, for the period totalled $3.6 billion, a 23.2 percent increase from the $2.9 billion in sales for the comparable period in 1995.
Same-store sales at J.C. Penney stores, not including drug stores, for the holiday period increased 6.2 percent over 1995. The company did not release dollar figures for same-store sales, which cover stores open at least a year.
The company also said it expected fourth-quarter earnings before charges would not meet Wall Street expectations and that profit margins for November and December were below planned levels.
J.C. Penney stock dropped $1.75 to $47 in midday trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
Dayton Hudson said same-store sales at its 65 department stores in the Midwest, 736 Target discount stores nationwide and 300 Mervyn's discount stores in the West and South were up 4.2 percent for the same period. The Minneapolis-based company did not give dollar figures.
"Results at Target and Mervyn's for the four weeks were on plan, while department stores sales were below our expectations," Chief Executive Bob Ulrich said in a statement. "With the shorter selling season this year, we planned our sales conservatively and generally met our plans for the season."
Dayton Hudson department store sales increased 0.3 percent, Mervyn's sales decreased 4.1 percent and Target sales increased 7.1 percent, the company said.
Dayton Hudson stock fell $1.25 to $38 on the NYSE.
Carson Pirie reported a 12.8 percent increase in sales to $194.1 million for the four-week period vs. 1995. Same-store sales rose 7.6 percent.
"The sales results during the 1996 holiday season were in line with my expectations," Chairman Stanton Bluestone said in a statement.
But the Milwaukee-based company, which operates 53 department stores and four furniture stores, said it expects five-week sales results for fiscal December will fall slightly below those for the five-week period ended Dec. 30, 1995.
Carson Pirie and Dayton Hudson expect to report five-week results next week.
Carson Pirie stock dropped 25 cents to $25 on the NYSE. Among other retailers, Sears Roebuck &amp; Co. dropped $1.25 to $44.875 and May Department Stores Co. fell $1.375 to $45.375, both on the NYSE.
