General Instrument Corp is setting goals for NextLevel Systems Inc -- the lead business to come out of a three-way corporate break-up -- of 35-45 percent annual operating income growth and 22-25 percent annual sales growth on operating margins of 10-12 percent.
Those growth rates could be even higher this year, General Instrument chief executive Richard Friedland said in an interview with Reuters on Tuesday, adding he sees stock price gains ahead for all three firms being formed in the break-up -- NextLevel, CommScope Inc and General Semiconductor Inc.
"I'd look to CommScope and General Semiconductor to increase at above-average rates in the eight to 10 percent return range, maybe more. I see NextLevel Systems doubling over the next year to 18 months," Friedland said.
Shares in General Instrument were up 1/4 to 22-7/8 Tuesday after the Chicago-based company announced a three-way split designed primarily to unlock the share value of NextLevel.
For CommScope, to be built on the world's largest coaxial cable business, Friedland said management's goals are 18 to 20 percent annual sales growth and 16 to 17 percent operating income growth with operating margins of 16 to 17 percent.
For General Semiconductor, to be formed from General Instrument's electronic component manufacturing operations, goals are 10 to 11 percent operating income growth on annual sales growth of 14-16 percent and operating margins of 20-21 percent, Friedland told analysts at a meeting Tuesday.
Under the plan, General Instrument shareholders will get one share in each of the new companies for each General Instrument share held, Friedland said.
"We may have to do a reverse split to comply with New York Stock Exchange rules," he said, adding closing of the transaction is seen by July.
No layoffs or hiring are planned. "There are no staff actions contemplated as a result of the transaction," he said.
General Instrument has primary goals in the restructuring, Friedland said. One is to unlock the value of the businesses that will comprise NextLevel, which analysts said has been held back by General Instrument's other segments.
"Electronic conglomerates are not looked at very favorably these days," said Michael Geran, industry analyst at the Pershing Division of Donaldson Lufkin &amp; Jenrette.
The other goal, Friedland said, has to do with General Instrument's heritage as part of the cable television industry -- a legacy that has overshadowed its newer technologies.
"We're going to continue to service the heck out of the cable base, but we're also getting into provision of dial tone and data. We need to break out of that mold General Instrument has been in of being a cable supplier," Friedland said.
He said the company decided to proceed with the break-up because it showed in 1996 that it could meet its business objectives, after failing to do so in years past. "We've made that transition from development to deployment," he said.
Deprived of cash flows thrown off by the CommScope and General Semiconductors businesses, NextLevel will fund growth two ways. "We do have a lot of visibility to cash flow in NextLevel Systems now that we have the products going out the door," he said. "So we feel that, while NextLevel Systems may be slightly cash negative in '97, even our downside scenarios say we have more than adequate capabilities."
In addition, he said, most of General Instrument's debt will be loaded onto CommScope and General Semiconductor, which can afford to service it. "That leaves CommScope and General Semiconductor in fine shape in terms of their capital structure because they do generate the cash to pay this debt off in the near-term," he said.
