General Instrument Corp pleased Wall Street Tuesday by announcing a three-way corporate break-up that analysts said will unlock the value of the company's core high-tech communications systems business.
"Generally, these things work in the sense that when you do the spinoff, the sum of the parts tends to be greater than the initial whole," said industry analyst Hickman Powell at Southeast Research Partners.
At the same time, the planned creation of three new companies raises some questions, analysts said.
Chicago-based General Instrument said it will create a company to be called NextLevel Systems Inc out of its cable television, satellite and telephone businesses.
Also planned is creation of a new firm called CommScope Inc out of a world-leading coaxial cable manufacturing business, and General Semiconductor Inc out of electronic component manufacturing operations.
"Investors will be able to value each of the three companies on its own merits and growth fundamentals," said General Instrument chief executive Richard Friedland.
Shares in General Instrument were up 1/4 to 23 at midday.
The prize to emerge from the bust-up will be NextLevel, focused on high-speed modems, television cable set-top boxes and other hot areas. "That's where the growth is," said analyst Louis Ehrenkrantz of Ehrenkrantz King Nussbaum.
But some analysts questioned how the business will fund its growth after being stripped of the coaxial and semiconductor businesses, which throw off large cash flows.
"The answer must be that that portion will have to, from time to time, come to the equity market," Powell said, adding that a recent optic fiber deal with NYNEX Corp bodes well for NextLevel.
Optic fiber is replacing coaxial cable in many places, especially along communications trunk lines, which may pose a threat to the distant future of CommScope, analysts said.
But Powell pointed out, "There's still quite a lot of the world to be cabled up...That company, by the way, has been gaining market share."
Finally, General Semiconductor on its own will suffer from the same cyclical swings in the electronic components markets that drove it as a unit of General Instrument, analysts said.
"Two-thirds of that company are going to be very good stocks. The semi-conductor unit, well, it will come along when the semiconductors recover," Ehrenkrantz said.
General Instrument said the break-up will force it to take charges against earnings of as much as $135 million on its fourth quarter results due February 10 and later this year.
