General Instrument Corp. said Tuesday it planned to split into three companies through a tax-free spin-off to shareholders in a bid to boost its stock market value.
Wall Street welcomed the move, which was seen as unlocking the value of the Chicago-based company's core high-tech communications business.
"That's where the growth is," said industry analyst Louis Ehrenkrantz of brokerage Ehrenkrantz King Nussbaum.
General Instrument said it will create NextLevel Systems Inc. out of its cable television, satellite and telephone business; CommScope Inc. out of its coaxial cable manufacturing business; and General Semiconductor Inc. from its units that make electronic components.
"Investors will be able to value each of the three companies on its own merits and growth fundamentals," said General Instrument Chairman Richard Friedland.
The company said the breakup will force it to take an after-tax charge against earnings of $55 million to $65 million, or 37 cents to 44 cents a share, for the fourth quarter. The fourth-quarter charges consist mainly of costs related to the transition to the next generation of digital products, restructuring costs incurred through Dec. 31, and the write-down of certain assets, the company said.
The company said it will incur additional charges this year of up to $70 million for costs related to the spin-off, including the costs of dividing the company's Taiwan assets between NextLevel Systems and General Semiconductor.
The company expects fourth-quarter earnings, which will be announced Feb. 10, to be in the range of 28 cents to 32 cents a share, excluding the charges. Last year, the company reported net earnings of $53.5 million, or 43 cents per share, in its fiscal fourth quarter.
The restructuring is expected to be completed this summer.
Friedland, who will become chairman of NextLevel, said the three businesses would be best positioned as independent, public companies.
"The businesses have different dynamics and business cycles, serve different markets and customers, are subject to different competitive forces and must be managed with different short- and long-term goals," Friedland said in a statement.
NextLevel will be comprised of General Instrument's cable, satellite and telephone businesses, which had 1996 sales of about $1.7 billion. The company will supply systems and components for high-performance networks delivering video, voice and Internet and data services.
CommScope Inc. will make and supply coaxial and electronic cables, businesses that had 1996 sales of more than $560 million.
General Semiconductor Inc., the company's power semiconductor division, will supply low-to-medium power rectifiers and voltage suppressors. It had 1996 sales of more than $360 million.
General Instrument stock rose 12.5 cents to $22.875 in afternoon trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
