Ford Motor Co. said Wednesday it may sell its interest in Budget Rent a Car, joining other U.S. automakers in their race to exit the battered rental car business.
"We're looking at the idea that a sale could be done," said Ford spokesman Chris Vinyard.
Ford does not own Budget outright, holding non-voting preferred shares and an option to acquire the car rental agency's common shares, which are owned by investor John Nevin, Vinyard said.
"We could theoretically either sell our option or direct the sale of the common shares through our option," he said.
If a sale goes through, as analysts widely expect, Budget would be the fifth major rental car agency to change hands since 1994. "The reason is they're not making any money," said WEFA Group automotive consultant George Magliano in New York. "Travel is hot, but the car rental business is going nowhere."
That is not evident from the sudden interest shown in the $14 billion a year business by a new class of investors who are buying up the agencies as the automakers unload them.
"They see opportunity for profits. The industry is in a mild recovery and it's probably a better time to own a rental car agency than it has been for a long time," said Jon LeSage, editor of Auto Rental News, a trade journal in California.
Ford declined to comment specifically on an article in Wednesday's Wall Street Journal that said Ford was expected to sell Budget to Team Rental Group Inc., a Daytona Beach, Fla.-based Budget licensee, for $350 million.
A Team Rental spokesman also declined comment.
"No agreements have been reached among any parties," said Kimberly Mulcahy, spokeswoman for Lisle, Ill.-based Budget. She declined further comment.
Ford said last year it would exercise its option and buy out Budget's common shares, but analysts said the deal looks shaky now after delays resulting from an antitrust review by the Federal Trade Commission.
Budget has been closely allied with Ford for many years and rents mainly Ford vehicles. Ford's planned purchase of the company was meant to improve its performance.
Vinyard said Ford was exploring a possible sale because of rising investor interest in rental car firms. "Interest in the group in the last six to 10 months has increased significantly," Vinyard said.
Vinyard said the automaker does not plan to make any announcements regarding Budget following Ford's regular board of directors meeting scheduled for Thursday.
A.G. Edwards auto analyst Michael Braigg in St. Louis said he expects Ford to sell Budget soon, likely to Team Rental. "I think that one's pretty far along," he said.
"The real issue is that Budget is the small rental property of Ford. And if Budget is for sale, then so is Hertz in the long run," Braigg said.
Ford began investing in Park Ridge, N.J.-based Hertz in 1987 when U.S. automakers were buying up rental car agencies hoping to load up their fleets with the thousands of new cars that consumers were leaving on the lots.
The strategy worked for a while, but then backfired when agency sales of barely used rental vehicles started eating into new car sales. Automakers began encouraging the agencies to hold fleet cars longer, which restricted how many new cars the agencies could take on.
Ford bought all of Hertz in 1994 and, unlike many rental car agencies, Hertz is probably profitable, analysts said.
"There is no big advantage to the automakers to owning these agencies anymore," WEFA's Magliano said. "Probably along the way, Ford will sell Hertz. Generally, when these companies begin to divest operations, they get rid of them all."
Reassured by a back-to-basics management trend running through U.S. industry, automakers started selling off rental car agencies in 1994 with Chrysler Corp.'s sale of Snappy Car Rental. General Motors Corp. sold National Car Rental Systems Inc. in 1995 to private investors, who earlier this week agreed to sell National to Republic Industries Inc.
Seeking to lock in supply for its fledgling AutoNation used-car chain, Atlanta-based Republic in November agreed also buy Alamo Rent-A-Car Inc.
Last June GM sold its 29-percent stake in Avis Inc. to HFS Inc., a real estate and hotel concern based in New Jersey.
Chrysler still owns Dollar Rent-A-Car and Thrifty Rent-A-Car. "Our status today is that Dollar and Thrifty are very much a part of our everyday business. It's business as usual," said Chrysler spokeswoman Lori McTavish.
"It is Chrysler's goal, however, to focus on our core automotive business," she added.
Based on U.S. vehicle fleet size, Auto Rental News ranks privately held Enterprise Rent-A-Car, of St. Louis, as the nation's largest rental car agency, followed by Hertz, Avis, National, Alamo, Budget, Dollar and Thrifty.
Together, Enterprise, Hertz and Avis own half of the total rental fleet of about 1.5 million vehicles, according to the trade journal.
