Ford Motor Co joined other U.S. automakers Wednesday in their accelerating race to exit the battered car rental business.
Ford said it may sell its interests in Budget Rent a Car, the nation's sixth-largest rental car agency.
If a sale goes through, as analysts widely expect, Budget would be the fifth major agency to change hands since 1994.
"The reason is they're not making any money," said WEFA Group automotive consultant George Magliano in New York. "Travel is hot, but the car rental business is going nowhere."  
That is not evident from the sudden interest shown in the $14-billion a year business by a new class of investors who are buying up the agencies as the automakers unload them.
"They see opportunity for profits. The industry is in a mild recovery and it's probably a better time to own a rental car agency than it has been for a long time," said Jon LeSage, editor of Auto Rental News, a trade journal in California.
Ford declined to comment specifically on a published report that it may sell Budget to Team Rental Group Inc, a Florida-based Budget licensee, for $350 million.
A Team Rental spokesman also declined comment.  
"No agreements have been reached among any parties," said Budget spokeswoman Kimberly Mulcahy, declining further comment. She said Ford does not own Lisle, Ill.-based Budget outright, but controls the company through an option to purchase its common shares.
Ford said last year it would exercise its option and buy out Budget's common shares, but analysts said the deal looks shaky now after delays resulting from a U.S. Federal Trade Commission antitrust review.  
As a result, A.G. Edwards auto analyst Michael Braigg in St. Louis said he expects Ford to sell Budget soon, likely to Team Rental. "I think that one's pretty far along," he said.
"The real issue is that Budget is the small rental property of Ford. And if Budget is for sale, then so is Hertz in the long run," Braigg said.
Ford began investing in Hertz in 1987 at a time when U.S. automakers were buying up rental car agencies hoping to load up their fleets with the thousands of new cars that consumers were leaving on the lots.  
The strategy worked for a while, but then backfired when agency sales of barely used rental vehicles started eating into new car sales. Automakers began encouraging the agencies to hold onto fleet cars longer, which restricted how many new cars the agencies could take on.
Ford bought all of Hertz in 1994 and, unlike many rental car agencies, Hertz is probably profitable, analysts said.
But Magliano said, "There is no big advantage to the automakers to owning these agencies anymore ... Probably along the way, Ford will sell Hertz. Generally, when these companies begin to divest operations, they get rid of them all."  
Reassured by a back-to-basics management trend running through U.S. industry, automakers started selling off rental car agencies in 1994 with Chrysler Corp's sale of Snappy Car Rental.
General Motors Corp in 1995 sold National Car Rental Systems Inc to private investors, who earlier this week resold National to Republic Industries Inc.
Seeking to lock in supply for its fledgling AutoNation used-car chain, Atlanta-based Republic in November agreed to buy Alamo Rent-A-Car Inc.
In June last year, General Motors sold off its 29-percent interest in Avis Inc to HFS Inc, a real estate and hotel concern based in New Jersey.
Chrysler still owns Dollar Rent-A-Car and Thrifty Rent-A-Car. "Our status today is that Dollar and Thrifty are very much a part of our everyday business. It's business as usual," said Chrysler spokeswoman Lori McTavish.
She added, "It is Chrysler's goal, however, to focus on our core automotive business."
Based on U.S. vehicle fleet size, Auto Rental News ranks privately held Enterprise Rent-A-Car, of St. Louis, as the largest U.S. rental car agency, followed in order by Hertz, Avis, National, Alamo, Budget, Dollar and Thrifty.
Together, Enterprise, Hertz and Avis own half of the U.S. rental car fleet of about 1.5 million vehicles, according to the trade journal.
