Shareholders are pushing harder for change at WMX Technologies Inc, which said Monday a major investor is proposing that the company hire investment bankers to examine further sales of non-core assets.
Lens Inc, based in Washington, D.C., also has hired an executive recruiter to assemble an alternate slate of nominees for four WMX board seats coming open this year, including WMX chairman Dean Buntrock's seat,  said a Lens spokeswoman.
"The battle lines are being drawn here," said Goldman Sachs industry analyst Barry Mannis.  
WMX, the largest U.S. garbage hauler with $10 billion in annual revenues, has been under investor attack for months. Not only Lens, headed by Robert Monks, but billionaire George Soros and others are among WMX shareholders demanding changes.
The company has responded by repurchasing shares and selling off pieces of its Rust International unit, its stake in Wessex Water Plc and most of its medical waste business. The sales have raised about $1 billion in cash.
Yet WMX's stock price has hardly budged, prompting the activist stakeholders to press harder still for management changes, new directors and more asset sales, analysts said.  
"Management has been moving in this direction and the stock price has responded moderately, but I don't think to anywhere near the level that investors want," Mannis said.
Shares in WMX were off 1/4 at 33-1/2 late Monday, compared to a 24-month high above $36 in early December. A year ago, they were trading in the $30 per share range.
"Between now and the annual meeting (May 9), management has its opportunity to once and for all...show the Street its plan for enhancing shareholder value. If they don't do that, I think investors are going to look at some of the proposals Lens is making," Mannis said.  
Soros Fund Management owns 19.7 million shares of WMX, or nearly four percent of the company, according to CDA/Spectrum.
Lens's stake is reportedly much smaller than Soros's.
The latest proposal from Lens on selling non-core assets contains little new, WMX spokesman Bill Plunkett said.
"The proposal is consistent with the things the company is already aggressively pursuing, essentially affirming our strategy," Plunkett said. "We have other equity investments remaining. We have other businesses that are non-core and we have under-performing businesses.... We have been working with various financial advisers to enhance shareholder value."
Credit Suisse First Boston industry analyst Michael Hoffman said WMX on its own will likely fulfill Soros's and Lens's agenda. "These guys would just like it to happen faster," Hoffman said. WMX has "done a lot of the easier things. Now it gets a little more challenging."
An obvious next step for the company would be to authorize more share buybacks, Mannis said.
WMX could still sell off certain non-U.S. interests, as well as its equity interest in ServiceMaster LP, analysts said. Whether such steps are taken before the annual meeting remains to be seen, but in the meantime, Lens and Soros can be expected to keep the pressure on.
"This is just another volley in the skirmish," said Smith Barney industry analyst Leone Young.
WMX is scheduled to report fourth-quarter financial results in the week of February 3.
((--Chicago Newsdesk 312-408-8787))
