Amoco Corp is basing its 1997 business plans on assumed prices of $18 to $19 per barrel for crude oil and $2.00 to $2.10 per thousand (corrects from million) cubic feet for natural gas, said chief financial officer John Carl.
In an interview with Reuters, Carl said, "We're making our investment decisions on $18 to $19 crude. On natural gas ... around $2.00, $2.10 per thousand (corrects from million) cubic feet of natural gas is what we're looking at from a planning assumption.""
U.S. crude futures for March delivery on Wednesday closed at $24.24 per barrel.  
"We like these prices where they are. We think they're where they are because of a tightness between supply and demand ... But we're not making our investment decisions on those prices," Carl said.
Shares in Chicago-based Amoco rose 7/8 to 85-7/8 on Wednesday after the energy giant reported strong fourth-quarter and 1996 financial results.
Amoco will likely spend about $550 million this year on exploration, compared to about $610 million in 1996, he said.
The company also is planning to hold its 1997 operating costs throughout the company flat at the 1996 level, he said.  
"You look at total operating costs as a company, they're basically flat, '97 to '96, on a planning basis. We're really pushing that responsibility down into the units. One unit to another unit might have job eliminations ... But we don't anticipate any wholesale, large restructurings like we announced in '92 and '94," Carl said.
In reporting results, Amoco said fourth-quarter chemical sector earnings fell versus the year-ago period and cited lower olefins and softened paraxylene product profit margins.
On paraxylene prices, Carl said, "It looks like maybe they hit the bottom at the end of December" near $0.19 per pound.  
"It may be that they're starting to firm up a little bit, but I think it's too soon to call that," he said.
Paraxylene traded on the spot market Wednesday near $0.22 per pound. "Paraxylene prices appear to be coming up," said Salomon Brothers energy industry analyst Paul Ting.
On olefins, Carl said, "Olefins is much tougher. The trick with olefins right now is the feedstock issue hitting them. A little bit of pressure on the price side, too. Too soon to call that one, too, I think."
He said Amoco saw refining margins decline in December. "We're not seeing any change from that" in Q1, he said. "It's kind of hanging around the same place. Those refining margins continue to be below where we were a year ago on a year-to-date basis. It's still tough out there."
((--Chicago Newsdesk 312-408-8787))
