Mercury Finance Co.'s woes deepened Friday when the company said it would be unable to pay $17 million in commercial debt due the same day and its stock lost 86 percent of its value.
The auto lender's stock tumbled $12.75 to close at $2.125 on the New York Stock Exchange on volume of more than 42 million shares after it opened for trading for the first time since Tuesday. It fell as low as $1.625.
Based on the more than 172 million shares outstanding as of early November, that would mean a loss of more than $2.2 billion in market capitalisaiton for the company.
On Wednesday, the company said it found problems in its bookkeeping that caused it to overstate earnings by $90 million over four years.
The consumer finance and auto loan company said Friday that as a result of downgrades from several debt rating services, it would not be able to issue new short-term debt, known as commercial paper, to repay maturing debt and could not make the payments due Friday.
Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. and Fitch Investors Service downgraded the company's commercial paper to a default rating.
Lake Forest, Ill.-based Mercury said it was in discussions with lenders to satisfy its working capital needs, but could not predict the outcome of the discussions.
Analysts said the company has another $100 million in commercial debt due next Thursday and that the company could be forced to file for bankruptcy protection from creditors if those discussions were unsuccessful.
"They're very close to some reorganization, bankruptcy filing, probably a voluntary reorganization," said Thomas Kmiotek, analyst at Duff &amp; Phelps Credit Rating Co.
A finance company like Mercury makes money on the difference, or spread, between what it pays to borrow and the higher rates it charges customers. A finance company without a source of funds is like a retailer without a source of merchandise, analysts noted.
"If you can't fund, you're out of business," one analyst who follows the company said, requesting anonymity.
A company spokesman did not return repeated phone calls seaking comment on Mercury's financing.
The company said in a statement that it had retained Salomon Brothers Inc. to advise it on current and future capital needs and related issues.
Mercury said on Wednesday it had to restate its earnings downward by about $90 million for the past four years because of accounting irregularities. It said the problems appeared to stem from unauthorised entries in financial records by its controller, James Doyle.
But Doyle's lawyer reportedly accused Mercury of a charade and said Doyle was cooperating with federal authorities.
A special committee of Mercury's board, formed to investigate the accounting problems, has instructed its lawyers to contact Doyle's attorney for information on the investigation, Mercury said Friday.
Doyle's lawyer was out of town Friday and did not return phone calls.
The company said it also directed its lawyers and accounting firm to complete a thorough investigation of the company's auditing and accounting practices and report to the board.
Another class-action lawsuit accusing the company of violating securities laws by issuing misleading and false financial statements was filed in federal court in Chicago, bringing to at least four the number of such suits filed.
