Mercury Finance Co.'s agreement to buy a consumer finance business fell apart Thursday after the auto-loan company said phony bookkeeping entries had inflated its earnings and it had fired its chief accountant.
At the same time, the officer blamed for the overstated earnings may be cooperating with federal authorities.
BankBoston Corp. said it terminated its agreement to sell its Fidelity Acceptance Corp. unit to Mercury for 32.7 million shares of Mercury stock. When the deal was announced on Jan. 10, the stock was worth about $458 million.
Mercury Finance stock has not traded since it closed at $14.875 on the New York Stock Exchange on Tuesday. The NYSE would not indicate where the stock might open but traders said it was changing hands at $4.25 overseas. That would make the 32.7 million shares worth about $139 million.
"BankBoston today informed Mercury Finance Co. that recent events regarding Mercury Finance constituted a breach of the provisions of BankBoston's agreement for the exchange of shares of Fidelity Acceptance Corp. for shares of Mercury Finance," BankBoston said in a statement.
Analysts said BankBoston, a Boston-based banking company, would have little trouble finding another buyer for Fidelity, its auto financing arm.
"At the time they were structuring this deal there were four or five other firms that expressed interest or made bids on Fidelity," said Nancy Bush at Brown Brothers Harriman.
"I don't think they're going to get the kind of sweetheart deal they got with Mercury," she added.
A Mercury Finance spokesman declined to comment on the deal.
But the spokesman said the company was interested in talking to James Doyle, the controller who Mercury Finance said had disappeared but who is reportedly cooperating with federal authorities.
A Dow Jones news wire report quoted Doyle's attorney as saying Doyle had accused Mercury Finance of a charade and that the controller had not disappeared but was cooperating with the authorities.
The attorney was not available and his assistant would not confirm the accuracy of the Dow Jones report.
A spokesman for the U.S. attorney's office in Chicago declined to comment.
Mercury Finance said on Wednesday its 1996 earnings would be restated to $56.7 million from $120.7 million and that earnings for the three prior years would also be adjusted downward, though not as sharply.
The problems appeared to stem from unauthorized entries in financial records by its chief accounting officer, Doyle, who the company said had been fired.
Mercury Finance also said it was in violation of certain provisions if its loan agreements and that a special committee of directors has been formed to investigate the problems.
Mercury Finance said Thursday that the NYSE was seeking more information. Mercury spokesman Joseph Kopec said the exchange wanted "additional assurance that the numbers in the release Wednesday were reliable."
Kopec said he did not know if the Lake Forest, Ill.-based finance company would issue additional information.
Mercury Finance also got hit by at least three lawsuits charging it violated securities laws.
Filed in federal court in Chicago on Wednesday and Thursday, the lawsuits alleged the company and some senior officers misrepresented or omitted crucial information about Mercury Finance's earnings for the last three years, lawyers who filed the suits said in statements.
Also, Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. cut its debt rating on the company's commercial paper and said it may cut the rating further.
