Mercury Finance Co.'s woes deepened Friday when the company said it would be unable to pay $17 million in commercial debt due the same day, and its stock lost nearly 90 percent of its value.
The stock lost $13 to $1.875 on the New York Stock Exchange on volume of more than 27 million shares after it opened for trading Friday afternoon for the first time since Tuesday. It fell as low as $1.625.
Based on the more than 172 million shares outstanding as of early November, that would mean a loss of more than $2.2 billion in market capitalisaiton for the company.
On Wednesday, the company said it found problems in its bookkeeping that caused it to overstate earnings by $90 million over four years.
The consumer finance company said Friday that as a result of downgrades from several debt rating services, it would not be able to issue new short-term debt, known as commercial paper, to repay maturing debt and could not make the payments due Friday.
Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. and Fitch Investors Service downgraded the company's commercial paper to a default rating.
Lake Forest, Ill.-based Mercury said it was in discussions with its lenders to satisfy its working capital needs, but could not predict the outcome of the discussions.
The company also said it had retained the services of Salomon Brothers Inc. to advise on its current and future capital needs, as well as all related issues.
Mercury said Wednesday it had to restate its earnings for the past four years by a total of about $90 million lower because of accounting irregularities.
Mercury said the problems appeared to stem from unauthorised entries in financial records by its controller, James Doyle.
But Doyle's lawyer reportedly accused Mercury of a charade and said Doyle was cooperating with federal authorities.
A special committee of Mercury's board, formed to investigate the accounting problems, has instructed its lawyers to contact Doyle's attorney, to attempt to reach Doyle and to obtain information on the investigation, Mercury said Friday.
Doyle's lawyer was out of town Friday and did not return repeated phone calls.
The company said it also directed its lawyers and accounting firm to expeditiously complete a thorough investigation of the auditing, accounting practices and procedures of the company and report to the board.
Another class-action lawsuit accusing the company of violating securities laws by issuing misleading and false financial statements was filed in U.S. District Court in Chicago. At least four such suits have been filed.
