FBI agents Monday searched the headquarters of troubled Mercury Finance Co., which announced a change in its leadership days after announcing bookkeeping problems that caused it to overstate its earnings by millions of dollars.
The used-auto loan company named turnaround and bankruptcy specialist William Brandt Jr. president and chief executive officer. Brandt replaces John Brincat, who resigned those positions but will remain as an employee and a member of the board of directors, Mercury said.
The FBI agents, armed with a search warrant, arrived late Monday morning at Mercury's headquarters in the Chicago suburb of Lake Forest, Ill., seeking financial records, a company spokeswoman said.
Mercury said in a statement that it was cooperating fully with the investigators in supplying documents requested under the search warrant.
"We are grateful the FBI is conducting the search in a way that is not disruptive to business," the spokeswoman said.
The company announced Wednesday that it had found problems in its bookkeeping that caused it to overstate earnings by $90 million over four years. The company said the misstatements appeared to stem from unauthorised entries in financial records by its former controller, James Doyle, whom the company said it dismissed.
But Doyle's lawyer reportedly accused Mercury of a "charade" regarding the faulty books and said his client was cooperating with federal authorities.
Brandt, president and chief executive officer of Chicago-based Development Specialists Inc., takes over as Mercury continues to negotiate with lenders after defaulting on $17 million in commercial debt Friday. Analysts said Mercury has as much as $100 million in debt due this week.
In a statement, Brandt said, "My experience with turnarounds is that the first stage is critical and requires enormous focus, coordination and immediate information-gathering to identify the most effective way to return a company like Mercury Finance to financial stability."
One person familiar with Brandt's reputation said the appointment could help forestall a bankruptcy filing by Mercury.
"I think with the announcement of this guy as head, he will buy them some time ... to do some negotiating with creditors," said James Schrager, senior lecturer in business policy at the University of Chicago.
Schrager described Brandt's reputation as "Mr. Clean. Knows the rules for bankruptcy, which are the relevant rules here."
A Mercury spokeswoman stressed that while Brandt is a bankruptcy expert, he also has experience with corporate turnarounds that did not involve bankruptcy.
But, while conceding that the hiring of an outsider might buy Mercury a little more time with its lenders, one attorney with experience in bankruptcy cases said it was disappointing that Mercury did not say it secured bank financing this weekend.
"Unless they get the bank support, there's no way they're going to be able to restructure" the short-term debt coming due, said Ted Koenig, a partner with Holleb &amp; Coff in Chicago.
Mercury, whose stock lost about 86 percent of its value last week after it announced it was forced to restate its 1996 earnings due to the accounting irregularities, also was meeting its lenders in Chicago on Monday to discuss financing arrangements to meet its liquidity needs.
The stock continued slipping Monday, dipping 25 cents to $1.75 on the New York Stock Exchange.
Brandt was trustee for the bankruptcy liquidation of Southeast Banking Corp., a Miami-based bank taken over by the FDIC in 1991 and the bankruptcy of Standard Brands of America Inc, a Florida-based electronics and appliance retailer.
