Mercury Finance Co's new chief executive officer said on Monday he hoped to receive a short-term credit facility from the troubled consumer finance company's lenders to gain time to stabilize the firm.
"I'm guardedly optimistic," William Brandt Jr. said of the possibility of receiving a short-term facility after a day of meetings with Mercury's institutional lenders.
Mercury said last week it had defaulted on $17 million of commercial debt, and analysts said the company had about $100 million of debt coming due on Thursday.
But Brandt, who was named chief executive of the company on Monday, said he hoped he could avoid filing for bankruptcy reorganization while stabilizing the company.
"I am not prepared to file any imminent bankruptcy," Brandt, who has a background as a corporate turnaround and bankruptcy specialist, said in an interview late on Monday. "I would like to keep the company intact and operating as it is."
However, Brandt said he also was familiar with the rules and advantages of bankruptcy filing if it became necessary.  
About four weeks of breathing space would give Brandt time to determine if Mercury could re-enter the commercial debt market at rates it considered reasonable, he said.
"I'm not about to go into that market right now," he said.
Last week, Mercury had its debt ratings lowered to default status by some major rating services after defaulting on the commercial debt.
The default came after Mercury said it needed to lower its past four years' net income by a total of about $90 million due to accounting irregularities.
If it could not re-enter the commercial debt market in the next few weeks, Brandt said Mercury would consider securitizing its consumer loans -- bundling them -- to sell in the open market.
Mercury said last year it would consider securitizing its loans, but Brandt said the company's systems were not centralized enough to do that immediately.
"The good news is, there is some background spade work" that had been done by the company to set up securitization, he said.
Access to the debt market gives Mercury the capital it needs to lend to its sub-prime credit customers.  
Brandt replaced John Brincat, who resigned as president and chief executive but will remain as an employee of the company. Brandt said his pay package with Mercury would include salary and other compensation based on the company's performance, but he would not say what the salary was.
Brandt said his life's goal was not to remain chief executive of Mercury, but that a stint of 18 months at the head of a company he was trying to turn around was not considered long in his business.
When asked how long he would stay at Mercury, Brandt answered: "Until I run out of aspirin."
