Strong business fundamentals and a presumed change in the shareholder profile of Wallace Computer Services Inc should protect it from a bid by investor Guy Wyser-Pratte to remove the company's poison pill takeover defense, analysts said.
"I think they've done a terrific job of creating shareholder value and I think it will come out at some time," said Judith Scott, analyst at Robert W. Baird.  
Meanwhile, many arbitrageurs likely sold their Wallace stock after Moore Corp Ltd said in early August it was abandoning its 13-month takeover campaign, analysts said.
"Since August 6, you've had a substantial change in the profile of the Wallace shareholder base," said Martin McDevitt Jr., analyst at Cleary Gull Reiland and McDevitt.  "Most of the selling since the early part of August is on behalf of arbitrageurs."
McDevitt conceded that he could not say for sure how much of the selling in the stock has been from arbitrageurs.  
But he argued that the shareholder base is probably more composed of shareholders looking for a longer-term return. His 12-15 month price target for Wallace is $36-$40 a share, with other analysts in the $35-$36 range.
The stock was unchanged at 27-1/4 Thursday.
After Moore withdrew its bid, Wyser-Pratte, who controls a 2.3 percent stake in Wallace, filed proxy materials with the Securities and Exchange Commission, seeking to have three directors elected to Wallace's board.  He is also seeking the repeal a bylaw requiring an 80 percent vote to approve certain mergers.  
In an interview, Wyser-Pratte argued that while Wallace shareholders could have received $60 a share from Moore a year ago, the stock, on a pro forma basis adjusting for a stock split, is trading just above $54.
But analysts counter that the company posted higher than expected earnings of $1.60 a share in the fiscal year ended July 31 and that the stock price should improve after uncertainty over the Wyser-Pratte proposals subsides.
"We think over the next three to five years, the company can grow 15 percent a year on the bottom line," McDevitt said.  
But while forecasting better results and a higher stock price for the company, not all analysts are convinced Wyser-Pratte will be unsuccessful in having the poison pill defense removed.
Kenneth Bohringer, analyst at Prudential Securities Research, noted that 59.8 percent of Wallace's shares were tendered to Moore's bid last year.
"I would assume that going forward, they can expect challenges to the poison pill," he said. "But I think that they have been vindicated by the performance they put together over the last year."
--Reuters Chicago newsdesk, 312-408-8787
