American Business Information Inc founder and chief executive officer Vin Gupta Thursday backed the First Call consensus forecast of $0.23 a share in third quarter earnings from continuing operations and $0.91 a share for the full year.
"I'm comfortable with that," Vin Gupta, founder and chief executive officer of the Omaha, Nebraska-based provider information on businesses said in response to both estimates.
The estimates compare with $0.20 a share for the third quarter of 1995 and $0.80 a share for all of 1995.  
American Business sells data to customers who use the information for sales leads.  While the information is publicly available, Gupta says it is not easy for individual businesses to find.
While the company's stock fell to 10-1/2 from just under 15 after second quarter earnings were released, Gupta said in an interview that he bought about 200,000 shares in the company on July 16.  The company also bought back about 200,000 shares under a stock repurchase plan approved in June.  
Gupta said he and his family own 56 percent of the stock and he manages the company for long-term value, eschewing dividends and higher margins to reinvest in technology, expand its sales force, develop products and make acqusitions. Those who sell at the first hiccup in earnings should stay away from the stock, he said.
"We don't take unnnecessary gambles," he said.  "We don't bet the house.  So people who get nervous, I guess they don't belong in our stock."  
Gupta started the business in 1972 with a $100 investment, and expects sales of about $100 million in 1996, compared with $86.8 million in 1995.
"We have the most comprehensive, the most accurate database in the country now," he said.  Aside from phone directories and other sources, American Business makes about 14 million telephone calls to businesses each year to verify and gather more information.  
Aside from selling directly to subscribers, the company also sells CD-ROM formats of its data and is now offering business profiles on the Internet at $3 a profile.  In the first three weeks that service, Lookup USA, was avaialble, about 100-120 profiles were sold each day, he said.
In the next three years, Gupta sees $10-$20 million in revenues added from products on the Internet.  "The Internet, the way its growing, I think could be a lot bigger," he said.
Among future developments for the company, Gupta noted that its address database will be bundled with a Microsoft Corp mapping product soon to be released.
He also said the company expects to be more active in the acquisition market.
"I would say that there's a good possibility that something could happen in the next two or three months," he said of acquisitions.
--Reuters Chicago newsdesk, 312-408-8787
