Mercury Finance Co. said Thursday it was suspending payment of a previously announced dividend while it tries to secure short-term financing as it falls deeper and deeper into debt.
The troubled consumer finance company said it had been unable to refinance a total of $61 million in commerical paper -- or short-term debt -- that had matured through Wednesday. Another $127 million comes due between Thursday and Feb. 14, Lake Forest, Ill.-based Mercury said in a news release.
The company has been in violation of certain loan covenants since last week, when it was unable to pay $17 million in commercial debt.
Mercury has been in turmoil since it announced last week that accounting irregularities had caused it to overstate its earnings by about $90 million.
It said accounting misstatements appeared to stem from unauthorised entries by former controller James Doyle. But Doyle's lawyer has accused the comapny of a "charade" and said Doyle is cooperating with federal authorities.
FBI agents served a search warrant seeking financial records Monday.
Mercury said Thursday that it suspended a dividend payment of 7.5 cents a share that was payable March 3.
The company also said it was continuing to try to obtain short-term financing from its lenders in talks that have been taking place all week.
It added that funds from the short-term financing will be used exclusively for operating purposes and will not be available for paying principal or interest on company debt.
One analyst said the apparent lack of a report so far by new auditors on the extent of the accounting discrepancies might be hindering the talks with lenders.
"Certainly, (the talks are) complicated in one instance by the default on the commercial paper to date and what seems to be the lack of resolution on the extent and nature of the accounting regularities," said Thomas Kmiotek, analyst at Duff &amp; Phelps Credit Rating Co.
Earlier this week William Brandt Jr., a turnaround and bankruptcy specialist who replaced John Brincat as chief executive officer Monday, told Reuters the company needed about four weeks of financing to gain time to stabilise the firm.
Mercury, which makes used-car loans to individuals of often relatively low creditworthiness, also said Thursday that operations were continuing at all of the company's 280 locations nationwide.
Market sources said there had been rumours of bids for Mercury's commercial paper at 50 percent to 80 percent of face value.
One attorney familiar with bankruptcy matters said bidders might be trying to have more influence if Mercury is forced to file for bankruptcy.
"It is not uncommon for investment groups to be buying paper at a discount to improve their situation in a restructuring," said Ted Koenig, attorney at Holleb &amp; Coff in Chicago.
Meanwhile, another auto lender, Evanston, Ill.-based First Enterprise Financial Group Inc. said it did not report 1996 earnings as expected Thursday and that it was reviewing its portfolio in light of recent developments in the industry.
An analyst at ABN AMRO Chicago Corp. lowered that stock to hold from buy.
"We believe the Mercury situation is causing audit firms to take a much harder position with automobile finance companies," Chicago Corp. said in a research report.
First Enterprise stock plunged $4 to $8.25 on Nasdaq.
The fallout from Mercury's financial troubles is also striking a foundation established by Mercury founder Daniel Terra, who died in June.
The foundation, which funds the Terra Museum of American Art in Chicago and an American musuem in Giverny, France, holds 8 million shares as part of its $350 million endowment.
Those shares were worth more than $116 million a week ago, but were worth about $21 million Thursday.
Mercury stock was unchanged at $2.625 in afternoon trading on the New York Stock Exchange, where it was one of the most heavily traded issues.
