Mercury Finance Co. said Monday it has secured $50 million in short-term financing from Bank of America, giving the troubled lender breathing room to work on longer-term financing.
At the same time, some of Mercury's competitors in the market for automotive financing to borrowers with less-than-pristine credit records, said they are interested in purchasing some or all of its assets, once its books are back in order.
"A lot of people have been interested, but Mercury has been sending them all to Salomon Brothers (the company's adviser)," said Mercury spokesman Joseph Kopec.
Mercury said Monday that financing from Bank of America, secured by the Lake Forest, Ill.-based company's assets, would be used to meet day-to-day operating expenses and to cover interest payments coming due in the next few weeks. Mercury said it continues to serve customers at all its locations.
"These funds will enable Mercury to operate while a long-term financing facility is being put together," Mercury Chief Executive Officer William Brandt Jr. said in a statement.
Last week, Mercury said it was unable to refinance $61 in short-term debt that had matured through Feb. 5 and that another $127 million would come due between then and Feb. 14.
Mercury's woes began Jan. 29 when it said it had to restate its earnings over the last four years downward by about $90 million.
The cut in reported profits was due to accounting discrepencies Mercury blamed on its controller, James Doyle. But a day later, Doyle's lawyer accused Mercury of a charade and said Doyle was cooperating with federal authorites.
Since then, Mercury has defaulted on millions of dollars in debt, been served with a search warrant by FBI agents seeking financial records, and hired Brandt, a turnaround and bankruptcy specialist, as chief executive officer. It also has been named a defendant in more than half a dozen lawsuits regarding the misstated earnings.
The company lost more than $2 billion in market capitalisation when its stock plunged following news of its reduced earnings.
But all that has not scared off rivals looking to buy Mercury's assets, if Mercury can clean up its books.
"If they should decide to sell assets, yes, we'd be interested," said George Evans, chief executive officer of Dallas-based Search Capital Group Inc. In an interview, he added that Search might be interested in taking over Mercury and running it on a long-term basis.
"We have had no direct contact with Mercury," Evans said. "We've had some indirect contact with the lenders."
He would not elaborate on that contact.
"If you make the assumption that the $90 million hit was all of it, Mercury is still, other than debt liquidty, a viable company," Evans said.
Thomas Barlow, chief executive officer of Reliance Acceptance Corp., the auto lending unit that is expected to be spun off this week by Cole Taylor Financial Group Inc., said his company might be interested in acquiring Mercury, once Mercury solved its liquidity woes.
"Once Mercury has gotten its books in order, we'd be interested if they were interested," Barlow said. "Certainly, if they're interested, there are synergies in the two companies."
Mercury shares were up 37.5 cents at $2.25 in late trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
