Motorola Inc. filed a federal lawsuit Thursday against U.S. Robotics, alleging infringement of a number of Motorola's patents for high-speed modem technology.
The patents at issue cover technologies essential to the international standard for current modem technology and may also apply to parts of the new, higher speed, 56-kilobit modem technology, Motorola said.
The lawsuit comes just as U.S. Robotics is preparing to ship modems that allow users to download information from the Internet at a rate of 56 kilobits per second over ordinary, analogue telephone lines. U.S. Robotics said it plans to ship those modems in the next few days.
Bill Heimbach, manager of corporate development for Schaumburg, Ill.-based Motorola's Information Systems Group, said Motorola would not seek to delay those modems reaching the market.
He said the lawsuit, filed in U.S. District Court in Boston, came after two years of unsuccessful negotiations with Skokie, Ill.-based U.S. Robotics over licensing Motorola's technology.
"We did it in an attempt to force a very early closure to the issues we have," Heimbach said, adding that the timing of the lawsuit was not influenced by U.S. Robotics' plans to ship the modem.
The technology is part of standard international technology for modems.
Heimbach said International Telecommunications Union rules say the technology must be made available to others on a fair, reasonable, non-discriminatory basis, which allows Motorola to require license fees for its part of the standard technology.
Earlier Thursday, Motorola said it settled similar litigation with Rockwell International Corp. Motorola also said it formed an alliance with Rockwell Semiconductor Systems to develop a 56-kilobit modem using Rockwell's technology.
Motorola said it expects to introduce the modems in early March.
A spokeswoman for U.S. Robotics said the company had yet to see the lawsuit and could not comment.
Heimbach said Motorola hopes to settle quickly with U.S. Robotics, and one industry analyst said he also expected the case would be settled.
"All this is just a diversion, because U.S. Robotics says it will have its (modems) in as many retailers' stores as they can by the weekend," said John Grangaard, at GS2 Securities.
U.S. Robotics shares closed up $2 at $60.875 on Nasdaq, Motorola slipped 75 cents to $63, and Rockwell was down 50 cents at $67.75, both on the New York Stock Exchange. ROK.N MOT.N USRX.O
