TCF Financial Corp., a bank holding company, moved to enter the business equipment leasing field Friday, signing a letter of intent to acquire Winthrop Resources Corp. for about $326 million.
Under the agreement, TCF said it will offer one share of its stock for every 1.2877 shares of Winthrop in a tax-free pooling of interests, resulting in a total of about 6.9 million new TCF shares.
Winthrop, with leased assets of $327 million, specializes in leasing high technology and business equipment to companies throughout the United States, the company said.
"This is a well-managed, dynamic firm that will increase our asset origination capacity and complement our existing lines of business," TCF Chief Executive Officer William Cooper said in a news release.
Wintrhop, also based in Minneapolis, will become a subsidiary of TCF Bank Minnesota, the companies said. Winthrop's funding costs are expected to drop as a result, allowing it to grow its business.
"We've always known that somewhere down the line, we'd have to get that borrowing cost down," said Winthrop President David Morgan, who has agreed to continue running Winthrop after the deal is completed.
The deal values Winthrop at $36.50 a share, based on a TCF stock price of $47, TCF said.
TCF shares fell 62.5 cents to $46.50 on the New York Stock Exchange. Winthrop rose 37.5 cents to $34.375 on Nasdaq.
The deal is likely to reduce earnings per share slightly in the first full year after the acquisition, and boost earnings after that, told analysts on a conference call.
Minneapolis-based TCF also said it has suspended its share repurchase program due to the accounting treatment it chose to use for the deal.
The deal is expected to close by the third quarter, subject to negotiation of a definitive agreement, a due diligence review, and approval by both companies' boards of directors, shareholders and regulators.
TCF, with assets of $7.1 billion, has banking operations in Minnesota, Illinois, Wisconsin, Michigan and Ohio.
The proposed acquisition appears to fit Cooper's focus on "power assets and power liabilites," said Joseph Duwan, analyst at Keefe, Bruyette &amp; Woods.
"The (interest rate) spreads are relatively wide, the yields are attractive, as opposed to straight commercial lending," Duwan said of the leasing business.
