Hyatt Hotels Corp. said Monday it will spend $1 billion over the next three years to acquire 20 to 30 hotels, rapidly accelerating its expansion programme.
Target properties will be upscale three- to five-star hotels and resorts in the United States, Canada and the Caribbean over a three-year period, said Hyatt, which is owned by Chicago's Pritzker family.
The company already has made two deals which it says are typical of the expansion plan. Last Friday, a Hyatt affiliate purchased the Grand Hyatt San Francisco, which Hyatt has managed since 1973, for $125 million plus the assumption of $5 million in debt, the company said.
On Friday, Chicago-based Hyatt will take over management of the Hotel Nikko Atlanta after acquiring the hotel in partnership with Blackstone Real Estate Partners for $90 million. The hotel will be renamed the Grand Hyatt Atlanta.
Hyatt, which operates 176 Hyatt hotels and resorts around the world, purchased 12 hotels in the past three years.
The more aggressive acquisition stance was seen by some as a response to acqusition plans by Hyatt's competitors.
"Hyatt is probably doing this to be defensive," said Burland East, analyst at Everen Securities in Chicago, noting that the move comes as other hoteliers, including Host Marriott Corp. and Hilton Hotels Corp., are looking to expand.
Hyatt's plan was made easier by a recent reorganization of some Pritzker family holdings. The family recently formed Hyatt Equities L.L.C., a real estate acquisition company that consolidates a number of the family's hotel real estate interests into one company, Hyatt said.
Hyatt Equities was created to capitalise on the equity value of the Pritzkers' hotel portfolio, allowing the company to borrow against a collection of assets instead of individual assets at more favourable interest rates.
"Hyatt Equities provides an additional vehicle through which we will grow our family's interest in Hyatt hotel real estate, enabling Hyatt to acquire hotels already managed by Hyatt as well as hotels currently managed by other hotel companies," Nicholas Pritzker, president of Hyatt Development and Hyatt Equities, said in a news release.
Hyatt Equities debt will be rated by Standard and Poor's and Moody's, and Hyatt's investment bankers anticipate strong investment-grade ratings Hyatt said.
Hyatt said that, as a private company, Hyatt Equities is able to use a broader set of transaction structures than is typically available to public companies, real estate investment trusts or acquisition funds.
Among real estate investment trusts that could wind up competing with Hyatt for upscale properties are Dallas-based Patriot American Hospitality Inc. and Phoenix-based Starwood Lodging Trust, East said.
"At the margins, 30 hotels is meaningful," East said of the impact of Hyatt's plan on the hotel landscape. "Is it earth-shattering? No."
