With Mercury Finance Co in talks to secure long-term financing and no fresh disclosures about the consumer finance company emerging, investors have started to come back to the stock.
"I think the stock is moving up because of time here," Michael Durante, senior specialty finance analyst at Prudential Securities, said on Wednesday. "With each passing day, the company looks to be more and more stable."  
No word has surfaced about any fresh adverse findings since Mercury appointed Arthur Andersen LLP as its auditor on February 18, Durante said, though the audit of 1996 results was still incomplete.
"I think indications are so far that nothing new has been found over and above what Peat Marwick found, which is good news," Durante said, referring to KPMG Peat Marwick, the company's former auditor.
A Mercury spokesman said the auditors declined to say exactly when they would finish their work.  
Meanwhile, Mercury this week has tried to secure long-term financing from lenders. The spokesman could not say how successful those talks have been.
On January 29, Mercury said accounting discrepancies were discovered, causing it to restate its results to show earnings over four years were $90 million less than previously reported.
Since then, Mercury has defaulted on millions of dollars of debt. It was served with a search warrant by FBI agents seeking financial records and hired a new chief executive officer. The company was also named as a defendant in more than half a dozen lawsuits related to the misstated earnings.  
The company lost more than $2 billion in market capitalization when its share price plunged after the disclosure of the erroneous financial information.
But in recent days, the stock has moved higher in active trading. After falling to as low as 1-1/2 on January 31 from 14-7/8 before the disclosures, Mercury was up 1/4 at 3-5/8 in early afternoon trading on Wedesday. More than 12 million shares changed hands.
Durante said the company had a liquidation value of $3-$4 a share, barring any new disclosures, while its value as a going concern was in the high single digits.
But other analysts were not as sanguine about Mercury's value. Katrina Blecher, an analyst at Gruntal &amp; Co, recommended investors sell at the stock's current level.
"On a fundamental basis, which is difficult at best to garner given the state of unaudited and/or unavailable specifics, we feel the company is fully valued," Blecher wrote in a research report Wednesday.
((Chicago newsdesk, 312-408-8787))
