Shuffle Master Inc Chief Executive Joseph Lahti said Monday he is not seeking to put the gaming equipment supplier up for sale, but also said it was his responsibility to consider ways that provide value to shareholders.
"Are we in play? No," Lahti said in an interview. But he added that if someone were to inquire about the availability of the company, "what's the price is my next question."
Shuffle Master earlier said it would not pursue unsolicited discussions with Anchor Gaming.  
Those discussions, initiated by Anchor Chairman Stanley Fulton, related to a potential business combination with Anchor, Shuffle Master said in a news release.
Shuffle Master also said it believes it will be served with a lawsuit by Anchor alleging that Shuffle Master's Let It Ride game infringes on certain of Anchor's patents.
Lahti said in a news release that Shuffle Master viewed any potential lawsuit as an attempt by Las Vegas-based Anchor to pressure Eden Prairie, Minnesota-based Shuffle Master into a business combination.  
In the interview, Lahti said Shuffle Master noted Anchor's game when it filed for its patent, yet was awarded a patent anyway.
Anchor did not return telephone calls seeking comment.
But one analyst was skeptical of whether Anchor would seek to acquire Shuffle Master, which is trading at about 24 times its annualized third quarter earnings of $0.13 a share.
"I find Anchor being interested highly unlikely," said Stuart Linde, analyst at Gerard Klauer Mattison &amp; Co, who rates Shuffle Master a sell. "I think Anchor's more intent on making an acquisition in the casino sector." He said an acquisition of Shuffle Master at current prices would be dilutive for Anchor.
Shuffle Master shares fell 1/8 to 11-5/8 Monday, while Anchor's stock price fell 5/8 to 52-3/4, both on Nasdaq.
Another analyst said Shuffle Master could be part of consolidation in the gaming equipment business.
"Consolidation on the supply side really hasn't occurred yet," said Robert Evans, analyst at John G. Kinnard &amp; Co. "It wouldn't be surprising if it did."
--Reuters Chicago newsdesk, 312-408-8787
