The nation's retailers are expected to post modest sales gains for February, with warm weather during the month having a mixed impact on results, analysts said Tuesday.
Analysts said retailers are expected to post a rise of about 4 percent in sales from stores open at least a year, or same-store sales, for February.
"While warm weather, particularly in the Northeast, did boost sales of apparel at many retailers, it depressed sales in some hardline areas," analysts at Merrill Lynch said in a research note.
Most retailers are scheduled to report their February sales results Thursday morning, though Carson Pirie Scott &amp; Co. reported Monday that its same-store sales rose 8.2 percent for the month.
"Carsons had a strong reading, which might be a tell-tale sign for some of the smaller retailers," said Michael Niemira, analyst at Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi.
One retailer that has exceeded the industry average in recent months, Sears, Roebuck and Co. , is expected to fall back to the pack, with gains of about 2 percent to 4 percent in sales at stores open at least a year.
"Its sales were depressed by its automotive business, which was hurt by the warm weather and hard lines, which continued their weak performance," Merrill Lynch's analysts said in the report.
Many retailers will have tough comparisons with their 1996 sales from February through the middle of spring due to warm weather a year ago, analysts said.
But one retailer that is expected to exceed the average is J.C. Penney Co. , which some analysts see posting same-store sales gains of about 9 percent.
"The (sales) numbers, I think are going to be led by Penneys in particular, which seems to have a strong reading for February," Niemira said. "Apparel is certainly helping them."
The nation's largest retailer, Wal-Mart Stores Inc., is seen posting gains of 4-6 percent, analysts said.
Electronics superstores should continue to trail the rest of the retail sector, analysts said.
Dean Ramos, with Dain Bosworth Inc., estimated that both Best Buy Co. Inc. and Circuit City Stores Inc. would report a 7 percent to 10 percent decline in same-sales for February.
"New consumer electronics products such as Digital Video Disk are not yet a factor," Ramos said in a report previewing last month's retail sales.
