Warm weather spurred sales of spring merchandise and boosted retail sales in February, the nation's store chains said Thursday, but flooding in the Midwest could hurt results in March.
Industry officials and analysts said most winter clothing was cleared out of stores in January and early February, so retailers were properly stocked for spring.
Salomon Bros. said its index of same-store sales rose 4.7 percent in February, compared to a 5.2 percent rise a year ago and a 7.3 percent January rise. Same-store sales measure results at stores open at least a year.
"It looks like early trends on spring fashion are good," said Harry Ikenson, analyst at Rodman &amp; Renshaw Inc. "Inventories seem to be in good shape and it's a good start to spring."
"After January's sales performance, our level of clearance merchandise coming into February was substantially below last year," said William Kellogg, chairman of Kohl's Corp., a Wisconsin-based retailer with 150 stores in the Midwest and the East.
"We are particularly encouraged by the early selling of spring merchandise."
Though comparisons were difficult after retailers posted a strong February in 1996, a week of temperatures in the 50s and 60s in much of the country this year was a plus.
"It drives people in to buy spring merchandise," analyst Peter Schaeffer at Dillon Read &amp; Co. said.
Several chains posted stronger-than-expected results.
Wal-Mart Stores Inc., the nation's larget retailer, said same-store sales rose 6.7 percent, above analysts' forecasts, while J.C. Penney Co. Inc. posted a strong 11.4 percent gain.
Kmart Corp., the third-biggest retailer, said sales rose 3.9 percent at comparable stores, while Sears, Roebuck and Co., the No. 2 retailer, posted a 1.6 percent gain.
Among department stores, Dayton Hudson Corp. said sales rose 4.2 percent, Federated Department Stores Inc. reported a 2.2 percent gain and Dillard Department Stores Inc. had a 1 percent rise.
Carson Pirie Scott &amp; Co. reported on Monday that February sales rose a solid 8.2 percent.
"I was particularly pleased with the strong initial sell-through on new spring receipts during the month," Carson Chief Executive Stanton Bluestone said in a statement.
Sales at clothing chain The Gap Inc. were flat.
Sales of computers and other electronic gear continued to lag, though results were not as weak as had been expected.
Electronics superstores Best Buy Co. Inc. and Circuit City Stores said sales fell 3 percent and 4 percent, respectively. Analysts had expected sales declines of up to 10 percent.
Sales of electronic gear, which have been dismal for several months, were unlikely to improve until later this year or early 1998 when new high-tech products are due to be available, analysts said.
They also said retail stocks were unlikely to be as strong as they were in 1996.
"I don't think that we're seeing any sort of a rally here in retail like we saw last year," Dillon Read's Schaeffer said. "I don't think it's a sector play, it's an individual stock play."
Gap shares fell $1.25 to $32.50, Dillard fell 25 cents to $30.25, Sears lost 75 cents to $54.875, and Federated was unchanged at $35.875.
Best Buy rose $1.375 to $10, Circuit City added $2 to $33.75, Wal-Mart rose 12.5 cents to $26.75 and J.C. Penney gained 37.5 cents to $49.50.
