Beleaguered auto lender Mercury Finance Co. said it was in last-minute negotiations Monday to extend $50 million in short-term financing it received a month ago from Bank of America.
The financing, used to meet daily operating expenses and interest payments, was granted in February in order for Mercury to establish firmer financial footing as it tried to regroup from troubles that included overstated earnings, an FBI investigation and a slew of shareholder lawsuits.
Under terms of the financing, the loan comes due Monday unless Mercury secures waivers from lenders.
A spokesman said Mercury has been discussing the extension with lenders in recent days and that an announcement on whether it was extended was expected before the market opens Tuesday.
One analyst said Mercury indicated Monday it expected to receive the extension.
"Mercury was optimistic that all the ducks were in a row and that they would be able to negotiate an extension," said Thomas Kmiotek, analyst at Duff &amp; Phelps Credit Rating Co. That rating agency lowered Mercury's senior debt to a default rating of double-D from triple-C Monday, after Mercury failed to pay $15 million in debt Friday.
Though Mercury has defaulted on millions of dollars in short-term debt in the past several weeks, the $15 million due Friday was the first in medium-term notes to come due since Mercury's financial woes began, Kmiotek said.
On Jan. 29, Mercury said it would have to lower its earnings over the last four years by about $90 million.
The cut in earnings was due to accounting discrepancies Mercury blamed on its controller, James Doyle. But a day later, Doyle's lawyer accused Mercury of a charade and said Doyle was cooperating with federal authorites.
Since then, Mercury has defaulted on millions of dollars in debt, been served with a search warrant by FBI agents seeking financial records, hired William Brandt Jr., a turnaround and bankruptcy specialist as chief executive officer, and has been named a defendant in more than half a dozen lawsuits surrounding the misstated earnings.
The company also lost more than $2 billion in market capitalization when the stock plunged following its cut earnings.
