Case Corp said Tuesday it plans to spend $950 million in the next four years as part of an ongoing program to revamp its product line by the turn of the century.
"We have the goal to replace all the major (agricultural) products by the end of the century," Jean-Pierre Rosso, chief executive of the Racine, Wisconsin-based farming and construction equipment maker said in an interview. Many construction products will also be revamped.  
One major portion of that product overhaul, a new tractor series, will enter production this spring, Rosso said.
The MX Series tractors, which run from 85 to 115 horsepower, are in the midsize area of the tractor market, which represent about 30 percent of tractor sales worldwide for Case, Rosso said.
Orders in the United States and Europe have already exceeded company plans, Rosso said, although he would not disclose what those plans were.
"We have significant orders on both sides of the ocean already," he said.  
The tractor, which was recently unveiled, will be produced in Racine and the United Kingdom.
The switch from the German production site of Case's mid-sized tractors is expected to lower costs both from a labor and logistics stand point, Case said. The Racine and UK plants are also more efficient than the German plant. The new design utilizes more common components for models in different parts of the world, also bringing down costs, Case said.
Typically, the U.S. market has larger farms and looks for more horsepower, with wider implements. European farmers are looking for more advanced features on lower horsepower tractors, Rosso said.  
"The new design is much better matched to the needs and requirements of the customer base that it is targeted to," said J. Blair Brumley, analyst at Dain Bosworth Inc. The pricing of the tractor will also be equivalent to products offered by competitor Deere &amp; Co, Brumley said.
The switch to the MX series tractors is expected to depress earnings in the first quarter, before boosting earnings later in the year, Case and analysts have said.
At the same time, Case is also introducing a premium tractor called the QuadTrak, which has also been well received.  
"There's more demand than we can supply this year," Rosso said of the QuadTrak, which is designed with four tracks to have better terrain handling and less soil compaction.
In the early phases of the QuadTrak introduction, Case will lease about half of those tractors in order to get more customer feedback, Rosso said.
Also this year, Case plans to introduce a new skid steer loader, a piece of construction equipment that can utilize many different attachments -- sort of the construction equivalent of a Swiss Army knife. The loader will be at the higher-margin heavy lift end of the product line, Rosso said.
"It gets us in a part of the market which we are not present," Rosso said.
Adding a new product to its skid steer line could help Case to face new competition in the market, Brumley said.
"They're number two in market share and that skid steer market is going to get real crowded," with offerings from other manufacturers, Brumley said.
((Chicago newsdesk, 312-408-8787))
