Mosinee Paper Corp on Wednesday it expected capital expenses to double in 1997 as the paper products company expands capacity during the year.
"We expect to spend about $40 million," Daniel Olvey, chief executive of the Mosinee, Wisconsin-based manufacturer, said in an interview.
In recent years, the company has spent about half that. The increase would come with Mosinee adding a large number of paper-converting lines at its Bay West commericial towel and tissue unit, Olvey said.  
The increased spending is possible because the company paid down $31 million in debt in 1996, freeing up capital this year, Chief Financial Officer Gary Peterson said.
About 55 percent of Mosinee's $314.5 million in revenues came from specialty paper in 1996 and the rest from the towel and tissue business. Olvey said he expected towel and tissue to account for more than 50 percent of its revenues in the next couple of years.
The company is adding about 30 percent capacity to its Bay West towel paper converting plant and thinks the market can absorb the extra output.  
"We think over a period of two or three years it will be able to absorb that, " he said.
Currently, operating margins in the towel and tissue business are in the high 20 percent range, while the specialty paper margins are in the low to mid 20 percent range, he said.
The company produces about 99,000 tons of towel and tissue each year from 140,000 tons of waste paper. Waste paper prices have been moderate in recent weeks, not much changed from the fourth quarter of 1996, Olvey said.
The company is seeing some softness in towel and tissue prices. Such seasonal fluctuations are expected, he said.  
"In terms of selling prices, we're seeing stable to slightly up prices on the specialty paper side, and on the towel and tissue side, we're seeing stable to moderately down prices there," Olvey said. He expects towel and tissue prices should rebound in the next two months.
Raw material costs for the company have been favorable this year, he added.
"The raw materials area is still very soft," he said. "The pulp we're purchasing, there's a lot of deals out there."  
Mosinee focuses on niche businesses, with long-term contracts and above-average margins, to help lessen the effects of cyclicality in the paper business.
Olvey said the company was the largest U.S. producer of paper for masking tape, and provides the paper used for the test strip on one brand of battery Olvey would not name.
The company also makes decorative laminate for countertops and is one of the manufacturers of paper boxes for McDonald's Corp sandwiches.
Aside from adding capacity through capital improvement, Mosinee continues to look at potential acquisitions.
"We are very interested in making good acquisitions that we are comfortable with for the long haul," Olvey said. "We want equipment that is not only competitive in the marketplace now, but is competitive 15 to 20 years from now."
Acquisitions should also fit a niche with which the company is familiar.
"We are interested in expanding our specialty papers business, because we are at capacity there," he said.
((Chicago newsdesk, 312-408-8787))
