TCF Financial Corp. and Standard Financial Inc. said Monday they signed a definitive agreement for TCF to acquire Standard Financial for $424 million in stock and cash.
The deal was announced two days after Milwaukee-based bank holding company Marshall &amp; Ilsley Corp. said it would acquire cross-town thrift Security Capital Corp. for about $945 million in cash and stock, or about $92 a share.
Both deals help the buyer increase market share in the consolidating Midwest banking arena. Marshall &amp; Ilsley said it will increase its market share to 19.2 percent in Wisconsin, with Milwaukee-based Firstar Corp., the number two bank in the state, at 12.1 percent of deposits.
At the same time, the acquisition of $2.4 billion asset Standard Financial and its 14 full-service offices would strengthen TCF's franchise in Chicago, allowing it to do more cost affective advertising than it could before the deal, William Cooper, chairman of $7.1 billion asset TCF said.
"We believe this merger will produce long-term revenue enhancements and meaningful cost savings," Cooper said in a news release.
TCF expects to save about $4 million annually once the two banks' operations are combined in Illinois and to generate more than $4 million in revenues from the deal by offering more products to Standard Financial customers, changing the mix of Standard Financial's loan portfolio to add higher yielding loans and through fees at its automatic teller machines.
"Standard certainly has the customer profile TCF looks for, but I thought the price that they paid was fairly rich based on Standard's earnings," Stephen Skiba, analyst at ABN AMRO Chicago Corp, said.
The combined company would have $10 billion in assets and 276 financial services offices and more than 900 automatic teller machines in five Midwest states.
TCF, a savings bank holding company based in Minneapolis, will offer about $25 for each Standard share. Standard stockholders may choose to receive cash or TCF shares or a combination of the two. Between 40 percent and 60 percent of the purchase would be paid in TCF stock, and the rest in cash.
The exchange ratio for shares would depend on the average price of TCF stock during the 30 trading days before the deal closes.
Analysts also thought Marshall &amp; Ilsley paid a full price for Security Capital, a $3.66 billion asset thrift with 42 bank branches and 10 lending offices throughout Wisconsin.
The $92 a share acquisition price includes about 12.3 million Marshall &amp; Ilsley common shares and $376 million in cash and is a premium over the $84.75 closing price for Security Capital Friday.
"It's pretty pricey," said Thomas Maier, analyst at EVEREN Securities. "You can argue that given what it does for them in terms of share in the state of Wisconsin, it's worth it."
Wisconsin is seen as one target area for Midwest regional banks to make acqusitions to enhance market share.
"I think it's a defensive move on M&amp;I's part, that if they didn't grow within the Wisconsin market, it was more likely they would be a takeover target," Skiba said.
Skiba also said the acquisition of Standard Financial by TCF could make other Chicago-area thrifts, including MAF Bancorp Inc. and St. Paul Bancorp Inc., even more likely acquisition targets.
"I think there's becoming a scarcity value on the large independent thrift franchises that are left," Skiba said.
TCF shares fell $0.625 to $44 Monday, Standard Financial rose $2.375 to $23.50, Marshall &amp; Ilsley fell $0.56 to $36.75, and Security Capital rose $0.75 to $85.50.
