Sears, Roebuck and Co will spend more than $500 million to revamp and expand its off-the-mall tire and battery stores under the new National Tire and Battery name, the retailer said Wednesday.
The change is part of a plan under which Sears will spend more than $1 billion through the year 2002 on its entire auto group to add stores and convert some existing stores.  
Hoffman Estates, Ill.-based Sears, which sold 25 million tires and 8.5 million batteries through its Sears Tire Group in 1996, will combine most of its 275 Tire America and National Tire Warehouse Stores under the National Tire and Battery name, Sears said.
The company also plans to add about 100 National Tire stores over the next five years, hoping to add about $120 million in annual revenue for the tire group when the expansion is completed. Sears' tire group had $2.3 billion in revenues in 1996.  
The stores, unveiled Wednesday in Chicago, will have a high-tech, open feel, with customers able to watch the work being done on their cars. Pricing will be competitive in individual markets, Sears said.
"We will be at market pricing in every market we're in," Paul Baffico, president of Sears Automotive Group, said in an interview. "We do not necessarily want to be the market price leader, but we will be competitive with anybody who is in the market."  
The off-the-mall stores are geared toward a younger, higher income customer with higher performance car needs than the 800 mall-based Sears Auto Centers, Baffico said. Because of the existence of the mall stores, the retailer chose not to include the Sears name in National Tire and Battery.
"From a location strategy standpoint, a different name allows us to be closer to a Sears store without cannibalizing the market," Baffico said.
Areas targeted for new tire stores this year are Detroit, Minneapolis/St. Paul, Rochester, N.Y. and Buffalo, N.Y.  
Sears will also add a small number of Sears Auto Center stores in malls where they have recently acquired other retailers, Baffico said.
Separately, Sears plans to spend more than $650 million to add 780 Parts America auto parts stores by the year 2002 and to transform 240 Western Auto stores to Parts America, Baffico said.  
"We should be by 2002 the clear number two in parts," Baffico said. That category is currently led by Memphis, Tenn.-based AutoZone Inc, with Pep Boys -- Manny, Moe &amp; Jack of Philadelphia second, based on revenues. Sears' parts group had $1.4 billion in revenue in 1996.
Since the parts stores do not compete with Sears' mall format, the company will decide by the end of the summer whether to include the Sears name in the name of the stores, Baffico said.
One analyst agreed that Sears' expansion plans for the automotive group were aggressive, but noted that the company was being even more aggressive in other formats.
"Those are relatively aggressive, but remember they're coming from a place where they've been a little stagnant for a while," Stephen Latz, analyst at A.G. Edwards, said of the auto group expansion plans.
((Chicago newsdesk, 312-408-8787))
