The U.S. bank megamergers of 1995 have been digested and banking honchos are already bellying up to the table for more deals, with the nearly $9 billion acquisition of U.S. Bancorp by First Bank System Inc announced Thursday the latest example.
"I think 1997 will wind up, and it's already started out very much, like 1995," said Steven Schroll, banking analyst at Piper Jaffray.  
Before the First Bank announcement, $12.85 billion in bank and thrift acquisitions had been announced in 1997, according to SNL Securities LP, a financial information company. In 1995 there were $74.4 billion in deals, a figure that fell to $46.27 billion in 1996.
"What's happening is all those megamergers in 1995 are completed," Schroll said.
At the same time, the acquisition menu for banks is broader, with regulatory barriers to mergers between banks, insurance companies and securities firms likely to be lowered.  
Congressional action to remove barriers between banks and thrifts last year could also put more thrifts in play, analysts said.
Frank Barkocy, an analyst at Josephthal Lyon &amp; Ross, said in a research note that today's deal could be a catalyst "for stepped-up merger and acquisition activity in coming months, likely at significant premiums, as institutions scramble to obtain meaningful market share positioning in additional geographic sectors."  
Among the larger potential targets mentioned are First Chicago NBD Corp, which was formed by one of the larger mergers of 1995, and Bank of Boston Corp, which bought BayBanks Inc in a $2.0 billion deal that year.
"There's no deal too big" to be done, Schroll said.
While not predicting a takeover of either firm, Tucker Anderson, chief investment strategist at Cumberland Associates, told a panel in New York Thursday that both BankBoston and First Chicago "could be beneficiaries of consolidation." Neither is too big to be acquired, he said.  
James Schutz, bank industry analyst at ABN AMRO Chicago Corp, said First Chicago could give a buyer a large foothold in major Midwest markets at a reasonable price because of its relatively low price-to-earnings multiple.
"For bang for the buck, First Chicago is probably the most lucrative," Schutz said.
A First Chicago spokesman said the bank does not comment on merger speculation.
Meanwhile, Schroll predicted that regional banks with between $10 billion and $40 billion in assets could largely disappear through consolidation in the next two or three years.  
Firstar Corp in Milwaukee, with assets of about $20 billion and a presence in four states, could be a target, Schroll said.
"To me, it's the closest lookalike to U.S. Bancorp" of the banks Piper Jaffray monitors, Schroll said. Firstar was also mentioned as a target by Salomon Brothers in a note on the First Bank/U.S. Bancorp deal, as was KeyCorp, market sources said.
Spokesmen for Firstar and KeyCorp said their banks do not comment on merger speculation.
James Schmidt, executive vice president of the John Hancock Funds, noted during a panel discussion on bank trends Thursday that the number of U.S. banking companies has shrunk from around 14,000 in the mid-1980s to about 9,500 today. He predicted a further winnowing to 4,000 banks by the year 2010.
((Chicago newsdesk, 312-408-8787))
