First Bank System Inc is seen paying a premium price to expand its geographic footprint to the Pacific Northwest with its planned $9 billion acquisition of Portland, Oregon-based U.S. Bancorp.
"This is very rich pricing," analyst James Schutz at ABN AMRO Chicago Corp said, noting that the deal -- which would make First Bank the 14th largest bank in the United States based on assets -- values U.S. Bancorp at about $59.08 a share, or 19.2 times 1996 earnings.  
U.S. Bancorp shares were up 6-3/16 at 54-7/16 Thursday.
But at the same time, First Bank chief executive John Grundhofer's reputation for aggressive cost cutting, the complementary fit of U.S. Bancorp with Minneapolis-based First Bank's mostly Midwestern markets, and the rich price of bank stocks in general, make the deal palatable to analysts.
"It's a natural fit for them," said Frank Barkocy, analyst at Josephthal, Lyon &amp; Ross. "It's a natural extension of their marketplace."  
First Bank said it would be able to grow revenues from the deal by offering its payment systems services to U.S. Bancorp's extensive corporate base. Home equity lending and investment management services are also businesses First Bank plans to offer U.S. Bancorp's customers, while U.S. Bancorp's leasing expertise would be offered to First Bank customers, the banks said.
"Where the deal makes more sense is the compatibility of the business lines," said Stephen Biggar, analyst at S&amp;P Equity Group.  
First Bank expects to cut the combined banks' operating expenses by about 14 percent, with a pre-tax cost savings of about $340 million.
"We believe that (First Bank's) ability to cut costs could make this deal work," Salomon Brothers said in a note on the deal, according to market sources.
While First Bank stock was down 3-1/2 at 74-3/4 Thursday, analysts still saw the deal as a positive for the acquisition minded bank.
"They've got the acqusition history behind them," Biggar said. "They've got a management that can make deals work."  
The deal could also spark more bank consolidation, especially in the Midwest, with buyers swooping in while First Bank is busy consolidating its purchase, analysts said.
"We expect this announcement could trigger other activity," Salomon Brothers said, according to market sources.
Among potential targets frequently mentioned are Milwaukee-based Firstar Corp and Cleveland-based KeyCorp. Schutz even argues that Chicago-based First Chicago NBD Corp could be an attractive target at a reasonable price.
"For bang for the buck, First Chicago is probably the most lucrative" in terms of Midwest markets, he said.
((Chicago newsdesk, 312-408-8787))
