First Bank System Inc. said Thursday it will acquire U.S. Bancorp  in a stock deal worth more than $8.5 billion that will make it the 14th-largest bank in the United States and give it a firm toehold in the Pacific Northwest.
The deal between Minneapolis-based First Bank and U.S. Bancorp, a regional bank based in Portland, Ore., will also result in the loss of about 4,000 jobs, the banks said.
Under a definitive agreement, U.S. Bancorp shareholders will receive in a tax-free exchange 0.755 share of First Bank common stock for each U.S. Bancorp share they own.
Based on First Bank's trading price of $75.375 Thursday, which was down $2.875, the purchase price equals $56.91 a share for holders of U.S. Bancorp, whose shares jumped $6.75 to $55.
"This is very rich pricing," said James Schutz at ABN AMRO Chicago Corp., noting the deal values U.S. Bancorp at about 19.2 times its 1996 earnings.
However, First Bank Chief Executive John Grundhofer's reputation for aggressive cost-cutting, the complementary fit of U.S. Bancorp with First Bank's mostly Midwestern markets and the rich price of bank stocks in general made the deal palatable to many analysts.
"You could live a couple of lifetimes without finding another fit this good," Grundhofer said in a statement announcing the deal.
"It's a natural fit for them," said Frank Barkocy, analyst at Josephthal, Lyon &amp; Ross. "It's a natural extension of their marketplace."
First Bank said it expected pretax cost savings of about $340 million from the merger, with combined operating expenses being reduced by 14 percent.
First Bank said it would take pretax charges of $625 million for costs related to the merger, which was expected to close by the end of June.
While it was too soon to say specifically which jobs would be cut in the merger, the majority of jobs affected will be in the Portland area, bank officials said. Both banks have instituted hiring freezes to help minimize the number of people losing jobs, the banks said.
First Bank said the deal was expected to add to its earnings per share starting in the second quarter of next year. By 1999, First Bank sees about an 8 percent addition to earnings per share.
First Bank said it would be able to increase revenues from the deal by offering its payment systems services to U.S. Bancorp's extensive corporate base.
Home equity lending and investment management services are also businesses First Bank plans to offer U.S. Bancorp's customers, while U.S. Bancorp's leasing expertise would be offered to First Bank customers, the banks said.
"Where the deal makes more sense is the compatibility of the business lines," said Stephen Biggar, analyst at S&amp;P Equity Group.
Grundhofer will be president and chief executive of the new company, which will take the U.S. Bancorp name but remain based in Minneapolis.
U.S. Bancorp Chairman Gerry Cameron will serve as chairman of the merged bank until his retirement in 1998.
Since 1991, First Bank has made 23 acquisitions, including the $717 million acquisition of Nebraska-based FirsTier Financial Inc. in 1996.
Cameron said he was first approached by Grundhofer about a deal in early November.
"I frankly told him he should go talk to someone else that was interested," Cameron told reporters during a conference call. But he said he felt a responsibility to shareholders to hear Grundhofer out and the two discussed the deal around Thanskgiving.
After subsequent meetings and a review that ended last weekend, both sides were even more convinced the deal made sense, he said.
