Cobra Electronics Corp said Monday it expects to report increases in revenue and profits in 1997, after the company reported a profitable year in 1996, its first year in the black since 1989.
"We are expecting double-digit revenue growth and a significant increase in profit," chief executive officer Jerry Kalov said in an interview.
The company reported revenue of $90.3 million in 1996 and net income of $601,000 in 1996, compared to revenue of $90.4 million and a loss of $1.1 million a year ago.  
After completing a cost-cutting program in 1996, Cobra is looking to its new radar and laser detection products and a comeback in the citizens band radio market to help fuel revenue growth.
The company is currently introducing a system called Safety Alert, which expands on its radar dectector technology to allow drivers to receive a signal alerting them to emergency vehicles, oncoming trains and construction and other equipment that might cause an accident.
The company plans to sell the detector, which mounts on a windshield for about $69.95, Kalov said.  
The signal comes from a transmitter that sells for about $300 and is mounted in the light panel of emergency vehicles, he said. The company hopes municipalities will be interested in purchasing the transmitters to help avoid costly accidents to their vehicles.
"It's going to take some time, because municipalities don't have a lot of money," Kalov said about selling transmitters.
The company is also introducing a product for about $149 that combines Safety Alert, a radar detector and a system to warn drivers when police are using laser to trap speeders in an area.  
In fact, the growing use of laser by police should spur sales in the company's detection equipment, Kalov said.
"As more and more laser guns are showing up, we believe it's going to create a spurt" in laser detector sales, he said.
Cobra currently has about 15 percent of the detection market, but it expects its market share to grow to 20 to 25 percent by the end of the year, he said.
The company also has about a 35 to 40 percent market share in CB radios, its largest business. It sees that share rising to 50 percent with introduction of technology that reduces background noise and with new distribution channels.  
Kalov said use of CBs, which peaked in the 1970s, is rebounding as people become used to the mobile communications of cellular phones for emergencies but don't want to pay cellular phone charges.
CB radios also serve a "chat-room" function, allowing drivers to get recommendations for restaurants and information on road conditions, Kalov said.
The company also maintains a niche profile in the cordless telephone market with less than three percent of the market. Kalov said that the company's goal is to have three to five percent of that market.
((Chicago newsdesk, 312-408-8787))
