U.S. retailers are expected to post sales gains in the single digits for March, bolstered by low-end discount stores sales while department store performance was nearly flat compared with a year ago.
"It appears there's a slowdown in the department store end of the business, but the discounters are still doing well," Michael Niemira, analyst at Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi Ltd. said.
Overall, he expects comparable-store sales, or sales at stores open at least a year, to be up about 5 percent or slightly less.
An early Easter could depress sales at stores that were closed on the holiday, which fell in the March selling period instead of April this year. Winter storms in much of the northern part of the nation may have also held sales back.
"You need to look at March and April overall to get comparable sales," William Armstrong, an analyst at Fahnestock &amp; Co. Inc. said of quirks in the reporting calendar, where some retailers include Easter in March and others in April this year.
Armstrong is expecting overall retail sales for March to increase by 2 percent to 4 percent.
Most retailers will report March sales early Thursday. But Plano, Tex.-based J.C. Penney Co. Inc. Tuesday reported a 3.7 percent decline in comparable-store sales at its JCPenney stores in March. The early report was due to a debt offering the company is making this week.
The loss of one day's sales because of Easter hurt sales, J.C. Penney said.
Penney's decline is expected to be mirrored by other department stores, analysts said.
"Most (department store) chains saw flat or even slightly lower comparable sales during the March period, as they compared with healthy year-ago increases," analysts at Montgomery Securities wrote in a research report. They added that the early Easter and snowstorms in the Northeast added to pressure on sales.
At the same time, discount stores are expected to post 4 percent to 6 percent sales gains, with low-end discounters reporting low double-digit gains, Montgomery said.
"We continue to believe the low-end strata is benefitting from the fruits of a fully-employed economy and the direct pay-hike from the 1996 minimum wage increase," Montgomery's analysts wrote.
Among the major chains, analysts see Wal-Mart Stores Inc., the nation's largest retailer, reporting same-store sales gains of about 7 percent. Sears, Roebuck and Co. was expected to report gains of 2 percent to 3 percent, with Kmart Corp. up 10 percent to 12 percent.
Kmart's results are expected to be driven by seasonal items, such as horticulture, home goods and bicycles. But it will give back some of those gains in April because of the calendar shift, analysts at Deutsche Morgan Grenfell said in a research note. Kmart stores were open on Easter, analysts added.
Dayton Hudson Corp. is expected to post a 1 percent to 2 percent gain, with a 3 percent to 4 percent increase at its Target discount stores offsetting flat department store sales. Federated Department Stores Inc. is expected to post flat sales, with some planned promotions moved into April, analysts said.
