Shares of Sears, Roebuck and Co, the nation's second largest retailer, fell about six percent Thursday after the company said it will voluntarily refund some payments from credit card holders who filed for bankruptcy.
Sears said the repayments might have a material effect on 1997 earnings. But analysts said the company could not quantify its earnings exposure during a conference call.
Sears stock was down 3-1/8 to 47-3/4.  
The dispute is over a process called reaffirmations, where Sears approaches holders of Sears credit cards who have filed for bankruptcy and attempts to have them make payment to Sears rather than having the debt and their Sears credit wiped out in bankruptcy court.
The reaffirmation agreements must be filed with a bankruptcy court. Sears said Thursday some of the agreements were not filed properly.
While Sears could not say how much it might have to refund to debtors, the company did say it had $400 million in reaffirmations from 1992 through February 1997, analysts said.  
Analysts noted that some of the reaffirmations were properly filed. But Sears may also be subject to other court sanctions.
The retailer told analysts it would offer each debtor affected a $100 gift certificate.
A Sears spokeswoman was not immediately available to confirm analysts' comments.
"It (the earnings impact) could end up being $0.50 to $1.00 a share and that's a lot," said Peter Schaeffer, analyst at Dillon, Read.  
Analysts also said that Sears defined "material" as anything over five percent of annual net income. Based on analysts estimates for 1997 earnings, that could mean a minimum cost of about $70 million to 1997 earnings, analysts said.
But analysts also said it was too early to say how much impact the credit card problem would have.
"They (Sears officials) don't know," said Karen Sack, analyst at S &amp; P Equity Group. "They can't quantify it until they do a full investigation."
The company also said same store sales rose one percent in March, slightly below expectations.
But the credit card problem was what was hurting the stock, analysts said.
"Granted, sales were somewhat disappointing," said Joseph Ronning, analyst at Brown Brothers Harriman. "But this came out of the blue."
((Chicago newsdesk, 312-408-8787))
