USG Corp, maker of building products such as wallboard, is looking to double its earnings by the early 2000s from its 1995 base.
"By the early 2000s, we would like to double the bottomline of our company," USG chief executive William Foote said in an interview.
He said that goal was based on its 1995 earnings. The company reported earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization of $417 million in 1995.
EBITDA rose to $437 million in 1996 for the company.
USG plans to achieve this by growing revenues with production expansion and through cost cutting initiatives, Foote said.
The company is also seeking to have its debt rating raised to investment grade -- triple-B or better -- by the end of 1998, Foote said. The rating is currently double-B-plus.
The company currently spends about $150 million a year on capital improvements and $150 million a year to pay down debt. Once investment grade rating is reached, more of the company's cash will be spent on expanding capacity and improving costs, Foote said.
On Thursday, USG said its United States Gypsum Co unit will spend at least $85 million to build a facility to manufacture gypsum wood fiber panels, a building product the company plans to position between its less expensive wallboard product and more expensive cement board.
In November, the company announced plans to build a new, lower-cost wallboard manufacturing facility in Bridgeport, Ala. for $110 million. The company also last year said it would spend $35 million to modernize a Cloquet, Minn. plant.
Foote would not rule out announcing another new facility plan by the end of 1997.
"There are no plans that are imminent but I can't say that that might not happen," Foote said.
He also conceded that the new gypsum wood fiber product could cannabalize sales of the company's other products, but noted that this would free USG up to sell to more customers in the wallboard market.
"It would allow us to increase our (wallboard) market share," Foote said. "We are able to sell all the Sheetrock (wallboard) we make right now."
USG shares closed up 1/2 at 32-3/4 Thursday.
((Chicago newsdesk, 312-408-8787))
