Banyan Strategic Realty Trust, which releases its full 1996 results early next week, will report funds from operations (FFO) of $0.03 a share for the 1996 fourth quarter, down from $0.07 a share a year ago.
Leonard Levine, chief executive of the real estate investment trust also said Friday that funds from operations for the year ended December 31 would be $0.34 a share, up from $0.32 a share a year ago.
But the company expects funds from operations, the standard measure of a REITs performance, to jump in 1997.  
"In 1997, we expect our targeted numbers for FFO, both as a result of acquisitions made in late '96 and continuing acquisitions in early '97...will be somewhere between $0.50 and $0.55," Levine said in an interview.
The company's target for 1998 FFO is $0.65 to $0.70 a share, not including additional acquisitions, which it expects to make.
By June 30 of this year, Banyan expects to own 19 properties in the Midwest and Southeast, including industrial buildings, suburban office buildings, apartment complexes and a retail center.  
"Real estate is cyclical and the best way to protect against that cycle is to spread your risk," Levine said in explaining Banyan's strategy, which is counter to most REITs, which focus on one property sector.
The company focuses on markets without much competition from larger REITs.  
"Our principal investment strategy is to focus on smaller real estate markets and smaller properties where we believe there continues to be extraordinary opportunities available to us to purchase stable and appreciating real estate and where the economies are both very strong and there continues to be an absence of credit and capital," Levine said.
Banyan buys properties with an eye toward both improving its revenue stream and selling at a profit down the road.
The company hopes to speed its portfolio growth in coming years and Levine expects Banyan to make some sort of equity offering in the next year to raise market capital.
"I think sometime within the next 12 months we'll be exploring ways in which the company can grow from that perspective," Levine said of a potential equity offering.
Among the benefits from an equity offering would be to improve Banyan's liquidity, he added.
Shares of the company closed Wednesday at four and have not traded since.
((Chicago newsdesk, 312-408-8787))
