Caterpillar Inc. reported a first-quarter profit of $394 million Tuesday, the best quarter in the company's history and up 33 percent from a year ago.
Caterpillar also said it now expects 1997 profits will be higher than the $1.4 billion it posted in 1996, based on expectations for "moderately higher" sales.
The outlook is a switch from January, when Caterpillar forecast profits near 1996 levels.
The Peoria, Ill.-based heavy equipment maker reported earnings of $394 million, or $2.08 a share, well above the Wall Street consensus of $1.69 a share. Sales and revenues were $4.26 billion.
A year earlier, Caterpillar earned $296 million, or $1.53 a share, on revenues of $3.84 billion.
Caterpillar shares rose $2.375 to $81.75 on the New York Stock Exchange in afternoon trading.
"This is just a very, very solid operating quarter," said J. Blair Brumley, an analyst who follows Caterpillar at Dain Bbosworth Inc.
Gross profit margins helped drive earnings in the quarter, rising to 26.8 percent of machinery and engine sales from 24.5 percent a year ago.
The rise in profit margins was primarily due to higher prices, higher physical sales volume, a favourable change in geographic sales mix, lower sales discounts and the net effect of the stronger dollar.
But the favourable effect of the stronger dollar on costs incurred in Japanese yen and European currencies was substantially offset by the negative impact on prices.
If the dollar remains too strong vs. the yen, the company could be forced to cut prices because of competition from Japanese companies, Caterpillar said.
"So far...  the (negative) impact's been very minimal and a large part of that is the fact that we've restructured our business so we know how to manage an overvalued dollar," Caterpillar Chief Financial Officer Douglas Oberhelman said in an interview. "No question that if the dollar continues to be overvalued and continues to be strong, we'll see some price erosion later in the year."
Sales in the United States were $2.17 billion, up 15 percent from a year ago. Sales outside the United States were $1.90 billion, up 6 percent from a year ago.
Sales volume in the quarter was up 9 percent, while prices improved 2 percent, Caterpillar said.
Caterpillar did hedge its forecast for the year, saying greater-than-expected interest rate increases by the Federal Reserve and lingering weakness in European demand could hurt results. Last month the Fed raised short term interest rates by one-quarter percentage point in a bid to ward off inflationary pressures.
"We're expecting another 50-75 basis points (one-half to three-quarter percentage point in rate increases) probably this year before they finish," Oberhelman said of the Fed. "That's in our plan. Anything over and above that, we'd be concerned about."
Caterpillar noted that the economic and industry outlook improved from January because the United States and Canada are now expected to have better economic growth and higher machine industry demand than originally anticipated.
The company said it expected U.S. gross domestic product to rise 3 percent in 1997, up from the 2 percent it expected earlier.
