Caterpillar Inc. reported a first quarter profit of $394 million Tuesday, the best quarter in the company's history and up 33 percent from a year ago.
Caterpillar also said it now expects 1997 profits will be higher than the $1.4 billion it posted in 1996, based on expectations for "moderately higher" sales.
The outlook is a switch from January, when Caterpillar forecast profits near 1996 levels.
The Peoria, Ill.-based heavy equipment maker reported earnings of $394 million, or $2.08 a share, well above the Wall Street consensus of $1.69 a share. Sales and revenues were $4.26 billion.
A year earlier, Caterpillar earned $296 million, or $1.53 a share, on revenues of $3.84 billion.
"This is just a very, very solid operating quarter," J. Blair Brumley, an analyst who follows Caterpillar at Dain Bbosworth Inc., said.
Gross profit margins helped drive earnings in the quarter, rising to 26.8 percent of machinery and engine sales from 24.5 percent a year ago.
The rise in profit margins was primarily due to higher prices, higher physical sales volume, a favourable change in geographic sales mix, lower sales discounts and the net effect of the stronger dollar.
But the favourable effect of the stronger dollar on costs incurred in Japanese yen and European currencies was substantially offset by the negative impact on prices.
Sales inside the United States were $2.17 billion, up 15 percent from a year ago. Sales outside the United States were $1.90 billion, up 6 percent from a year ago.
Sales volume in the quarter was up 9 percent, while prices improved 2 percent, Caterpillar said.
While results were far better than expected for the quarter, analysts expressed some concern about how much the stronger dollar aided results.
Caterpillar also hedged its forecast for the year, saying greater-than-expected interest rate increases by the Federal Reserve and lingering weakness in European demand could hurt results.
Also, if the dollar remains too strong vs. the yen, the company could be forced to cut prices because of competition from Japanese companies, Caterpillar said.
Caterpillar noted that the economic and industry outlook improved from January because the United States and Canada are now expected to have better economic growth and higher machine industry demand than originally anticipated.
The company said it expected U.S. gross domestic product to rise 3 percent in 1997, up from the 2 percent it expected earlier. Caterpillar shares rose $2.25 to $81.625 Tuesday.
