Kmart Corp., in another bid to spruce up its discount stores, said Wednesday it will spend $750 million over the next three years to convert nearly all of the outlets to a new concept called "Big Kmart."
The new Big Kmarts are designed to help shoppers save time and money and bring them back more often by reorganizing merchandise and displaying it in wider, easier-to-access aisles.
"This new store signals real change, a new beginning, a new Kmart, bigger and better in every respect," Chairman Floyd Hall said at an unveiling of the Big Kmart concept at the Chicago Brickyard Mall.
The Big Kmart concept is expected to add significantly to sales at existing stores.
"We would look for a 20 percent gain in any given store in sales per square foot," Hall said in an interview.
The Big Kmart prototypes, under development for 18 months, have previously been called Kmart's "high frequency" concept. So far 297 stores have been converted. Another 333 are slated for conversion in 1997. Most of the remainder of Kmart's more than 2,000 traditional stores will be converted by 1999.
Big Kmart stores, not to be confused with another concept, the Super Kmart Centre, are the same size as the 60,000 to 80,000 square feet traditional stores.
The Big Kmart concept groups merchandise into three areas: home fashions, including towels, bedding, dinnerware and appliances, located near the front of the store; childrens' apparel and toys, near ladies and mens apparel; and consumables, including health and beauty care products, near the centre of the store.
Big Kmart stores will also feature a new Pantry department filled with more food and household products, paper products and pet supplies.
"We don't really look for a customer to choose us over a grocery store," Hall said. "We're offering it up as a convenience to our customers."
The Big Kmart stores will not duplicate the full grocery sections offered in the firm's 97 Super Kmart Centres.
Kmart, the nation's third largest retailer, has launched previous programmes to draw shoppers into its discount stores, which have been criticised as dirty and disorganized.
In 1990, former Kmart chairman Joseph Antonini launched a massive store renovation programme that also updated the company's logo. However, the changes failed to bring Kmart up to the standards set by archrivals Wal-Mart Stores Inc., and Dayton Hudson Corp.'s Target.
Hall said the company plans to open seven traditional stores and three Super Kmart Centres in 1997 and concentrate its efforts on opening 35 new Big Kmart stores and 15 to 18 Super Kmart Centres in 1998.
