Harnischfeger Industries Inc chief executive officer Jeffery Glade thinks acquiring Fond Du Lac, Wisconsin-based Giddings &amp; Lewis Inc is his company's best option as it tries to become dominant in the fragment machine tool and material handling business.
But whether or not Harnischfeger's $747 million unsolicited tender offer for Giddings is successful, the company is still looking for other acquisitions.  
"This is not our last acquisition in this industrial product service group," Glade said in an interview late Friday.
Grade said the industry, which he estimated as more than an $80 billion business, "is poorly served. It is fragmented. No one is a lion's share owner of it."
He sees acquiring Giddings, a supplier of industrial automation products and machine tools, as a way of improving Milwaukee-based Harnischfeger's aftermarket service to the machine tool and material handling business.  
"We'll be within 24 hours of any major plant in the United States," Glade said. "That's what happens if you put their business with ours."
Glade said Harnischfeger announced the $19 a share tender offer for Giddings, which closed Friday at $13.625, after discussing an acqusition with the company since last Monday.
He said Giddings' board of directors Friday issued what Harnischfeger considered a rejection to the offer, asking for a two year "stand still" agreement while it tried to convince Harnischfeger it was worth more. Under the agreement, Harnischfeger would not be able to try to acquire Giddings.  
"My own view is they decided they wanted a public auction," Glade said.
Giddings would not comment on any discussions it had with Harnischfeger.
In a statement Friday, Giddings urged shareholders not to respond to Harnischfeger's offer until its board of directors reviews the offer and other alternatives.
"The true value of (Giddings) shares is not reflected in the marketplace," Marvin Isles, Giddings chief executive, said in a news release.  
But Glade said the offer for Giddings was fair.
"It's a darn good offer, 40 percent over the market for a machine tool business most analysts are pretty cautious about," Glade said.
According to First Call, the consensus recommendation of 12 analysts who follow Giddings rates the company closer to hold than buy.
Harnischfeger will have to take on a "significant" amount of new debt to finance its bid for Giddings, but has the financing in place, Glade said. He expects the debt to be paid down in two to four years and thinks the acquisition would be accretive to earnings as soon as it closed.
That accretion would come from growing the business, not shutting plants and laying off people, he said.
"What we intend to do is grow this little baby," Glade said. "We think we can sell more and become a better service provider when we combine our strategy."
"We have other alternatives to (Giddings), but I would tell you (Giddings) is the best opportunity at this moment," he said. He would not say at what price Giddings is not the best alternative for Harnischfeger.
((-- Chicago newsdesk, 312 408-8787))
