The stock of Giddings &amp; Lewis Inc. jumped Monday amid speculation that Harnischfeger Industries Inc. would boost its hostile $631 million takeover offer for the supplier of machine tools or that another suitor would make a bid.
Analysts were sceptical that Fond du Lac, Wisconsin-based machine tool and industrial automation products maker Giddings would see a much higher bid than the $19-a-share tender offer Harnischfeger announced Friday.
"I don't think there's much more in that Harnischfeger bid than what's in there, and I don't think there's anyone else out there" that would make a higher bid, Thomas Burns Jr., analyst at NatWest Securities, said.
The stock of Giddings, which also makes industrial automation equipment, soared $6.73 to $20.36 in active trading of more than 10.1 million shares on the Nasdaq market.
"People are expecting a higher bid," one trader said.
Harnischfeger's unsolicited bid of $19 a share for Giddings has a total value of $747 million including assumption of Giddings debt.
Giddings has asked its stockholders not to act on the offer until its board reviews the proposal. Giddings also said it retained Credit Suisse First Boston to explore all strategic alternatives.
Many analysts think that Harnischfeger's bid will prove to be successful.
While saying the Harnischfeger bid was not a done deal, "We expect (Harnischfeger) to pursue its target with vigour and would be surprised if another offer significantly higher than the one now on the table would surface," J. Blair Brumley, analyst at Dain Bosowrth Inc., said.
Harnischfeger said it is looking at using Giddings &amp; Lewis to expand in the fragmented industrial products aftermarket service business, which Harnischfeger estimates as an $80 billion market.
But some analysts said buying Giddings &amp; Lewis, a company that took a $64.1 million charge last year to try to fix its integrated automation systems business, adds a lot of uncertainty for Harnischfeger shareholders.
"...We believe that investors will be looking at a fundamentally different company with much more risk involved than they had previously," Brumley wrote in a research note, in which he also lowered the rating of Harnischfeger to a hold from a buy.
But some analysts said Harnischfeger has picked a perfect time to go after Giddings &amp; Lewis. Giddings &amp; Lewis has already taken steps to fix its underperforming operations, but the stock, in their opinion, still is ailing, they said.
"They got all the dirty work behind them," said Darren Bagwell, analyst at Robert W. Baird &amp; Co Inc. "They've wiped the slate clean, and yet the stock price still reflects that wait and see attitude."
In fact, Bagwell also said Giddings &amp; Lewis could probably squeeze a higher bid out of somebody and said he felt the company was worth more than $19 a share.
Harnischfeger Industries stock fell $3.125 to $42.25 on the New York Stock Exchange.
