Harnischfeger Industries Inc's $19 a share tender offer for industrial tool and systems maker Giddings &amp; Lewis Inc could be about the best offer Giddings can get, industry analysts said Monday.
"I don't think there's much more in that Harnischfeger bid than what's in there, and I don't think there's anyone else out there" that would make a higher bid, Thomas Burns Jr., analyst at NatWest Securities, said.  
Shares of Fond du Lac, Wisconsin-based Giddings &amp; Lewis jumped 6-3/4 to 20-3/8 Monday. That was seen as an indication that some buyers expect a higher bid, a view many analysts take issue with.
"My feeling is at $19 a share, that's full value, I think, for Giddings &amp; Lewis," said William Cooke, analyst at McDonald &amp; Co. "I think that Harnischfeger is assuming they can double the earnings of Giddings &amp; Lewis in the not too distant future. I think they're being optimistic."  
Harnischfeger said it is looking at using Giddings &amp; Lewis to expand in the fragmented industrial products aftermarket service business, which Harnischfeger estimates as an $80 billion market.
But some analysts said buying Giddings &amp; Lewis, a company that took a $64.1 million charge last year to try to fix its integrated automation systems business, adds a lot of uncertainty for Harnischfeger shareholders.  
"...we believe that investors will be looking at a fundamentally different company with much more risk involved than they had previously," J. Blair Brumley, analyst at Dain Bosworth, wrote in a research note, in which he also lowered the rating of Harnischfeger to a hold from a buy.
While saying the Harnischfeger bid was not a done deal, "we expect (Harnischfeger) to pursue its target with vigor and would be suprised if another offer significantly higher than the one now on the table would surface," Brumley said.  
Some analysts said Harnischfeger has picked a perfect time to go after Giddings &amp; Lewis. Giddings has already taken steps to fix its underperforming operations, but the stock, in their opinion, still is ailing, they said.
"They got all the dirty work behind them," said Darren Bagwell, analyst at Robert W. Baird &amp; Co Inc. "They've wiped the slate clean, and yet the stock price still reflects that wait and see attitude."
In fact, Bagwell also said Giddings &amp; Lewis could probably squeeze a higher bid out of somebody and said he felt the company was worth more than $19 a share.
Some analysts also noted that Harnischfeger's bid was likely based only on publicly available information and that a bidder who had a good look at Giddings &amp; Lewis books might find information to convince them to make a higher offer.
Harnischfeger shares were down 3-5/8 at 41-3/4 Monday.
((Chicago newsdesk, 312-408-8787))
