Talks between Caterpillar Inc. and the United Auto Workers will resume with the help of a federal mediator, the parties said Friday, almost a year and a half after striking workers returned to the work at the heavy machinery maker.
No date has been set for the talks called by the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service. The talks would be the first formal negotiations since November 1995, when a tentative agreement, subsequently rejected, was submitted to UAW members.
The 17-month strike ended in December 1995 without a new contract. Peoria, Illinois-based Caterpillar's workers have been without a contract since 1991.
Neither Caterpillar nor the union would say if any specific event occurred to spur new talks.
"As a result of conversations between FMCS, UAW and Caterpillar, I have called a meeting of the parties for a discussion of the issues between them," John Calhoun Wells, FMCS director, said in a statement.
A union official said jobs and job security have been main issues throughout negotiations, while almost 400 unfair labour practice complaints by the UAW and seniority problems have also become issues.
"I've always felt that there's going to come a time when it would make a good business decision for the company" to reach a labour agreement, Jim Clingan, executive vice president of UAW local 974 in Peoria, said. But he added that he did not know if that time has been reached.
Caterpillar has reported record profits in the wake of the strike and analysts have said the continuing labour woes have had little, if any, impact on the company's bottom line.
"(Caterpillar is) not going to budge enough for it to make a difference," said J. Blair Brumley, analyst at Dain Bosworth Inc. "Even if they get a contract, it's not going to look very different than what those guys are working under now."
Caterpillar reported profit of $1.4 billion on revenues of $16.52 billion in 1996.
In a statement, Cateprillar vice president Wayne Zimmerman called the resumption of meetings "a positive development."
"It's long past time to resolve the uncertainty this dispute has created for our employees," Zimmerman said.
UAW president Stephen Yokich also welcomed Wells' announcement.
"It is clearly in the best interests of all stakeholders, including communities and families, that the long-standing labour dispute be resolved equitably," Yockich said in a statement.
Caterpillar shares rose $2.625 to $93.375 in line with other capital equipment makers.
Brumley noted that when the news of the announcement was made, Caterpillar shares traded lower briefly.
