Huntington Bancshares Inc. said Monday it agreed to acquire First Michigan Bank Corp., a Michigan banking company, in a deal valued at $898 million.
The deal comes just months after Holland, Mich.-based First Michigan said it had been targeted by a different company. A First Michigan spokeswoman would not say who made the previous offer, or how it compared to the Huntington deal.
First Michigan shares fell 87.5 cents to $29.875 on Nasdaq at mid-afternoon, after having jumped to as high as $30.75 in recent weeks on takeover speculation.
Under the definitive agreement, Columbus, Ohio-based Huntington Bancshares will offer 1.05 shares of its stock for each First Michigan share in a fixed exchange that is expected to be a tax-free pooling of interests.
The deal originally was valued at $31.50 per share or $908 million, based on Friday's closing stock price for Huntington. Huntington stock, however, fell 50 cents to $29.50 on Nasdaq on Monday, lowering the value of the deal.
"It's an expensive price here," said Joseph Duwan, analyst at Keefe Bruyette &amp; Woods Inc. He noted that the deal valued First Michigan at 3.1 times book value and about 19 times 1996 earnings.
But First Michigan is also seen as a well-run franchise, in a western Michigan market that is attractive for its diverse economic base. Huntington is not currently in the western Michigan market, analysts noted.
"It's very pricey, but the point is I don't think anybody could have gotten First of Michigan without doing at least an at-market deal," said James Schutz, analyst at Chicago Corp.
All of First Michigan's 90 banking offices in the state will be merged into Huntington's lead subsidiary, Huntington National Bank. First Michigan has assets of $3.6 billion.
The combined company would have assets in excess of $25 billion, stockholders' equity of about $1.9 billion and a market capitalisation of about $5.2 billion.
"This merger significantly expands our Michigan market share and enables us to realise important synergies in our consumer, commercial and fee-based businesses," said Frank Wobst, chairman and chief executive of Huntington.
"Upon completion of this transaction, Huntington will have approximately $6 billion in assets in Michigan making it our second-largest market after Ohio."
The acquisition is expected to boost Columbus, Ohio-based Huntington's earnings slightly in 1998 and increase profits by 4 percent in 1999, he said.
A pre-tax merger-related charge of about $35 million will be recognised in the quarter the merger is completed.
The merger is expected to result in annual cost savings of at least $19 million, or 15 percent of Michigan's expense base in 1998, by eliminating redundancy and excess capacity.
The deal is expected to close late in the third quarter, subject to regulatory and shareholder approvals.
Huntington has warrants to buy up to 19.9 percent of First Michigan's outstanding shares at an exercise price of $29.275 per share if the deal does not close under certain circumstances.
Huntington Bancshares, with assets in excess of $21 billion, operates 355 offices in Ohio, Florida, Indiana, Kentucky, Michigan and West Virginia. It also has 81 mortgage, trust, investment banking, and automobile finance offices in those states as well as in Georgia, Maryland, New Jersey, North Carolina, South Carolina, Pennsylvania and Virginia.
