Japanese workers are facing another year of marginal salary increases as traditional systems of fixed pay rises give way to greater wage flexibility and growing job insecurity.
With Japanese companies struggling to maintain competitiveness and profit margins in a tough global marketplace, employers are showing waning enthusiasm for the "shunto" spring wage talks in which pay hikes used to be standardised across industrial sectors.
Economists estimate that the average wage rise for Japanese salaried workers at big companies will be around 2.9 percent for the coming business year, which starts in April, against an actual 2.86 percent, or 8,712 yen ($72) per month increase for 1996/97 -- less than the rise targeted by labour unions.
The central group representing Japan's labour unions is seeking an average wage increase of 4.4 percent, or 13,000 yen ($108), this spring, similar to last year's target.
Under a system introduced 40 years ago, labour representatives and management hold their shunto "spring offensive" in February and March to seek unified wage increases through collective negotiations.
A fixed pay scale was one of the cornerstones of the lifetime employment system under which armies of salaried workers toiled long hours to fuel Japanese economic growth, assured of a rising paycheck in return for years of service.
But with more companies introducing merit-based pay and cutting costs to stay competitive, the power of labour unions to secure broad-based raises has ebbed.
This year, labour is calling for increased wages in light of the scheduled rise in the nation's consumption tax from three to five percent in April but the unions' bargaining power is limited, given the weak economy and a traditional reluctance to resort to strike action.
Economists say that while corporate earnings are projected to improve in 1996/97, helped by the weaker yen, management wants this to be reflected in bonus payments -- which are flexible -- rather than annual pay increases.
They say managers will not meet labour demands, given Japan's stable consumer prices and rising competition, particularly from other Asian countries with low wage costs.
Atsushi Ohsaka, a director at Asahi Bank Ltd, said that the "shunto" system had benefits for both management and labour when Japan had a job-for-life system -- at least for certain male salaried workers -- as well as seniority-linked pay and a growing economy. "But the situation is changing," he said.
Under the traditional system, older workers would be paid more even if their productivity slowed, while some younger workers would get less than their performance merited.
Management feels it is difficult to maintain such a system in a mature economy and a rapidly ageing society, economists said. In addition, the gap between the relative financial strengths of individual companies and sectors is widening, making it hard to set standardised pay rises.
For instance, the Non-Government Railways Association, an employers' body, decided earlier this month that its members would each hold separate "shunto" talks with labour rather than collective ones.
Management and labour at Takeda Chemical Industries Ltd, an Osaka-based pharmaceutical company, are negotiating to introduce a system of performance-based pay from April, a company spokeswoman said.
Masao Yuki, executive vice president at Nikko Securities Co Ltd, recently said that the most important and urgent issue for Nikko was how to cut personnel costs while raising the salaries of talented young workers and maintaining overall morale. He acknowledged this would be a very difficult task and he had no specific ideas at this time.
Asahi Bank's Osaka said: "It is inevitable that Japan's employment system as well as shunto will change at a time of economic globalisation and fierce international competition...But the change will be gradual...as humans are not just objects."
