Japan's securities industry reacted cooly on Thursday to draft proposals by the ruling Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) to speed up the implementation of the government's "Big Bang" reform plan.
According to a draft report obtained by Reuters, the LDP's administrative reform panel proposes deregulating 19 financial areas from April, 1998, including abolishing the securities transactions tax and liberalising brokerage commissions on stock transactions.
The proposals also call for allowing banks' securities subsidiaries to engage in stock broking business in 1998/99; enabling banks to sell investment trust funds through their branch networks in the same year, and allowing leasing and credit firms to issue commercial paper from 1997/98.
"The financial areas in the report cover most areas in which deregulation must be considered," said Takashi Kanasaki, a managing director at Yamaichi Securities Co Ltd.
"But we don't think all the steps and the time tables to implement Big Bang reforms will be decided by the LDP alone as the Finance Ministry is also working out realistic steps to do so," he said.
Last November, Prime Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto unveiled a five-year plan to liberalise Japan's financial markets and catch up with reforms carried out more than a decade ago in Europe and North America.
A special committee of an advisory panel to the Finance Ministry is currently working out measures to realise the Big Bang" reforms. It will finalise its proposals by June.
Industry sources said that the ministry would come up with necessary changes in financial laws by early next year.
A LDP source said that the report will be a blueprint for discussion among panel members in order to help the government finalise a broader deregulation package by the end of March.
Kanasaki said that he expected brokerage commissions on stock transactions and the securities transaction tax to be deregulated in 1998 as stated in the LDP's draft proposals.
"Unless Japan tries to cut trading costs by deregulating such areas as securities transactions tax and commissions next year, we will see a hollowing out of Tokyo financial markets because Japan will liberalise the foreign exchange control system next year," he said. "Local investors will place orders for local stock transactions abroad if costs are cheaper there."
The cabinet submitted a bill revising the foreign exchange control law to parliament earlier this week. It enables freer cross-border capital transactions and settlements by individuals and corporations from April, 1998.
Yasuyuki Fujita, a senior economist at Nomura Research Institute, said some of the LDP's draft proposals were not realistic.
He said discussions would be needed on how to allow banks' securities arms to join the stock broking business, as banks, major holders of Japanese stocks, can influence the corporate decision-making process.
Analysts said that it is still difficult to predict who would be the winners after Big Bang, although top commercial banks and brokers are likely candidates.
"All financial sectors agree on the general gist of the Big Bang reforms but they expect harsh problems in their business if specific issues are implemented," said Katsuhito Sasajima, an analyst at Nikko Research Centre.
