Japan's deposit insurance system is expected to seek loans from banks through a tender later this year for the first time, financial sources say.
They said the move could fuel fears that funds available in the system may not be enough to protect depositors.
The tender would be aimed at repaying stopgap loans provided by the Bank of Japan (BOJ) to the semi-governmental Deposit Insurance Corp of Japan (DIC).
The DIC borrowed 500 billion yen ($4.13 billion) from the central bank last month to pay 1.03 trillion yen ($8.5 billion) to a liquidation scheme for failed credit union Kizu Shinyo Kumiai.
The tender would take place after June, when financial institutions make half-yearly payments of deposit insurance premiums, which will cover part of the BOJ loans, they said.
In the tender, which would not be mandatory, banks would indicate interest rates on loans and the DIC would select those with lower rates.
"After such a huge amount of money was used for the Kizu scheme, we are increasingly worried about whether and how the DIC will protect depositors' money in the event of any large bank failure in future," said a bank official.
The deposit insurance system, set up in 1971, is designed to help prevent a financial crisis and protect depositors from any financial failures.
The DIC was dormant until 1992, but it has used a total of 2.05 trillion yen ($16.9 billion) in the past five years to bail out troubled financial institutions and cover losses stemming from a series of financial failures since 1995.
In addition, the DIC must provide funds to help wind up already failed regional bank Hanwa Bank and small credit union Sanpuku Shinyo Kumiai, the sources said.
Finance Ministry officials also said recently that bank debentures issued by long-term credit banks may be covered by the deposit insurance system until March 31, 2001, in order to protect creditors holding the debentures.
An official of the DIC said, however, that it had sufficient funds to deal with possible future problems at financial institutions.
Under financial bills passed by parliament last June aimed at solving Japan's problem loan mess, the DIC boosted the insurance premiums which financial institutions pay by seven times, to 0.084 percent of total deposits from 0.012 percent.
This means the DIC will get 500 billion yen ($4.13 billion) in premiums a year until 2001, the official said. Under the financial bills, it can also borrow a total of two trillion yen ($16.5 billion) from the central bank as stopgap funds.
But analysts and even influential politicians are not optimistic.
Takeo Nishioka, secretary-general of Japan's main opposition New Frontier Party, said in a television programme last weekend that the present deposit insurance system could not cope with bank failures.
At the end of September, Japan's deposit-taking financial institutions had 29.23 trillion yen ($239 billion) of problem loans, of which 7.3 trillion yen ($59.8 billion) had not been covered by loan-loss provisions and collateral, Finance Ministry data shows.
Analysts say the actual amount of problem loans must be more than double the official figure. If regulators want to deal with insolvent financial firms seriously, there are potentially three measures they can take, analysts say.
The first is to boost deposit insurance premiums and the second is the use of loans provided by the Bank of Japan.
But the central bank is unwilling to have its money used to bail out financial institutions, and it is difficult to keep on increasing the premiums that institutions must pay the DIC.
"So the final source is public money, and politicians are beginning to try to establish measures to cope with the situation," said Katsuhito Sasajima, an analyst at Nikko Research Center.
But it is no easy task to establish such measures after a storm of public criticism that blew up last year over the use of 685 billion yen ($5.66 billion) in taxpayers' money to help resolve bad loans held at collapsed housing loan companies.
"The key is whether the authorities can avoid emotional reactions from the public," said Yoshinobu Yamada, an analyst at Merrill Lynch Japan. "While we believe public money is needed to ensure the stability of Japan's financial system, it may take a long time to reach a decision." ($1=122 yen)
