The top executive at Japan's largest brokerage, Nomura Securities, was reported on Friday to be preparing to step down over a scandal that could result in stiff penalties for the securities firm.
In the latest chapter in the saga of the scandal-tainted House of Nomura, the brokerage is being investigated by Japan's securities watchdog over dubious deals that Nomura admitted on Thursday appear to have broken the law.
Japan's Jiji news agency said on Friday president Hideo Sakamaki had offered to step down once the investigation into the transactions had been completed.
Nomura declined to comment on the report but rumours were rife in the securities industry that such a management sacrifice was inevitable after the brokerage was hit by its second scandal in just six years.
Sakamaki's predecessor in the post stepped down over a similar scandal in 1991 over improper compensation of elite clients and links between Nomura affiliates and organised crime.
Financial authorities served notice on Friday that Nomura could expect stern treatment if the securities watchdog concludes that the deals did violate the law.
Finance Minister Hiroshi Mitsuzuka said the ministry will take any necessary strict steps against Nomura after the Securities and Exchange Surveillance Commission (SESC) completes its probe.
The case is another blot on the reputation of Japan Inc after a series of scandals over unauthorised trading in the bond and copper markets, shady oil deals and overly cosy ties in the "iron triangle" of politics, business and bureaucracy.
The two Nomura directors involved in the suspect deals apparently made discretionary transactions and moved profits raised from Nomura's own funds to a corporate customer's account, actions which are against the law, Nomura vice president Atsushi Saito said on Thursday.
He said he could not confirm reports the corporate client was run by a relative of a "sokaiya" racketeer, but said that the client had a longstanding relationship with the directors and family ties to a Nomura shareholder.
Sokaiya, often linked to Japan's "yakuza" crime syndicates, typically try to extort money from firms by threatening to expose dubious business practices.
Nomura is no stranger to controversy. It endured the stiffest penalties among Japan's Big Four brokers in the early 1990s when brokerages were found to have been compensating favoured clients for losses. Japan eventually banned brokers from making discretionary transaction contracts with clients as these give brokers free rein to make investment decisions.
In 1993, Nomura dropped a two-year libel suit against the British publisher of a bestseller that linked the company with insider trading, blackmailers and yakuza gangsters.
Nomura said that it had decided to drop its suit because the comments to which it took exception in the original English language version of the book, written by U.S.-born stockbroker Al Alletzhauser, did not appear in the Japanese translation.
Sakamaki's predecessor Yoshihisa Tabuchi was quoted at the time as saying failure to take action against the book would mean Nomura acknowledged the illegal acts described.
A top management change could hamper Nomura's ability to take swift, proactive steps to deal with Japan's "Big Bang" financial reforms, which aims for more transparency in the market, said Ayako Sato, an analyst at UBS Securities Ltd.
But, she added, "I don't think Nomura will fall from the current top position even in the long term."
In the past, illegal activity by brokers was punished by a partial business suspension but some industry officials warned that a more severe penalty could be imposed on Nomura this time, such as the suspension of sales and purchases on Nomura's own account.
Nomura shares fell on Friday, losing 50 yen to close at 1,530 yen.
