Japan's Finance Ministry served notice on Friday that it may take punitive action against Nomura Securities Co Ltd over suspected illegal deals involving a corporate client.
Finance Minister Hiroshi Mitsuzuka told a news conference on Friday that the ministry would take strict measures, if necessary, after Japan's securities watchdog -- the Securities and Exchange Surveillance Commission (SESC) -- completes its investigation into the dubious deals.
Mitsuzuka said that it would be "very regrettable" if Nomura, Japan's biggest brokerage, was involved in illegal trading as reported.
On Thursday, Nomura publicly admitted that it was highly likely that two of its directors had been involved in illegal deals.
At a hastily called news conference, Nomura vice president Atsushi Saito said that Nomura had found out that the directors made deals regarded as discretionary transactions with a corporate client, and they also transfered profits from Nomura's own account to the client's account.
He said that both of the actions are illegal, and the SESC has been investigating the case.
The revelations are yet another blot on the reputation of Japanese business, already hurt by scandals over unauthorised markets trading, shady oil deals and cosy contacts between bureaucrats, politicians and corporate executives.
After the securities industry was hit by a scandal over compensating favoured clients for losses in the early 1990s, Japan banned brokers from making discretionary transaction contracts with clients as these give brokers free rein to make investment decisions.  
Brokerage industry officials said any punishment would not be imminent and could possibly take the form of a suspension of Nomura business.
Yasuo Ueki, general manager at Nikko Securities, said: "Investigations take a long time to complete in the first place and as the market is at a crucial stage ahead of the end-March book closing, punishment measures will probably not be announced or carried out in a hurry."
A market source said that in the past, illegal activity by brokers has resulted in a partial business suspension as the functions of the trading section of the brokerage cannot be halted completely.
However, there is a possibility that a more severe penalty, such as a suspension of buying and selling on Nomura's own account, could be imposed if the authorities conclude that illegal actions did take place, he said.
Nomura shares fell in the wake of the news conference, finishing 50 yen lower at 1,530 yen on the Tokyo Stock Exchange after being ask-only at the opening. But many analysts and market sources said that Nomura's business was unlikely to be greatly undermined by the news and that the stock price should prove resilient.
They also said that that the market had to some extent digested the scandal as the media reported on the suspected impropriety last year.
"I've told our boys it's great buy opportunity," said one foreign analyst.
Another securities analyst, Dresdner Kleinwort Benson International's Robert Garone, said: "This is not devastating for Nomura or the brokerage industry."
Ayako Sato, an analyst at UBS Securities Ltd, said, however: "I reviewed the rating for Nomura after yesterday's news and reduced it to neutral from buy."
She said that the topside of Nomura's shares would be heavy for a while until the stock market fully digests any punishment imposed on Nomura by regulators and its impact, if any, on Nomura's business.
But she said it was unlikely Nomura would lose its top ranking among Japanese brokerages. "I don't think Nomura will fall from the current top position even in the long term," she said.
But any change in top management at the brokerage may hamper Nomura's ability to take swift, proactive steps to deal with Japan's "Big Bang" financial reforms, she added.
