Japan's major asset management firms said on Monday they had suspended business with scandal-tainted Nomura Securities after the top brokerage revealed suspected illegal deals.
The suspension will deal a serious blow to Nomura's business, reducing its commission income on bond and stock transactions -- 28.5 percent of its total revenue.
Even its own unit, Nomura Investment Management Co, said it would suspend business with the brokerage from Monday. Orders given to Nomura Securities by the investment management unit have accounted for about 20 percent of its total orders.
"We decided to take the action out of consideration for our customers, including foreign customers," said an official at Nomura Investment Management.
Asset managers have been under pressure from customers, particularly public pension funds, to halt orders to Nomura, which last week admitted to irregular deals apparently linked to corporate racketeers.
Nomura said two of its directors had apparently made deals that were discretionary transactions and moved profits raised from Nomura's own funds into a corporate client's account, practices banned under Japan's securities law. Media reports have linked the firm to a former "sokaiya" racketeer.
The two Nomura directors, who Monday's Japan's Asahi Shimbun said raised at least 70 million yen ($573,000) in profits in shady transactions, resigned their posts on Monday.
Nomura chairman Masashi Suzuki also said on Monday that the Finance Ministry had accepted his offer to resign as the head of the Japan Securities Dealers Association (JSDA).
Company president Hideo Sakamaki is also reported to have offered to step down once the probe into the deals is complete.
The investigation may also determine whether Nomura's business with asset management firms will remain suspended.
An official at Nikko International Capital Management said the suspension of business would last at least until the Securities and Exchange Surveillance Commission (SESC) decides whether to take punitive action against Nomura. He said the position would then be reviewed.
At least six major asset management firms suspended business with Nomura on Monday, including affiliates of Daiwa Securities, Nikko Securities, Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi and the Industrial Bank of Japan.
In 1991, when Nomura was embroiled in a similar scandal over improper compensation to elite clients, most of its stockbroking business was halted for more than a month.
At that time, the Finance Ministry also banned Nomura's underwriting of and bidding at auctions for government bonds for two months. Nomura was also ordered to voluntarily restrict its corporate divisions' business for several weeks.
But a more severe penalty, such as a suspension of buying and selling on Nomura's own account, may be on the horizon this time if the authorities conclude that the company itself was involved in illegal actions.
Nomura's vice president Atsushi Saito told reporters last week that the two directors made the deals on their own judgement and the company itself was not involved.
But even if administrative punishment takes place, analysts and market sources said that Nomura was unlikely to lose its position as Japan's top brokerage.
"I don't think Nomura will fall from the current top position even in the long term," said an analyst at one of Japan's Big Four brokerages, who asked not to be identified.
Another analyst said: "In bond dealings, Nomura is the most influential and strongest. If Nomura's business is suspended by the regulators, it is market participants who face trouble in doing business, rather than Nomura."
Some have turned a blind eye to the scandal altogether.
"Our company does not plan to suspend business with Nomura because of the scandal," one foreign asset management company official said. "...There are no reasons to hold business if conditions Nomura offers are better than other brokers." ($=122 yen)
