An investigation by Japan's securities watchdog into possibly illegal deals at Nomura Securities Co Ltd is unlikely to be concluded quickly, a government source said on Tuesday.
The Securities and Exchange Surveillance Commission (SESC) has been investigating since last September and the probe is now centred on whether and how Nomura provided profits to a corporate customer, the source told Reuters.
The source said the investigation is likely to take at least a few more weeks, and urged Nomura to cooperate fully.  
"To complete the investigation as soon as possible, extraordinary cooperation is needed from Nomura," he said, adding that until recently Nomura was not as cooperative as the authorities might have hoped.
Under the Securities and Exchange Law, the SESC could advise the finance minister to hand down administrative punishment if it finds evidence of illegal activity. The heaviest penalty would be revocation of brokerage licences and suspension of business for up to six months.
Under the law, the SESC could also pass the case to prosecutors to pursue legal action.  
Nomura said last week that two of its directors made deals suspected to be "discretionary" transactions, meaning they were done without the client's knowledge, and moved profits raised from Nomura's own funds into a corporate client's account, practices banned under Japan's securities law. Media reports have linked the firm with a former "sokaiya" racketeer.
Nomura Securities has said it could not confirm the media reports that the corporate client was run by a relative of a "sokaiya".
Sokaiya are people who extort money from a company by threatening to disturb a shareholders' meeting, or by offering to prevent a disruption of the proceedings. Japanese commercial law has prohibited paying off racketeers since 1982.
A Nomura spokesman said the company did not know how long it would take for the SESC to complete its investigation.
"We must make utmost efforts to restore people's trust... But we are now at a halfway stage (as the SESC investigation has not yet finished)," he said.
He said two company executives involved in the irregular dealings scandal resigned as managing directors as of Monday, but said they would stay at the company to help its in-house investigation into the deals.  
Industry sources said that the longer the SESC investigation lasts, the greater will be the damage to Nomura's business and reputation.
An executive at a life insurance company said: "I was very shocked at the news as Nomura, a leading company in Japan's securities industry, seems to have repeated its wrong-doing after similar scandals (in 1991)."
Several Japanese investment management companies have suspended business dealings with Nomura in light of the scandal.
"Such business suspensions will continue at least until the SESC completes its investigation and official actions are decided upon," the insurance executive said.
