Mitsui Fudosan Co Ltd, Japan's biggest real estate developer, hopes to rise above Japan's property slump and drum up new business by offering real estate investment services to foreign and small investors.
Income from consulting and coordinating for real estate projects, rather than owning and developing them, and from selling real estate-backed securities could eventually make up 20 to 30 percent of the company's profits, Mitsui Fudosan President Junichiro Tanaka said in a recent interview.
"The investment advisory business and the securitisation of real estate are promising businesses," Tanaka said, adding he was keen to attract foreign investment to Japan to help revitalise the sagging real estate market.
"Japan's real estate business must be globalised and we should try to improve our expertise in planning and coordinating real estate development projects," he said.
While Japan's real estate market appeared to be picking up, he said any major turnaround was at least another three years away.
The company's push into real estates services was apparent in last month's surprise winning bid for land held by Japan's former state-owned railway.
Forming a consortium that included a Singaporean firm, Alderney Investment Pte Ltd, and Matsushita Electric Works Ltd, Mitsui Fudosan and its partners put together plans for a 250 billion yen ($2.06 billion) office complex, including 138.2 billion yen ($1.14 billion) in land costs.
Mitsui Fudosan, which will cover seven percent of the total cost, will act largely as coordinator and consultant for the project, while Alderney will rent out office space and Matsushita Electric will set up its Tokyo headquarters there.
Junichi Shiomoto, an analyst at Nomura Research Institute, said this was Mitsui Fudosan's first new commercial development project in several years and appeared to reflect a belief that prices were bottoming out in Japan for some types of land.
Mitsui's Tanaka said trends in Japan's real estate market were indeed changing, after years of depressed prices sparked by the bursting of an asset price bubble in the early 1990s.
He expected the Japanese government to ease landholding taxes and building restrictions, after adopting in January a new basic land policy that focused on effective land use rather than the earlier goal of curbing high land prices.
"The ruling Liberal Democratic Party is serious (about land reform) and we expect various policies will emerge based on the new land policy," he said.
Tanaka said, however, that he did not expect land prices in Japan to go up over the coming three years or so.
He also said Mitsui Fudosan would continue working to cut its debts below the one trillion yen ($8.2 billion) mark over the next two years from 1.26 trillion yen ($10.4 billion) as of September 1996, a goal it announced last November.
"The current low interest rates are abnormal and what we are aiming to do is to cut our debts to improve our financial strength," he said.
He said the company also aimed to boost operating profits to 50 billion yen ($413 million) per year, compared with a forecast parent current loss of 70.3 billion yen ($580 million) in the business year to March 31, 1997. That loss largely reflected the sale of about 200 billion yen ($1.65 billion) of non-performing assets in the latter half of the fiscal year. ($1=121 yen)
