A week after Japan's top brokerage, Nomura Securities, said two directors were involved in suspected illegal deals, speculation is spreading that similar scandals may emerge at other brokerages.
On Thursday, the share price of Daiwa Securities Co Ltd, Japan's second-biggest brokerage, plunged on speculation -- later denied -- that Daiwa would hold a news conference concerning a probe by Japan's securities watchdog, the Securities and Exchange Surveillance Commission (SESC).
A Daiwa spokesman told Reuters that the SESC had been conducting an inspection since March 3 but that it believed the checks were routine and were not related to any suspicious deals.
Two Nomura directors resigned on Monday after the brokerage said they made apparently illegal deals and funnelled funds to a corporate client which has been linked by Japanese media to a former "sokaiya" racketeer.
The incident comes six years after Japan's securities industry, including Nomura and other "Big Four" brokerages, was hit by a scandal over improper compensation to favoured clients.
Top executives at Nomura and Nikko Securities Co Ltd resigned in 1991 over the improper compensation and revelations that affiliates had done deals with gangsters.
Prime Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto took Nomura to task on Thursday for damaging the reputation of Japan's brokerage industry and confidence in the stock market.
"I cannot use any other words except 'extremely regrettable'," Hashimoto said. "I want Nomura at least to be aware again of the damage it has done to confidence in (Japan's) securities industry in international society."
Hashimoto resigned as finance minister in 1991 over his ministry's failure to prevent the brokerage scandal and the SESC was set up in 1992 to improve industry surveillance.
Government and industry sources expressed regret that speculation over a potentially widening scandal had emerged but were tightlipped about any ongoing investigations.
Salesmen at other Big Four brokerages are also fielding questions from customers worried about a wider scandal.
"Our salesmen told me that customers have been asking whether we are involved in scandals as Nomura is," an official at one Big Four brokerage said. "We must be patient about such doubts...but it is irritating and we are really upset."
Some industry analysts also fear history may repeat itself. "We may also see a wider investigation into this matter vis-a-vis other securities companies in Japan,"said James Fiorillo, a financial analyst at ING Baring Securities.
Nomura is already suffering repercussions from the incident, although the official probe has yet to be concluded. Major Japanese asset management firms, big trust banks and life insurers have suspended business dealings with Nomura, and Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corp said it would take steps to alter its business ties with the brokerage.
Japan's Postal Life Insurance Bureau (Kampo) and Finance Ministry officials are waiting for the outcome of the SESC probe before deciding whether to suspend their bond business with Nomura, and other major Nomura clients also said they are watching the outcome of the SESC's probe.
"It is actually a big blow on our business," said a Nomura official, who declined to be named. "Even before the SESC probe is concluded and the Finance Ministry decides to impose penalties, institutional investors have begun to punish us."
