The resignation of the president of Nomura Securities Co Ltd on Friday should be only a first step by the country's top brokerage house in restoring its scandal-scarred image.
Analysts believe the resignation should just be to clear the decks so Nomura can carry out widespread management restructuring, including bringing in a young, untainted leader to help win back public trust.
In a hastily called news conference, Nomura president Hideo Sakamaki, 62, said that he had stepped down and would become simply an adviser to the firm. Chairman Masashi Suzuki, also 62, took over the post of president in addition to the chairmanship.
Sakamaki's resignation followed the departure of two Nomura directors who quit the brokerage last week after they were found to have made apparently illegal stock deals and funnelled funds to a corporate client linked by Japanese media to a former "sokaiya" racketeer.
Several analysts said the resignation stopped far short of the action needed to restore public trust.
David Threadgold, an analyst at BZW Securities Ltd, said although Sakamaki had resigned the failure to immediately announce his permanent replacement indicated the firm had not been able to find the right person to replace him.
Yushiro Ikuyo, first vice president of Smith Barney International Inc, said Nomura may take several years to recover from a scandal which was a repeat of similar incidents in the early 1990s.
Ikuyo said the fact there was a repeat scandal indicated there was a problem with Nomura's corporate mentality.
"Nomura has the potential to be a Japanese company which could be a winner in international competition and under Japan's "Big Bang" reforms as an investment bank," he said.
"To change the corporate culture, a drastic restructuring in management, such as the resignation of all senior executives, must be considered and a young and clean leader appointed," he said.
Prime Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto has vowed to carry out "Big Bang" financial reforms to implement substantial deregulation by 2001.
A securities analyst, who declined to be named, was sceptical that a wholesale clean-up could be carried out.
"All the top executives have great contacts with corporate Japan," the analyst said. "In Japanese business, it's also going to be hard to find a 'Mr. Clean.'"
A senior Finance Ministry (MOF) official told Reuters this week the ministry is waiting the outcome of investigations by the country's securities watchdog over the suspect deals.
But the official said MOF was focusing on whether Nomura violated the Commercial Code, rather than securities laws.
"Sokaiya" extort money from a company by threatening to disturb a shareholders' meeting, or offer to prevent a disruption of the proceedings by unruly shareholders.
Japanese commercial law has prohibited paying off racketeers since 1982.
Ironically, Sakamaki's presidency began in 1991 when top executives Setsuya Tabuchi and Yoshihisa Tabuchi (no relation) resigned after revelations the brokerage compensated elite clients for losses and affiliates dealt with organised crime.
The two Tabuchis, however, rejoined Nomura's board in 1995, triggering a controversy among Nomura employees because the two were regarded as a symbol of the firm's previous tainted corporate culture -- aggressively grabbing profits, even sacrificing small investors' interests.
New president Suzuki said that the two Tabuchis offered to resign from the board again. He said he would accept their offers which are not related to the scandals.
"My first priority is to restore confidence. I would like to transform the company to one with a healthy situation and transfer the company to the next generation," Suzuki said.
He said that he would take all possible steps to avoid a recurrence of wrongdoing but fell short of announcing details.
"Nomura is not a family-run company and Suzuki's position as both president and chairman is something irregular," an analyst at a major local brokerage said.
