The top executive of Japan's leading brokerage, Nomura Securities Co Ltd, resigned from his post on Friday to atone for a scandal over suspected illegal deals.
Nomura said president Hideo Sakamaki stepped down as of Friday and became an adviser to the company. Chairman Masashi Suzuki takes on the job of president in addition to the chairmanship.
"As the top official of the company, I think I should take responsibility," Sakamaki told a news conference.
The scandal broke last week when Nomura said two of its directors, who subsequently resigned, had made apparently illegal deals and funnelled funds to a corporate client linked by Japanese media to a former "sokaiya" racketeer.
The president's resignation, which was widely expected, comes amid signs that the scandal may be widening as suspicion falls on other prestigious Japanese brokerages.
Nomura's Sakamaki said the scandal was not endemic in the company itself, but added he did not know whether other Nomura executives were involved in the suspected illegal deals, which are being investigated by the nation's securities watchdog.
The brokerage pledged to strive to win back public trust.
"My first priority is to restore confidence," chairman Suzuki told the same news conference. "We will take all possible measures to avoid any repetition of such scandals."
Sokaiya, often linked to "yakuza" crime syndicates, typically try to extort money from firms by threatening to expose dubious business practices or to disturb shareholders' meetings -- called "sokai" in Japanese.
Companies have also been known to hire sokaiya to muzzle legitimate shareholders' questions at the annual meetings.
The case is another blot on the reputation of corporate Japan after a spate of scandals over unauthorised trading in financial markets, shady oil deals and overly cosy ties in the "iron triangle" of politics, business and bureaucracy.
Speculation is also spreading that similar scandals may emerge at other brokerages.
Finance Minister Hiroshi Mitsuzuka said on Friday that regulators will likely probe Japan's other "Big Four" brokerages after reports that the corporate client cited in the Nomura scandal as having sokaiya links also holds accounts at other leading securities houses.
"It's hard to believe the authorities will sit by after such reports. It's common sense for them to conduct an appropriate investigation," he said.
Nomura had been widely expected to make a top management sacrifice to express remorse over its second scandal in just six years. In 1991, senior Nomura executives Setsuya Tabuchi and Yoshihisa Tabuchi (no relation) resigned over revelations the brokerage had compensated favoured clients for losses and that affiliates had dealt with gangsters.
The fate of the two Tabuchis, who rejoined Nomura's board in 1995, was being watched by some analysts for clues to how serious the brokerage was about internal reform. Nomura said on Friday that the two will quit the board again.
The scandal is a potentially serious blow to Nomura's business as well as its reputation, as a number of financial firms, including one in the Nomura group, have suspended dealings with the brokerage pending the outcome of the probe by the Securities and Exchange Surveillance Commission (SESC).
Nomura also faces a possible shareholder suit seeking compensation for any losses resulting from the scandal.
Leading credit rating agency Moody's Investors Service said on Friday that short-term financial damage may be limited but Nomura faces the challenge of strengthening management control, restoring its reputation and regaining business momentum.
