The latest scandal at Nomura Securities has seriously damaged the industry's image and the brokerage will be hard-pressed to convince investors it can clean up its act, analysts and market sources say.
In the latest development, the California Public Employees' Retirement Fund said on Tuesday it was suspending business with Nomura. The action came in the wake of a scandal over illicit transactions that could be linked with corporate racketeers.
The fund said, however, that it did not plan to take legal action against Nomura.
Sources close to the company say Nomura, rocked by its second major scandal in six years, will likely unveil a programme at the urging of the Finance Ministry to avoid a recurrence of such shady backroom deals.
The steps are expected to include the establishment of a compliance committee made up of senior management, the sources said. They also said Nomura's senior executives will accept salary cuts to atone for the scandal, in addition to president Hideo Sakamaki's resignation last Friday.
But analysts said Japan's top brokerage was responsible for a grave loss of investor confidence in the ethics of the securities industry as a whole.
The revelations about improper movements of funds between accounts raise fears that profits made in customers' accounts may be moved to brokers' own accounts, destroying the trust between investors and brokerages, they said.
Nomura said on March 6 that two of its directors, who have since resigned, had made discretionary transactions with a corporate client and transferred profits from Nomura's own account to the client's account.
Japanese media have said the corporate client was a relative of a one-time racketeer, but Nomura said it could not confirm the identity of the client.
Japanese newspaper and television reports have said Nomura had obtained profits worth about 40 million yen ($325,000) from trading in shares of Fuji Bank Ltd that it funnelled to the client's account on March 15, 1995.
A spokesman for Nomura declined to comment on the reports.
But Kazumasa Niimi, a senior economist at the Japan Research Institute, said if the reports were true, it raised questions over whether Fuji's share price was affected by Nomura's trading.
He said the volume of trading in bank shares is generally small, meaning trades of that size could influence the market price.
While the investigation is still under way with no charges made, industry sources said the transactions may have violated securities laws banning stock price manipulation.
Industry sources say the investigation is also looking into whether Nomura transferred profits from the brokerage's own account to that of a favoured client and made discretionary transactions without a client's consent.
Nomura sources also said the deals in question were on handwritten order forms, which would be easier to alter than computer printouts usually used to keep a record of transactions.
If the profits are then revealed to have been funnelled to a racketeer, this would also violate the commercial code, they said.
Corporate racketeers, called "sokaiya", extort money from companies by threatening to disturb shareholders' meetings or by offering to prevent disruption of the proceedings. Japanese commercial law has banned such payoffs since 1992.
Nomura has remained silent on the repercussions of the scandal since its president's resignation on Friday, saying it cannot comment as the matter is under investigation.
It will hold a regular board of directors' meeting on Wednesday, but a spokesman said the topics for discussion have not yet been decided.
A government source told Reuters last week that the probe by Japan's securities watchdog, the Securities and Exchange Surveillance Commission, or SESC, is likely to take some time.
"In order to complete the investigation as soon as possible, an extraordinary amount of cooperation is needed from Nomura," he said.
He added that until recently, Nomura was not as cooperative as the authorities might have hoped.
In the last major scandal to rock Nomura, in 1991, two senior executives resigned from the board over revelations that the brokerage had compensated favoured clients for losses and that affiliates had dealt with gangsters. ($1=123 yen)
