Most of Japan's second-tier brokerages said on Wednesday that they would land in the red in the current business year because of tumbling Tokyo stock prices.
Many of the firms had previously expected to turn a profit for the 12 months to March 31 after making losses the year before, but the downward spiral in stock prices seen earlier this year has dashed their hopes of a robust bottom line.
The nine brokerages said the drop in the Tokyo stock market had forced them to take write offs on the shares they own in listed companies, particularly banks.
The stock slump, triggered by worries about the sputtering economic recovery and banking woes, also ate into commission income as investors shied away from the market.
"While we have profits from bond trading, we were forced, unexpectedly, to post appraisal losses on shareholdings because stock prices fell sharply from January onwards," an executive at Okasan Securities Co Ltd told a news conference.
The nine brokers which issued revised earnings forecasts on Wednesday were Okasan, Sanyo Securities Co Ltd, New Japan Securities Co Ltd, Kankaku Securities Co Ltd, Tokyo Securities Co Ltd, Cosmo Securities Co Ltd, Dai-Ichi Securities Co Ltd, Wako Securities Co Ltd and Yamatane Securities Co Ltd. The only other brokerage in the second tier, Kokusai Securities Co Ltd, did not revise its existing forecast, which is for a profit.
Predicted parent current losses ranged from 1.5 billion yen ($12.1 million) for Sanyo and Okasan to a hefty 22 billion yen ($178 million) at Kankaku. In 1995/96, the nine firms had suffered losses ranging from 1.0 billion yen ($8.1 million) at Cosmo to 18.11 billion yen ($147 million) at Sanyo.
The key Nikkei average finished at 18,493.71 on Wednesday compared with 21,406.85 at the end of fiscal 1995/96.
The firms said daily turnover on the Tokyo Stock Exchange for the fiscal year so far had been averaging about 380 billion yen ($3.08 billion), much lower than they had expected.
Analysts said that to ensure profits, the second-tier brokerages need the daily turnover to be 500 billion yen ($4.06 billion) or more. Medium-sized brokerages rely more heavily on business from small investors than the top-ranking ones.
Analysts said that the second-tier brokers need to further streamline their business to cut costs ahead of the likely liberalisation of brokerage commissions next year in Japan's broad deregulation drive.
Revenue has fallen sharply since the early 1990s, when Japan's asset "bubble" collapsed, but the brokerages have not managed to scale back costs to the same extent, they said.
"Some of second-tier brokerages are likely to join holding companies led by big banks in the future in line with Japan's Big Bang financial reforms," said Yukiko Ohara, an analyst at UBS Securites Ltd. ($1=123 yen)
