Nippon Credit Bank Ltd, one of Japan's most-troubled banking groups, had 10 trillion yen ($81.3 billion) of its most senior debt cut to junk levels by Moody's on Friday,
Financial analysts said the move will raise costs for Nippon Credit and represented a vote of no-confidence in Japan's attempts to reform its financial sector.
The bank, in the middle of a restructuring program that is being closely watched by Japan's powerful Ministry of Finance, said the move was regrettable.
"We have to say that it is based on a complete misunderstanding, taking into account the environment surrounding our bank's business situation and other factors," the bank said in a statement.
Analysts said that the downgrading would be a serious blow for NCB and would raise its borrowing costs. As one of Japan's three long-term credit banks, NCB raises money through issuing debentures instead of taking deposits.
Moody's said it cut the ratings of NCB debentures to Ba1 from Baa3 as it expects NCB may ultimately require outside assistance because of its "substantial unrealised losses" in its loan portfolio. Such a rating puts the debentures below investment grade, commonly known as junk-bond status.
Analysts also said Moody's action showed the respected firm had doubts about the ability of Japan's financial authorities to deal with possible bank failures in the process of Tokyo's "Big Bang" reforms to liberalise markets by 2001.
It is the first time Moody's has given junk status to the senior debt of a Japanese bank.
The Ministry of Finance expressed surprise at the move.
"I really don't know what Moody's based their decision on," a senior MOF official told Reuters.
He also said that debentures issued by Japanese banks were secure and added that he did not expect any disruptions to financial markets due to concerns over NCB's financial health.
"But Moody's seems to be sceptical about Japan's monetary authorities. That's disappointing, but we have never left depositors with losses in case of failures at financial institutions," the official said.
Smith Barney International analyst Yushiro Ikuyo said that the action would quickly boost NCB's funding costs abroad.
Another analyst, who declined to be identified, said that insurers, who have been increasingly careful about their investment risks, may gradually reduce the amount of NCB debentures they buy.
"Moody's decision may force those investors to take a second look at purchasing NCB debentures. It could have an enormous impact on NCB's business."
Brian Waterhouse, a senior analyst at HSBC James Capel Japan, agreed, saying that Moody's downgrading would rekindle persistent concerns about the extent of problem loans NCB owns and its funding difficulties.
Investors see international credit rating agencies such as Moody's and Standard &amp; Poor's as being in the best position to judge the financial condition of NCB, he said.
Yields on five-year bank debentures issued by NCB jumped soon after the Moody's announcement.
But its share prices kept its earlier gains on technical buying-back, closing up 21 yen (17 cents) at 301 yen ($2.45) after hitting its all-time trading low of 177 yen ($1.43) on February 5.
"There is a great technical need to buy back the shares and the market turned a blind eye to the news of the downgrade," a broker at a medium-sized brokerage said. ($1=123 yen)
