A year after being formed in a Japanese financial "megamerger", the world's biggest bank is in better shape than its domestic rivals but faces tough challenges to become a genuinely global player, analysts say.
The creation of the Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi Ltd last April through the marriage of two prominent Japanese banks was touted as a good match with the potential to create a global institution in terms of quality as well as sheer size.
The bank has much to celebrate on its first anniversary -- a strong share price and a relatively light burden of bad loans, thanks to conservative lending policies by the individual banks in the investment boom of the 1980s and a pre-merger drive to clean up problem loans.
But analysts say Tokyo-Mitsubishi will have to grasp the challenge of Japan's "Big Bang" reforms and tackle efficiency and profitability problems to ensure sustained success and an international profile to match its giant proportions.
The merger of Bank of Tokyo and Mitsubishi Bank created the world's biggest bank in terms of assets, which exceed 70 trillion yen ($569 billion), blending Bank of Tokyo's strength in overseas operations with Mitsubishi's good domestic network.
"Of all Japanese banks, Tokyo-Mitsubishi has the greatest potential to become a winner in intensely competitive global financial markets," said Yoshinobu Yamada, an analyst at Merrill Lynch Japan Inc. But he said there was work to do.
"To be a winner amid fierce competition in deregulated markets, the key thing is to get rid of unprofitable businesses from the balance sheet."
"Big Bang" reforms aimed at making Japanese financial markets "free, fair and global" by 2001 will expose banks to greater competition both from domestic and international rivals. The proposed deregulation will lift barriers between various financial sectors that have hitherto protected the banks' business territory.
A Tokyo-Mitsubishi spokesman told Reuters the bank was aware of the challenges and opportunities presented by the Big Bang and was speeding up its streamlining plans. More concrete clues to the bank's strategy will emerge next week when it is due to reveal a three-year management plan.
"Our aim in the first year was harmonising the two banks' ways of business without inconveniencing our customers," the spokesman said.
Katsuhito Sasajima, an analyst at Nikko Research Center, said the benefits of the union have yet to be fully felt due to the initial cost of merging businesses and corporate cultures. "The real test in getting maximum benefit from the merger will come in the next business year and thereafter," he said.
Analysts said its profits from the core banking business for the year to March 31, before bad loan write-offs, should be robust. But despite its strengths, in international terms the bank has a low ranking for efficient use of capital.
Some analysts said moves to cut back unprofitable assets may be hampered by the bank's desire to become an international player offering a variety of products.
In its reforms, Tokyo-Mitsubishi may also be held back by traditional Japanese corporate values stressing loyalty to key customers and a responsibility to protect jobs, even at the expense of the bottom line, analysts said.
"While foreign analysts say big banks like BOTM should cut lending to big corporate customers to boost profitability. I don't think they will do so even if the existing return on those loans is small," he said. "Managers at Japanese banks do not pay much attention to shareholders but focus on the size of profits and job security for themselves and their employees."
The bank stands out not only for its size but in the quality of its loans. Problem loans accounted for 3.4 percent of overall lending at the end of September, the second-lowest rate among Japan's top 20 banks.
The bank has said it aims to boost its return-on-equity (ROE) ratio -- a gauge of efficiency in the use of capital -- to 10 percent. But its ratio was a mere 0.87 percent in the first half of the current business year, from last April to September, compared with rates above 30 percent for many U.S. and European banks operating internationally, analysts said.
To streamline operations, Tokyo-Mitsubishi announced last year that it would cut its work force to 18,000 by the end of March 1999. At the end of September 1996, the number totalled 20,014. It also plans to cut domestic offices by 10 percent over the coming two years from 363 at the end of last March.
David Atkinson, a financial analyst at Goldman Sachs (Japan) Ltd, said in a report that Japanese financial markets are inefficient because banks have very large assets on their balance sheets at incredibly low levels of profitability.
"If city banks (such as Tokyo-Mitsubishi) do not restructure their existing balance sheets but go into Big Bang by simply adding new businesses, then there will be no winners," he said. ($1=123 yen)
