Japanese prosecutors on Tuesday raided the country's biggest brokerage, Nomura Securities Co Ltd, in a dramatic sign of a widening probe into its part in payments to a client linked to racketeers.
The late afternoon raid on Nomura headquarters in central Tokyo was by both prosecutors and officials of the nation's securities watchdog, the Securities and Exchange Surveillance Commission (SESC).
The highly public raids appeared to signal that the Nomura incident could become a showcase crackdown as Japan seeks to clean up business practices and deregulate its economy.
Coinciding with the headquarters raid, 90 officials raided 10 other locations and for the first time formally spelled out in detail what they were investigating.
Deputy chief prosecutor Kunihiro Matsuo told reporters the raids were to investigate a Nomura director's illegal payment of 38 million yen ($309,000) to a company run by a relative of a racketeer to avoid disruption of a Nomura annual meeting.
Matsuo said the other raids included searches of the homes of the racketeer, or "sokaiya," as well as the Nomura director involved in the scandal, Shimpei Matsuki, and other Nomura executives.
Police have said Sokaiya, often linked to "yakuza" crime syndicates, extort money by threatening to expose dubious business practices or to disturb shareholders' meetings -- called "sokai" in Japanese.
The scandal surfaced on March 6. Matsuki and fellow director Nobutaka Fujikura resigned on March 10 after internal probes found they made discretionary deals banned under Japanese securities law and funnelled profits to a front company for the racketeer.
Individuals found to have violated the law would face a fine of up to one million yen ($8,100) and a maximum one-year jail sentence. If the company is found in violation, the fine is up to 100 million yen ($813,000).
A government source said that the SESC had decided to search the firm's headquarters while investigations were still under way because of concerns that evidence could be hidden.
The company said on Tuesday it regretted the raids but would cooperate with investigators.
Nomura president Hideo Sakamaki stepped down on March 14 to atone for the scandal. Chairman Masashi Suzuki took over his position while retaining the chairmanship.
Nomura, as well as share trading, exerts a powerful influence on every business in the yen bond market and is also Japan's top foreign bond seller.
The company has seen key foreign and domestic clients suspend business with it since the scandal broke.
Nomura has been a key player in Japanese financial markets for most of this century, including underwriting firms such as Sony Corp, which were part of Japan's postwar economic miracle.
In a scene akin to a Japanese film, 90 officials in business suits, led by a man with a briefcase, marched military-style through the front doors of Nomura's modernistic headquarters.
They locked the doors, shutting out journalists gathered for a raid designed to have maximum publicity.
Reports of the raids hit Nomura's share price, which ended the day down 20 yen (16 cents) at 1,440 yen ($11.70).
"What the market is more concerned about is any punitive measures which will be taken against the brokerage," said Yasuo Ueki, Nikko Securities Co Ltd general manager.
"The punishment will probably have an effect on the firm's business and could have an impact on the whole brokerage industry as well," Ueki said.
The investigation comes six years after Nomura and other leading Japanese brokerages were hit by a scandal over improper compensation to favoured clients.
Top executives at Nomura resigned in 1991 over the improper compensation and revelations of deals with gangsters.
($1=123 yen)
