Japanese prosecutors on Tuesday raided the country's biggest brokerage, Nomura Securities Co. Ltd, in a dramatic sign of a widening probe into its part in payments to a client linked to racketeers.
The late afternoon raid on Nomura headquarters in central Tokyo was by both prosecutors and officials of the nation's securities watchdog, the Securities and Exchange Surveillance Commission.
The highly public raids, including tipoffs to the media that they were imminent, appeared to signal that the Nomura incident could become a showcase as Japan seeks to clean up business practices and deregulate its economy.
Coinciding with the headquarters raid, another 90 officials swooped on 10 other locations and for the first time formally spelled out in detail what they were investigating.
Deputy chief prosecutor Kunihiro Matsuo told reporters the raids were to investigate a Nomura director's illegal payment of 38 million yen ($309,000) to a company run by a relative of a racketeer to avoid disruption of a Nomura annual meeting.
Matsuo said the other raids included searches of the homes of the racketeer and the Nomura director involved in the scandal, Shimpei Matsuki.
The scandal surfaced on March 6 and Matsuki and fellow director Nobutaka Fujikura resigned on March 10 after internal probes found they made discretionary deals banned under Japanese law and funnelled profits to a front company for the racketeer.
The "sokaiya" racketeers, often linked to "yakuza" crime syndicates, extort money by threatening to expose dubious business practices or to disturb shareholders' meetings -- called "sokai" in Japanese.
Nomura President Hideo Sakamaki stepped down on March 14 to atone for the scandal. He became an adviser to the company, and Chairman Masashi Suzuki took over his position while retaining the chairmanship.
Nomura, one of the world's most powerful financial institutions, is involved in bond and share trading. It exerts a powerful influence on every business in the yen bond market and is also Japan's top foreign bond seller.
The company has seen key foreign and domestic clients suspend business with it since the scandal broke.
Nomura has been a key player in Japanese financial markets for most of this century, and has underwritten firms such as Sony Corp., which were part of Japan's postwar economic miracle.
In a scene akin to a Japanese film, 90 officials in business suits, led by a man with a briefcase, marched military-style through the front doors of Nomura's modernistic headquarters.
They firmly locked the doors, shutting out reporters who gathered to witness the raid, which was designed to have maximum publicity value.
Reports that the raids were imminent hit Nomura's stock, which ended the day down 20 yen (16 cents) at 1,440 ($11.70).
But brokers said the impact of the news was limited as the market had expected such a development.
"What the market is more concerned about is any punitive measures which will be taken against the brokerage," said Yasuo Ueki, Nikko Securities Co Ltd general manager.
"The punishment will probably have an effect on the firm's business and could have an impact on the whole brokerage industry as well," Ueki said.
The investigation comes six years after Nomura and other leading Japanese brokerages were hit by a scandal over improper compensation to favoured clients.
Top executives at Nomura resigned in 1991 over the improper compensation and revelations that affiliates had done deals with gangsters.
