The scandal surrounding Nomura Securities Co Ltd will force Japan's largest brokerage firm to lay low for a while, but most industry sources and analysts say the mighty firm will again rise to the top.
"It is unthinkable Nomura will fall to the depths of an ordinary firm since it has the strongest distribution network in Japan," said an executive at a foreign securities house.
He said the crackdown on Nomura was inevitable as part of Japan's move to create free, fair and global markets.
But he added, "Nomura is not the only one of Japan's brokerages to keep ties with sokaiya racketeers and I don't think other local brokers have the nerve and ability to take over Nomura's market share."
On Tuesday Japanese prosecutors raided Nomura in its widening probe into the brokerage's part in payments to a client linked to "Sokaiya" racketeers.
Japanese prosecutors and officials of the nation's securities watchdog have been investigating illegal payments by Nomura directors to a company run by a relative of a racketeer.
The payment was made to avoid disruption of a Nomura annual meeting, the deputy prosecutor said. Payoffs to racketeers violate Japan's commercial code and are punishable by law.
The scandal surfaced on March 6 when the powerful brokerage said internal probes had found out that the directors had made discretionary deals and funnelled profits raised through stock trading to a corporate client.
A government source said that the Securities and Exchange Surveillance Commission (SESC) was probing whether the firm itself was also involved.
Japanese newspapers reported on Wednesday that the raid by prosecutors may be aimed at another, potentially more embarrassing, scandal involving politicians and bureaucrats over convertible bonds.
"The raid by regulators was aimed at resolving a deep-rooted problem in Japan's securities industry," said Yushiro Ikuyo, first vice president of Smith Barney International.
"Racketeers exist in Japan but not as much as in western countries. The Finance Ministry and prosecutors must have been keen to clean up the problem before Big Bang reforms," he said.
Industry sources said the scandal has already eroded Nomura's earnings, particularly in the stock brokering business.
The Nikkei Financial Daily on Tuesday reported Nomura's share of trading volume at the Tokyo Stock Exchange (TSE) has fallen to 6.4 percent after standing at 14.3 percent two weeks earlier.
Major Japanese asset management firms, including Nomura's own Nomura Investment Management Co, several trust banks and life insurers as well as the California Public Employees' Retirement Fund suspended business with Nomura soon after it announced the suspected illegal deals.
The industry sources said that Nomura's stock brokering, dealings on its own account and underwriting business would likely be suspended for months, which may force Nomura to post losses in the coming business year starting April 1.
"Nomura's business will be damaged over the next year. Investors have already reacted harshly to the scandal," said an executive at an insurance company
Nomura is expected to post the highest parent current profit among domestic brokers of some 100 billion yen ($806 million) for the business year ending March 31, analysts said.
Traders said Nomura may be partially suspended from trading in bonds.
While this is expected to have little impact on the highly liquid government bond market, traders said the move could cause problems in the smaller corporate bond market, requiring borrowers to offer higher yields to investors.
($1=124 yen)
