Troubled Nippon Credit Bank Ltd said on Thursday it expected to unveil a restructuring plan in early April, and banking sources said it would include selling real estate and shutting down some operations overseas.
In a hastily called news conference, Tadao Iwaki, senior managing director of NCB, denied a newspaper report that the restructuring plan was all set.
"We have been for long time working on a restructuring plan," he said.
He said the bank could not give a specific date to unveil the plan until earnings results for the current business year ending March 31 become clearer.
Banking sources told Reuters that the plan would include shutting down some overseas branches and sale of real estate including its Tokyo headquarters.
NCB's Iwaki said the steps were among the measures which should be considered.
It is the second time in the past two months that the bank has held a news conference to deny various reports, the last time to deny that it is on the verge of collapse.
Analysts said that while the bank denied the rumours last month, the financial markets have been waiting for its restructuring programme because of persistent fears about the future of the bank, which has been reeling from the weight of problem loans.
Last week, Moody's Investors Service cut the ratings on NCB's debentures to junk levels as it said it expect NCB may ultimately require outside assistance due to its massive problem loans.
As one of Japan's three long-term credit banks, NCB raises money mainly through issuing debentures instead of taking deposits.
On Wednesday, Bank of Japan Governor Yasuo Matsushita told reporters that the central bank is ready to help debenture-issuing lending institutions if they are in trouble, a clear allusion to Nippon Credit.
"If the restructuring plan reported in the Nihon Keizai were true, it would be ultimate programme designed to realise Japanese authorities' pledge, too big to fail," said one analyst, who declined to be named.
The Ministry of Finance (MOF) asked commercial banks if they would help out Nippon Credit in its efforts at restructuring, the banking sources also said.
They said a senior MOF official visited their offices asking them if they would want to buy new shares to be issued by NCB in order to boost the ailing bank's capital.
"Any attempt to pass on the costs of restructuring Nippon Credit Bank should raise new concerns about remaining contingent liabilities for the stronger financial institutions," Salomon Brothers Asia said in its report.
Another analyst said that Nippon Credit's denial about the report indicates that the restructuring plan may face a hard time winning approval from private-sector banks.
