Moves by two of Japan's most troubled banks to tackle their massive problem loans are not enough to get in shape for Japan's sweeping "Big Bang" financial deregulation, analysts said on Tuesday.
Hokkaido Takushoku Bank Ltd, Japan's 10th biggest commercial bank, and regional bank Hokkaido Bank Ltd, both based in Sapporo, announced they would merge next April and withdraw from overseas operations by next March.
Long-troubled Nippon Credit Bank Ltd (NCB), the smallest of the nation's three long-term credit banks, separately announced that it will restructure, halting overseas operations, selling off its Tokyo headquarters and posting losses to dispose of problem loans.
"As for the merger agreement by the two Hokkaido banks to restructure their operations, it is not impressive at all," said Yushiro Ikuyo, first vice-president of Smith Barney International Inc.
"The restructuring programme announced by Nippon Credit Bank is quite drastic, but when taking into account the size of its massive problem loans, the programme falls short of solving its bad loan woes," he said.
Hokkaido Takushoku and NCB are among the nation's weakest banks.
The Moody's Investors Service ratings agency assigns its lowest "E" ratings to both institutions, along with Chuo Trust &amp; Banking and Yasuda Trust &amp; Banking.
"There are no U.S. banks which received an E rating. Banks with E ratings are those which have been supported (in Japan's regulated system) despite their inefficiency," a Moody's officer recently said.
After the announcement of the merger and the restructuring plans, a spokeswoman at Moody's said that analysts in Tokyo and New York were expected to hold a ratings meeting later in the day but did not say if any ratings would be changed.
The Hokkaido merger is seen as putting two problem institutions together, some analysts said.
"It's a step in the right direction but they are taking two banks with huge bad debt problems -- merge them together and you've got a colossal bad debt problem to deal with," said Brian Waterhouse, an analyst at HSBC James Capel.
"Unless we see some public funds being used to assist with this it is unlikely that they will deal with all their problem loans before the merger," he said.
Problem loans at Hokkaido Takushoku totalled 936 billion yen ($7.54 billion) at the end of last September, accounting for 13.34 percent of loans outstanding.
Hokkaido Bank said its problem loans totalled 167 billion yen ($1.34 billion) at the end of September, but financial analysts say the actual number is larger.
NCB will meanwhile dispose of 460 billion yen ($3.70 billion) in problem loans in 1996/97, enabling the bank to cover 48 percent of its problem loan portfolio.
However, Yukiko Ohara, an analyst at UBS Securities Ltd, said that NCB's restructuring is not enough to solve the problem loan mess.
"In order to tackle Japan's problem loan woes, you will have to set up a clear system to determine how public money will be used," she said. ($1=124)
