Two of Japan's most troubled banks took action on Tuesday to end their long-running financial problems, with one finding a merger partner and the other finalising a radical restructuring.
The moves are seen as just the beginning of a drive by the the indebted banking industry to get ready for Japan's emerging "Big Bang" era of financial deregulation.
Hokkaido Takushoku Bank, Japan's 10th-largest commercial bank, said it will merge with the smaller Hokkaido Bank Ltd and cease its overseas operations to become a "super-regional" bank.
Such super-regionals use their local power base to build a large presence that rivals their big-city competitors.
Meanwhile, Nippon Credit Bank Ltd, one of three long-term credit banks in Japan, was expected to hold a news conference later in the day on a restructuring that would include an injection of government money and bankruptcy filings for its debt-ridden affiliates.
Hokkaido Takushoku said it had no choice but to retrench, ending lofty ambitions of being a global player in the banking world.
"We made the decision (on the overseas pullout) believing that it was inevitable to ensure leverage in our business while promoting bad loan write-offs," it said in a statement.
Hokkaido Takushoku said it and Hokkaido Bank would merge as equals by April 1998.
Both are headquartered in Sapporo, the largest city on Japan's northernmost main island of Hokkaido.
The merger will cut costs at the two banks and mean the elimination of 2,000 jobs.
It will also help Hokkaido Takushoku face its mountain of bad debts. The bank has long been considered the most troubled of Japan's major city banks and a merger candidate.
As part of the new focus it will shut down its six overseas branches in locations including New York and London and seven representative offices. It said the withdrawal from overseas operations would have only a limited impact on its business.
The two Hokkaido banks said they must be able to provide advanced financial services and be in strong financial condition in an era of deregulation in Japan's financial industry.
"We have reached the conclusion that the merger on an equal bases will best respond to the needs of the times," they said.
Hokkaido Takushoku will cut costs by 40 billion yen ($322 million) per year through steps such as rationalising overlapping branches in Hokkaido, Hokkaido Takushoku vice president Chuji Ohno told a news conference.
NCB's announcement of its overhaul is expected to include an end to most or all of its overseas operations.
As a long-term credit bank, NCB raises cash through issuing debentures rather than taking deposits.
Earlier in the day, it put three non-bank financial affiliates, estimated to have debts of 2.025 trillion yen ($16.3 billion), into bankruptcy protection.
The Japanese government, which has spoken of the benefits of deregulation and leaving the market alone, has meanwhile taken a strong hand in ensuring that NCB survives, urging other banks to accept newly floated shares to help it rebuild its capital base.
The Ministry of Finance (MOF) said on Tuesday that it had met with 12 banks and 30 insurance companies but did not give details of the discussions.
Financial analysts have criticised the NCB plan, saying it would further weigh down other big banks, which are themselves in far from robust financial health.
MOF also said it planned to use 80 billion yen ($645 million) from a special fund originally created to cope with bad loans from the collapse of "jusen" housing loan firms.
The jusen were hardest hit by the near-collapse of the real estate market when Japan's economic "bubble" burst in the early 1990s. The fallout from that is the main demon haunting all of Japan's financial world. ($1=124 yen)
