The Industrial Bank of Japan Ltd (IBJ) is working on radical reforms of its corporate structure and staff policies to gear up for the approaching era of "Big Bang" deregulation, financial sources said on Wednesday.
The bank will announce the plan, which is being spearheaded by president Masao Nishimura, in the coming months, they said.
The move would be another sign of the drive among Japan's debt-burdened banking industry to boost efficiency ahead of the reforms, which aim to liberalise the financial markets by 2001.
Nishimura held a luncheon meeting with analysts last week and sent a strong signal that the bank would soon clarify its strategy for success in a competitive, deregulated environment after Big Bang, they said.
This could include performance-related pay and other mechanisms designed to reward expertise and initiative rather than seniority.
An IBJ spokesman confirmed that president Nishimura had the meeting with economists and analysts, but did not give further details.
IBJ is working on a programme which includes a change in its corporate structure and the introduction of pay based on individual merit, said the sources, who did not want to be identified.
In Japan, tinkering with personnel practices is widely considered taboo, particularly at big banks, which are generously staffed compared with their international counterparts.
IBJ is aiming to be an international investment bank offering a variety of products to corporate customers and also intends to use a financial holding company, they said.
Nishimura told the Nihon Keizai Shimbun recently that the bank was considering boosting efficiency by setting up a company with a bank, securities house and trust banking firm under its umbrella.
Japan is expected to lift a ban on establishing financial holding companies next year, they said.
Analysts said that under a holding company, barriers between banks, brokers and insurers could be broken down and major banks could streamline their financial groups and bail out weaker affiliates.
The sources said that a sense of crisis is needed at the management level of Japanese banks as the reforms aimed at deregulating Japanese financial markets by 2001 will expose banks to greater competition from both domestic and international rivals.
If IBJ were to announce a radical reform programme, it would probably be welcomed by investors, they said.
IBJ, the biggest of Japan's three long-term credit banks, provides long-term loans to big corporations by mainly obtaining funds through bank debenture issues, not deposits.
However, the businesses of long-term credit banks have been hurt by recent moves by corporate clients to raise funds through the securities market.
Worries about their business outlook have also increased as the proposed Big Bang deregulation will lift barriers between various financial sectors that have hitherto protected the banks' business territory, they said.
