Japan's troubled banks, which once turned a cold shoulder to foreign suitors, now appear ready to welcome foreign acquisitions that might help them survive an impending industry shake-out.
But foreigners are likely to be hesitant about tying the knot, industry sources and analysts said, given insufficient disclosure of bad loans at Japanese banks and the lack of a clear system in Japan to deal with losses at failed banks.
A Finance Ministry official added that, while links with foreign firms may help Japan's banks weather the "Big Bang" financial reforms planned by 2001, Japanese institutions would have to get their houses in order before entering such unions.
"Japanese banks are busy cleaning up their bad-loan mess right now," Sei Nakai, a deputy director general of the ministry's banking bureau, said in an interview.
Japan's hopes for a few foreign white knights were apparent when troubled Nippon Credit Bank Ltd (NCB) on Monday announced a radical restructuring programme, including a withdrawal from overseas operations.
President Hiroshi Kubota told reporters that the scheme would help make his bank more attractive for a tie-up or a merger with a foreign firm.
"In order to meet new challenges, there would be nothing wrong with a foreign bank taking us under its wing and bringing in a blue-eyed president," he said.
"We've even been talking to (foreigners) about a tie-up.... They express interest, but say we should first clean house," he added.
But David Threadgold, an analyst at BZW Securities, doubted such offers would come rushing in.
"This is an unprofitable banking market -- overcapacity, overregulated. I'm not sure there is going to be a big queue (to buy NCB or other Japanese banks)."
An executive at a foreign investment bank echoed this sentiment. "While we are committed to remaining an active player in cash-rich Japanese markets, where individual assets total 1,200 trillion yen, we are not interested in making an unprofitable investment," he said.
Some Japanese industry sources said, however, that recent approaches by foreign firms belied such aloof talk.
A U.S. bank made overtures last year to Hokkaido Takushoku Bank Ltd about a possible takeover, while a European investment bank was reported to have made inquiries about acquiring a troubled small bank in northern Japan, they said.
On Monday, however, Hokkaido Takushoku Bank announced a merger with a regional bank, Hokkaido Bank Ltd.
The sources also said a major concern among foreign firms was insufficient disclosure by Japanese banks of problem loans backed by collateralised land, which became a heavy burden after a land and share price bubble burst in the early 1990s.
While the Finance Ministry said that problem loans at Japan's deposit-taking institutions totalled 29 trillion yen at the end of last September, Moody's Investors Service estimated the actual amount was at least three times larger.
"To exaggerate somewhat, under the Japanese criteria all loans are innocent unless proven guilty. Under the U.S. criteria, however, all commercial real estate secured loans are guilty unless proven innocent," it said in a recent report.
Personnel issues are also likely to make foreign firms think twice about uniting with Japanese banks, analysts said.
"No shareholder (of a foreign bank) would stand for it. Little specific pieces (of a bank's assets) could be attractive, but why would they want to buy a business when you can't reduce staff?" said a foreign analyst.
