One month after giant Japanese brokerage Nomura Securities Co Ltd revealed a scandal involving suspected illegal deals, new president Masashi Suzuki is struggling to regain trust in the company.
"I have resolved to make my utmost efforts to restore the trust we have lost," Suzuki told Reuters in an interview.
"I must put things in order, as our staff and branch managers are struggling with hard times because of rebukes from customers," he said.
On March 6, Nomura announced that an internal probe had found that two of its directors had been involved in apparently illegal deals which involved transferring money from a Nomura account to a corporate client's account.
Prosecutors and officials from Japan's securities watchdog raided Nomura on March 25 in a sign of a widening probe into Nomura's role in payments to the corporate client, who has been linked to a "sokaiya", or racketeer.
Sokaiya extort money by threatening to expose dubious business practices or to disturb shareholders' meetings.
Suzuki, 61, added the post of president to his position as chairman on March 14 when Hideo Sakamaki stepped down from the post to take responsibility for the scandal.
"It is true that holding the positions of both president and chairman is something unusual. I want to return the company to healthy shape and then transfer the company (management) to the next generation, although I cannot say when," he said.
As one step to avoid any recurrence of wrongdoing, Nomura will establish a compliance committee made up of senior executives and chaired by the president, Suzuki said.
He added that the scandal, which comes after a similar embarrassment in 1991 over improper payments of compensation for losses and revelations of deals with gangsters, indicates there was no healthy checking system to stop any wrongdoing at the management level.
Suzuki said the scandal had not only hurt Nomura's image but would also erode future earnings.
The scandal had little impact on results for the business year which ended on March 31, but would have a severe impact on results in the current financial year, he said.
"We don't know exactly how severe the impact on earnings will be because it is not known whether and how much administrative punishment will be imposed, but it will be very severe."
Market sources said Nomura's share of trading volume on the Tokyo Stock Exchange (TSE) fell to 9.2 percent in March from 11.4 percent in February, toppling it from the top spot it has held among brokerages since February 1992.
Daiwa Securities Co Ltd had 9.6 percent of the TSE market in March.
Major Japanese asset management firms and some institutional investors, as well as the huge California Public Employees' Retirement Fund, suspended business with Nomura soon after it revealed the suspected illegal deals.
But Suzuki said he was convinced Nomura could again become the securities house of choice by taking all possible measures to restore its customers' trust.
"Only (financial) companies offering a distinctive business strategy can survive in liberalised financial markets. While expected liberalisation of stockbroking commissions will slash commission income, our strategy will be to offer value-added financial services," he said.
Japan aims to deregulate its financial markets by 2001 under a "Big Bang" to catch up with reforms carried out more than a decade ago in Europe and North America.
