Heavily indebted Nippon Credit Bank Ltd said on Thursday it will tie up with New York blue chip Bankers Trust to help turn some of its loans into cash.
NCB, with a heavy load of real estate loans left over from the asset bubble of the 1980s, has been considered the most endangered large bank in Japan's faltering banking sector.
On April 1 it announced that it was retreating from the international arena. It also said that it was selling prime real estate and floating new shares to try to rebuild its capital base.
Under the alliance, Bankers Trust will help NCB "securitise" some of its loans, turning them into stocks or bonds that are sold to outside investors.
The tie-up with Bankers Trust will also enable NCB to maintain services to its customers after its planned withdrawal from overseas business, the two banks said.
NCB said that it would also consider a capital tie-up with Bankers Trust, which is on an expansion drive.
"We will consider limited capital participation in each other after the ongoing restructuring of NCB's capital is completed," the statement said.
Industry analysts said such an equity deal would be the first time a foreign bank has taken a stake in a Japanese bank.
But they said that it was very unlikely that Bankers Trust would take over NCB.
"(The tie-up) will make it easier for NCB to implement its restructuring programme, but its return on equity is too low for the U.S. bank to consider any takeover move," said Yoshinobu Yamada, analyst at Merrill Lynch Japan.
The market took the news well, with an increase in buying interest in NCB debentures. As one of Japan's three long-term credit banks, NCB raises the bulk of its cash through issuing debentures rather than taking deposits from customers.
In a blow to NCB's image, the debentures were recently downgraded to junk-bond status by Moody's Investors Service.
But Thursday's announcement won praise from regulators and the markets.
"The tie-up will contribute greatly to a smooth implementation of NCB's restructuring plan," the Bank of Japan said in a statement.
The deal was also cheered by the stock market, with NCB shares surging as much as 30 percent in afternoon trading. There was no trading for most of the day due to a surge of buy orders hitting the market.
When NCB announced its restructuring, President Hiroshi Kubota said the bank was very interested in getting help from a foreign partner, a rare statement for a Japanese corporate leader and seen as a sign of the difficult situation facing NCB in its attempt to get back on its feet.
