Dozens of Japanese banks may close their foreign operations in the next few years as their huge problem loans make it hard to meet new capital requirements, analysts say.
Two of Japan's top 20 banks have already announced they will shut down their overseas branches, and some analysts say many others should follow suit, delivering possible boosts to profitability.
"Japanese banks must cut unprofitable assets overseas to boost return on equity," said Yushiro Ikuyo, first vice president of Smith Barney International Inc.
"All that many of them are doing overseas is providing services to Japanese customers, rather than doing business with local customers in host countries. They are doing Japanese business even in overseas markets."
He said that over the next few years, the number of Japanese banks operating abroad could fall to about a third of the current 85. There are a total of 149 banks in Japan.
Earlier this month, two of Japan's most troubled banks, Nippon Credit Bank Ltd (NCB) and Hokkaido Takushoku Bank Ltd announced restructuring plans that included pulling out of overseas operations. Hokkaido also said it would merge with regional bank Hokkaido Bank Ltd.
Hokkaido Bank closed its overseas offices last year, saying they were not profitable.
Financial authorities, worried that Japan's banking problems could destabilise global financial markets, do not object to Japanese banks closing overseas.
Sei Nakai, senior deputy director-general of the Finance Ministry's banking bureau, recently told Reuters the ministry had proposed the step to NCB and Hokkaido Takushoku to avoid the possibility of Japanese banks troubling foreign creditors.
He also said the ministry might tell other Japanese banks to retreat "quietly" from their overseas operations if they were in trouble.
Analysts say tougher capital adequacy requirements scheduled to be introduced from the end of March 1998 under the auspices of the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) could encourage Japanese banks to close their international operations.
James Fiorillo, a financial analyst at ING Baring Securities (Japan) Ltd, said some Japanese banks were expected to try to boost their capital to meet the BIS requirements. But others would likely take a second look at continuing internationally.
Under BIS capital adequacy requirements set in the late 1980s, Japanese banks operating internationally need capital equivalent to a minimum of 8.0 percent of risk-weighted assets.
In 1995, the BIS set second-stage guidelines that factor in market risk when determining capital requirements. This means Japanese banks operating abroad will have to take into account risks from activities such as foreign exchange transactions and swaps when calculating adequacy ratios from this fiscal year.
Some analysts calculate that the introduction of these second-stage guidelines could cut international capital adequacy ratios of Japanese banks by up to 0.3 percent.
Katsuhiro Sasajima, an analyst at Nikko Research Center, said major commercial, trust and long-term credit banks and big regional banks would not abandon overseas operations.
But smaller regional banks burdened by problem loans would do so as their low credit ratings had made it increasingly expensive for them to raise capital, he said.
Sasajima said some Japanese banks would likely seek foreign partners in order to maintain their services abroad.
Earlier this month, NCB said it would tie up with Bankers Trust New York Corp to help turn some of its loans into cash and to maintain services to overseas customers.
