The president and 15 board members at Nomura Securities Co Ltd will resign to take responsibility for a racketeering scandal that has again sullied the name of Japan's biggest securities firm, the company announced on Tuesday.
The president, Masashi Suzuki, was appointed just a month ago after the resignation of his predecessor when the affair came to light.
The case is the latest to hit Japan's brokerage industry, where ties between companies and shadowy racketeers have long been a problem.
Prosecutors and the securities watchdog are investigating whether Nomura paid off the racketeer, known as "sokaiya", to avoid disruptions at its shareholders' meetings.
Junichi Ujiie, a Nomura managing director who will take over as president on May 1, told a news conference that his aim will be to establish a more open management system based on clear rules.
He said there was an atmosphere inside the company that discouraged free discussion among executives.
But one analyst said the reshuffle should help the brokerage transform that culture.
"I think the resignation of many executives will have a good impact on Nomura as it will make it easier for new management to reform its corporate culture," said Yushiro Ikuyo, first vice-president of Smith Barney International Inc.
It was not the first time that Nomura has been embroiled in scandal. In 1991 it was punished by regulators for improperly favouring certain clients.
In a separate case, news reports on Monday linked Yamaichi Securities Co to illegal deals, sparking threats of libel action by the firm.
Suzuki said that, while he had expected to transfer the company's management to the next generation after regaining public trust, Nomura's current situation was serious, requiring sweeping changes.
"Nomura is experiencing the worst crisis since it was founded," he said.
He said that Nomura was facing difficult problems, including continued investigation by regulators and expected administrative punishment by the Finance Ministry.
He also said Nomura's clients had increasingly been suspending business with the brokerage since the beginning of April and Nomura's employees were receiving complaints from customers.
Hideo Sakamaki, who resigned as Nomura's president last month when the scandal broke, said earlier on Tuesday that the company had paid more than 70 million yen ($555,000) via stock deals into accounts linked to a racketeer.
Sakamaki, who was testifying before a committee of the Upper House of parliament, said that one of the irregular stock deals included a transaction involving more than seven million shares in a commercial bank on March 15, 1993.
It was the first time a Nomura insider had publicly revealed the amount of money transferred to the racketeer.
A Japanese news service reported on Tuesday that the Ministry of Finance was likely to suspend some of Nomura's operations, including stock dealing on its own account, for about three months as punishment for the scandal.
An official at Nomura, who declined to be named, said that he welcomed the reshuffle.
"While I feel sympathy for the people who have to resign, Nomura employees are welcoming the decision," he said.
Morale at Nomura's branches has fallen since the scandal was revealed in March, but the sweeping executive reshuffle will help restore confidence in Nomura not only by investors but also by its employees, he said. ($1=126 yen)
