The president and 15 board members at Nomura Securities Co Ltd resigned on Tuesday to take responsibility for a racketeering scandal that has again sullied the name of Japan's biggest securities firm.
The president, Masashi Suzuki, was appointed just a month ago after the resignation of his predecessor when the affair came to light.
The case is the latest to hit Japan's brokerage industry, where ties between companies and shadowy racketeers have long been a problem.
Prosecutors and the securities watchdog are investigating whether Nomura paid off the racketeer, known as "sokaiya", to avoid disruptions at its shareholders' meetings.
The new president, Junichi Ujiie, currently a Nomura managing director, told a news conference that his aim will be to establish a more open management system based on clear rules.
He said there was an atmosphere inside the company that discouraged free discussion among executives.
It was not the first time that Nomura has been embroiled in scandal. In 1991 it was punished by regulators for improperly favouring certain clients.
In a separate case, news reports on Monday linked Yamaichi Securities Co to illegal deals, sparking threats of libel action by the firm.
Suzuki said that, while he had expected to transfer the company's management to the next generation after regaining public trust, Nomura's current situation was serious, requiring sweeping changes.
"Nomura is experiencing the worst crisis since it was founded," he said.
He said that Nomura was facing difficult problems, including continued investigation by regulators and expected administrative punishment by the Finance Ministry.
He also said Nomura's clients had increasingly been suspending business with the brokerage since the beginning of April and Nomura's employees were receiving complaints from customers.
Hideo Sakamaki, who resigned as Nomura's president last month when the scandal broke, said earlier on Tuesday that the company had paid more than 70 million yen ($555,000) via stock deals into accounts linked to a racketeer.
Sakamaki, who was testifying before a committee of the Upper House of parliament, said that one of the irregular stock deals included a transaction involving more than seven million shares in a commercial bank on March 15, 1993.
It was the first time a Nomura insider had publicly revealed the amount of money transferred to the racketeer.
A Japanese news service reported on Tuesday that the Ministry of Finance was likely to suspend some of Nomura's operations, including stock dealing on its own account, for about three months as punishment for the scandal.
Asked if there were accounts at Nomura linked to other racketeers, Sakamaki said that he believed there were no such accounts.
He said that while he believed that only two former directors, who resigned last month, were involved in the payoffs, he was also responsible himself as Nomura's top manager at the time for causing the scandal.
He said that Nomura would work out measures to avoid a recurrence of such a scandal. ($1=126 yen)
