Scandal-tainted Nomura Securities Co Ltd said on Thursday that it could post parent current profits for the current business year despite expected penalties that would temporarily suspend some of its business.
Analysts said, however, that the results at Japan's biggest brokerage for 1997/98 would hinge on when and how hard the Ministry of Finance (MOF) comes down on Nomura after regulators complete their investigation.
Japanese prosecutors and the country's securities watchdog, the Securities and Exchange Council (SESC), are currently investigating Nomura's suspected illegal stock deals linked to a "sokaiya" racketeer.
Sokaiya extort money from companies by threatening to expose dubious business practices or to disturb shareholders' meetings.
The SESC is expected to recommend that MOF take punitive action against Nomura, and analysts said that whether Nomura posts a profit this year will depend on when a punitive suspension of operations would occur and how long it would last.
"If the SESC completes its investigation in May and the MOF's administrative punishment ends before the end of September, then Nomura would be able to escape the worst-case scenario," said Ayako Sato, an analyst at UBS Securities Ltd.
However, another analyst, who declined to be named, said if the punitive suspension continues into the second half of 1997/98, it might be difficult for Nomura to post a profit.
"If the investigation lasts a long time and the punishment affects Nomura's business in the latter half, it would seriously hurt earnings. It is possible for the company to post a loss," he said.
But he added that if the punitive action does not affect business in the second half, it would be possible for Nomura to post a parent current profit of up to 50 billion yen.  
Market sources said they expected the authorities could suspend Nomura's underwriting operations and stock dealing on its own account for up to three months as a penalty for the scandal.
On Thursday, Takamichi Arata, a Nomura director, said at a news conference: "Even if our business is suspended, we will be able to post profits in the current business year because of a cutback in expenditures in April and thereafter."
Analysts said, however, that speculation is growing that similar scandals may emerge at other big brokerages and this may delay investigations at Nomura.
"There is talk that the investigation will end after Japan's 'Golden Week' holiday (in the first week in May), but there is also speculation it may take a long time as regulators have started probes of similar wrongdoing at other big brokers," an analyst said.
Under Japan's Securities and Exchange Law, the SESC could advise the finance minister to take punitive administrative action against Nomura if it finds evidence of illegal activity. The heaviest penalty would be the revocation of securities licences and the suspension of business for up to six months.
MOF is currently awaiting the outcome of the investigation, a MOF official said, but he added that the focus is on whether Nomura violated the commercial code rather than securities law.
Japanese commercial law prohibits payoffs to racketeers. The securities law bans discretionary transactions and the transfer of a broker's trading profits to the account of a client, both actions which Nomura said two of its directors were suspected of undertaking.
James Fiorillo, an analyst at ING Baring Securities (Japan) Ltd, said he is rather optimistic, adding that Nomura's experience with a scandal in the early 1990s proved that the firm could quickly repair the damage caused by the latest dubious deals.
"In light of this, current forecasts that Nomura will take years to win back business and restore its reputation appear exaggerated," he said.
In addition to its stock broking and underwriting business, Nomura is also highly influential in the yen bond market and is Japan's top seller of foreign bonds.
