Scandal-tainted Japanese brokerage Nomura Securities Co plunged into the red on a net basis last business year after incurring a hefty special loss due to a cash injection to a troubled subsidiary.
But the nation's biggest brokerage said on Thursday it enjoyed a healthy jump in its current profit in the year to March, helped by income from bond trading and underwriting.
Nomura, mired in controversy over a scandal linking it with "sokaiya" racketeers, said it posted a parent net loss 271.51 billion yen ($2.15 billion) in 1996/97 against a profit of 23.1 billion yen ($183 million) in 1995/96.
This largely reflects a special loss of 371 billion yen ($2.94 billion) resulting from Nomura's aid to its troubled financial affiliate Nomura Finance Co.
The brokerage meanwhile recorded a parent current profit of 124.19 billion yen ($985 million) in the year, up 35.7 percent year-on-year and the highest in six years. Current profit is pre-tax and includes gains and losses made on investments.
On a group basis, Nomura said it posted a net loss of 91.07 billion yen ($722 million) in 1996/97 after a profit of 81.27 billion yen ($645 million) the year before under U.S. accounting rules.
Japan's securities industry suffered a major setback last month when Nomura said two of its directors were involved in suspected illegal deals in which substantial sums of Nomura money were moved to the account of a corporate customer who was linked to a sokaiya.
The outlook for Nomura's business remains gloomy. It has already been hit hard by the scandal, which has led many clients to refrain from trading with it.
In March alone, Nomura's current profit dropped to about half the usual monthly levels due to the scandal, which cut its brokerage commissions and its share of the underwriting market, a company executive said on Thursday.
"As one might expect, the scandal has had an effect (on our profits)," Nomura director Takamichi Arata told reporters. But he added it was hard to calculate the extent of the impact.
Arata said the brokerage hopes to post a parent current profit this month and in succeeding months by cutting operating costs.
Nomura was cutting its monthly operating expenditures to between 20.2 billion and 20.3 billion yen (about $161 million) per month in April, down two billion yen ($15.8 million) from March, he said. That would be 22 percent below the peak of 26 billion yen ($206 million) five years ago, Arata said.
Nomura's share of trading volume on the Tokyo bourse fell to 9.2 percent in March from 11.4 percent in February, toppling it from the top spot it had held since February 1992.
Analysts said the fate of Nomura's business this financial year hinges on how hard the Ministry of Finance comes down on the brokerage after regulators complete their investigation.
Japanese media reports say the authorities could suspend some of Nomura's operations, including stock dealing on its own account, for about three months as a penalty for the scandal.
Such a penalty would be the heaviest ever imposed on a securities firm in Japan.
Nomura on Monday announced that its president and 15 board members will resign on May 1 to take responsibility for the scandal. ($1=126 yen)
