Japanese life insurers, already unhappy at having to help out ailing Nippon Credit Bank, are angry at the Finance Ministry which they say has ignored trouble at failed insurer Nissan Mutual Life for years.
"The responsibility of the Finance Ministry is heavy," a life insurance company official, who declined to be named, said on Friday.
"The ministry has not taken any appropriate action to inform Nissan insurance's policy holders of the company's troubles.
"Nissan's annual reports (over the past two years) did not give any hint that liabilities of the company would exceed its assets by 200 billion yen ($1.58 billion)," he said.
On Friday, Japan suffered the first failure of a life insurance firm in its post-war history when Nissan Mutual Life Insurance Co was ordered by the Finance Ministry to start shutting down its business.
The president of the medium-sized insurer, Hiroshi Yonemoto, said at a news conference that the company had been suffering from excessive liabilities for the last three to four years, stemming from the bursting of Japan's "bubble era" of inflated real estate and stock prices in the late 1980s.
"We sharply increased our assets during the bubble economy period, but the bubble burst and low interest rates have continued."
He said that the company had taken restructuring steps, but gave up such efforts and continuation of its business due to a loss in the last business year ended March 31.
The Finance Ministry, for its part, pointed the finger of blame for the firm's failure at the management of Nissan Life.
The financial situation of Nissan Life is "abnormal" and management responsibility is "heavy", Makoto Fukuda, a senior Finance Ministry official, told reporters.
He said that the ministry had found that Nissan Life's financial condition was substantially worse then when it conducted an inspection of the company in September 1995.
But he added: "In September 1995, we did not think its business was in a crisis."
Finance Minister Hiroshi Mitsuzuka pledged to protect Nissan Life's policy holders and the Life Insurance Association of Japan, an industry body representing life insurers, said it would work out a liquidation scheme.
Kenjiro Hata, chairman of the Life Insurance Association of Japan, said that a scheme to wind up Nissan Life was expected to be ready in two to three weeks.
Hata told reporters that the insurance body wants to seek capital contributions from major clients of of Nissan Life, such as Nissan Motor Co Ltd and Hitachi Ltd if a new company is set up to take over Nissan Life's business.
The insurer also owns shares in Nissan Motor and Hitachi.
However, industry sources said that it would take some time for the association to work out the scheme.
And even if a company is set up to take over Nissan Life's business, those life insurers who take over the policies of Nissan Life would have to bear a financial burden for a long time since nearly half of Nissan Life's assets are individual pension policies that have guaranteed high returns.
Normally, such high-yield policies account for only seven percent of a life insurer's assets. Protecting policy holders would mean guaranteeing the returns that have been promised until the policies mature, they said.
However, they said that members of the body, now totalling 44, would agree to cough up a total of 200 billion yen ($1.58 billion) to a new company to make up for the estimated excessive liabilities to protect Nissan Life's policy holders.
Earlier this month, ailing Nippon Credit Bank asked both life and non-life insurers to buy a total of 97 billion yen ($769 million) worth of ordinary shares to be newly issued under a radical restructuring plan which was supported by the Finance Ministry.
($1=126 yen)
