Japan suffered the first failure of a life insurance firm in its post-war history on Friday, when Nissan Mutual Life Insurance Co was ordered to start shutting down its business.
The Finance Ministry announced that it had instructed the medium-sized Tokyo-based life insurer to halt most business, except for servicing current customers, after the company said it had decided to wind up operations.
It was the first such order against a life insurance company since the nation's financial system was restructured after World War Two.
Financial analysts said the move would speed up a much-needed restructuring of Japan's life insurance industry.
Finance Minister Hiroshi Mitsuzuka told a news conference that his ministry had received a report from Nissan Life saying that it had come to a decision to discontinue business at an emergency board meeting held earlier on Friday.
"After receiving the report, I thought it was my duty as finance minister to deal with the problem in a swift manner and eliminate any worries," Mitsuzuka said.
Mitsuzuka pledged to protect all policyholders of Nissan Life in an attempt to avoid any resurgence of worries over the already fragile financial system, which has been hit hard by a series of bank failures and financial scandals.
But the Finance Ministry said it was not considering using tax money to liquidate Nissan Life as it did for failed "jusen" housing loan companies last year.
Mitsuzuka said Nissan Life's failure was due to its failure to manage its investment portfolio properly. Insurance companies typically rely on investment earnings for a large share of their earnings.
Mitsuzuka said there were no similar cases involving other Japanese life insurance companies.
Mitsuzuka said it was the first failure of a Japanese life insurance company in the postwar period and added: "I hope to make it the last."
Nissan Mutual Life suffered heavy losses through excessive stock and real estate investment during Japan's late-1980s "bubble" era of inflated asset prices.
A Finance Ministry official termed Nissan Life's financial situation "abnormal", with its liabilities exceeding assets by about 200 billion yen ($1.58 billion).
Although the firm had been striving to improve its business by itself, the hefty financial burden made it difficult for it to continue business.
Mitsuzuka said the ministry was preparing to announce who would manage the company's insurance policies and added that the life insurance association would likely become involved.
But he added that further discussions would be held on how to transfer insurance policies to other companies.
The news came as a surprise to the financial markets but there was no big sell-offs of shares or bonds and the Nikkei stock index ended the morning session with a small gain.
"The impact of Nissan Life was unexpectedly small, and that gave relief to the market," said Seiki Orimi, manager of the stock information service office at Dai-Ichi Securities Co Ltd. ($1=126 yen)
