Sanwa Bank Ltd, one of Japan's top banks, intends to list its shares in New York as soon as possible in a bid to become a truly global player in the financial sector, its president said on Wednesday.
"We want to do so as early as possible.  We need to take various forward-looking measures including the listing (in New York)," Naotaka Saeki told Reuters in an interview.
Sanwa Bank is one of Japan's six biggest commercial banks, with assets of 51.96 trillion yen at the end of last September.
Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi Ltd is the only Japanese bank listed in New York.
Financial sources said that Sanwa could not be listed on the New York Stock Exchange, however, until it had recorded a profit for three consecutive years.
After posting a parent current loss of 259.87 billion yen in 1995/96 to write off massive problem loans, including loans to failed mortgage firms, or "jusen", Sanwa has forecast a parent current profit of 50 billion yen for 1996/97, which ended March 31.
In 1996/97 Sanwa is disposing of 450 billion yen in problem loans, which would cover 48 percent of its estimated problem loans as of the end of March. The bank is scheduled to announce its 1996/97 business results later this month.
Saeki said he would not, however, declare that the bank's problem-loan mess was behind it.
He added that while the bank has been preoccupied with the disposal of problem loans for the past few years, it will now aim to boost its return-on-equity (ROE) ratio, a gauge of the efficiency of the use of capital, to 12 percent.
It also aims to increase its international capital adequacy ratio to 10 percent from an estimated 9.0 percent at the end of March 1997, he said.
Saeki added that the possibility of a major Japanese bank failure has virtually disappeared, as Japan's big banks have largely completed preparations to meet the stiff requirements to be imposed under the nation's early warning system, scheduled for launch in April 1998.
He added, "Land prices are thought to have bottomed out, so the environment has also changed."
Asked if Sanwa is seeking a merger partner, Saeki stated that the bank had no such intentions.
"In the past, in regulated markets, our predecessors might have thought that bigger is better. But now, with deregulation, we have various options," he said.
Even if a big Japanese bank merged with another big one, it would have few advantages in Japan because it is difficult to cut payrolls given Japan's social conventions, he said.
Saeki added, however, that Sanwa may form alliances with foreign financial institutions in specialised areas such as overseas leveraged buy-outs and mergers and acquisitions.
He also said that Sanwa would seriously study the possibility of setting up a financial holding company following the expected lifting of Japan's ban on such companies as part of its deregulation drive.
