Japanese life insurers may ask for support from banks to liquidate failed Nissan Mutual Life Insurance Co, industry sources said on Friday.
While life insurers have basically agreed to provide a total of 200 billion yen to help liquidate the firm, they are worried whether their contributions will be enough to cover losses resulting from the failure, they said.
Nissan Life was ordered by the Finance Ministry to start shutting down its business on April 25. It was the first failure of a life insurance firm in Japan in the post-war period.
Nissan Life's liabilities were estimated to have exceeded its assets by 200 billion yen.
"If the life insurance industry alone cannot cover the losses, we may ask for some kind of support from banks which have business ties with Nissan Mutual Life," one industry source said.
He said that there were more than 100 banks and credit associations with business ties to Nissan Life.
Koichi Yoshida, the president-designate of Sumitomo Life Insurance Co, said this week that banks should help sort out the collapse of Nissan Life.
An official at the Life Insurance Association of Japan, which was appointed by the Finance Ministry to work out a scheme to wind up Nissan Life, said it had not yet done so as it was still examining the firm's financial situation.
It will take three weeks or more to complete the inspection, the official said.
Association chairman Kenjiro Hata told reporters last month it may also seek capital contributions from major clients of Nissan Life -- Nissan Motor Co Ltd and Hitachi Ltd.
Industry sources said that Nissan Life policy holders would probably be asked to accept an increase in premiums or cuts in payments.
They said that the most likely liquidation scheme would involve the establishment of a joint company to take over Nissan Life's assets.
However, one estimate had shown that the new company could post losses of some 30 billion yen a year if conditions of existing insurance contracts were not changed, the sources said.
Nearly half of Nissan Life's 2.1 trillion yen in assets are individual pension policies that have guaranteed high returns. Many were contracted in the late-1980s bubble economy era.
When interest rates fell and the stock market languished following the collapse of the bubble economy, a large gap developed between investment yields and guaranteed returns to policy holders.
