Punitive actions by Japan's Finance Ministry against scandal-tainted Nomura Securities Co Ltd are unlikely for some time, even if Japan's securities watchdog files a complaint against Nomura this week with prosecutors, government sources said on Monday.
"The SESC (the Securities and Exchange Surveillance Commission) usually recommends punitive action to the Finance Minister after prosecutors complete their investigation of a case and decide whether to issue an indictment or not," one source said.
How long it takes prosecutors to complete their investigation is expected to depend on how far they intend to pursue the case, he added.
Over the weekend, Japanese newspapers reported that the SESC plans to file a complaint this week with prosecutors against former Nomura executives and against Nomura itself, after which Tokyo prosecutors plan to launch a full-scale investigation of the Nomura scandal.
Comment was not available from the SESC on Monday.
Since late March, prosecutors and the SESC have been investigating Nomura's role in suspected illegal payments to a corporate client linked to a "sokaiya" racketeer.
Government sources said that Nomura is suspected of violating the Securities and Exchange Law, by illegally using discretionary stock dealings to compensate the corporate client for stock trading losses, and the Commercial Code, by indirectly offering profits to the sokaiya.
"Sokaiya" extort money from a company by threatening to disturb a shareholders' meeting or by offering to prevent a disruption of the proceedings by shareholders critical of the company. Japan's commercial law has prohibited payoffs to such racketeers since 1982.
By way of example, financial sources noted the case of a smaller brokerage, Chiyoda Securities Co Ltd, that was ordered by MOF in mid-March, 1996 to suspend some of its business.
The SESC had first asked prosecutors to bring criminal charges against Chiyoda as early as December 1995.
The SESC waited until Chiyoda itself and five executives were indicted in February, 1996, however, before making a proposal to MOF on penalising the brokerage.
Media reports in recent days suggested that the scope of the Nomura scandal was widening.
The Mainichi Shimbun reported on Monday that there were more than 20 Nomura accounts linked to "sokaiya" racketeers in 1995, not including the racketeer at the centre of the current scandal.
Nomura declined to comment, stating that the company views the Mainichi report as linked to the current incident under investigation by Japanese regulators. He also said that the company could not comment on accounts of its customers.
Mainichi said those accounts were opened at Nomura before 1991, when the brokerage was hit by a scandal involving improper payment of compensation for preferred customers' losses and revelations of deals between its affiliates and gangsters.
Mainichi quoted unnamed sources as saying that, after the 1991 scandal, Nomura cancelled accounts of problematic clients but it could not cut its relationship with racketeers.
It also quoted a former Nomura executive saying that Nomura transferred profits from trading on its own account to those racketeer-linked accounts, due to its desire to avoid any troubles at its annual shareholders' meetings, it said.
In the past month Japanese media have also reported that Dai-Ichi Kangyo Bank Ltd (DKB) made loans to the corporate client to help the sokaiya secure 300,000 Nomura shares in 1989, which gave him the right to propose the dismissal of executives at shareholders' meetings.
The newspapers have also said that prosecutors are investigating DKB loans for a possible link between the racketeer and the bank.
DKB repeatedly declined to comment on the reported loans.
