Losses have mounted in a stock market slump that has dragged on for years, yet Japanese securities brokers still cling on.
But expected liberalisation of brokerage fees could be the final blow for some of the weaker securities houses.
Analysts and industry sources say small Japanese brokers are seriously considering closing down amid fears of a plunge in revenues from commission fees, and foreign brokerages are taking a more positive look at the advantages of acquiring local brokers.
"The number of Japanese brokers will likely fall to half the current level over the next five to 10 years," an official at a Japanese securities house said. "Many small brokerages are likely to close down or to be liquidated."
As seen in Europe and North America, some analysts say revenues from commission fees will fall by at least 30 percent within one or two years of deregulation, while others say they could fall by half within the initial year.
Prime Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto announced a five-year "Big Bang" plan last November to enable Japan to catch up with reforms carried out a decade ago in Europe and North America.
Japan will finalise procedures next month to implement the reforms, which include the timing of liberalising commissions and breaking down barriers between financial sectors. They may also include abolishing a system under which brokers must operate under licences granted by the Ministry of Finance (MOF), analysts say.
No Japanese brokers have voluntarily closed and handed back their licences to MOF since the licence system began in 1968.
But such moves are now in sight.
Industry sources say a small broker based in Osaka, Ogawa Securities Co Ltd, an affiliate of Yamaichi Securities, could be the first to go into voluntary liquidation, as Yamaichi may not give it financial aid.
Ogawa said last Thursday it had no plans at present to stop doing business. Yamaichi, meanwhile, says it is considering how it will deal with Ogawa's difficulties.
There are about 285 brokerages in Japan including 56 foreign firms, but only 25 brokers, all Japanese, are listed.
A senior MOF official told Reuters the ministry would accept voluntary liquidation by brokers. He added that brokerage fees should be liberalised in the final stages of the "Big Bang" process after other areas of the securities business have been deregulated.
"We are well aware that local brokers would face difficulties unless they are given a certain period of time to prepare for the liberalisation of brokering fees," he said.
Indeed, the financial strength of domestic brokers has deteriorated since the bursting of the late 1980s "bubble" of inflated asset prices.
Last month, the Big Four -- Nomura Securities, Daiwa Securities, Nikko Securities and Yamaichi -- and one of Japan's 10 second-tier brokerages, Kokusai Securities, announced parent current profits for 1996/97, ended March 31.
But the other nine second-tier brokers all said they expected parent current losses for 1996/97 due to stock price falls. They will announce their earnings figures this week.
Among the nine, Dai-Ichi Securities and Yamatane Securities said they would be reporting current losses for the seventh consecutive year.
Analysts say many of the second-tier brokers, which depend on stock commission fees for 50 to 60 percent of their revenues, are likely to eventually be acquired by big banks.
They also say medium-sized brokers face more urgent restructuring moves this year, such as mergers and seeking outside capital, because by law they must raise minimum capital reserves by the end of next March.
Meanwhile, one analyst said foreign brokerages and non-financial Japanese firms had begun seriously studying the possibility of taking over local brokers. "Foreign securities houses are keen to strengthen underwriting and asset management businesses and they want to have more networks to do so."
One solution for foreign brokerages worried whether they can cut payrolls to boost efficiency would be to increase the number of people working on a commission basis, he said.
"Japanese brokerages are now cheap. Even among second-tier brokerages, there are some firms you can buy for about 30 billion yen ($252 million)," he said. ($1=119 yen)
