Japan's securities watchdog filed complaints with prosecutors Tuesday alleging that Nomura Securities Co Ltd, Japan's biggest brokerage, and three former executives made illegal to payments to a client.
While the regulators did not identify the client, he is believed to be one of Japan's "sokaiya" racketeers, who extort money from corporations by threatening to disrupt shareholder meetings.
Japan's commercial law has prohibited payoffs to such racketeers since 1982.
Government sources said the Securities and Exchange Surveillance Commission complaints allege that Nomura and the employees made illegal payments to the client totalling 49.7 million yen ($417,600).
It was the first time that regulators have charged that the company was itself involved in the scandal. Nomura has repeatedly denied any participation in the scam, saying it was the work of three former executives.
It is now up to prosecutors to determine if there is enough evidence to file charges in the case.
In a sign that the probe may have a sweeping impact on Nomura, the SESC said that some of the improper orders were handled by more junior employees, which could bring more names into the scandal.
Nomura issued a statement apologising for the scandal.
"We deeply apologise for the inconvenience the scandal has caused to our customers and the public," it said.
"We are taking the complaints seriously...We will make a 'fresh start' to prevent a recurrence of such events."
The government sources said the SESC would start drawing up proposals for civil penalties against Nomura immediately. But they added that it was too early to say how long it would take the SESC to present the proposals to the Finance Ministry.
Market sources say the Finance Ministry may suspend part of Nomura's operations, including stock dealing on its own account, for about three months as punishment for the scandal.
That would be the heaviest ever penalty imposed on a securities firm in Japan.
The scandal has already casted a long shadow over Nomura's business and prompted many clients to shun the financial powerhouse.
In March alone, Nomura's current profit dropped to about half the usual monthly levels due to the scandal, which cut its brokerage commissions and its share of the underwriting market, a company executive said in April.
Nomura's share of trading volume on the Tokyo bourse fell to 9.2 percent in March from 11.4 percent in February, toppling it from the top spot it had held since February 1992.
In the first fallout from the SEC action, the Ministry of Finance said late Tuesday that Nomura was being suspended from taking part in Japanese Government Bond auctions and underwriting activities.
Nomura's admission in March that two of its directors were involved in transferring Nomura money into the account of a corporate client linked to a sokaiya racketeer was a major blow to the image of the Japanese brokering industry.
In 1991, Nomura and other leading Japanese brokerages were found to be paying improper compensation to favoured clients. Top executives at Nomura resigned that year over payments and revelations that affiliates had done deals with gangsters.
Nomura made a sweeping reshuffle of its top management late last month in an effort to win back public trust in the wake of the scandal.
