The criminal complaint filed against Nomura Securities Co Ltd on Tuesday reveals a widening circle of players in a pay-off scandal that has rocked the firm, dashing its hopes for a quick end to the affair.
Japan's Securities and Exchange Surveillance Commission (SESC) filed a criminal complaint with prosecutors alleging that Nomura, two former executives and a former general manager compensated a client for investment losses, government sources said.
The sources said what was unusual about the latest scandal were revelations that company executives had asked junior staff to conduct illegal deals to compensate clients for stock trading losses for a long time.
But the securities watchdog decided not to take action against the junior staffers involved in the illegal deals, the sources said.
"The SESC decided not file a complaint against Nomura staff who had been actually involved in the transactions," a government source said.
Besides the brokerage, the SESC took action against former Nomura directors Shimpei Matsuki and Nobutaka Fujikura, both of whom resigned on March 10 as directors after Nomura's internal probe found they had made discretionary deals banned under Japanese securities law and funnelled profits to the corporate client.
The other was former general manager Osamu Fujita, who made the transactions under Fujikura's orders, the sources said.
They also said that Nomura continued the practice of making illegal compensation payments even after it was involved in an industry-wide loss compensation scandal in 1991.
Since the scandal was revealed by Nomura itself on March 6, the company's executives, including then president Hideo Sakamaki, insisted that they believed only the two former directors were involved in the pay-offs.
Sakamaki has since been forced to step down to take responsibility for the scandal.
With the SESC's latest move, the focus has now shifted to when the Finance Minister will impose penalties on Nomura and how severe they will be.
Analysts said that Nomura's business results for 1997/98 will depend on when and how hard the Ministry of Finance (MOF) comes down on Nomura.
If administrative penalties are severe and the ramifications extend into the second half of 1997/98, Nomura may be forced to post losses in 1997/98, they said.
The Japanese watchdog lacks the right to take punitive action itself but can recommend that the finance minister mete out administrative punishment and can ask prosecutors to take legal action against possible criminal violations.
Finance Minister Hiroshi Mitsuzuka has said that the ministry would impose strict penalties against Nomura if the SESC were to propose that administrative action be taken against the company.
The sources said the securities watchdog would start drawing up its recommendations for penalties against Japan's top brokerage now that it had filed a complaint with prosecutors.
However, they said it was too early to say how long it would take the SESC to present its proposals to MOF.
A senior Finance Ministry official said after the scandal was revealed that MOF was focusing on whether Nomura had violated the commercial code, rather than the securities law. If the SESC investigation finds that pay-offs were made to a racketeer, the ministry will impose severe administrative penalties against Nomura, he said.
However, the client at the centre of the latest Nomura scandal was not included in the complaints, as the SESC could not confirm the role of the client.
In late March, prosecutors said that the client was linked to a "sokaiya" racketeer. Sokaiya extort money from a company by threatening to disturb a shareholders' meeting, and Japan's commercial law has prohibited payoffs to racketeers since 1982.
