St George Bank Ltd announced on Monday an agreed A$2.65 billion merger with Advance Bank Australia Ltd - its fifth merger attempt in the past two years.
The merger of the two Sydney-based regional banks would create Australia's fifth largest bank, with assets of A$40 billion and a market capitalisation of A$4.5 billion, making its of Australia's top 25 listed companies.  
Analysts said the plan for Advance to pay St George A$100 million if it were taken over by a third party was seen as a way to ward off other bids, making it look like it was fifth time lucky for the St George.
"I think that would make it unattractive for somebody else to come in and make a bid," said Linda Lyon, banking analyst at brokers BNP Equities.
St George said it would offer an effective A$7.30 for each share in Advance Bank.  
Advance shareholders would be offered a combination of A$2.10 in cash, a 20 cent special cash dividend and new St George shares up to a value of A$5.00 per Advance Bank.
St George said the total value of the offer was A$7.30 per share, representing a 20 percent increase over the average Advance Bank share price over the previous five trading days.
Advance shareholders will also receive Advance Bank's interim dividend, expected to be 20 cents, payable in February.
St George said it would also raise A$360 million in a new capital raising to help fund the bid. The issue would proceed upon completion of the acquisition, expected to in April.  
St George said the merger was driven by the need to lower costs and a review had found the merger could achieve a reduction of 15 percent in annual combined expenses or A$140 million before tax.
Advance shares soared over 10 percent on the announcement.
Analysts said that although there would be cost savings, the price was still fairly generous.
"My initial reaction is that it looks like Advance Bank shareholders are coming out of the deal quite well, whereas St George shareholders are coming out not so well," said one Sydney-based banking analyst.  
"It's a big price. I can't imagine anybody else coming and topping the price St George is offering," said BNP's Lyon.
Analysts said the offer valued Advance at 2.8 times net asset backing, well above the 2.0 times asset backing level at which recent Australian bank merger prices had been based.
St George has been desperate to have a friendly merger as it is seen as a takeover target itself.
Australia's largest banking group, National Australia Bank Ltd (NAB), holds a 6.8 percent stake in St George.
NAB has said it has no takeover plans for St George.  
Analysts said the Wallis inquiry into Australia's finance and banking sector might put NAB's acquisition plans on hold until the inquiry reported its findings in March.
St George's bid for Metway Bank Ltd earlier this year was scuttled by the Queensland government, which trumped its offer with a higher bid through its wholly-owned financial services group Suncorp and the Queensland Industry and Development Corp (QIDC). Last year, St George was foiled in its merger bid for Perth-based Challenge Bank Ltd when Westpac Banking Corp made a higher offer.  
St George was also in talks last year to merge with the Bank of Western Australia Ltd, before the Bank of Scotalnd Ltd took control, and the Bank of South Australia, which was takeover by Advance early 1995.
St George shares plunged after the announcement.
At 2.20 p.m. (0420 GMT) Advance Bank shares were 69 cents or 10.99 percent higher at A$6.97 while St George shares were 40 cents or 4.47 percent down at A$8.55.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
