Media mogul Rupert Murdoch said on Tuesday he intended to use sports broadcasting rights as a "battering ram" for dominance of pay television markets in Asia and throughout the world.
He said the purchase of those rights would also buy his way into the world's sporting establishment.
"Sport absolutely overpowers film and everything else in the entertainment genre," Murdoch told shareholders at the annual meeting of News Corp, his global media group.
"We have the long-term rights in most countries to major sporting events and we will be doing in Asia what we intend to do elsewhere in the world, that is, use sports as a "battering ram" and a lead offering in all our pay television operations," said Murdoch, News' chairman and chief executive.
News Corp has spent big money on acquiring sports programming rights worldwide over the last five years and has set up sports programme distribution deals with some of the industry's biggest players in the past 12 months.
Murdoch's global media and entertainment group set up a worldwide sports programming joint venture with U.S. cable television giant Tele-Communications Inc (TCI) and Liberty Media of the United States in January.
Two weeks ago, News Corp formed an Asian sports programming joint venture with its former competitor Walt Disney Inc's sports broadcaster ESPN.
"Sport will remain very important and we will be investing and acquiring long-term rights and becoming part of the world sports establishment," said Murdoch, News' chairman and chief executive.
"Football, of all sports, is number one," said Murdoch, who sails as a sporting pastime.
News Corp has spent millions on football programming rights over the past few years. It has bought the rights for the National Football League (NFL) in the U.S. and Premier League soccer in the United Kingdom and is setting up its rebel rugby league competitions in Australia and Europe.
"We expect the next three World Cups will have a significant place on our platforms," said Murdoch referring to the soccer and Rugby Union world cups.
Murdoch received a boost to his Australian sports broadcasting plans two weeks ago, when the Australian Federal Court overturned a Court ruling in March that banned the launch of News' rebel rugby league competition, Super League. News Corp's Australian offshoot has spent A$273 million (US$216 million) on setting up Super League.
"There has been an unfortunate hold-up, but it (Super League) is going to be a wonderful asset to have now that we are free to get that competition under way," said Murdoch, who is Australian-born, but now holds U.S. citizenship.
The group's sports programmes are broadcast through its vast television operations, which reach accross the United States and into parts of Latin America.
In Europe, News Corp's main TV interest is through its 40-percent stake in British Sky Broadcasting Plc (BSkyB), which announced sharply-increased pre-tax profits of 257 million pounds sterling (US$406 million) for the year to June 30.
News Corp operating profits for the same period were A$1.26 billion. Television, which contributed A$549 million, was the most profitable sector.
In Asia, News' satellite TV operator STAR TV broadcasts throughout Asia from Saudi Arabia to Japan. In Australia, News Corp has a 50-percent stake in the Foxtel cable TV joint venture and a 15-percent stake in TV broadcaster Seven Network Ltd.
(A$=US$.7900, 1 pound sterling = $1.58)
