The Australian Gas Light Co (AGL) was interested in looking at the Australian assets of Tenneco Inc if the assets were put up for sale, managing director Len Bleasel said on Tuesday.
Tenneco has announced a restructure that includes a proposed merger of its energy arm with El Paso Energy Corp
"But we haven't got a deal in front of us ... but I can tell you we have had more than one knock on our door and say 'if we could put something together would you be interested,' and we say 'come on back when you have got something'," Bleasel said.  
"The whole Tenneco story is yet to unfold," Bleasel told Reuters in a telephone interview.
"There are a lot of rumours in the market that El Paso may not want to hold onto all of the assets," he said.
Bleasel said said AGL, a Australian gas utility and energy group, would wait and see what unfolds with the Tenneco-El Paso restructure, whether assets are sold off or not.
Tenneco's Australian assets include the 1700 km of pipeline in South Australia including the state's primary gas pipeline from Moomba to the Adelaide pipeline system. Tenneco is also building a 760 km gas pipeline in southwest Queensland.  
"I continuously say ... that AGL is interested in every sale whereever it is in the country because we are now a broad based energy company and if the Tenneco assets were to go to the market then we would be interested in how they were going to be presented to the market," Bleasel said.
"The silly thing to say is 'no we are not interested or no there is no possible sale,' then if somebody wants to do a little slick sale then they are not going to come and talk to you because you have said publicly you are not interested."  
However, a Tenneco Australia spokeswoman said Tenneco had made no decision about the future of its Australian assets nor had it told anyone the assets were for sale.
AGL's main market is New South Wales but it has businesses in Victoria, Western Australia and the Nortern Territory.
The Sydney-based group also has interests in China, Poland and Chile. "When you are trying to grow a company like we are, we are interested in everything," Bleasel said.  
Bleasel said he was very optimistic on the company's prospects from Monday's agreement with Santos Ltd and ALISE Energy Australia Pty Ltd for the supply of gas to a proposed cogeneration plant at Botany in Sydney.
"This gives a new revenue stream to AGL," Bleasel said.
He said 20-year agreement would not affect the company bottom line until the project is up and running in about two years time.  
AGL earlier held its annual meeting where the former deputy governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia John Phillips was formally appointed the company's new chairman, replacing Richard Mason who retired.
Shareholders also approved the appointments of Charles Allen, the former managing director of Woodside Petroleum Ltd and Carolyn Hewson, a director of CSR Ltd and wife of former Australian liberal party leader John Hewson.
AGL shares ended four cents up at A$6.64.
-- Sydney newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
