Rupert Murdoch, the Australian-born mogul who turned his father's newspaper business into a global media empire, is publicly grooming the next generation to succeed him.
But the 65-year-old who has transformed the industry worldwide still has a few more ambitions to achieve before he passes on the baton to his heirs and settles into retirement.
Instead of rolling up their shirtsleeves and getting inked up on the printing presses as Rupert did, his eldest son Lachlan and daughter Elisabeth will be dealing with the latest in digital technology and multi-channel television satellites.
With the dawning of the digital age, television is the business that Murdoch sees fuelling the next stage of growth of the News Corporation Ltd conglomerate built from the small beginnings of his father Keith's Adelaide newspaper.
The TV business already produces the most revenue of News Corp's five main operations -- newspapers, magazines, films and book publishing. News Corp recorded total revenues of A$13.0 billion (US$10.27 billion) in the year to June 30, 1996.
NEWS CORP, A FAMILY BUSINESS
Lachlan, 25, and Elisabeth, 28, are already familiar with the television business. Elizabeth owned and operated two TV stations in California before selling them earlier this year to join British Sky Broadcasting Plc (BSkyB).
Murdoch's other son, James, and daughter Prudence are not involved in Dad's business, but his wife Anna is on the board of "News", which is about 32-percent owned by the Murdoch family.
"Obviously he is lining up people to help," said a Melbourne based media analyst.
At 65, Murdoch has passed News Corp's own retirement age but with the business just entering a new phase of expansion he is not about to leave yet.
"News Corp is still being formed, that is why there is not much chance of him walking away tomorrow," said the Melbourne analyst, referring to News Corp expansion in satellite and cable TV.
The analyst said either Elisabeth or Lachlan would probably work in News Corp's U.S. business, before they could take over.
At the start of October, Elisabeth was appointed head of programming at BSkyB, which is 40-percent owned by News Corp. The British-based satellite TV operation nearly sank News Corp in debt six years ago, but has become a river of cash.
A week before his sister's promotion, Lachlan was appointed managing director of News Ltd, the Australian arm of News Corp.
"Lachlan's job is to get pay TV up and running (in Australia)," said one Sydney analyst of News Ltd's 50-percent interest in Foxtel, a cable TV network launched last year.
Murdoch has placed both his children under the tutorage of two of his loyal lieutenants, BSkyB managing director Sam Chisholm and News Ltd chairman Ken Cowley.
Most Murdoch watchers see Lachlan as the favourite to step into his father's shoes because of his appointment to the key 12-strong executive committee of News Corp, which is separate from the company's board of directors.
"You can't consider Elisabeth a real contender for the top job until she gets on that board," the Sydney media analyst said. He added that she would have to take Chisholm's job at BSky to get onto the executive committee.
"That is not going to happen for a while, whereas Lachlan has got the job of managing director of Australia and he is on the executive committee -- so that tells you who is the favourite right now," the analyst said.
Lachlan's growing confidence was evident recently at News Corp's annual meeting in Adelaide, where the Princeton graduate and rock climbing enthusiast firmly guided his father away from an impromptu press conference after the annual meeting.
The previous year the young Murdoch stayed firmly in the background as his father spoke about all.
"We have to go, I'm sorry," Lachlan told reporters firmly, ushering his father away once the questioning turned to the thorny matter of Australian media ownership rules.
EXPANSION THE NEW MURDOCH WAY
Since he inherited his father Keith's newspaper stable in 1952, Murdoch built his media empire by raising large slabs of debt -- often to the annoyance of his shareholders.
But in a move welcomed by analysts, Murdoch has said News Corp's future growth is likely to be based on a more conservative financing strategy.
"We now have US$2.5 billion in the bank and we intend to leave it there," Murdoch told News Corp's annual meeting.
This is a far cry from the dark days of late 1990 and January 1991, when Murdoch had to beg his bankers to get them to reschedule US$7.6 billion in debt after News Corp said it would be insolvent if the refinacing package was not completed.
Murdoch said News Corp's multi-billion dollar plans for pay television networks in the United States, Asia, Japan, Latin America and Australia would be financed from cash flow.
Analysts say Murdoch is unlikely to leave until he has widened News Corp's world television network reach and increased the company's reservoir of programming content.
"I think geographically he is almost there. There are only three areas he doesn't have exposure to, they are Canada, Africa and Eastern Europe," said one analyst.
"I don't think he is very interested in Eastern Europe, Canada is very difficult for foreigners from what I understand. But, I think there is a chance at some stage that Africa might be in his sights," the analyst added.
Murdoch will have to build up News Corp's programming further, particularly in film, analysts said. They said News is strong in sports and now news following the launch of the 24-hour a day Fox News channel launched on October 7.
"Sports, movies and news are the focus, but it wouldn't surprise me that he would have something to do with music as well at some stage," said a Melbourne-based analyst. "If you think about the sort of content you can take from one country to another, sports is obviously one, then news and film and the other one to my mind would be music." (A$1 = $0.79)
