Australia's second largest telephone carrier Optus Communications rang up its first annual profit on Wednesday and is on track for its sharemarket float by the end of the year.
Optus, established at the start of 1992 to compete with Australia's main telephone carrier, state-owned Telstra Corp, reported a pre-tax profit of A$60.3 million (US$47.64 million) in the year to June 30, 1996.
This compares with a loss of A$17.0 million in 1994/95.
"After a tremendous effort during its first few years, Optus is now in a very strong position to capitalise on the many opportunities presented by the rapidly growing telecommunications industry," chief executive officer Zygmunt Switkowski said in a statement.
The profit was within expectations. Telecommunications analysts forecast Optus to deliver a profit before abnormals of between A$55 million and A$65 million.
"I don't think the market will be disappointed," said one Sydney-based analyst. "I think the revenue is a little bit down on what they were talking about."
The results reflected strong revenue growth of 36 percent to A$1.94 billion in 1995/96, with high revenue increases from its three main businesses of mobile telephones, long-distance calls and services to the corporate and government sector, chief operating officer Phil Jacobs said on Wednesday.
Optus, 24.5 percent owned each by U.S. BellSouth Corp and Britain's Cable and Wireless Plc, said in February it expected to achieve A$2.0 billion in revenue in 1995/96.
The Sydney-based group is still expected to make its sharemarket debut by the end of 1996, Switkowski said.
"The float's planned to occur this side of Christmas and the prospectus is progressing to plan, but it is not done," he told reporters after the results anouncement.
The float is expected to raise around A$1.5 billion, making it the largest telecommunications company to list on the Australian Stock Exchange, with up to 40 percent of the company shares to be listed.
Optus will later be joined by Telstra on the stock exchange.
The Australian government plans to raise A$8.0 billion from the sale of one-third of Telstra in 1997/98, which will be just after full deregulation of Australia's telecommunications industry on July 11, 1997.
Despite chalking up its first annual profit, Optus incurred increased losses from its 46.5 percent-owned pay television and local telephone call operator Optus Vision.
Optus said its share of losses from Optus Vision was A$74.0 million, which were mainly due to the start-up of the offshoot, which is spending A$3.0 billion rolling out its nationwide fibre optic cable network to provide pay TV and telephone services.
Optus Vision, which includes Australia's richest man Kerry Packer amongst its shareholders, reported a loss of A$1.54 million in 1994/95, in its first year of operation. The company has not announced its 1995/96 results.
Switkowski was coy about 1996/97 forecasts. Optus Communications was completing its prospectus for the sharemarket float, which would contain revenue and profit forecasts.
However, Switkowski predicted that revenue from its mobile telephone business would exceed revenues from its long-distance calls due to strong local demand, as Australia has one of the highest penetration rates for mobile phones in the world.
(A$1 = US$0.79)
