Rupert Murdoch's global media group, The News Corp Ltd, on Tuesday reported an 8.1-percent fall in net profit for the first quarter of 1996/97, in stark contrast to market expectations of a healthy rise.
But analysts said Murdoch's forecast last month at News Corp's annual meeting that the group would achieve a profit lift of 20 percent for the year to June 30, 1997 was still possible.
The film, television, publishing and newspaper conglomerate reported net profits of A$283 million (US$223 million) for the three months ended September 30, down from A$308 million a year earlier.
Analysts had forecast net profit before abnormal items would be around A$320-330 million, up around 15 percent.
Net profit before abnormals came in at A$285 million.
The poor result caused News Corp shares to fall sharply and dragged the whole Australian share market lower.
The share price fall wiped over A$300 million of the group's market capitalisation. The stock closed 18 cents or 2.52 percent lower at A$6.95 with over 4.7 million shares traded.
The weaker profit was a result of poorer returns in U.S. TV, Australian newspapers and book publishing, News Corp said.
"This is not as people were expecting type of result. It was a very flat result," one Sydney-based media analyst said.
News Corp could still report a 20 percent rise in net profits for the 1996/97 year as it was only the U.S. television business that was clearly below forecast, analysts' said. They said this forecast by Murdoch was in U.S. dollar terms.
In U.S. dollar terms, News Corp operating income was seven percent higher in the first quarter.
"Basically, what News has said is 'the first quarter was a bit disappointing but you are still going to get your growth for the year'," one Melbourne-based analysts said after taking part in an analysts' conference telephone call with News Corp.
News Corp said its profit was mainly bolstered by the worldwide box office success of the science fiction movie Independence Day and its British newspapers and book publishing.
Independence Day, a film about invading aliens who launch an attack against the Earth from huge space ships, has grossed more than US$670 million worldwide, making it the third highest-grossing film in box office history.
British newspaper operations enjoyed strong growth with an 18-percent gain in operating profits in the three months to September, News Corp said. The Sun, The Times and The Sunday Times newspapers all posted gains in both advertising and circulation revenues in the first quarter.
"Additionally, the group has benefitted from reduced newsprint costs," the company said.
"Offsetting these gains were weaker results in U.S. television, Australian newspapers and book publishing, which lacked results from the educational division which was sold in March 1996," it said.
News also said continued losses for its Asian satellite broadcaster, STAR TV, were in line with expectations.
The fall in profit in Australian dollar terms also reflected the stronger local currency against the U.S. dollar as about 75 percent of News Corp's revenue is in U.S. dollars.
The first quarter profit drop follows a profit dip for News Corp in the 1995/96 year, when it reported a six-percent fall in pre-abnormals net profit to A$1.26 billion.
(A$1 = $0.79)
