Rupert Murdoch's global media group, The News Corp Ltd, on Tuesday reported an 8.1 percent fall in net profit for the first quarter of 1996/97, in stark contrast to analysts' forecasts of a healthy rise.
But analysts said Murdoch's forecast last month at News Corp's annual meeting that the group would achieve a profit lift of 20 percent for the year to June 30, 1997 was still possible.  
News Corp reported net profits of A$283 million for the three months ended September 30, down from A$308 million a year earlier. News said the weaker profit was a result of poorer returns in U.S. TV, Australian newspapers and book publishing.
Analysts had forecast net profit before abnormal items would be around A$320-330 million, up around 15 percent.
Net profit before abnormals came in at A$285 million.
"This is not as people were expecting type of result. It was a very flat result," one Sydney-based media analyst said.  
News Corp could still report a 20 percent rise in net profits for the 1996/97 year as it was only the U.S. television business that was below forecast, the analyst said.
The analyst said he would likely cut his full year forecasts for News Corp from the current A$1.545 billion (excluding abnormals and before preference dividends). "I can see myself shaving that back to about the A$1,500 (million) mark," he said.
However, asked if News Corp could meet Murdoch's forecasts, the analyst replied: "I think so, because the rest of the result was perfectly in line with what we were going for, so they will have to work hard and if things go right for them they can."  
News Corp said its profit was mainly bolstered by the worldwide box office success of the science fiction movie Independence Day and its British newspapers and book publishing. Independence Day has grossed more than US$670 million worldwide, making it the third highest-grossing film in box office history.
British newspaper operations enjoyed strong growth with an 18-percent gain in operating profits in the three months to September, News Corp said. The Sun, The Times and The Sunday Times newspapers all posted gains in both advertising and circulation revenues in the first quarter.  
"Additionally, the group has benefitted from reduced newsprint costs," the company said.
"Offsetting these gains were weaker results in U.S. television, Australian newspapers and book publishing, which lacked results from the educational division which was sold in March 1996," it said.
News also said continued losses for its Asian satellite broadcaster, STAR TV, were in line with expectations.
At 1.40 p.m. (0240 GMT), News Corp shares were 16 cents or 2.24 percent lower at A$6.97 with just over 2.30 million shares traded, wiping over A$300 million off its market capitalisation.  
"It seems it's just a knee-jerk reaction to the first quarter, which looks like it was A$40 million below what the market was looking for," a Sydney broker said.
The analyst said the fall in Australian dollar terms also reflected the stronger local currency against the U.S. dollar as about 75 percent of News Corp's revenue is in U.S. dollars.
In U.S. dollar terms, News Corp operating income was seven percent higher in the first quarter.
The film, television, publishing and newspaper conglomerate reported a six percent fall in pre-abnormals net profit to A$1.26 million for the year to June 30, 1996.  
This is seen rising to around A$1.59 billion in 1996/97 according to the Barcep survey of analysts by BZW Australia.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1813
