Australian mineral sands and base metals miner RGC Ltd reported on Thursday that it had doubled annual operating profit for the 1995/96 year, thanks largely to a boom in demand for aircraft and golf clubs.
RGC, 40 percent owned by British conglomerate Hanson Plc, reported a 101 percent rise in operating profit to A$108.57 million (US$85.99 million) for the year ended June 30.
And it said it was on the lookout for expansion opportunities in Bolivia, India, Sri Lanka and the Ukraine.
The higher profit was due to improved mineral sands demand and prices, together with a stronger tin price and output, chairman Tony Cotton told reporters on Thursday.
"It was a good result and was in line with market expectations," Pru-Bache Securities mining analyst Quek told Reuters. "The mineral sands division did very well and there was an improvement in the tin business too," he said.
The higher mineral sands and tin prices helped lift sales 54 percent to A$986.39 million in 1995/96.
RGC, which tussles with South African miner Richards Bay Minerals for the title of the world's largest mineral sands miner, has about 30 percent of the world market for titanium dioxide (Ti02), which is used to make titanium metal.
"With Ti02 we have good news and bad news," RGC managing director Mark Bethwaite told reporters. "The good news is that U.S. growth forecast is very strong, around three to four percent, and there is strong titanium metal demand particularly because of some aviation growth and also of golf clubs.
"Titanium is now a favourite material to make golf driver heads," Bethwaite said.
As for the bad news, Bethwaite said: "In the U.S. and in Asia there is something of a price war going on.
"So prices are taking quite a battering," he said.
RGC, which has operations in Australia, the United States, Papua New Guinea (PNG) and Indonesia, was also keen on expanding to other countries, including Bolivia, India, Sri Lanka and the Ukraine, for mineral sands and base metal exploration, he said.
"What we are saying there is that we are ready and able to joint venture particularly with junior (small miners) and governments, where they seek a strong partner in both financial and technical capacity," he said.
The Sydney-based miner said it was one of three companies on the short-list to buy the tin assets of the Bolivian state-owned COMIBOL mining corp, which include a tin smelter and two mines.
"We are on the short-list for what is called the capitialisation of COMIBOL tin assets. There were four parties, there are now three, including RGC as one," Bethwaite said.
If RGC was successful with its tender to acquire the tin assets in the land-locked South American nation it would become one of the world's largest tin miners, he said.
RGC produced about 16,000 tonnes of tin in concentrate in the 1995/96 year. The two Bolivian tin mines up for sale would increase the group's annual tin output to over 35,000 tonnes.
The world's largest tin miner is Tambang Timah of Indonesia, which is expected to produce 41,500 tonnes in 1996.
Despite the better-than-expected profit, RGC shares rose just one cent to A$5.94 on light volume.
(A$1 = US$0.7920)
