Australian government plans to toughen the rules for the rollout of optic fibre cable could make Optus Communications' cable rollout plans uneconomic, said Optus chief executive officer Zygmunt Switkowski.
"We looked at the technology and the economics of underground cabling and we can't make the business case work for us," Switkowski told Reuters, before addressing a luncheon at the Committee for Economic Development of Australia.
"It could certainly add hundreds of millions of dollars to our cost base," Switkowski said.  
Last week, the Australian government said Optus and Telstra Corp would need the approval of a local council before it could install cables in its jurisdiction.
Optus, through its 46.5 percent owned Optus Vision, is rolling out fibre optic cables overhead on mainly existing telephone poles to carry pay television and telephone services at a cost of around A$3.0 billion.
Switkowski said there was no overall figure on how much extra it would cost Optus for the underground cables.
"It can be three to six times more costly to roll out an underground cable than it is to roll out an aerial cable."  
However, Switkowski said the government's decision had not affected the group's cable rollout programme.
Optus has targetted 2.3 million homes to be cabled by the end of 1996. "Everything is going according to plan," he said.
Switkowski played down newspaper reports that the telecommunications group would take the government to court over its change in policy.
"I think the suggestion that the rules under which have established this corporation should change earlier than expected is an unsettling one," he said.
The new cable rollout rules start on July 1, 1997.  
This is the same day that Australia's telecommunications industry will be liberalised, allowing overseas telephone carriers to provide local telephony services.
Australian Communications Minister Richard Alston announced the cable rollout changes last week, following lobbying by some lcoal councils and back-benchers in his own conservative Liberal party who wanted the roll-out restricted or stopped.
Alston said cable operators would not be able to install overhead cables where there had previously been no overhead cables and would have to go underground when above-ground power cables in that street went underground.  
Several councils have taken Optus Vision to court, but the rollout has continued because it is permitted under the current telecommunications regime.
Switkowski said he could make no comment on Optus Communications planned sharemarket float, which is scheduled to list by the end of this year, but has been delayed by legal action between Optus Vision and Seven Network Ltd.
Optus Communications is 25 percent owned by Mayne Nickless Ltd, BellSouth Corp and Cable and Wireless Plc both have a 24.5 percent stake in the Sydney-based group.
The balance is owned by Australian institutions.  
-- Sydney newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
