Australia's information technology and telecommunication industry (IT&amp;T) on Tuesday welcomed a decision by Asia-Pacific leaders that would lead to a substantial reduction in tariffs.
"It is certainly welcome, as the telecommunications area has some very strong barriers in many markets," said Fleur Bayley, export manager of the Australian Informational Industry Association (AIIA).  
Bayley told Reuters that Australia has no trade barriers on IT&amp;T equipment, whereas local companies have to compete in markets that have high tariff barriers.
The meeting in the Philippines of 18 leaders of Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) economies endorsed a United States plan to free the annual US$500 billion global trade in computers, memory chips and telecommunications equipment.
However, most IT&amp;T observers wanted more details about the tariff plan before they could assess its implications for the Australian sector.  
One computer industry analyst said the APEC plan is likely to benefit Australian IT&amp;T exports, but is unlikely to stimulate growth of technology imports into Australia.
"One would have thought with the relative maturity of our market that exports could increase faster than imports," the analyst said.
He said there could be a mild boost in demand from home users of computers, but it is unlikely to affect the demand in the corporate market.  
But another analyst said most of Australia IT&amp;T exports are from multinational corporations with operations in Australia and these companies are the ones that are most likely to benefit.
Australia exported more than A$2.5 billion in IT&amp;T goods in the 12 months to September this year but imported around A$9.6 billion worth of IT&amp;T goods over the same period.
U.S. computer giant International Business Machines Corp lBM exports about A$500 million of its computers from Australia to Asia, making it the country's single largest technology exporter.  
French telecommunictaions equipment maker Alcatel Alsthom is another multinational with large export volumes from Australia.
AIIA's Bayley said the association has a target of A$10 billion in IT&amp;T exports by the year 2000.
A decade ago, Australia's IT&amp;T exports were negligible.
-- Sydney newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
