Australia's second largest bank Westpac Banking Group renewed its interest in Asia on Wednesday through an alliance with British-based Standard Chartered Bank, 3-1/2 years after its sold a swag of its Asian units.
The move signals Westpac is ready to expand in Asia again after largely withdrawing from the region to focus on Australia and New Zealand during the last Australian recession.
Under the alliance Westpac and Standard Chartered would share banking services for medium-to-large scale corporate customers in their respective dominant markets of Australia and New Zealand and Asia.
Westpac chief executive Bob Joss said in a statement that the initiative was of major importance to Westpac.
"It is a good strategic fit for our future growth," he said. Standard Chartered group chief executive Malcolm Williamson said his bank was committed to "ensuring this new relationship with Westpac is of significant long-term benefit to both companies".
The venture would focus primarily on Singapore, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Thailand and Malaysia, before expanding into Vietnam and China in about six months, said David Morgan, group executive of Westpac's Institutional and International Banking.
"Initially the main purpose of this relationship is to provide select Asian banking services to Westpac's medium to large customers -- including cash management services, local Asian currency lending, local transaction facilities and trade finance facilities," the banks said in a joint statement.
The banks expect quick success from the alliance.
"We expect it to be a fairly rapidly growing revenue stream," Morgan told Reuters.
Westpac reported a A$16 million (US$12.8 million) profit in the year to September 30, 1996 from its Asian operations compared with A$10 million in 1994/95.
But, Morgan said he could not say how much revenue the alliance would produce in its first year of business or how much Westpac had invested in the venture, which started on Wednesday.
"We have made a substantial investment already, but it is going to be a continuing investment as we expand our capabilities across Asia," Morgan said.
The move was a cheap way of getting into Asia by Westpac, banking analysts said. "It gives them access to markets in a fairly cost effective way," said Graham Maloney, banking analyst at brokers Macquarie Equities. "It's a good thing. It gives them exposure to an area that is very fast growing."
Westpac has banking licences is some Asian countries, but its activities are limited, Westpac's Morgan said.
Traders welcomed news of the alliance pushing Westpac shares up two cents to A$7.36, while the overall market was lower.
The link with Westpac follows Standard Chartered's Asian pact formed with the U.S. First Chicago NBD Corp last week.
"They (Standard Chartered) are obviously looking around the region for alliances," one Melbourne-based analyst said.
Westpac's alliance with Standard Chartered also comes ahead of an inquiry into Australia's finance and banking industry, which could see further deregulation and some mega-mergers.
The inquiry's final report is due next March.
Last month, speculation mounted that Standard Chartered was looking at a merger with another Australian bank, the Australia and New Zealand Banking Group (ANZ), but this was denied by Melbourne-based ANZ. (AUD=US$0.80)
