Canadian gold mining giant Placer Dome Inc on Thursday announced plans to expand its presence in the Asia-Pacific region through takeover offers worth a total of US$600 million for two Australian-listed gold miners.
Placer Dome launched takeover offers for Papua New Guinea (PNG) miner Highlands Gold Ltd and a mop-up offer for its Australian offshoot Placer Pacific Ltd.
If Placer Dome succeeds with both bids it will have control of PNG's biggest gold mine. PNG's Porgera mine is expected to produce over 940,000 ounces of gold in calendar 1996.
"It (the takeover) recognises the prospectivity that we see of the Asia-Pacific region and our desire to take full advantage of any opportunities that exist here," said Placer Dome's chief executive officer John Willson.
However, there were no plans to acquire more assets in the Asia-Pacific region, he said. However, Placer Pacific has stepped up its exploration activity in Asia in recent years with programmes in China, Indonesia and the Philippines.
The takeover bids were well received by investors on the Australian share market, with both Highlands and Placer Pacific shares soaring in active trade on the bid announcements, which were made before Thursday's market open.
However, the bids were not so welcomed by Highlands, which said Placer Dome's offer of 75 cents (US$0.61) for each Highlands shares was inadequate. However, Placer Pacific was more coy, it advised shareholders to take no action on the bid.
The Sydney-based Placer Pacific was partly floated in 1986 by its parent, which in turn now plans to buy-out the rest of the 24.6 percent it does not own through a share swap of one Placer Dome share for every 15 Placer Pacific shares.
Placer Dome, a Vancouver-based miner and one of the world's top three gold producers, plans to finance its A$425 million Highlands purchase through the issue of prefered shares.
"When we are done with this acquisition assuming it goes ahead, we will have debt of about US$1.0 billion and equity of US$1.7 billion," Willson said
"We will then refinance the Highlands gold purchase through a preferred share issue and we look at asset sales to bring our equity close to US$2.0 billion and with debt below $1.0 billion, we will be well within our range on a debt-to-equity basis."
Highlands has stakes in two potentially large mining projects in PNG. The Nena/Frieda River copper/gold project and the Ramu nickel-cobalt deposit, both projects are estimated to cost a total of US$1.5 billion to develop.
In regards to Highlands non-gold assets, Willson said: "We don't know much about them or what we are going to do with them, to develop them, sell them, or swap them."
Australian gold analysts said the Canadian gold miner was likely to succeed with its two bids. "I think they will walk it in," said David Kauler, gold mining analyst at ANZ Securities.
Analysts said the offers are probably opportunistic, given that Placer Pacific and Highlands share prices were both earlier this year above Placer Dome's offer prices. But both have fallen with the gold price, which is currently around 2-1/2 year lows.
Highlands shares closed 17 cents or 29 percent higher at 75 cents, Placer Dome has amassed a 33 percent stake in Highlands over the past two days. Placer Pacific shares closed 42 cents or 29.37 percent higher at A$1.85 with 5.5 million shares traded.
(A$1=US$0.80)
