Canadian gold giant Placer Dome Inc's takeover bids for its Australian offshoot Placer Pacific Ltd and Papua New Guinea gold miner Highlands Gold Ltd are likely to be successful, analysts said on Thursday. A takeover of the two miners would give Placer Dome control of the big Porgera gold mine in Papua New Guinea (PNG).
"I think they will walk it in," said David Kauler, gold mining analyst at ANZ Securities.
Placer Dome had amassed a 33 percent stake in Highlands in the 24 hours before launching a 75 cents a share bid.  
The Vancouver-based miner is offering one of its shares for every 15 Placer Pacific shares. Placer Dome said its offer for Highlands represented a 36 percent premium to the price of the the shares on November 26. The offer for the 24.6 percent Placer Dome does not own in Placer Pacific represents aa 50 percent premium on the November 26 price, the Canadian miner said.
The shares of both Placer Pacific and Highlands soared after Placer Dome unveiled its offers before the market opening.
At 12.50 p.m. (0150 GMT) Placer shares were 47 cents or 32.87 percent higher at A$1.90 while Highlands shares were 16 cents or 27.59 percent higher at 74 cents.  
Australian gold analysts said they did not expect Placer Dome to raise its bid prices, with both Placer Pacific and Highlands directors likely to recommend shareholders to accept the offers in the absence of any higher bids.
"At the moment, the advice would be not to sell," Highlands company secretary Phillip West told Reuters. "But the directors are considering the offer and are expected to make a statement later today," West said.
Analysts said the speed at which Placer Dome picked up a third of Highlands indicated there were plenty of sellers of the stock at these levels.  
Highlands has been in play since MIM Holdings Ltd put its 65 percent stake up for sale at 65 cents a share in April, but underwriter to the offer ANZ Securities, was left with 40 percent of Highlands, as investors neglected the offer.
"When you have someone offering 75 cents and not too long ago nobody was buying at 65 (cents) then its no wonder they are queuing up to sell," said Keith Goode at Bell Securities.
Analysts said Highlands needed a partner to help develop the Nena/Frieda River copper/gold project and the Ramu nickel-cobalt deposit, both in PNG. The two projects are estimated to cost US$1.5 billion to develop.  
"Highlands was really under pressure as its needed around A$500-A$600 million to finance its share of the Frieda and Ramu projects and that is pretty difficult for a company that is capitalised at A$350 million," ANZ's Kauler said.
Analysts said the offers are probably opportunistic, given that Placer Pacific and Highlands share prices were both earlier this year above Placer Dome's offer prices. But both have fallen with the gold price, which is currently around 2-1/2 year lows.
"It is opportune, with the gold price falling, but neither Placer (Pacific) or Highlands share prices have been going anywhere for most of this year," Kauler said.  
Gold analysts said Placer Dome was unlikely to mop up the remaining stake in Kidston Gold Mines Ltd, which is currently 75 percent owned by Placer Pacific.
"I don't expect there to be bid for Kidston, I think they will let that run its course," said one Sydney gold analyst.
The takeover bids for the Porgera partners, also boosted Goldfields Ltd share price, which owns 25 percent of the PNG mine and most of the gold sector despite a weaker gold price, which is currently trading at US$373/50 an ounce.
At 1.35 p.m. (0235 GMT), Goldfields shares were 24 cents or 9.76 percent higher at A$2.70. --Sydney newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
