Investment bank Macquarie Bank Ltd reported on Monday a record result for the six months ended September 30, and started the second half optimistically.
Macquarie Bank, which is 13.4 percent owned by the Brunei Investment Agency (BIA), reported a 21.3 percent rise in first half net profit to A$46.03 million in the first half of 1996/97.
"This was a very solid first half result and one which reflects more even contributions fom business groups across the bank," executive chairman David Clarke said.  
"Although it is too early to make a forecast, we are optimistic about the second half," Clarke said.
While the 1995/96 second half was very strong, he said the bank was hopeful it could at least match the result.
"There has been nothing to change that view following the trading for the first two months of this half."
Managing director Allan Moss said the equities, treasury and commodities group accounted for most of the first half rises.
"The Treasury and Commodities Group's first half result is the best since the formation of the group in 1993," Moss said.  
"The strong result in the Equities Group reflects good performances from institutional and corporate stockbroking and underwriting," Moss said.
Moss said the near 400 percent increase in profit from its stockbroking arm, Macquarie Equities Ltd, was due partly to an increase in market share, but mainly due to market volume.
Macquarie's Direct Investment division, which manages the Macquarie Investment Trusts, also had a good result, Moss said.
The bank was currently very active right across all its operations, Moss said. "We are busy right across the board. There is a lot of activity in all our operations," he said.  
Macquarie said total operating income rose to A$232.69 million in the half, from A$190.21 million a year earlier.
The Brunei government-owned BIA became Macquarie's largest shareholder after it bought Lloyds TSB Plc's 13.4 percent stake for A$151.7 million last week.
Macquarie's chairman said there had been a good reaction to the link with BIA.
"We have had a very positive reaction from a number of existing clients, particularly in southeast Asia. I think it has been widely acclaimed in southeast Asia that it would lead to more business in the region," Clarke said.  
Macquarie, which listed in late July, reported a net profit of A$93.17 million in the year to March 31, 1996, up from A$76.07 million a year earlier.
Clarke said Macquarie had no plans to return capital to shareholders or to make a takeover due to its high capital adequacy ratio (CAR). Macquarie's CAR was 13.6 percent at September 30, down from 15.4 percent at March 31, 1996.
This ratio compares with the Reserve Bank of Australia's minimum requirement of eight percent.
"As far as any prospect of share acquisition or buy-back, we have nothing in mind yet," Clarke said.  
"I think it is the nature of our business to have a capital adequacy ratio that is higher than the trading banks because we are very dependent on counter-party limits from other banks, they in turn are quite dependent on ratings...it is a healthy capital adequacy ratio and I think we can expect to be well and truly above the basic minimum," Clarke said.
At 2.00 p.m. (0300 GMT), Macquarie shares were 11 cents lower at A$8.55 with about 160,000 shares traded in a generally weaker Australian sharemarket.
The shares listed on the local bourse in July at A$6.95.
-- Sydney newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
