Building materials group James Hardie Industries Ltd reported on Friday a first half net profit in line with expectations, but comments on the second half by the group is likely to see full year earnings forecasts trimmed.
James Hardie, 27.23 owned by New Zealand's Brierley Investments Ltd, reported a 12.1 percent fall in net profit before abnormals to A$27.6 million for the six months ended September 30, 1996, in line with analysts' forecasts.
But managing director Keith Barton said he expected the second half result to be significantly down on the first half.  
Analysts at the company's results briefing said Barton's comments on the second half meant that estimates for pre-abnormal net profit for the 1996/97 year would be trimmed back to around A$50 million from A$53-A$54 million.
They welcomed the company's statement that outlook for its U.S. businesses were very positive for the 1996/97 second half and into 1997/98.
"In contrast, the outlook for Australian operations remains bleak in the short term," it said.  
"In view of the immediate prospects, the company maintains its previously stated position that profit for the full year will reflect a marked deterioration on last year's results," the company said.
"Growth prospects for the following year remain very positive," James Hardie said.
Keith Barton said the first half downturn reflected a fall in earnings from Australian building products due to lower housing starts.  
"Reduced activity in the housing sector had an adverse impact on both volumes and margins for the Australian building boards, windows and bathroom products businesses," he said.
Continued strong performances from the fibre cement and gypsum businesses in the United States as well as solid performances from New Zealand had however helped the result.
"U.S. fibre cement production sold out during the six months to September and we continue to ship significant volumes of product from Australian and New Zealand plants to satisfy demand," Barton said.  
Hardie had just increased U.S. fibre cement production capacity by more than 40 percent to 480 million square feet through the commissioning of a third line at Plant City in Florida.
However analysts said the market would not be worrying too much about 1996/97 results, which are widely expected to be down on the A$58.4 million pre-abnormal net profit reported in the year to March 31, 1996.
Barton said he expected a rebound in profit in the year to March 31, 1998, following an expected fall in profit in the 1996/97 year.  
"I expect it to be higher, but it is too early to say if it will be significantly higher," Barton later told reporters.
Analysts forecast James Hardie to have pre-abnormal net profit earnings of about A$90 million in 1997/98.
Barton also revealed that the Sydney-based group was conducting a study of the European fibre cement market, but had made no decison to enter any European countries yet.
"We are going to have a look, it is a large market," Barton said. "It is early days, we are just having a look to see if we can understand the market."  
Sales for the first half rose 2.7 percent to A$913.9 million, while the dividend remained unchanged at 6.5 cents per share.
At 1.10 p.m. (0210 GMT), James Hardie shares were six cents lower at A$3.40 in a weaker Australian sharemarket that has been hit by a slump in the local bond market.
-- Sydney newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
