The recent surge in the Australian dollar and higher jet fuel prices are going to hurt exporters of fresh food in particular, according to Australian Federation of International Forwarders (AFIF) chief executive Brian Lovell.
"With the rise in the fuel price and the higher Australian dollar it is going to affect a lot of exporters," Lovell said.
"The hardest hit are going to be the perishible exports," Lovell said, referring to Australia's fresh food exporters to mainly to Asian countries.
Lovell said exporters, who had entered contracts before the recent freight rate hike, could now be finding they cannot meet their contract obligations due to the extra charge.
"This can really affect things as you might have signed the contract and then suddenly realised that you can't afford to move it," Lovell told Reuters in an interview.
"There are some people that won't be able to get out of a binding contract," Lovell said.
Lovell said many AFIF members were surprised by the freight rate rises by some local air carriers, due to the strength of the local dollar, which had given carriers greater buying power.
"They are buying fuel now more cheaply," Lowell said.
Qantas Airways Ltd has increased its jet fuel surcharge, while Ansett Airlines Ltd has kept its freight rates unchanged.
The Australian dollar has risen four percent to its current level of US$0.8000 over the past five months.
Lovell said that although airfreight volumes had been growing over recent years, there was now a move by exporters to transport perishable goods to Asia by fast ferry.
"I would say in the next 10 years we will see a lot more freight carried by fast ferries, as it is more economical to carry them by ferry than plane as fuel costs are lower."
Lovell said some of the AFIF's 250 members were in dispute with some of the airports over the management of cargo terminals, but this had not impeded freight movement.
AFIF was formed in October following the merger of Australian Dederation of Air Freight Forwarders and the International Forwarders Association of Australia.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
