Australian fast ferry and transport group Holyman Ltd plans to further expand operations in Europe before moving into the Asian market, managing director Christopher Butcher said in an interview.
"We currently have operations in North America and northern Europe and we can't see any reason why we can't start doing the same thing in the Mediterranean," Butcher told Reuters.
Butcher said Holyman was likely into expand into Asia in the future as the cost structure for operating fast ferries improved in some markets in the region.  
"We could be seeing the cost structure changing in Asia, so we are likely to move into some markets in north Asia and south east Asia," Butcher said.
He said that as incomes rose in Asia the amounts charged for ferry services would rise, making it more economical for operators like Holyman to enter the market.
Holyman company secretary Simon Lennon said the company was also looking at fast ferry services from Darwin to Indonesia, but he did not expect a decision to be made for at least a year.  
"It is one of a number of projects we are looking at in the region," he said. He said Holyman had looked at particular routes within China and Indonesia, but they did not fit within the company's plans. "I would imagine in a few years we would have something up there (in Asia)," Lennon said.
Holyman shares had a lacklustre showing in its first year of listing, but since January this year the shares have more than doubled to make the stock one of the strongest sharemarket performers over the past year.
The shares listed in April 1994 at A$2.00 and hit a high of A$6.00 on November 11 and are currently trading around A$5.06.  
The Sydney-based group was floated on the local bourse in April 1994, as part of a spin-off from TNT Ltd, when the transport group was selling assets to trim its high debts.
"The stock really took some time to get off the ground," Butcher said.
"I think there has been a lot of hard work done over the past year to educate shareholders in what the company is doing and where the company is going as there was a perception out there that we were a mismash of businesses," Butcher said.  
Holyman's main activities are its fast ferry services in Australia, across the North Sea between Britain and Europe, New York and in Denmark. It also operates a gas pipeline, bulk commodity handling and freight forwarding businesses.
"There are a number of different projects and businesses, we found there are quite a lot of common threads going through," Butcher said. "I think these operations all have their own place and there are opportunties to expand these further," he said.
Butcher worked with TNT for 25 years before taking charge of Holyman when it split from TNT.  
Butcher said the group had no plans to raise capital to fund the expected expansion, as the company was well financed.
In October, Holyman bought a fast passenger ferry for A$43 million. He said there was no plans for any immediate purchases of more ferries.
Butcher said he could not comment on its trading performance or earnings forecasts.
Holyman reported a net profit of A$16.09 million in calendar 1995. The group posted a net profit of A$15.03 million in the six months to June 30, 1996, up from A$6.79 million earlier.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
