Sydney Harbour Casino Holdings Ltd said on Wednesday it wanted to grab a slice of the lucrative Asian high-roller market but first had to win a tax break from the state government.
The company holds a 12-year licence to operate the only legal casino in Australia's largest city but has battled with the New South Wales (NSW) government for the past 15 months to receive the same tax concession that its interstate rivals have.
"I am hopeful, but I can't say anything concrete at this stage," chief executive officer Neil Gamble told Reuters in an interview. The Sydney casino is 26.3 percent owned by U.S. casino operator Showboat Inc.
(Corrects to add Gamble's first name and title)
Without the 10 percent tax concession on winnings made by the high-rollers, the Sydney casino could only watch as rich Asian customers headed to casinos in Melbourne, Perth and on the Gold Coast, Gamble said.
"As far as the high-rollers are concerned it makes us totally uncompetitive." Gamble said the high-rollers also required other incentives to be lured to Sydney.
"The professional gamblers would have about A$100,000 (US$80,000) to spend on a weekend, some would go up to A$2 million or A$3 million, some go up to tens of millions of dollars, but that is rare."
If the Sydney casino could have its big gamblers tax reduced from more than 27 percent at the moment, it would then open a network of marketing offices around Asia, he said, adding to its representation in Hong Kong and Singapore.
So far its revenue from high rollers is negligible as 90 percent of the 12,000 people that visit the casino daily are considered locals.
The Sydney casino currently operates out of temporary premises but plans to open a A$1 billion permanent casino late next year, with 1,500 gaming machines and 200 gaming tables, a hotel and two theatres.
The casino has posted a string of disappointing results since it opened its doors in September 1995, with Gamble largely attributing this to over-optimistic forecasts in the prospectus.
"I think the prospectus forecast was too bullish," Gamble said "I don't think that was a failure of mangement to achieve I think it was an over estimate of reality by any comparsion with other parts of this industry."
The casino floated on the local bourse in June 1995 and forecast an operating profit after tax of A$37 million for the 1995/96 year. It reported an actual net loss of A$4.68 million in the financial year to June 30, 1996.
The recent sell down by international financier and founding shareholder George Soros was not a vote of no-confidence in the group, Gamble said. Soros now has under five percent down from 9.8 percent at the time of the float.
Since Soros sold down his stake in mid-November, Sydney casino shares have fallen eight percent. Sydney Harbour Casino shares closed steady at A$1.78 on Tuesday.
(A$1 = US$0.80 cents)
