Sydney Harbour Casino Holdings Ltd chief executive officer Neil Gamble said on Tuesday he was still hopeful the casino would receive tax concessions on earnings from big-betting foreign gamblers, despite previous knock-backs.
The casino operator, which holds a 12-year monopoly to operate the only legal casino in Australia's largest city, has battled with the New South Wales state government for the past 15 months to get a similar tax rate to other Australian casinos.
"I am hopeful, but I can't say anything concrete at this stage," Gamble told Reuters in an interview.  
Gamble, appointed to his current position in mid-October after leaving struggling pay television operator Australis Media Ltd, said he had held talks with NSW state premier Bob Carr, who planned to make a decision early 1997.
He said that without the 10 percent tax rate concession it wanted from the government, the Sydney casino was unable to compete in the high-roller market with rival casino operators Crown Ltd, Jupiters Ltd and Burswood.
"As far as the high-rollers are concerned it makes us totally uncompetitive," Gamble said. He added the high-rollers require incentives to be brought into play at a casino.  
"The professional gamblers would have about A$100,000 to spend on a weekend, some would go up to A$2 million or A$3 million, some go up to tens of millions of dollars, but that is rare," the South African-born executive said.
Gamble said the high-roller market was worth about A$200 million to Australian casinos with Sydney's share about A$100 million and A$10 million to the casino's bottom-line profit.
Australia's share of the worldwide high-roller market could potentially be worth about A$300 million, Gamble said.
But he added this would be dependent on Sydney getting the tax concessions its desires.  
If the Sydney casino was to get the go-ahead from the NSW government to lower the tax rate from the current rate of around 27 percent, it would open up a string of marketing offices around Asia to attract high-rollers to its casino, he said.
The Sydney casino currently has marketing offices in Hong Kong and Singapore. But so far the casino's revenue from high rollers is negligible, as 90 percent of the 12,000 people that visit the casino daily are considered locals, Gamble said.
The rest of the casino's patrons are tourists, but Gamble said this part of the market would grow once the A$1 billion permanent casino opens in late 1997.  
The permanent casino would be complete with 350 hotel rooms, 140 serviced apartments, lyric and showroom theatres.
Gamble said the Sydney casino was not in a saturated market. Last week international ratings agency Standard and Poor's said the local casino industry had reached saturation point.
"We are sitting here with a 12-year monopoly in a city of 3.5 million people. With two million tourists a year I don't see it as a particular issue for us," Gamble said.  
Gamble said it was too early for him to comment on whether the Australian gaming industry would have a debt profile similar to that of the U.S. gaming industry, where 80 percent of the gaming company ratings fall within the 'BB' and 'B' category.
U.S.-based Showboat Inc  owns 26.3 percent of Sydney Harbour Casino and has a contract to run the casino, which is located on the outskirts of Sydney's central business district.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
