Sydney Harbour Casino Holdings Ltd, which has posted a string of disappointing results since it listed in June 1995, was too optimistic in its prospectus, chief executive officer Neil Gamble said on Tuesday.
"I think the prospectus forecast was too bullish," Gamble told Reuters in an interview. "I don't think that was a failure of management to achieve, I think it was an over-estimate of reality by any comparsion with other parts of this industry."  
The company is 26.3 percent owned by U.S. casino operator Showboat Inc and holds a 12-year monopoly to operate the only legal casino in Australia's largest city.
It forecast an operating profit after tax of A$37 million for 1995/96 but reported an actual net loss of A$4.68 million in the year to June 30, 1996.
The casino, which opened a temporary site in September 1995 and plans to open a permanent casino late 1997, changed its balance date to December 31 from June 30 earlier this year.
Gamble said the casino was recording a slow and steady improvement in results, but would not give any forecasts.  
In October, the Sydney casino said it expected the December quarter profit to be higher than the September quarter.
"Basically we are building the business and there is not a exponential increase, there is a slow steady improvement in the results each month as we go along," Gamble said
"We think that the actual threshold leaps will start during the first and second quarter of next year," he said.
Gamble said the casino had expected the recent sell down by international financier and founding shareholder George Soros and was not a vote of no-confidence in the group.  
But investors have taken a contrary view, with the share price falling eight percent since Soros sold down his stake in mid-November.
Gamble said he met with George Soros representative on the Sydney casino board Steven Gilbert, who had said that Soros was a trader and would sell out from time to time. Soros now has less than five percent from a high of 9.8 percent at the time of the float.  
"He sold 25 percent of his holding, which is very prudent and was totally expected on our part, he still owns 30 million shares, which is very sizeable and he is still very much involved with the company," Gamble said.
He said the largest shareholder, Showboat, had no plans to sell its stake, despite frequent rumours about a takeover for either the Sydney casino operator or its parent.
"If the price is right, Showboat could sell, but I don't see any sign of that at this point in time," said Gamble, who joined joined the casino in October.  
"If an operator wanted to take over the casino, they would have to take over the management contract and if that were to happen Showboat is the gatekeeper," said Gamble, the former chief executive officer of Australis Media Ltd.
Showboat has the management contract to operate the Sydney casino. Australian newspapers have speculated that the nation's richest man and biggest gambler Kerry Packer was keen on buying the Sydney casino or Showboat.
"The rumour about Packer came around the time I joined. That has dissipated now, but that will probably come around another time," Gamble said.  
Packer lost to the Showboat-Leighton Holdings Ltd consortium in 1994 for the Sydney casino licence.
Gamble said the casino's plans to list on the NASDAQ exchange in the United States was still going to plan and would be listed by April 1997.
"That is progressing satisfactorily, we have had a lot of other priorities on and we expect during the first quarter of calendar 1997 to compete that ADR listing on NASDAQ," he said.
-- Sydney newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
