Australian airlines and tourist operators are worried about Australia's falling share of the growing number of Japanese taking overseas holidays, so much so that they have formed an action plan to halt the decline.
However, details of the action plan are secretly guided by the carriers, Qantas Airways Ltd and Ansett Airlines Ltd, as they don't want to be giving away their strategic plans to the opposition.
Ansett is jointly owned by News Corp Ltd and Air New Zealand Ltd.
Both Qantas and Ansett also face lower yields as they cut air fares on the Japan route to entice holidaymakers down-under.
"We have to arrest the decline as soon as we identify it, because it might be even worse next year and then we are in trouble," said Col Hughes, Qantas' group general manager Pacific and Japan.
Hughes said the decline in Japanese market share is serious for the A$14-billion Australian tourism industry.
"Our share of the Japanese market has fallen 0.5 of a percentage point over the past eight months, so our share of a growing market is falling and that is not good news to have a decline in a market share, because once you have a decline it could have further ramifications," Hughes told Reuters.
Hughes said Australia is losing its share of the Japanese tourist market to Europe and the United States, in particular Hawaii.
He added these markets have raised their promotion budgets to attract Japanese tourists, while Australia was cutting its marketing budget.
The Australian government plans to cut 25 percent of the budget for the industry's top body, the Australian Tourism Commission (ATC).
Fellow Australian airline Ansett Airlines Ltd sees raising capacity on the Japan route as a way to tourist numbers, said Ansett's general manager of international services, Craig Wallace.
"There has been a great expansion of capacity on the European route (from Japan)," Wallace told Reuters.
"What I would like to see is an increase in our (Ansett) capacity, so we can fly daily to Japan, which would create more flexibility with tour operators and may stimulate demand."
Ansett, which started its international operations in September 1994 with its inaugural flight to Osaka, has five flights a week to Japan's second largest city.
Aviation analysts said the entry of Ansett into the Japan market has put more pressure on Qantas' Japanese routes.
"Qantas is hurting as there is more competition on the Japanese route, with Ansett coming in and airfares going down, said Peter Harbison, managing director of aviation consultants Centre for Asia-Pacific Aviation.
Qantas said in August that results from its Japan routes had weakened in the six months to June 1996.
Revenue from the Japanese route fell to A$742.1 million in the year to June 30, 1996, compared with A$797.3 million a year earlier, but the route still generated the most revenue of Qantas' overseas routes. Qantas also flies to the UK and Europe, southeast Asia, northeast Asia and the U.S. and the Pacific.
However, the number of Japanese tourists coming to Australia is still projected to grow, albeit at a slower rate.
The Australian government's Tourism Forecasting Council predicts that 849,000 Japanese tourists will come to Australia in 1996, up from 783,000 in 1995, and this is expected to grow to 923,000 in 1997.
The number of tourists from the rest of Asia, excluding Japan, is forecast to grow to 1.32 million in 1996, from 1.12 million in 1995, and to grow further to 1.53 million in 1997.
"The market is still growing, but it's just not as fast as some people would like it," Harbison said.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
