Australian government-owned airport operator Federal Airports Corp (FAC) sees some life after the planned privatisation of its 22 airports, chief executive officer Barry Murphy said.
"We will eventually go out of existence if all 22 airports that we currently own and operate are eventually disposed of to other owners," Murphy told Reuters in a telephone interview.
"One thing we do hope will survive is our service group called the FAC Airport Consultancy, which we are trying to build into a viable business for the long run," Murphy said.
Murphy said FAC Airport Consultancy would be a group of 20 or 30 people, with specialist knowledge of the aviation industry and property management.
"We hope to sell those services at arm's length to the remaining airports and to new airport owners," Murphy said.
The Australian government has 10 consortiums shortlisted for bidding in its first sale phase which consists of 50-year leases for Melbourne, Brisbane and Perth airports. These are expected to sold in early 1997.
The sale of Adelaide lease was supposed to be part of the first phase, but was delayed for an upgrade.
The remaining 18 airports, including Sydney and the yet-to-be-built second airport at Sydney, will be sold in one or more future tranches.
"By the year 2000 I would imagine that they would have all gone with the possible exception of Sydney, if that is held back because of the Olympics," Murphy said.
Sydney will host the 2000 Olympics Games.
Murphy said the sale timetable was uncertain and the whole process was quite unsettling for FAC staff, as one of the major problems for the corporation was staff leaving to join the various consortiums.
Former FAC chief executive Jack Moffatt is the acting chief executive of Australian Airports Ltd, a consortium bidding for Brisbane, Melbourne and Perth.
In late November, FAC reported a 14.5 percent rise in net profit to A$78.1 million in the year to June 30, 1996 on a 14.6-percent rise in revenue to A$579.3 million, while passenger volume at the airports grew 7.3 percent.
"Passenger growth seems to be holding up quite well and we are expecting a continuing strong performance in that area...and we are hopeful that kind of growth rate will continue," Murphy said.
"We are confident that revenue growth would follow similar growth."
Murphy said the FAC would try to minimise capital expenditure ahead of its privatisation, although Sydney airport may need to be upgraded. "We do expect significant work at Sydney to cater for terminal growth within in the two years."
Sydney is Australia's busiest airport.
Murphy said the FAC had been in talks with freight operators with a view to expand freight facilities at some of Australias airports.
"It is apparent now that freight is attracting more interest," Murphy said. However, he added any expansion of freight facilities was unlikely to involve major sums of money.
-- Sydney newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
