U.S.-owned express freight carrier United Parcel Service (UPS) could start flying its own planes to Australia if growth in the Australian market continued at the current rate, a senior company official said on Friday.
UPS, which started serving Australia in 1991, currently uses commercial airlines to carry packages in and out of the country, UPS general manager Australia Terry Hales said in an interview.
"If things continue the way they are I could see very quickly the realisation of that ...", Hales said.
"It is certainly not beyond the terms of possibility at all. I would say that we have a plan that it would happen in the next five years," he said.
UPS does not use its own planes, which currently total 300 worldwide, to fly to Australia as there was not enough export business from Australia, he said.
"We don't fly planes into Australia. The market is not yet large enough to warrant bringing in an airplane every day full up and then turn them around and fly them back," Hales said.
"We have no problems filling them up coming in. Going out is another matter on a regular basis," he said.
Hales said Australia imports four times as much air freight as it exports. However, he said UPS projects large export growth, albeit from a low base in Australia.
"Our volume of revenue forecasts are in the region of 34 percent (growth) in calendar 1997," he said.
The import business is seen growing at a more modest pace.
"We still feel fairly bullish that we will still grow in the (import) market, probably seven or eight percent which is reasonable for the business," he said.
UPS uses Australia as a service centre rather than a hub for the Asia Pacific. Hales said UPS was spending US$400 million on its Asia Pacific hub terminal in Taiwan, which was chosen due to its proximity to other Asian nations and the United States.
"When you sit down and work out the best location to service the customers, in our case we came out with Taiwan as the best location for the Asia Pacific," Hales said.
However, he did not rule out Australia becoming an Asian Pacific hub in the future.
UPS currently uses Honolulu as a connection point for freight bound for Australia.
Cargo is transferred to a Qantas Airways Ltd flight to carry it the rest of the way to Australia.
But this could change in the future if growth continued at the current pace, Hales said.
Atlanta-based UPS is privately owned.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
