The Australian Stock Exchange's transport sector is likely to see more modest gains over the next year after a sharp rise over the past year, analysts said.
The transport index has risen about 30 percent during 1996, while the broader market has increased six percent this year.
"Brambles and Mayne's have had a extraordinary run over the last eight to 10 months, and the impression of the market is that they have reached their short term value," said Paul Xavier transport analyst at BNP Equities.
Over half of the transport sector is made up by Brambles Industries Ltd and Mayne Nickless Ltd.
"In the last 12 months the sector has outperformed quite significantly," Pru-Bache Securities transport analyst Andrew Mullholland said.
It is outperforming because of a lot of stock specific issues," Mulholland said.
"You look at Mayne - it's because of Optus and healthcare and if you look at Brambles it's all to do with a turnaround in earnings," he said.
"If you look at TNT it is all to do with the bid," he said.
TNT Ltd, which was seen as a laggard among the majors, has been taken over by Dutch post and telcoms group PTT Nederland NV through its A$2 billion bid.
Mayne Nickless plans to sell its 25 percent stake in Optus Communications through the planned float of the telecommunications group in 1997, raising around A$1.0 billion.
Analysts said the Qantas Airways Ltd share price has underperformed the transport sector, with the stock trading for most of 1996 below its A$2.26 price at the start of January.
"If you look at Qantas they have underperformed, but they represent good value at these levels," Mullholland said.
Qantas shares are currently trading just above the A$2.00 price institutional investors paid for the shares in the airline's float in mid-1995.
However, analysts said that given the diverse operations of Mayne Nickless and Brambles the transport index is no longer seen as by investors as a leading indicator of economic activity and so not much attention is paid to the movement of the index.
"I have always seen the transport index as a bit of a misnomer, it is kind of a diversified hybrid," Pru-Bache's Mullholland said.
If investors want pure exposure to the domestic transport sector they would have to look at medium sized groups Finemores Holdings Ltd, Scott Corp Ltd and Toll Holdings Ltd, analysts said.
"If you want to be in transport in Australia, you are better off looking at the medium sized players not the big players," one Melbourne-based transport analyst said.
Analysts said that although transport companies represent some leverage to a slower growing Australian economy. But this leverage is limited as much the economic growth is seen in the service sector and not traded goods, which use transport.
"Economy growth is seen in telecommunications, media and entertainment and hardly any growth in the traded sector and that limited growth in the traded goods sector means that there isn't that much growth in the transport side," one analyst said.
Analysts said in the future the transport sector may start to represent more of a transport infrastructure index as Australian government's are expected to privatise airports, railways and shipping ports over the next few years.
The Australian government is expected to complete the first phase of its airport privatisation programme in the first half of 1997 with the sale of Melbourne, Brisbane and Perth airports.
