The aggressive cost cutting programmes planned by Australia's two major airlines Qantas Airways Ltd and Ansett Airlines Ltd can be achieved without affecting services, analysts said.
Both Qantas and Ansett face pressure on profits because of the stronger Australia dollar, higher fuel prices, a soft domestic market and competition in the international market.  
"Australian airlines are seen as high cost operators compared with the rest of world," said Peter Harbison, managing director of the Centre for Asia Pacific Aviation consultancy service.
"So I suppose there is scope there to reduce the cost base," Harbison told Reuters.
Qantas, which is 25 percent owned by British Airways Plc, announced at its annual meeting last month that it will increase its cost cutting programme by about A$100 million for the 1996/97 year on the previous target of A$330 million.  
Ansett, which is a joint venture between News Corp Ltd and Air New Zealand Ltd, said three months earlier that it plans to cut A$150 million from its annual cost base of A$3 billion.
"They will have to reduce their costs along with every other airline in the world and that will continue to happen for some time," Harbison said.
Investors are focusing on Qantas, which is cutting costs more aggressively so that it can meet profit estimates.
Qantas aims to cut costs across the board but has not revealed specific areas.  
Analysts said Qantas will have plenty of scope to cut costs, using its alliance with BA to share facilities.
"They have got a lot of inefficiences, they can outsource some of their engineering and maintenance," said Greg Ward, aviation analyst at First Pacific Stockbroking.
Analysts said the Australian flag carrier will also cut costs in areas where it is not so noticeable to customers, such as in the accounts, and marketing and sales departments.  
"It's the tail that Qantas will hack into, Qantas will not hack into the sharp end," said David Turner, analyst at Shaw Stockbroking, referring to accounts and sales areas as the tail, with the sharp end being flight services.
He said Qantas is very competitive with other world airlines in terms of pilot performance and aircraft ultilisation, so there is little change seen in those areas.
Analysts said Qantas has to focus on cutting costs in order to grow profits and release funds for the expansion of services and purchase of new aircraft.  
"They haven't got the capacity to go out and buy planes and fill them up and fly hundreds more routes so the focus is on improving their balance sheet and generating more profits to do that," one Melbourne-based aviation analyst said.
However, analysts said both Qantas and Ansett run a risk in cutting costs as it may affect staff morale, which in turn affects customer service and in turn customer loyality.
-- Sydney newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
