Corporate Australia is likely to continue its thirst for takeovers in 1997 with banks, media and resources tipped to feature prominently.
Brokers estimate there were about A$8.5 billion ($6.8 billion) worth of takeovers and share buy-backs in 1996, up from A$5.9 billion in 1995 and A$2.0 billion in 1994. Takeovers and share buy-backs are both seen as ways to boost growth in earnings per share.
The biggest deal this year was the A$2.0 billion agreed takeover of freight transporter TNT Ltd by Dutch postal and telecoms group Koninklijke PTT Nederland NV.
"Almost across the board there is rationalisation and international interest in our industries," said Chris Mackay, executive director at broker SBC Warburg.
SLOWING AUSTRALIAN ECONOMY SPURS RATIONALISATION
Analysts said Australia's low inflation and low economic growth prospects also made conditions ripe for takeovers.
"With low levels of inflation, companies have difficulty pushing through cost increases, so they have got to look for efficencies in order to increase profitability and to do that, some companies acquire others," said Merv Peacock, the Australian Mutual Provident Society's head of marketable securities.
Profits have been falling across the board for the past 18 months, with industrials hit by the slowing economy and resource companies severely affected by lower commodity prices.
GOLD TO SHINE IN RESOURCE TAKEOVER ACTIVITY
"Gold is an area where we could see a lot of takeover activity," said Craig Drummond from leading broker J.B. Were &amp; Son. "The gold valuations have fallen a long way this year," he told Reuters.
The Australian gold index is currently 22 percent down from its 1996 high in February, while the broader market has risen six percent over the same period.
"The scope still exists for both domestic takeovers and in particular foreign takeovers of Australian gold assets," Drummond said.
The Australian gold sector was one of the most active sectors during 1996. The largest takeover in this group was the A$3.0 billion merger among the Normandy Mining Ltd group of companies.
Foreign gold miners were also keen to snare Australian gold producers in 1996, a trend which analysts say will continue next year.
Last month, Canadian gold mining giant Placer Dome Inc unveiled a US$600 million plan to buy the rest of its local offshoot Placer Pacific Ltd and Papua New Guinea Highlands Gold Ltd.
Australian gold analysts said other North American gold miners keen on expanding their presence in the region are Battle Mountain Inc and Coeur d'Alene Corp.
However the rest of the resource sector is unlikely to see much takeover activity in 1997.
"There is not a lot left in the oil sector and in the base metals sector there are few options so it's primarily the gold sector where there is going to be more activity," Drummond said.
Australian oil assets were vigorously snapped up in 1996 by overseas predators. The biggest deal was the Mobil Corp's A$1.78 billion purchase of Ampolex Ltd.
INDUSTRY INQUIRIES MAY SPARK MORE TAKEOVERS
The Australian government is holding inquiries into the media and banking industries, with analysts tipping banking as the more probable of the two sectors to see merger activity.
The Wallis inquiry into Australia's financial system, which is looking at the possibility of a relaxation of rules that stop big bank mergers and takeovers by foreign banks, is due to hand down its recommendations in March 1997.
There have already been several regional bank takeovers in 1996, but the outcome of the largest deal -- the A$2.65 billion friendly bid by St George Bank Ltd for fellow Sydney-based Advance Bank Australia Ltd -- will be known early next year.
The Liberal-National government, elected in March, has ordered a review of media ownership laws which currently limits cross ownership of newspapers and television.
But the review is not examining foreign ownership rules, which could limit any expansion plans Rupert Murdoch's News Corp Ltd has pencilled in for Australia. Upmarket newspaper publisher John Fairfax Holdings Ltd remains the most likely target in this sector -- with Kerry Packer already holding a sizeable stake.
"In relation to media and banks, subject to the conclusion of the respective inquiries, there could well be more activity in those two sectors," SBC Warburg's Mackay said.
But some analysts said any liberalisation of the banking sector could find opposition from the anti-monopolies watchdog -- the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC).
($1 = 0.7960)
