Canadian gold giant Placer Dome Inc on Tuesday agreed to a deal with Papua New Guinean (PNG) miner Highlands Gold Ltd that gives Placer control of the vast PNG Porgera gold mine and ends a bitter feud between the two miners.
The deal also keeps the Highlands group as a listed company free to develop base metal and gold projects in the resource rich South Pacific nation.
Under the complex plan the Vancouver-based miner would pay Highlands A$316.1 million (US$249.7 million) to buy Highlands' 25 percent stake in the Porgera mine, which is estimated to have produced 850,000 ounces of gold in calendar 1996.
Placer had previously offered Highlands A$276.8 million for its Porgera stake after building up a 40-percent stake in Highlands through a hostile takeover bid.
"We are pleased that Placer has accepted our offer," Highlands managing director Ian Goddard said in a statement.
The restructuring plan involves all shares in Highlands other than those held by Placer being cancelled and holders receiving a capital return of 65 cents cash per share and one share in Highlands Pacific.
"It's good for Placer Dome because it gets what it really wanted, it's good for Highlands shareholders because they get more than 75 cents, they get 65 cents cash plus they have the share in the new company," one source close to the deal said.
Highlands will spin-off a new company, Highlands Pacific Ltd, which would hold the Ramu nickel/cobalt and Frieda-Nena copper/gold projects as well as its exploration porfolio in PNG and Indonesia.
"There has been strong institutional interest in our proposal, which unlocks the value of Ramu, Frieda-Nena and Highlands' extensive exploration interests," Goddard said.
Under the restructure of the Highlands group about A$160 million would be raised through a mixture of new equity and the planned sale by Placer Dome of the shareholding it would inherit in Highlands Pacific.
The new equity issue in Highlands Pacific would be at 30 cents per share, Highlands Gold said. The newly-formed company would have a market capitalisation of about A$250 million when it lists on the Australian Stock Exchange in March.
Placer Dome already has effective control over the 25 percent stake in Porgera through its Australian offshoot Placer Pacific Ltd, which the Canadian miner plans to buy-out the remaining 24.6 percent stake in the Australian miner.
Placer Dome's orginal bid of 75 cents per Highlands share launched on November 28, 1996 was rejected by the PNG miner, which valued Highlands at A$423 million. Highlands had also threaten Placer with court action over its initial bid.
Investors welcomed the new deal.
In early afternoon trade Highlands shares were two cents up at 81 cents on active trade of about 14 million. While fellow Porgera partner Orogen Minerals Ltd touched a record high of A$3.05 on the news. Orogen holds 15 percent of Porgera.
(A$=US$0.7900)
