Standard Chartered Plc group chief executive Malcolm Williamson said on Thursday he expected the British-based bank to form more strategic alliances in Asia with U.S. and European banks.
In 1996, Standard formed joint ventures in Asia with Westpac Banking Corp, First Chicago NBD Corp and Massachusetts-based Fleet Financial Services.
"We have another string of deals lined up in Europe and America which we are hoping to execute along similar lines," Williamson told Reuters in a telephone interview.  
The bank will make further annoucements on the planned ventures when it releases its 1996 year results in late February or early March, Williamson said.
Standard has a network of branches throughout Asia and Africa along with offices in London, New York and Sydney.
Williamson said it was difficult for foreign banks to enter Asia as bank licences were hard to get from regulatory bodies.
There was no limit to the amount of ventures Standard could set up with banks that want to enter the Asian market as it could offer the services of its bank partner through the Standard Asian branch network, Williamson said.  
However it was unlikely that Standard would do another deal with an Australian bank which could jeopardise its newly-formed relationship with Westpac, said Williamson, who is on a visit to the bank's Australian operations.
Williamson said Standard was not interested in any equity swap with any banks it forms a strategic alliance with.
"Reports there might be about a share exchange with Westpac would not be relevant to us because we wouldn't want to get into a special relationship with one party when you are trying to deal with many parties in other parts of the world," he said.  
Williamson said Standard was on track to achieve his target set three years ago to double the bank's profit.
He said three years ago the bank made 400 million stg annual profit.
"We made 400 million (stg) in the first six months of this year (1996), so that puts us well on target for reaching our goal," he said.
The bank plans to launch consumer finance operations and credit card services in Asia, where it has had operations since the 1850s, he added. "There is a lot of investment we want to make in order to protect the bank's future," he said.  
The bank had to make more investment into cash management systems and the corporate banking market in Asia, he said.
"We see no surplus of capital in the foreseeable future as we are ploughing so much back into the business," he said.
He said Standard had no plans to exit its African business.
"We make good profits out of Africa and we intend on staying there, because we get a very good return for our shareholders," Williamson said.
He also said the bank was no longer a takeover target as it was in the early 1990s when its share price was languishing.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
