Australia's biggest gambler Kerry Packer, a patron of Las Vegas casinos, on Monday raised his stakes in the local burgeoning casino industry with the acquisition of management control at Sydney Harbour Casino.
Packer's media group Publishing and Broadcasting Ltd said it would spend A$340 million on a 10 percent stake in Sydney Harbour Casino Holdings Ltd (SHC) and 85 percent of the management contract of the casino from U.S. casino operator Showboat Inc.  
PBL's investment both in the management contract and the shares of SHC would show very attractive financial returns over time, PBL chairman Brian Powers said in a statement.
"This transaction represents a major move into the gaming industry for PBL and provides us with an ideal base from which to build a substantial business in this dynamic industry," Powers said.
"This advances our strategic goal of building a third core business alongside our television and publishing businesses," he said. PBL also has a option over part of Showboat's remaining 16.1 percent stake in SHC.  
Showboat president and chief executive officer Kell Houssels said in the statement the transaction provided an opportunity to realise a superior return on its investment, while maintaining a major ownership position in the Sydney casino.
Packer, Australia's richest man, has sought control of the Sydney casino for the past three years. In 1994 Packer led a consortium to bid for the 12-year Sydney casino licence, but lost out to the Showboat led consortium in December 1994.
Since losing the Sydney casino license bid, Packer interests have launched several legal actions against Showboat for the award of the licence by the New South Wales (NSW) government.  
Packer's punt on SHC shares have already made him a profit as shares in both the casino owner and PBL rose strongly after the deal was announced before Monday's sharemarket open.
In early afternoon trade, SHC shares were at a record high of A$2.27, a 34 cent or 17.61 percent rise in active trade, while PBL shares were 25 cents higher at A$6.35.
The deal was good for both companies as Packer's influence was likely to yield a tax-concession for the casino on the high-roller market, which is seen boosting cash flow for both the casino and PBL, Australian market analysts said.  
SHC owns the only legal casino in Sydney and has battled the New South Wales state government for the past 16 months to get a similar tax rate to other Australian casinos.
"I think Packer will probably get the tax-break from the government," one Sydney-based casino analyst said. "I expect there will be some tax-break announcement this month," he said.
The Sydney casino is seeking a 10 percent tax concession from the state government on big spending gamblers, mainly from Asia, compared with the present tax rate of 27 percent.  
PBL is also expected to end the disappointing run of operating results the casino has reported since it opened a temporary casino in September 1995. The casino is expected to open a A$1.0 billion permanment casino later this year.
Packer also has a 10 percent stake in Melbourne casino operator Crown Ltd and about 20 percent of Hudson Conway Ltd, which in turn owns 37 percent of Crown.
"Given the Packer-Hudson Conway type of relationship it looks like there is a bit more to come out of this one," said Richard Wolf, a casino analyst at Bell Securities.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
