Czech consumer prices edged up less than expected in September, pleasantly surprising analysts though they remain guarded on the prospects of whether the government can hit its full-year target.
The Czech Statistical Bureau (CSU) said on Tuesday that CPI rose 0.3 percent, month-on-month, in September after an equally unexpected 0.2 percent increase in August.
The year-on-year rate now stands 8.9 percent higher while the September sliding 12 month average inflation average was 8.7 percent, after 8.6 percent in August. A Reuters survey of economists had predicted a monthly increase of 0.6 percent.
"Our forecast for the whole year does not change, which is also given by the fact that one month result does not change much in the average inflation rate," Martin Kupka of investment bank Patria Finance told Reuters.
"I don't think that the favourable development of the last two months will repeat in the months at the end of the year, which leads to our nine percent (average) inflation forecast for the whole year, not lower," he added.
The government had originally set its average inflation rate target for the whole year at eight percent, but recently raised it to 8.3 percent.
Analysts said that 0.2 percent monthly increase in the food, tobacco and beverages sector contributed to the overall result, though they warned it could have been caused by seasonal influences.
The CSU said prices in the heavily-weighted sector were held back by a 19 percent drop in potato prices, as well as a fall in vegetable and fruit prices.
Kupka welcomed the September result, but said that when more foodstuffs from the domestic harvest come to the market toward the end of the year, prices could be pushed up as farmers look to offset rising production costs.
Radek Maly of Prague's Citibank branch said he was pleased by the September figures, as he had expected a monthly increase of 0.5 percent.
"We have to wait for what the foodstuffs prices will do in the next months...But if they keep this pace, in line with the other basket components, we could get positive figures at the end of the year," Maly said.
"The year-on-year rate could get under nine percent at the year's end if the trend continues... maybe the moving average as well."
He added that other components of the basket also showed positive development, following low increases in producer prices in the last several months.
The CSU said prices in the leisure sector dropped by 1.1 percent in the month, thanks mainly to lower prices of holiday trips abroad. Education costs rose 3.9 percent due to an increase in fees at the beginning of the new school year.
Clothing prices rose 0.9 percent, housing climbed 0.3 percent, and transportation prices remained flat in the month.
The CSU in July raised its average inflation forecast for the whole year to 9.0 percent, and the cabinet based its 1997 budget calculations on an average inflation expectation of 8.6 percent.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
