Czech National Bank (CNB) Governor Josef Tosovsky on Friday said the central bank was committed to keeping the crown strong, despite some calls to depreciate the currency to help exports.
Speaking after a meeting with Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus and top business executives, Tosovsky said the central bank would keep the crown within the current band against which it fixes the currency daily versus a mark/dollar basket.
"I said that we will try to keep the rate within the plus/minus 7.5 percent band (against the mark/dollar cross rate)," Tosovsky told reporters.
"I dismissed speculation that we would want to move the crown in some way outside the band," he added.
Analysts recently have been debating whether a devaluation of the crown might be needed to boost exports and help stem a ballooning current account deficit.
The trade deficit is threatening to send the current account shortfall to close to six percent of gross domestic product this year after about four percent last year.
Some have argued that a devaluation is required to help the country's goods remain competitive while wages are rising and the economy is transforming.
But others have said that the foreign capital inflow is l comfortably paying for the imports, and the current account deficit is not dangerous.
Tosovsky said a stable crown had served its purpose in regulating inflation, and a stronger crown would have positive effects on reforming Czech industry to make it more competitive.
He said a stronger crown "should help faster restructuring of our economy, to help increase the added-value faster...and to help to bring our country closer in productivity to the countries that we want to compare ourselves with."
The central bank fixes the crown daily within a band plus or minus 7.5 percent from the central parity of the mark/crown basket.
It has been fixing it recently at more than three percent above parity to match a modest net inflow from foreign crown buying.
After the meeting, Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus said the government would aim to provide more funds to export promotion agencies such as the Czech Export Bank, and its sister export insurance agency.
He said he had told business leaders it was necessary to lower their expectations of higher inflation because it had become a self-fulfilling prophecy.
"We cannot automatically appease the expectation of, let's say, nine percent inflation, and make that the basis for all further expenditure -- price and wage items," Klaus said.
He said this would be key to the government's position in collective bargaining. "We have to radically break this (inflation expectation). This must be the basis of this year's debates on collective agreements."
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
