The chairman of Germany's opposition Social Democrats (SPD), Oskar Lafontaine, told Czech President Vaclav Havel on Wednesday that his party would push for approval of a long-awaited post-war reconciliation pact, Havel's spokesman said.
Speaking after a meeting of the two officials, Havel's spokesman Ladislav Spacek told reporters that the president "thanked German Social Democrats for their interest in removing the last stones from the way of good understanding" between the two nations.
"(Lafontaine) expressed the interest of the SPD in early debate on the declaration by the governments and parliaments of the two countries," Spacek said.
Lafontaine himself told a joint news conference with the Czech Social Democratic Party (CSSD) leader Milos Zeman that his party "was doing everything so the declaration would be approved yet this year."
The declaration seeks to address Czech memories of the 1938-1945 Nazi occupation and German memories of the indiscriminate expulsion of 2.5 million Sudetens for supporting Hitler, authorised by the victorious World War Two allies.
The Czech Republic is the only remaining victim of Nazi occupation not to have come to terms with Germany. Negotiations on the declaration have dragged on for more than a year, bedevilled by political pressures, particularly in Germany.
Prague says the text has been completed and the problem now lies with Bonn where members of the Sudeten German community, expelled en masse from the former Czechoslovakia after the war, have made a series of demands holding up the text's approval.
Havel called heads of the right-wing coalition including Foreign Minister Josef Zieleniec as well as Zeman for a Thursday luncheon debate on the progress of the issue.
One obstacle seemed to disappear last month when Chancellor Helmut Kohl, the dominant figure in German politics, said he hoped it could be signed before the end of the year.
Czech government and moderate opposition leaders agree on the need to settle the issue, which Sudeten leaders have threatened to use to block Czech attempts to join the European Union.
Zeman said on Wednesday the draft version of the declaration did not include demands of Sudetens on possible double citizenship, return of property, nor cancellation of the so-called Benes decrees under which the Germans were expelled.
"I am not aware of anything like that and I don't expect it would get to the final version," he told the news conference.
Havel has said that it was wrong to hold the Sudetens collectively guilty as some -- albeit a minority -- had remained loyal to the democratic Czechoslovak state.
Spacek said Havel might give a speech to the German parliament before the year's end, but added nothing has been finalised.
