The Czech National Bank (CNB) on Thursday laid out conditions for a government scheme to buy smaller banks' doubtful debts in an effort to restore confidence in the country's banks.
The CNB said it would demand that those participating in the scheme -- which is open to a total of 13 small, private, banks -- follow strict conditions and allow the central bank to make management changes where needed.
CNB officials said the programme, approved by the cabinet on Wednesday, was not aimed at resolving a problem at any one bank.
"It is a preventative programme, it is a step toward strenghtening the confidence in our banking sector," CNB Governor Josef Tosovsky said.
He said the decision followed the failure of Keditni Banka in August -- the 11th bank in which the CNB had intervened -- and the "politicisation" of the case which had undermined confidence especially in small banks.
The collapse became a political issue which drove parliament to set up an inquiry.
The plan will be open to all small private banks which have total paid-in capital of 12.5 billion crowns ($458.5 million), each with total assets not more than 30 billion crowns.
The state-run Konsolidacni Banka would buy the banks' doubtful assets at a nominal price.
The banks will be required to buy back the assets after "around five to seven years", again priced at their nominal value, minus credits recovered by Konsolidacni from the debtors in the meantime, CNB board member Ota Kaftan said.
He said banks seeking to participate would be held to strict requirements which include sticking to a three-year stabilisation plan and an agreement to attain an eight percent capital adequacy ratio.
Kaftan said that the banks must maintain cost controls, profitability, and liquidity as well as agree to frequent reviews by the central bank.
The maximum purchase of debt by Konsolidacni can total up to 110 percent of a single bank's paid-in capital, meaning a maximum exposure for the state of 13.7 billion crowns in total if all eligible banks participated.
The programme is voluntary based on a contract with the CNB, and the central bank said it would not reveal banks which elect to participate in the scheme.
The banks eligible include Ekoagrobanka, Union Banka,  Evrobanka,  Prvni Mestska Banka,  COOP Banka,  Pragobanka,  Plzenska Banka,  Foresbank,  Bankovni Dum Skala, Moravia Banka,  Universal Banka,  Zemska Banka, and Banka Hana.
Tosovsky said the money for the scheme would come primarily from state-controlled Konsolidacni Banka and if necessary from the CNB itself. A newly created unit of Konsolidacni, Ceska Financni s.r.o., will administer the programme.
Any losses from the programme would be covered by the National Property Fund (NPF), the state privatisation agency.
Analysts welcomed the programme as long as it leads to better risk management at the smaller banks, which still comprise a minor fraction of activity. But overall, they said, it was a political step taken under pressure. ($1=27.26 Czech Crown)
