Bitter infighting broke out among Czech Social Democrats on Friday only a month before elections in which the opposition party hopes to humiliate conservative Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus.
Party chairman Milos Zeman denied there was any split in his party, which is running neck and neck with Klaus's Civic Democratic Party (ODS) before Senate elections next month.
But almost in the same breath he threatened to resign next spring unless a party deputy chairman who broke ranks to vote with the Klaus government last week went first.
Adding to his woes, a Social Democrat deputy threatened to leave the parliamentary party in a row with an ex-communist colleague, a move which could tip the balance of parliamentary power between the minority government and opposition.
Klaus, whose three-party coalition lost its parliamentary majority in lower house elections earlier this year, has seemed under heavy pressure with opinion polls showing the Social Democrats level or slightly ahead of his ODS.
But just as the Social Democrats seemed in with a good chance of beating the ODS for the first time since the restoration of democracy, strife flared in opposition ranks.
Last week Jozef Wagner, the chairman of the parliamentary budget committee, led a revolt by four Social Democrat deputies which allowed the 1997 state budget to pass its first reading.
Tempers flared on Friday after Wagner threatened to resign from the parliamentary party unless another Social Democrat deputy, ex-communist Michal Kraus, quit the budget committee and a parliamentary commission investigating a bank collapse.
Despite the appearance of disarray in Social Democrat ranks, Zeman played down Wagner's threat. "There is no real split. I do not want to overestimate the importance of his proclamation in this case," he told a news conference.
"A split would happen only if a body of opinion formed which was sharply different in questions of principle from the opinion of the party leadership," he said.
But then he attacked party deputy chairman Karel Machovec, one of the Wagner rebels. "There should not be a person in the leadership who shows himself up by talking about disputes in the party," said Zeman.
Asked if he would resign if Machovec remained vice chairman after a party congress scheduled for next March, Zeman said: "Yes. It is true, I can confirm that."
Kraus, a communist deputy before the 1989 collapse of the East Bloc, accused the four budget rebels of being "corrupted politically" by the Klaus coalition.
Wagner told the daily Mlada Fronta Dnes he would leave the Social Democratic parliamentary party or "club" if Kraus did not go. Machovec was quoted by local media as saying that if Wagner left, there would be a serious party split.
This could change the balance of power in the 200-seat lower house where the Social Democrats, along with the little-reformed Communists and the far-right Republicans, have 101 votes to the government's 99.
The Senate itself has few powers. But the elections on November 15 and 16, with a second round runoff a week later, have become a test of public opinion which could indicate whether early lower house elections are likely.
Analysts say that if the Social Democrats perform strongly, Zeman might be tempted to bring down the coalition to force lower house polls in which his party might overtake Klaus's ODS. But that depends on Zeman being able to maintain discipline.
So far voters do not seem concerned. A poll taken by the STEM agency before and after the budget vote showed the Social Democrats with 27.3 percent support ahead of ODS with 26.8.
In the lower house elections on May 31-June 1, ODS won 29.6 percent and the Social Democrats 26.4.
