The Czech cabinet should decide soon on the further privatisation of the largest savings bank, Ceska Sporitelna a.s. to clarify the situation for potential investors, a bank official said on Thursday.
Sporitelna's deputy general director Jaroslav Svoboda said however there was not a need to hurry with the privatisation, and that he believed that the state should keep a 10 to 15 percent stake in the bank after sale is concluded.
"The important thing is to decide on the privatisation in order to calm down the situation, also for foreign investors (so they know) how to proceed on the Czech market," Svoboda told reporters.
"I think it is not necessary to hurry abnormally with the privatisation (after the decision)," he added.
Sporitelna's further privatisation has become a hot topic in Czech banking circles especially after the central bank's recent suggestion to merge the bank with Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka (CSOB), one of the country's four largest banks.
The state currently holds 45 percent stake in the bank through its privatisation agency, the National Property Fund (NPF). Svoboda said 30 to 35 percent should be sold to one, or possibly two, "long-term and transparent" investors.
"If it was a domestic investor, there is the question where it would get money for it. A foreign investor could use capital not obtained on the domestic market," Svoboda said.
Asked about the Czech National Bank's (CNB) proposal to merge Sporitelna with CSOB, Svoboda said that he had not seen the plans, and he had little reaction to what had been reported in the media.
He said however that Sporitelna has developed its specific position on the Czech market over many years and that should be preserved.
The CNB plan submitted to the cabinet calls for a merger of the two institutions which would create the largest banking institution in the Eastern Europe with combined assets of roughly 540 billion crowns.
The CNB however proposed holding off on privatisation of the new combined Sporitelna and CSOB for three to five years until the effects of the merger were analysed.
The plan also calls for fast selloff of the state 31.5 percent stake in another bank, IPB a.s. , to a foreign partner, and for a delay in the privatisation of the state roughly 49 percent share in Komercni Banka a.s. .
It is not clear when the cabinet will debate the CNB proposals, but a senior central bank official said it might be on the agenda of next Wednesday's government meeting.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
