Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus on Tuesday said the 1997 Czech state budget, to be presented to the full cabinet in September, plans an overall spending increase of 11.8 percent.
Speaking to reporters after a working session of economics ministers, Klaus also said he did not expect inflation to fall below eight percent next year.
The monetarist economist Klaus, who has said a balanced budget is the "Alpha and Omega" of his government, said spending increases would be largest in percentage terms for export supports, regional transportation, and housing.
He said the total expenditure side next year would rise 58 billion czech crowns ($2.21 billion) over expected 1996 spending to 549 billion crowns. The ministers were to discuss the revenue side of the budget later in September.
Finance Minister Ivan Kocarnik said the full cabinet should get the full draft for discussion on September 20. When asked if there was talk among ministers of anything excpet a balanced budget Kocarnik replied tersely "No".
The government's draft budget has traditionally been debated and passed by mid-December.
Klaus's government has passed four straight balanced budgets, although it will discuss a plan on Wednesday to cut 1996 spending by another 9.3 billion crowns in order to balance this year's ledger.
Klaus said the expenditure figures were still subject to further discussion but he did not expect major changes. Fixed manadatory expenditures are forecast rising by 14.0 percent while discressionary spending would rise 9.9 percent.
Klaus added that state sector wages were planned to rise a nominal 12.4 percent in 1997, and he hoped that it would set an example for private sector budget planning.
"(The government) wants to send a message which would lead to a certain stoppage of the pace of wage increases also in the non-budget (private sector) sphere," Klaus said.
Earlier this month the central bank warned of inflationary wage rises not being matched by increases in productivity.
Klaus also said that he did not expect 1997 inflation to fall below eight percent, which was the government's target for lowering inflation in 1996.
"Unfortunately we don't expect a number lower than eight (percent)," he said.
He did not elaborate on if he meant average or year-on-year inflation. For budget purposes, however, the government usually speaks in terms of average inflation.
Czech year-on-year inflation stood at 9.4 percent in July, while the moving average stood at 8.6 percent.
The government in passing the 1996 budget forecast inflation for the year of roughly eight percent, but strong domestic demand has kept prices higher.
($1=26.24 Czech Crown)
