The largest Czech commercial bank, Komercni Banka a.s. , on Friday posted roughly 10 percent lower nine-month results but attributed the drop to accounting changes and KB's shares rose on the news.
The bank's net profit, calculated under international accounting standards, declined to 4.88 billion crowns from 5.44 billion, but Komercni shares moved higher on the Prague Stock Exchange as analysts praised the results.
The bank's finance division director Kamil Ziegler told a news conference that since third quarter 1995, Komercni had revised its methodolgy to exclude unpaid late fees and commissions, including penalty payments.
"Our profit, according to international accounting standards, is by roughly 10 percent lower than in the same period of the last year. But, there is very important methodical influence," Ziegler told reporters.
"Currently there are only really paid late fees in our books, that means real cash flow."
He added that the sum of unpaid late fees substracted from the accounting was 1.2 billion crowns. Komercni posted a 5.11 billion net profit for the whole of 1995.
The bank's total assets rose to 432.04 billion crowns at the end of the third quarter from 336.21 billion, year-on-year.
The net interest margin declined to 4.07 percent from 5.40 percent, but up from 3.93 percent at the end of the first half.
Under Czech accounting standards, which Ziegler said do not include the tital of 700 million crowns of unrealised gains from securities, Komercni's gross for the period was 3.87 billion, down from 6.83 billion year on year.
He told rpeorters that he considered the results to be "very good", but warned that simple annualisation of the nine month figures would not lead to a full-year profit forecast.
He said fourth quarter results could be affected by unclear development on the stock market and other factors.
Sandy Winthrop Chen, vice president of equity research at the Prague office of CS First Boston, welcomed the figures,
"The results are quite in line with our expectations, I think the performance is very strong, and it puts Komercni Banka in a very good position to meet or exceed out 1996 forecast."
He added that the forecast was a 5.95 billion crown net profit, according to international standards.
Komercni share price jumped 125 crowns on the Prague Stock Exchange soon after the news to 2,125, and closed at 2,126 after a week of heavy losses in which some analysts anticipated poor results.
Dealer Karel Ruzicka of ING Barings said the results were in line with his expectations and partly attributed Komercni's share price rise to demand from foreign investors.
"Some of the foreign investors...think they are not so bad therefore we can see some demand in the stock," he said.
Added Chen: "We definitely remain buyers of the stock, and the recent weakeness in the shareprice we interpret as a major buyer opportunity."
Komercni's largest shareholder is still the Czech government which has a 48.74 percent stake, followed by the Bank of New York which has accumlated a 9.65 percent stake.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
