The largest Czech commercial bank, Komercni Banka a.s., said on Friday that profits in the first nine months of this year fell some 10 percent due to accounting changes. The shares rose on the news.
The bank's net profit, calculated under international accounting standards, declined to 4.88 billion crowns from 5.44 billion, but Komercni shares moved higher on the Prague Stock Exchange as analysts praised the results.
The bank's finance division director Kamil Ziegler told a news conference that since third quarter 1995, Komercni had revised its accounting method to exclude unpaid late fees and commissions.
"Our profit, according to international accounting standards, is roughly 10 percent lower than in the same period of the last year. But there are very important methodological influences," Ziegler told reporters.
Only those fees that have actually been paid are included in the figures now whereas outstanding receivables were included previously, he said.
He added that the amount of late fees that would have been included under the previous accounting method was 1.2 billion crowns. Komercni posted a 5.11 billion net profit for the whole of 1995.
The bank's total assets rose to 432.04 billion crowns at the end of the third quarter from 336.21 billion, year-on-year.
The net interest margin declined to 4.07 percent from 5.40 percent, but up from 3.93 percent at the end of the first half.
Under Czech accounting standards, which Ziegler said do not include the tital of 700 million crowns of unrealised gains from securities, Komercni's gross profit for the period was 3.87 billion, down from 6.83 billion year on year.
He told rpeorters that he considered the results to be "very good", but warned that simple annualisation of the nine month figures would not lead to a full-year profit forecast.
He said fourth quarter results could be affected by unclear development on the stock market and other factors.
Sandy Winthrop Chen, vice president of equity research at the Prague office of CS First Boston, welcomed the figures,
"The results are quite in line with our expectations, I think the performance is very strong, and it puts Komercni Banka in a very good position to meet or exceed out 1996 forecast."
He added that the forecast was a 5.95 billion crown net profit, according to international standards.
Komercni share price jumped 125 crowns on the Prague Stock Exchange soon after the news to 2,125, and closed at 2,126 after a week of heavy losses in which some analysts anticipated poor results.
Dealer Karel Ruzicka of ING Barings said the results were in line with his expectations and partly attributed Komercni's share price rise to demand from foreign investors.
"Some of the foreign investors...think they are not so bad therefore we can see some demand in the stock," he said.
Added Chen: "We definitely remain buyers of the stock, and the recent weakeness in the shareprice we interpret as a major buyer opportunity."
Komercni's largest shareholder is still the Czech government which has a 48.74 percent stake, followed by the Bank of New York which has accumlated a 9.65 percent stake.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
