The Czech government faces one of its most difficult decisions in choosing how to diversify natural gas supplies now coming solely from Russia, Industry and Trade Minister Vladimir Dlouhy said on Thursday.
"It is going to be one of the toughest decisions of this cabinet," ministry spokesman Miroslav Konvalina quoted Dlouhy as telling Anneke van Dok-van Weele, the visiting Dutch Minister of Foreign Trade.
Dlouhy has said he would submit four options for securing gas supplies in the future, but declined to detail them before the material is debated by the ministers. He has said that Russia would remain the dominant supplier.
But a source at his ministry, who asked not to be named, confirmed on Thursday a story in the Czech weekly Tyden which listed the four options:
* Purchasing all natural gas from Gazprom, using two different shipping routes, with a long-term agreement until 2,016, with price guarantees until 1998.
* Purchasing some Russian gas indirectly through Dutch company Nederlandse Gasunie NV, and Germany' Wintershall, a subsidiary of BASF.
Gasunie would start supplies in 1998, delivering up to two billion cubic metres in 2005, with agreement lasting until 2014. In case of fallout of Russian supplies, it would deliver its own natural gas through Wingas, a joint venture of Wintershall (65 percent) and Gazprom (35 percent).
Wintershall offers a similar scheme, with deliveries starting on January 1 next year, rising to one billion cubic metres in 2000, under a deal until 2016.
Negotiations with these firms are in the stage of initiating an supply contract.
* Finalising and maintaining the agreement for Norwegian gas, which has already been preliminarily approved this year, until 2017.
* A limited purchase from U.S.-based Mobil Europe Gas Inc., Germany's Brigitta Erdgas und Erdoel (BEB), and British Gas plc.
"But we do not want to connect this decision with political issues like our relations with the European Union or NATO."
The Czechs have ended their dependance on Russian crude oil by building a new pipeline to Germany, but are still completely dependant on supplies provided by Russia's Gazprom.
The senior official from Dlouhy's ministry told Reuters that the issue would most probably be debated by the council of ministers, which should come up with a recommendation to the full cabinet, "in the coming days, probably next week".
Government representatives have held talks on limited deliveries from Norway, which according to a preliminary agreement should start in January next year.
The Czechs consume around eight to nine billion cubic metres of natural gas per year, but volume is expected to rise to some 12-13 billion cubic metres by the turn of the century.
The preliminary agreement, which was initiated by Czech state-owned importer Transgas with Norway's GFU gas negotiating alliance in summer, expects eventual growing of the potential supplies to three billion cubic metres per year in 2002.
Konvalina said Dlouhy told Minister van Dok-van Weele that one option included involvement of Dutch companies in future supplies, and the minister said her country could provide "confidence and reliablity guarantees" for the supplies.
The spokesman, who declined direct comment on the four options presented to the government, said Dlouhy told the Dutch minister the Czech "priority is to diversify, but we will keep a balanced relations with the Russian side at the same time".
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
