Czech National Bank (CNB) Governor Josef Tosovsky said on Friday that there was no need to hurry the privatisation of shares in the largest commercial bank, Komercni Banka a.s. .
He said when the time comes to sell the state's roughly 49 percent in Komercni, it is possible the stake could be divided for sale to several investors.
"There is not a need to hurry with (Komercni's) privatisation. A strategic partner is not necessary, so it is possible to propose to sell the state stake to more investors," Tosovsky said after a closed meeting of the parliament's banking commission.
But he added the central bank does not yet have a strong concensus on what to do with Komercni's shares.
"We haven't an absolutely firm opinion on this, it's possible (to sell) to both domestic and foreign investors."
The central bank has submitted a broad plan to privatise shares in the so-called "Big Four" banks which calls for the merger of trade bank Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka a.s. with Ceska Sporitlena a.s. , the largest savings bank.
The CNB has said it would prefer to wait several years before privatising the state shares after the newly-merged bank is established to analyse effects of the merger.
"CSOB is ready for quite a fast privatisation, but when considered in a wider scope, we (the CNB) think that a merger with Ceska Sporitelna would be more suitable," Tosovsky said.
"If this proposal is accepted, privatisation would be... delayed, beause there must be the merger first."
The Czech cabinet must approve any privatisation of shares in the Big Four banks, and this week they asked the central bank for more concrete details on the central bank's plan.
"(A merger of CSOB and Sporitelna) has a number of rational and economic reasons," Tosovsky said without elaborating.
The governor rejected comments by CSOB and Sporitelna executives who reacted coolly to the merger plan.
"The managements are not the owners... it's logical the managements have their own interests and preferences, but the owner is the (state National Property Fund)," he said.
He said Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus had requested details to the central bank's plan for a quick sale of the state's 31.5 percent of Investicni a Postovni Banka a.s. to a strategic foreign partner.
"The prime minister proposed (for the CNB) to make concrete some procedings concerning mostly IPB so that the privatisation can start as soon as possible," Tosovsky said.
IPB executives have confirmed that both Japan's Normura and Dutch ING Bank NV have shown an interest in acquiring shares in IPB.
Klaus has said he is not in favour of the CSOB/Sporitelna merger, equating it with melding Prague's two top soccer teams Sparta and Slavia, an idea unthinkable for most Czechs.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
