Czech President Vaclav Havel on Tuesday called the opposition Social Democrat leader "extremely irresponsible" for claiming the secret service was being used for party politics.
Havel's remarks came as campaigning for closely-fought Senate elections due this weekend turned increasingly bitter, with the secret service in the middle.
Earlier Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus accused Social Democrat leader Milos Zeman of lying when he made a thinly-veiled allegation that the BIS intelligence agency had tried to extract compromising material from his elderly mother.
The slanging match between the two leading antagonists of Czech politics began on Monday when BIS director Stanislav Devaty, a Klaus protege, was forced to quit over allegations of spying on a deputy premier and a subsequent coverup.
"Yesterday's comments by Zeman on a police state, or on the BIS as a political police in the service of one party, are a visible result of losing his nerve before the elections," Klaus told a news conference on Tuesday.
"I can imagine such words being said by a radical anarchist but I can't imagine them from one of the three highest constitutional officials of this country."
On Monday Zeman, who is lower house speaker, accused Klaus of playing dirty before the Senate elections, where the Social Democrats have been running level with Klaus's ruling Civic Democratic Party (ODS) in most opinion polls.
"During the last three years an operational group has existed within the BIS which has been responsible for shadowing several Social Democrat politicians," said Zeman.
Havel, who is politically neutral, said after talks with Interior Minister Jan Ruml:  "I can only say that I consider (Zeman's) statements to be extremely irresponsible."
"As chairman of the parliament he should know that it is necessary to proceed in the proper ways," Havel said at his private residence in the Hradecek region of east Bohemia.
He said Zeman should have first brought the charges to a parliamentary commission overseeing the intelligence services before making them public.
But the president added that he would meet Zeman, who promised to produce evidence backing the claims next week.
Havel, imprisoned on several occasions as a political dissident under communism, said he "could not be the head of a state which would create a system for spying on its politicians".
He said rogue individuals or groups within the BIS might attempt such actions, but without the approval of superiors.
Spymaster Devaty quit after Deputy Prime Minister Josef Lux, who leads the Christian Democrats, junior partners in Klaus's coalition, accused the BIS of spying on him three years ago and then covering up the operation.
Allegations of politically-inspired spying have surfaced in recent years in a country where memories of the pervasive state security apparatus during four decades of communism still linger.
Klaus said the agent had been spying not on Lux, but on his former adviser, director of a bank which collapsed amid fraud allegations in 1993. He has not explained why the security service was investigating an apparent fraud case.
