Czech Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus accused opposition Social Democrat leader Milos Zeman of lying and losing his nerve as neck-and-neck campaigning for weekend Senate elections turned increasingly bitter.
Zeman made a thinly-veiled allegation that the BIS intelligence agency had tried to extract compromising material from his elderly mother.
The slanging match between the two leading antagonists of Czech politics began on Monday when BIS director Stanislav Devaty, a Klaus protege, was forced to quit over allegations of spying on a deputy prime minister and a subsequent coverup.
"Yesterday's comments by Zeman on a police state, or on the BIS as a political police in the service of one party, are a visible result of losing his nerve before the elections," Klaus told a news conference.
"I can imagine such words being said by a radical anarchist but I can't imagine them from one of the three highest constitutional officials of this country."
On Monday Zeman, who is lower house speaker, accused Klaus of playing dirty before the Senate elections, where the Social Democrats have been running level with the ruling Civic Democratic Party (ODS) in most opinion polls.
"The political struggle should be a struggle of arguments and not an abuse of secret services for spying on political opponents," he said.
"During the last three years an operational group has existed within the BIS which has been responsible for shadowing several Social Democrat politicians," said Zeman.
Spymaster Devaty quit after Deputy Prime Minister Josef Lux, who leads the junior Christian Democrats in Klaus's coalition, accused the BIS of spying on him three years ago.
The BIS had covered up the operation by failing to report it to the cabinet and a parliamentary commission supervising the agency.
Klaus said the agent had been spying not on Lux, who is also agriculture minister, but on a former adviser of his who was director of a bank which collapsed amidst fraud allegations in 1993. He has not explained why the state security service was investigating an apparent fraud case.
Devaty was a member of Klaus's ODS, although he had suspended his membership to become BIS chief.
Allegations of politically-inspired spying on both government and opposition politicians have surfaced regularly in recent years in a country where memories remain of the pervasive state security apparatus before communism fell in 1989.
The political temperature soared on Tuesday when Zeman said his 79-year-old mother had been visited by "certain people" trying to acquire compromising information.
Asked about this comment, Klaus said: "If this actually represents what he said then this is such an unbelievable lie that I couldn't bring myself to reply at all. It's pure lie."
Klaus accused Zeman of running a negative campaign.
"Instead of programmes there are scandals and affairs which destabilise the state and damage our country abroad," he said.
"The BIS affair is a clear evidence that above all the (Social Democrats) lack, in contrast to the ODS, a positive programme."
