The three-party Czech coalition cabinet on Wednesday agreed to quickly find a new director for the country's secret service following the resignation of its former chief amid a pre-election political spying row.
Prime Minster Vaclav Klaus, head of the senior coalition Civic Democratic Party (ODS), told a news conference that each coalition party had been asked to propose a candidate acceptable for all parties to lead the BIS "as soon as possible".
Acting-director Stanislav Devaty resigned on Monday after the head of junior coalition partner, Christian Democratic Union (KDU-CSL) Josef Lux accused the BIS last Friday of spying on him three years ago and then covering it up.
He requested Devaty's dismissal along with the right-wing Civic Demopcratic Alliance (ODA), the other coalition member which had already made similar claims last year.
The government charged Devaty's deputy, Jaroslav Jiru, to lead the BIS until a new director is named, Klaus said.
The affair hotted up just a week before Senate elections, a key test of Klaus's government which lost its majority in the lower house of parliament in June elections.
The Senate has only limited powers but analysts say the outcome of the polls will be a significant indicator for the future of Klaus's centre-right cabinet. The allegations within the coalition were potentially damaging ahead of the vote.
Klaus said the ministers were also asked to consider how to tighten control over BIS.
Analysts say if Klaus's party fares well in the elections, his government's position may be eased. But he might find it hard to stay in office if his position is weak in both houses.
Klaus said ministers were disturbed by opposition Social Democrat chairman of parliament Milos Zeman who had suggested the Interior Ministry had joined the BIS in creating "political police" groups shadowing politicians.
"All members of the cabinet expressed their irritation from the statements of the second constitutional official of this country, by which he in fact threw in doubt the credibility of the constitution system of the Czech Republic," Klaus said.
President Vaclav Havel has called Zeman's statements "extremely irresponsible" and said the opposition leader should go through formal channels he has proof of his accusations.
