Czech Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus said on Wednesday that there was no reason to hurry the privatisation of the country's four largest banks.
"(The privatisation) does not have any exceptional level of urgency," Klaus told a news conference after a cabinet meeting.
He said the cabinet would wait until the central bank submitted a more complete plan to the cabinet for the privatisation of the remaining state shares in the large banks.
"It is irrelevant if it is two or three weeks later or two or three weeks sooner," Klaus said.
The central bank and the finance ministry have both called for the rapid privatisation of the state's roughly one-third stake in Investicni a Postovni Banka a.s. to a strategic foreign partner.
Japan-based investment bank Nomura and Dutch ING Bank NV are both said to have a strong interest in the IPB stake.
The Czech National Bank, the central bank, also has called for the merger of the largest savings bank Ceska Sporitelna a.s., with the foreign trade bank Ceskovslovenska Obchodni Banka a.s..
If the merger goes ahead, forming a bank with 540 billion crowns ($20.16 billion) in assets based on end-1995 results, the plan would be to privatise the new megabank several years later.
Klaus has balked at the merger plan, saying that it was akin to merging Prague's two top soccer clubs, Sparta and Slavia, which would be hard for Czechs to imagine.
The prime minister has reacted favourably in recent weeks to news that Nomura was keen to buy the state's stake in IPB.
At the news conference Klaus bristled at a series of questions on the subject by foreign news agencies. When asked specifically about the timing of IPB's privatisation Klaus said: "I don't know if this is the question of some lobbyist who wants to buy some bank fast, or really the general interest of a journalist."
"From the point of view of the first (case)," he continued, "then I think that a party interested in buying or who instigates you into this question is probably in a hurry."
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003 ($1=26.78 Czech Crown)
