Czech President Vaclav Havel, nursing a heavy cold, voted in Senate elections on Friday and called on fellow citizens to turn out despite widespread apathy or even hostility towards the newly created upper house.
Voting in a Prague suburb, Havel showed his identity card to election officials before patiently queueing up with pensioners to cast his ballot in a primary school.
The vote is the first electoral test for right-wing Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus since he lost his lower house majority in June.
Opinion polls suggest many Czechs will not bother to turn out for the elections, which have a second round runoff on November 22 and 23, because they either do not understand what the Senate will do or feel it is a waste of time.
The Senate was written into the new constitution of the Czech Republic which came into force in 1993 after the breakup of Czechoslovakia. But only now is the Senate to be elected after much political footdragging.
Havel, who spent almost five years in communist jails in the fight to restore Czech democracy, called on citizens to vote even it means turning out two weekends in a row.
"At first glance it may seem like bothering people that they have to vote twice in a row," he said in a voice made hoarse by his illness.
But he pointed out that the two-round system, in which the top two candidates from the first round meet in a runoff if neither wins more than half the vote, was common in Europe.
"It has to be like that and I believe that anyone who is not indifferent to the democratic development of our country will turn out for the second round as well," he said.
Both rounds span a Friday and Saturday, with voting ending at 2 p.m. (1300 GMT).
Havel has appealed for a high turnout before previous elections. Until now Czechs, who regained their pre-war democracy after the 1989 fall of communism, have heeded him.
Turnout was 76.4 percent in voting for the lower house, the Chamber of Deputies, last June. But it is expected to be much lower for the Senate, which has few powers compared with the Chamber of Deputies where all government and opposition leaders sit.
A survey by the IVVM agency showed that only 57 percent planned to vote in the first round and 52 in the runoffs. Another IVVM poll showed 53 percent of those questioned doubted the need for the Senate at all.
Politicians have also been lukewarm. However, the results may give clues on the political way ahead, depending on how well Civic Democratic Party (ODS) headed by Klaus and its two junior coalition partners do.
If the coalition performs well, Klaus may be tempted to provoke early lower house elections in an attempt to regain the majority lost in a surge in support for the opposition Social Democrats.
But if the Social Democrats win the Senate race, Klaus could be forced to resign.
Most opinion polls suggest a tight race. But the last survey suggested the ODS was pulling ahead after an outbreak of squabbling in Social Democrat ranks.
The Social Democrats may also have suffered from a row this week over allegations by their chairman Milos Zeman that the state intelligence agency BIS had spied on him.
Asked about the row, Havel told reporters: "I don't think that the affair, as you call it, will influence in any significant way the outcome of the elections."
