The party of Czech Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus pulled ahead in Senate elections on Saturday but with turnout at just 35 percent, the real winner was apathy.
In what was billed as a key test of Klaus's minority coalition government, candidates of his centre-right Civic Democratic Party (ODS) topped voting in 66 of the 71 constituencies declared by mid-evening.
But most face a second round run-off on November 22-23 for the newly-created upper house, and analysts said the dismal turnout vindicated more the far-right Republicans, who boycotted the elections and told fellow Czechs to do likewise.
Nationwide figures were not available. But the Central Election Commission said turnout in 53 of the 81 constituencies had been just 34.27 percent.
This was far lower than forecast and compared with 76.4 percent participation in lower house elections held in June.
Klaus, the father of Czech economic reform, played down the voter apathy and played up the ODS performance following his electoral disaster last June, when strong Social Democrat gains stripped his three-party coalition of its lower house majority.
"From the results so far it is obvious that the citizens of this country understand that they want stability," he told reporters, alluding to the political stalemate which has stalled reform since the inconclusive lower house polls.
"These elections ... are an important test of the political feelings of people of this country about the (June) elections. In this respect they are giving an important signal," he said.
Under the Senate rules, candidates who fail to win over half the first round vote have to face the runner-up in a second round. Most constituencies will be decided next weekend.
But already it appears the Social Democrats of economist Milos Zeman have done badly, failing to come out on top in a single constituency.
Zeman, whose party has been afflicted by squabbling, appeared to blame the low turnout for the poor result.
But he added: "I firmly believe that in the second round, participation will be markedly higher because then it is a choice between the two strongest candidates."
In the end the Republicans led by doctor of philosophy Miroslav Sladek came out looking best without even running.
Sladek hit a chord by denouncing the Senate as a waste of time and money. "They had nowhere to dump the political zombies so they established the Senate," he told a recent rally.
Polls showed few Czechs understand the function of the Senate, which has little power compared with the lower Chamber of Deputies. With a few exceptions, most of the candidates are little known because Czech leaders all sit in the lower house.
Conventional wisdom has been that if ODS did well in the Senate, Klaus might provoke early lower house polls to regain the coalition's majority, although he denies that.
But ODS is better at mobilising support than the Social Democrats when interest is low. A big ODS win on a low turnout might therefore not be representative for lower house polls.
"If there is a low turnout, even if Klaus wins, I think that it would be very difficult for the ODS to know the real mood of the country," said Jiri Pehe, research director at the Open Media Research Institute (OMRI).
