The party of Czech Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus performed strongly in Senate elections on Saturday but with turnout at 35 percent, the real winner was apathy.
In what was billed as a key test of the minority coalition government, Klaus's centre-right Civic Democratic Party (ODS) took a commanding 36.47 percent of the first round vote, with the opposition Social Democrats trailing on 20.27 percent.
The result was a major improvement for the ODS, which won only 29.6 percent in elections to the lower house in June when a strong Social Democrat performance of 26.4 percent stripped Klaus's three-party coalition of its majority.
Klaus, the father of Czech economic reform, played down the voter apathy and played up the ODS performance.
"It is obvious that the citizens of this country understand that they want stability," he told reporters, alluding to the political stalemate since the inconclusive lower house polls.
"These elections ... are an important test of the political feelings of people of this country about the (June) elections. In this respect they are giving an important signal," he said.
Klaus also sidestepped questions on whether he might seek early lower house elections to try to regain his majority.
But analysts said the results may be misleading. Unlike the lower house system of proportional representation, the Senate is elected in two rounds of a first-past-the-post system.
Only three ODS candidates won outright in the first round held on Friday and Saturday. Another 76 face a run-off on November 22-23 between the top two contenders in constitiuencies where no-one won more than half the first round vote.
Also, the well-organised and funded ODS is better at rallying support when public interest in elections is low than the Social Democrats. Klaus cannot therefore automatically rely on repeating the performance in a lower house election, when turnout is usually over 75 percent.
But the dismal turnout vindicated more the far-right Republicans, who boycotted the elections to the newly-created upper house and told fellow Czechs to do likewise.
The Central Election Commission said turnout was just 35.03 percent, far lower than forecast and compared with 76.4 percent participation in lower house elections in June.
Zeman, whose party has been afflicted by squabbling, appeared to blame the low turnout for the poor result.
But he added: "I firmly believe that in the second round, participation will be markedly higher because then it is a choice between the two strongest candidates."
In the end the Republicans led by doctor of philosophy Miroslav Sladek came out looking best without even running.
Sladek hit a chord by denouncing the Senate as a waste of time and money. "They had nowhere to dump the political zombies so they established the Senate," he told a recent rally.
Polls showed few Czechs understand the function of the Senate, which has little power compared with the lower Chamber of Deputies. With a few exceptions, most of the candidates are little known because Czech leaders all sit in the lower house.
