Disgruntled Czech opposition Social Democrats have blamed party chairman Milos Zeman for their poor showing in weekend elections for the country's new Senate.
They suggested that charges by Zeman ahead of the elections that intelligence agents had harassed himself and his mother had backfired on the party, which had been neck and neck with the ruling Civic Democratic Party (ODS) in most opinion polls.
In the event, the Social democrats won only 20.3 percent of the vote in first round voting held on Friday and Saturday. This compared with 36.5 percent for the ODS, led by conservative Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus.
While the ODS called a news conference on Monday to trumpet its dominant showing, leading Social Democrats went to ground after a weekend of squabbling over who was to blame.
Vasil Biben, Social Democrat candidate in the north Bohemian town of Trutnov, was blunt in his criticism of Zeman.
"The Social Democrats were were hurt by his pre-election excesses, thanks to which the party lost centre-left voters," the daily Mlada Fronta Dnes quoted Biben, who will fight a second round run-off this weekend, as saying.
Shortly before the polls Zeman alleged secret agents had tried to extract compromising information from his elderly mother.
Earlier he had caused uproar when he accused the state intelligence agency BIS of spying on him. But he failed to provide evidence to a parliamentary watchdog and earned a rebuke from President Vaclav Havel.
The Social Democrats divided roughly into those who back Zeman and those who support four rebel deputies who voted with Klaus's coalition in a parliamentary budget vote last month.
Low turnout also hit the centre-left party, which did so well in general parliamentary six months ago that Klaus's centre-right coalition lost its parliamentary majority.
Only 34 percent of the electorate bothered to vote for the newly-created Senate (upper house), which few Czechs seem to understand. But the pro-business ODS proved much better at getting its supporters out than the opposition.
The Social Democrats failed to win most votes in any constituency, although their candidates went through to the second round in 48 of the 81 constituencies by finishing second.
Afterwards Zeman blamed the rebels, who included one of his vice-chairmen, Karel Machovec, for the setback. The defection in early October triggered public squabbling between the party's right wing and former communist colleagues.
Zeman dismissed the row over the BIS as a factor, citing a poll taken before the spy scandal broke which showed a sharp drop in the willingness of Czechs to vote again so soon after general elections.
"When I analyse what happened, and see that this opinion poll preceded the BIS affair, then I can find only one cause and that is the budget vote," he said.
One Social democrat rebel, Jozef Wagner, described this as nonsense.
Wagner, who chairs the parliamentary budget committee, noted that the BIS affair had been broken not by Zeman but by Deputy Prime Minister Josef Lux, who leads the Christian Democrats, a junior partner in Klaus's coalition.
Wagner said the Social Democrats should have stayed quiet in the affair, which cost the job of the BIS acting director.
