The "Big Four" state-controlled Czech banks need owners who could secure their growth and international competitivness, a vice-governor of the Czech National Bank (CNB), Pavel Kysilka, said on Wednesday.
"We need strong, stable, sound and efficient banks able to compete on the European market," Kysilka told a banking seminar. "Czech banks need owners who can meet that criteria."
He said the CNB had fine-tuned its concept, submitted to the government last month, for selling the state's stakes in the country's four largest banks, after requests for clarification from Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus.
Kysilka did not elaborate on what changes were made to the CNB's original concept.
The state holds 49 percent in Komercni Banka a.s., 45 percent in savings bank Ceska Sporitelna a.s., 66 percent in Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka a.s. (CSOB), and 31.5 percent in IPB a.s..
The parts of the original CNB plan which have already been been made public propose a quick selloff of the IPB stake, a merger of CSOB and Sporitelna with eventual privatisation of the single entity, and an incremental sale of Komercni shares.
The ultimate decision rests with the government which has yet to put forward its own plan. The CNB has said however that there is a broad consensus that the "Big Four" privatisations should go through, but the question is how.
Klaus has said he was opposed to the idea of a merger of CSOB and Sporitelna, which would create post-Communist Europe's largest bank with assets topping $20 billion
But Klaus and the Finance Ministry have agreed that the IPB stake should be sold quickly to a strategic foreign investor.
Local media have been ripe with speculation over which foreign partner is most likely to take the shares.
Japan-based Nomura, and Dutch ING Bank NV, are widely seen as front runners for the IPB stake.
The Czech private station TV Nova reported earlier this week that Dutch bank ABN Amro was also interested in buying into IPB.
On Wednesday, an ABN Amro spokesman said his bank viewed the report as "market rumour" and declined further comment.
Meanwhile, Klaus economic adviser Martin Kocourek was quoted as saying in the Czech daily Hospodarske Noviny on Wednesday that Union Bank of Switzerland  was looking to win a mandate to arrange the sale of IPB's stake.
CNB Governor Josef Tosovsky told Reuters last week however that the full cabinet had yet to discuss the central bank's plan but would do so in a few weeks time. He said only a few of the opinions from the government were known.
Kysilka told the confernce that the state-held stakes in the Big Four are now worth 50-60 billion crowns at market prices, after having negative value before the post-Communist banking reforms at the beginning of the 1990's.
-- Jan Lopatka, Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
