The Czech Republic could have a 50,000- 100,000 tonne sugar surplus from this year's campaign but little will be exported due to high local production costs and a world sugar surplus, sugar experts say.
The Agriculture Ministry said the state would buy some surplus sugar for strategic reserves and would prepare indirect support for exporters but it ruled out direct export subsidies.
Industry sources varied in their assesment of potential foreign markets but agreed producers will try to sell as much as they can at home as world prices were considerably lower.
"It is expected that the surplus will be up to 80,000 to 100,000 tonnes," said Eva Divisova of the ministry, adding that total production will be between 520,000 and 540,000 tonnes raw value after last campaign's 460,035 tonnes.
She added net sugar exports in 1996 should be about 4,000 tonnes. Divisova declined to say how much the state would buy for its reserves from this year's crop, nor what the reserves are, saying this was secret.
"State reserves will be filled, other parts will have to be exported. But it is very difficult to get to foreign markets," Divisova added.
She said Slovakia was not importing due to higher output. There are payment problems with Ukraine and Russia, but former Yugoslav countries were potentially interesting, she said.
Director of trading firm Agrointernational Petr Prochazka believed the surplus would total 50,000-80,000 tonnes, most of which would stay in the Czech Republic.
"The surplus will not be so dramatic...There are quite good yields but the harvest is going slowly due to bad weather. A forecast freeze and subsequent warming will limit output."
"Producers will not want to export...(because of low prices) Those who can store it, will, he told Reuters, adding he believed the state could buy up to 20,000 tonnes for reserves.
Secretary of the Sugar Refiners' Association Vladimir Ulrich also saw a 50,000-80,000-tonne surplus but said it could be partially swallowed by the state and the elasticity of domestic consumption. But he stressed that financial costs of storing sugar could push producers to sell at any price.
Ulrich said local prices have dropped to 12-15 crowns per kilo from 16 earlier in the year. The market is protected by a 68.4 percent tariff, which will drop next year to 65 percent.
"We are pushed from two sides -- the domestic surplus and low price on the world market. If prices drop further, other sugar could get here," Ulrich told Reuters.
Breweries could buy up to 10,000 tonnes more than they usually do if prices go below the costs of malt, and citric acid makers could take care of another 10,000 tonnes, Ulrich said.
"There is a hunger for sugar in Bulgaria, Romaina, Ukraine, also in Russia," said Ulrich. He added that Poland, which itself expects to have a sizeable surplus, was also a potential market.
"We also cannot expect to supply the London exchange, because our sugar does not meet the conditions," added Prochazka.
He said Czech exporters could also look to traditional markets like Saudi Arabia..."Of course, the price would be poor."
The ministry and Ulrich said the surplus would lead to a smaller sown area next year after 104,115 hectares this year. "I believe the optimal area for next few years would be between 90,000 and 94,000 hectares," Ulrich said.
