Czech  Ceska Rafinerska a.s. closed a cracking unit at its Litvinov refinery on Monday after the second fire in eight days struck the plant, company spokesman Ales Soukup said.
But he said the restoration of crude processing, which was halted after the first fire, would continue.
A fire broke out on Sunday night in a furnace of a cracking unit as crude flow resumed after an eight-day stoppage.
Oil flow had been halted since a blaze in another part of the refinery began on November 23 and lasted for more than two days. The latest fire was put out several hours after it started.
Soukup told Reuters that the current resumption of production at the refinery would continue as crude is diverted around the cracker.
The shutdown of the cracker would limit the content, not the amount, of processed crude, Soukup said.
"This (cracking) unit will be out of order for some time, and therefore the refinery will operate in a substitution regime. It will affect the depth of processing," he said.
The extent of damage at the refinery, near the northern town of Litvinov, has not yet been determined. Soukup said reopening the cracker "was not a question of hours or days."
An explosion in the refinery's tanking station on November 23 sent flames visible for several kilometres into the air and caused dense smoke to roll into neighbouring Germany.
Soukup said the causes and damage from both fires were under investigation.
After the earlier fire, officials from Rafinerska, petrol firms and the government decided that supplies from the Kralupy refinery and in the distribution network were sufficient in the short term, and state reserves would not be tapped.
In a deal completed last year, the IOC consortium of three foreign oil groups bought a 49 percent stake in Rafinerska, a company set up to operate the two main Czech refineries at Litvinov and Kralupy.
The IOC is equally owned by DuPont Co unit Conoco of the United States, Royal Dutch/Shell, and Italy's Agip SpA.
The state holds the remaining 51 percent stake in Rafinerska through the holding company Unipetrol a.s..
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
