Czech surgeons began exploratory surgery on President Vaclav Havel on Monday to remove a spot from his lung, but the former dissident playwright has said that his health was not in serious danger.
Havel's office announced in a statement that a news briefing would be held on Monday afternoon after the operation but an official said it was impossible to say how the long the surgery would last.
Havel, a heavy smoker who spent almost five years in communist jails, has been ill for several weeks.
But in his weekly radio address, broadcast on Sunday, he was in an optimistic mood, saying the operation would "remove some sort of bad point or spot found on my lungs, the character of which is still unknown".
"However, even if it is something bad, it is so small and its location is so favourable that it seems that I am in no serious danger," he said in the address, recorded on Friday.
Havel, who led the 1989 "Velvet Revolution" which overthrew communism, said in the address from his hospital bed: "I am here not because my state of health is worsening".
"On the contrary, never in the past few weeks have I felt as well as I feel just now."
Havel, who is widely respected at home and abroad, was admitted to hospital last Monday, more than a week after his office said he was suffering from pneumonia. Later surgeons described the planned surgery as "medium serious".
The Czech daily Mlada Fronta Dnes said that a sample of the spot would be sent for immediate analysis during the operation. Based on the results, surgeons would decide whether to continue with the operation, it said without elaborating.
Havel will keep his full presidential responsibilities during the operation.
Under the Czech constitution, most executive power lies with Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus who is attending the European security summit in Lisbon in Havel's place.
Havel's power lies more in his personal authority and reputation for honesty in a Czech political scene increasingly dominated by squabbling and allegations of impropriety.
Opinion polls show his popularity rating at around 80 percent while public disillusionment with Czech politics is widespread.
Turnout for elections to the new Senate last month was just 30 percent in the second round, and a poll published last week showed that 58 percent of respondents were dissatisfied with the state of Czech politics.
Havel, whose wife Olga died of cancer in January, supports the free market but has bitterly criticised the corruption, dishonesty and materialism which has accompanied the scramble to make money.
