The Czech Republic's sole supplier of natural gas, Russia's Gazprom, has agreed to start talks on a long-term supply deal, Industry and Trade minister Vladimir Dlouhy said on Tuesday.
He said the talks would focused on a contract for supplies of 8.9 billion cubic metres (bcm) per year.
"Today's offer respects this conclusion (of the Czech government to diversify supplies)," Dlouhy told a news conference after meeting Gazprom chairman Rem Vyakhirev.
"That means supplies of only 8.9 bcm, and an agreement to start negotiations on a long-term contract. I consider this to be a good result," he said.
The Czech Republic currently imports all of its roughly nine bcm of natural gas a year from Gazprom under a three-year contract ending in 1998, extendable for another three years.
Dlouhy said Gazprom had accepted that the Czechs want to partially diversify their gas supplies.
"Until now, they have been trying to save the 100 percent coverage. Today they came with an offer -- not all supplies from Russia," he added.
The consumption is expected to rise to about 12 to 13 bcm per year in several years. The country wants to cover the increase from alternative sources.
Dlouhy's deputy, Miroslav Tvrznik, told reporters that the aim was to bring the contract with Gazprom to "a European standard of 15 to 25 years".
Dlouhy said talks would start with several potential partners to choose how to diversify the supplies. These talks would be included in a report to the full cabinet which should make a "more concrete" decision next January, Dlouhy said.
"We would want to have the first supplies from diversified sources already in the year 1997," he said.
He added that some of the options would include buying Russian gas through an intermediary, possibly through Dutch company Nederlandse Gasunie NV, and Germany's Wintershall, a subsidiary of BASF.
Dlouhy said these partners would provide a guarantee of supplying from their own sources in case of emergency.
He also said an earlier announced option of buying some gas from Norway was still under consideration, and said that Germany's  BEB Erdgas und Erdoil, or U.S.-based Mobil could serve as "supplementary sources".
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
