The Czech Agriculture Ministry on Friday halted a shipment of U.S. maize thought to contain genetically-manipulated strains, pending further study on its effects.
Until the study is finished no maize from the shipment will be distributed in the Czech Republic, it added.
Frantisek Havir of the ministry's agriculture production section said the Institute for Agricultural Production would conduct the study as soon as possible.
"The state Veterinary Administration is halting the shipment of maize...until it is decided whether these genes can pass into the food chain," Havir said.
On Thursday, protestors in Hamburg disrupted loading of the shipment, chaining themselves to the trains bound for the Czech Republic, where laws regulating how genetically manipulated products should be treated do not exist.
The exact location of the 33,000 tonne shipment was unknown, but the Czech chapter of Greenpeace carried on with the protest on Friday, with five demonstrators dressing up as laboratory rabbits.
"Today, the issue is that there is a precedent being made. There is no legislation in the Czech Republic regulating dealing with genetically-modified materials," said Vaclav Masku of Greenpeace.
The protests are the latest of several blockades in Europe in recent weeks aimed a halting the import of genetically altered soybeans, and now maize.
It is illegal to market such modified maize in the EU, though Greenpeace says cargoes may have already reached Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Spain and Portugal.
An EU Commission is due to decide on December 18 whether to allow imports of such modified maize, made in the U.S. under licence by Swiss chemicals company Ciba  CIGZsn.S Geigy AG.
U.S. exporters do not separate the maize, estimated to amount to 0.6 percent of their crop, from conventional maize.
Havir, who met Greenpeace protestors before the news conference, said the Czechs would cooperate with the EU in any way possible, in addition to conducting its own study.
But he added: "Genetically-modified commodities do not have to be dangerous. Their usage is a great advance in agriculture."
