The Czech government on Tuesday approved the text of a long-awaited declaration on post-World War Two reconciliation with Germany, paving the way for its initialling on Friday.
The declaration, leaked to news media last week, contains mutual expressions of regret for the Nazi occupation from 1938 to 1945 and for excessive brutality during the post-war expulsion of ethnic Germans from the Sudetenland region of what was then Czechoslovakia.
Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus told reporters after a weekly government meeting that he had been authorised to sign the text, which took two years to negotiate, without changes.
"The government has closed the debate by this text and it sees no chance, opportunity or reason to make any changes to it...Negotiation on the text has ended for us, I'm saying that unambiguously," Klaus said.
The foreign ministers of the two countries are now due to initial the text in the Czech capital on Friday. Signature by the two presidents and confirmation by the parliaments are expected early next year.
"In this declaration it is clearly stated that the will of both sides is to close the past, to close the negative chapters of our history. This declaration means a clear turn in our relations toward the future," Klaus said.
The text has angered groups representing families of the Sudeten Germans, who complained that it did not compensate for property lost during the expulsions.
Germany's Christian Social Union (CSU), the political sponsor of the expelled Germans which has in the past hinted it might use its weight in the Bonn government to block the declaration, has given qualified support to the text.
But on Tuesday the CSU government of Bavaria, home of most expellees, made a number of demands.
It said it could accept the declaration only if both Bavaria and the official Sudeten German representatives were allowed to participate in a planned fund for German-Czech projects.
And it picked up a key condition which Prague has so far rejected, saying that it expected a commitment, "no later than when the declaration is signed, that the Czech side will hold talks with the representatives of the Sudeten German community".
In the Czech parliament the mainstream parties have backed the declaration, but the extreme-right Republican Party and far-left Communists have ruled out voting for it in any form.
Members of the largest Czech opposition party, the Social Democrats, whose votes may be crucial for approval by parliament, have said they still had concerns about vague wording on compensation for victims of Nazi aggression.
The declaration sets up a Czech-German Future Fund with the German side paying in 140 million marks ($90 million) and the Czechs paying about one-seventh of that to finance "projects of common interest" including joint environmental, historical and scientific projects and youth meetings.
But the text adds: "The German side acknowledges its obligation of responsibility to all who became victims of National Socialist violence. That is why the projects, wherever appropriate, should work mainly for the benefit of the victims of National Socialist violence."
