A reporter's call to the new director's secretary at a major Czech industrial company went something like this:
Journalist: "Could you please tell me Mr. Novak's first name."
Secretary (with no hesitation): "Doctor."
Czechs are obsessed with academic titles.
It was Justice Minister Jan Kalvoda's use of an unattained "Doctor of Law" which forced him to resign from cabinet on Tuesday in a shocking mea culpa on the floor of parliament.
"In this society having a title plays such a role -- whether or not you have a degree," Jiri Pehe, the head of research at Prague's Open Media Research Institute, said.
Normal discussions in many offices begin with colleagues addressing each other as "Mr. Engineer" -- a title of mid-level academic specialisation -- or "Mr. Doctor", held by many Czechs from physicians to lawyers to PhD'd journalists.
Kalvoda was once a practicing lawyer who did complete law school but did not finish the certification process required to become a doctor of law. His colleagues and his party began using the title in literature, and he never refuted it.
His resignation came on top of the confessions of four other deputies in the lower house of parliament who also used the unauthorised "JUDr" moniker in campaign material and biographies.
Apart from Kalvoda, only one resigned from parliament, the three others so far have refused.
"I suspect that there may be a few more deputies or government officials in some positions who are claiming to have degrees which they in fact do not have," said Pehe, a PhD who did not insist on the use of "Dr." for this story.
The Czech prime minister, a highly-educated economist, has the full academic title -- Professor Engineer Vaclav Klaus CSc (Candidate of Science, a former regional variation of PhD) -- but he does not inisist on its use by others.
Some of title-envy stems from four decades of communism which ended with 1989's bloodless "Velvet Revolution" led by a band of intellectuals and the dissident playwright Vaclav Havel.
Communist leaders insisted on an educated population, at least quantitatively, and even implemented programmes producing fast-brewed PhD's and engineers at colleges.
Kalvoda's resignation inspired commentaries on the subject of academic titles in Wednesday newspapers.
The daily Mlada Fronta Dnes quoted an unnamed cabinet member as saying the only minister safe from title-fixing accusations was Interior Minister Jan Ruml - a former dissident who the communists would never allow to attend college.
The daily Lidove Noviny used the Kalvoda incident to pay tribute to Havel, who became the country's president after the 1989 revolution.
Havel, as a dissident, was forced by the communists to work in manual jobs and never was allowed to study for a formal degree. He now has a truckload of honorary doctorates from universities worldwide.
"He made himself a name, not a title," Lidove Noviny wrote.
