The Czech ruling centre-right coalition agreed on Monday to name Vlasta Parkanova as justice minister, replacing Jan Kalvoda who resigned last month after he admitted to using an unattained "Doctor of Law" title.
But coalition leaders agreed to wait on the choice of a replacement for Kalvoda, who is chairman of a small right-wing junior coalition party, the Civic Democratic Alliance (ODA), in the more politically-sensitive post of deputy prime minister.
"We received an official proposal from the ODA for a new justice minister... as Doctor Parkanova. We approved this proposal by the ODA on the coalition level," Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus, the head of the senior Civic Democratic Party (ODS), told a news conference.
After a meeting with his coalition partners Klaus said that Parkanova could be officially appointed by President Vaclav Havel as soon as Tuesday.
Parkanova, 45, a certified doctor of law, currently serves as a chief of staff at the Interior Ministry.
She would become the first woman to have a seat in the Prague government since the split of Czechoslovakia in 1993.
ODA vice chairman Karel Ledvinka said the coalition agreed to a request by his party to postpone nomination of the new deputy prime minister, who would lead the party in the tenuous minority cabinet, until after the party's congress in March.
Kalvoda's position as chairman of the pro-business ODA is also to be decided at the March party congress.
The ODA has four seats in the 16-member cabinet under a coalition agreement with the ODS and the centrist Christian Democrats (KDU-CSL), plus one of four deputy premierships.
Kalvoda and the KDU-CSL leader Josef Lux have fought heated policy battles with Klaus's party, which controls half of the cabinet, but the coalition remains the longest-running conservative government in post-Communist Europe.
Tensions have been heightened since June when the coalition lost its majority in the lower house of parliament.
Kalvoda, a parliamentary deputy and a cabinet member since the coalition was formed in 1992, was the fifth member of parliament who admitted using the title of Juris Doctor without actually having qualified for it.
Out of the other four fake doctors, only one has resigned her parliamentary seat.
