The Czech government on Wednesday approved rules for a tender to sell a stake of about 34 percent in the financially troubled jet aircraft maker Aero Vodochody a.s. to a strategic partner.
Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus told a news conference after a cabinet meeting, that the tender is open to both domestic and foreign investors, despite hints from some ministers that the sale might be geared toward domestic companies.
The winner is to be announced on April 2.
The Czech chemical and arms conglomerate Chemapol Group a.s. has shown an interest in Aero, as well as U.S. Boeing Co in an alliance with Czech air carrier Ceske Aerolinie a.s., and local trading company CIMEX Holding a.s..
Aero is pinning hopes of recovering from financil problems on its flagship L-159, a light training subsonic fighter currently in its final stages of development, which is to be equipped with Rockwell International Corp. avionics.
The Czech army has signed up to buy 72 L-159s, and the government has already approved a 3.26 billion crown package clearing the heavily indebted company's books.
State-controlled shareholders approved a cut in Aero's basic capital last month to one milion crowns from 962 million, and to subsequently underwrite a rights issue to raise equity to between 1.74 and 2.5 billion crowns as a part of the deal.
Klaus said the criteria approved by the cabinet include that Aero will not pay out dividends until production of new L-159 starts, and that the investor has to pay most of the price of the shares from his own assets, not on credit.
He said a commission would be set up to consider bids, including representatives of the privatisation agency National Property Fund (NPF), ministries of interior, industry and trade, foreign affairs, defence, finance, and other officials.
Section Director at the Industry and Trade Ministry, Pavel Stejskal, told Reuters that "roughly 34 percent stake was available" for the tender.
He added that the chosen investor would underwrite a new share issue.
Klaus said the state would keep at least a 34 percent stake in the future.
Aero Holding a.s., majority owned by the NPF, holds 44 percent stake in Aero Vodochody, while the state-owned bank Konsolidacni Banka s.p.u. has 32 percent, while the banks IPB a.s. and Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka a.s. have 16 and eight percent respectively.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
