The main Czech oil refiner, Ceska Rafinerska a.s., said on Wednesday it would reopen the hydrocracking unit at its Litvinov refinery, damaged by a fire last month, by the end of January.
Company spokesman Ales Soukup said that the fire on December 2, and another apparently unrelated fire eight days before that, would have some effect on 1996 earnings, but he said it was not yet clear to what extent.
"The refinery is in full operation... the cracking unit was put aside. It should be reopen by the end of January," Soukup told Reuters.
He said that the refinery, in the northwest of the country, was processing crude at normal levels, but the depth of quality of the processing was lower due to the absence of the cracker.
"(The fires) will certainly have some impact, on the other hand, the company is insured, so a number of those damages will be paid for," he said.
Soukup added that final results for last year should be known at the end of the first quarter.
The fire affecting the hydrocrcker broke out on December 2 in a furnace of the unit, just as crude flow resumed after an eight-day stoppage.
Oil flow had been halted when a blaze ripped through a tanking terminal in another part of the refinery on November 23.
They were the first major reported incidents at the refinery since a western consortium took a major equity stake in the newly created Ceska Rafinerska at the end of 1995.
In a deal completed last year, the IOC consortium of three foreign oil groups bought a 49 percent stake in Rafinerska, a company set up to operate the two main Czech refineries at Litvinov and Kralupy, earlier belonging to Chemopetrol Group a.s. and Kaucuk Group a.s. .
The IOC is equally owned by DuPont Co unit Conoco of the United States, Royal Dutch/Shell , and Italy's Agip SpA .
The state holds the remaining 51 percent stake in Rafinerska through the holding company Unipetrol a.s..
The remaining parts of Kaucuk and Chemopetrol, both controlled by the state, are to complete a merger into Unipetrol with a share swap planned for later this year.
Unlike recent January's, Czech refineries are recieving Russian crude supplies normally through the Druzhba (Friendship) pipeline, which had frequent New Year's flow interruptions the past two years because of rows over transit fees between Moscow and Kiev.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
