Bidders for a stake in troubled Czech aircraft maker Aero Vodochody a.s. must offer at least 950 million Czech crowns ($35 million) for the shares, Industry and Trade Minister Vladimir Dlouhy said on Thursday.
But he told a news conference that the tender, open to domestic and foreign bidders seeking to revitalise the light jet maker, might be geared toward choosing a Czech partner.
Between 34 and 40 percent of Aero will be sold, depending on how many new shares are issued during the deal, rules for which the cabinet approved on Wednesday.
Dlouhy said a steering committee would evaluate bids in the tender, which is expected to open by the end of the month, based on bidders' economic strength, obligations to other shareholders and their strategic position.
The Czech chemical and arms conglomerate Chemapol Group a.s. has shown an interest in Aero, as well as local trading company CIMEX Holding a.s., and Boeing Co of the United States in an alliance with Czech airline Ceske Aerolinie a.s..
Dlouhy said Aero shareholders controlled by the state would pass their shareholders' rights to the new investor to allow it to manage the company from a majority position.
The winner of the tender, ultimately picked by the cabinet, should be known in April.
Dlouhy said strategic considerations might persuade the steering committee to pick a Czech domestic partner for Aero.
"If, for example, the Defence Ministry submits arguments which persuade the commission that it is necessary... to prefer a domestic investor, it will be a criterion ... followed by the commission.
"But we do not want to consider it open only for domestic companies from the beginning," he said.
Shareholders of the debt-strapped company approved a cut in Aero's basic capital last month to one million crowns from 962 million, as part of an overall a financial restructuring plan. They also agreed to underwrite a rights issue to raise equity to between 1.74 and 2.5 billion crowns as a part of the deal.
Aero is pinning hopes of recovering from financial problems on its flagship L-159, a light training subsonic fighter currently in its final stages of development, which is to be equipped with Rockwell International Corp avionics.
The Czech army has signed up to buy 72 L-159s, and the government has already approved a 3.26 billion crown package clearing the heavily indebted company's books.
Other criteria approved by the cabinet include that Aero will not pay out dividends until production of L-159 starts, and that the investor has to pay most of the price of the shares from his own assets, not on credit.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003 ($1=27.30 Czech Crown)
