Analysts said on Monday they were expecting UK electronic business information company M.A.I.D Plc to launch new screen-based products that would rival services offered by real-time financial news services.
M.A.I.D declined to comment on a newspaper report that it was working on new online products that would undercut the prices of international news and information group Reuters Holdings Plc and financial news group Bloomberg LP.
The company's executives are on a roadshow in the U.S. for about a week. But a company spokesman said: "We never comment on market speculation regarding product development."
The Sunday Times said M.A.I.D was poised to unveil a screen-based real time news service at sharply lower prices than services from Reuters or Bloomberg. Other products could include transmitting financial data to hand-held devices using mobile-telephone technology, the newspaper added.
Analysts had heard a deal was on the cards between MAID and Finnish group Nokia to start a mobile share price service and expected a similar deal with Psion Plc.
Experts said they had also been waiting for Reuters and MAID to launch more similar, rival services.
"I'm totally unsurprised at the article," said Keith Woolcock, analyst at Merrill Lynch. "MAID and Reuters are going to be competing more in the future. Their products are going to become more similar, I think,"
Reuters Business Briefing, the Reuters service against which MAID is expected to compete, offers mainly online business news and share price data at the moment, whereas about 70 percent of MAID's data is market research information.
But analysts expect soon to be able to set up a customised service on MAID systems so that they are alerted to pre-selected requested headlines as stories appear on MAID's news services.
"I know they have been working on that," noted one analyst who declined to be named. "The big deal is having the alerts built in. The key thing about this is what they are going to charge for it in America...
"If they offer this new alert service for free then it's very hot and will make it very hard for anyone to compete." Analysts expect MAID to tie up a deal with the Financial Times, adding it to French news agency Agence France Presse and U.S. services as well as direct links to other newspapers.
Reuters Business Briefing, meanwhile, is branching out into market research.
Market research group Datamonitor said it has signed a deal with Reuters since ending a similar contract with MAID.
From November no Datamonitor research will be available on MAID anymore, a Datamonitor spokesman said.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 7987
