Scotland-based hotels and casinos group Stakis on Thursday said it will buy Lonrho Plc's five Metropole hotels, funding the 327 million pound ($530 million) deal with a huge cash call on shareholders.
Stakis, which operates 46 British hotels and 22 casinos -- and whose current market value is only about 472 million pounds -- said it wanted to raise 222 million pounds via a heavyweight four-for-seven rights issue, set at 82 pence per share.
"We've found a reasonable and sensible price for a very good, perhaps unique, product," Stakis chief executive David Michels told a news conference.
Lonrho, which is in the throes of a demerger, said in a separate statement that the disposal would generate net proceeds of 316 million pounds as well as payments of 63 million pounds in dividends and tax relief that it will receive from the chain.
"The proposed sale of Metropole Hotels represents an important step in the separation of Lonrho's mining and non-mining assets...," said Lonrho chairman John Leahy, adding that the firm was continuing to make progress with its demerger.
Last month, Lonrho shelved plans for a 700 million pound flotation of its Metropole and its North American-based Princess luxury resort hotels because of the level of interest it had received from potential buyers.
Saudi billionaire Prince al-Waleed bin Talal has been tipped as the most likely buyer of the 10 five-star Princess hotels. Lonrho expects to announce the sale in about three weeks.
The sale of the hotels, which will be followed by the divestment of the group's African trading operations, is part of Lonrho's plans to turn itself into a focused mining company and ends 30 years of empire building by founder Tiny Rowland.
Stakis had been the front-runner to buy the conglomerate's Metropole chain -- four-star hotels with extensive conference facilities -- since rival Millennium &amp; Copthorne Hotels pulled out of the bidding race earlier this month.
The hotels group said it expected the acquisition to boost earnings from the first year and forecast 1996 group profit before tax and exceptionals would be over 30.6 million pounds.
Stakis also forecast a final dividend of 1.2 pence per share, giving a total payout of 2.15 pence for the full year -- 23 percent more than last year.
The company, which had been in acquisition talks with Lonrho for about 15 months, plans to cut costs at the hotels and boost profits by boosting occupancy -- currently at about 68 percent.
Analysts welcomed the deal. "The numbers stack up. I have no problem with their strategy," said Matthew Nayler, leisure analyst at brokers Williams de Broe.
Analysts estimate that Stakis will have to boost profits at the hotels -- in the cities of London and Birmingham and the seaside resorts of Brighton and Blackpool -- by at least 12 percent for the purchase to be profitable.
In an innovative move by investment bank Schroders that will save Stakis some money on commissions, the bank is arranging a partial tender for sub-underwriting of the rights issue by investment institutions in which sub-underwriters will be allowed to tender at lower commissions for additional sub- underwriting above their initial allocations.
Schroders will then cut the primary underwriting commission charged to Stakis at the same rate as any reduction in total sub-underwriting charges.
"We may lose money but we think change (to commission rates) is inevitable," Schroders' Robert Swannell told reporters.
The market is now awaiting news on Lonrho's sale of the Princess hotels, which include resorts in Acapulco, Mexico, the Caribbean and the U.S.
A Lonrho spokesman said news on this was expected in approximately three weeks.
Financial sources in the Gulf said earlier this month that the Saudi prince had exclusive rights to negotiate a deal and that the price was $300 million. The prince's key western investments include stakes in New York's luxury Plaza hotel, the Four Seasons hotel group, banking group Citicorp and the Disneyland Paris theme park.
($1=.6165 Pound)
