Scotish-based hotels and casinos group Stakis Plc launched a huge cash call to fund a 327 million pound ($530 million) acquisition of British conglomerate Lonrho's five Metropole hotels announced on Thursday.
Stakis, which has about 46 British hotels and whose current market value is only about 472 million pounds, said it wanted to raise 222 million pounds via a four-for-seven rights issue, set at 82 pence per share.
Last month, Lonrho shelved plans for a 700 million pound flotation of its Metropole and its North American-based Princess luxury resort hotels because of the level of interest it had received from potential buyers.
Saudi billionaire Prince al-Waleed bin Talal has been tipped as the most likely buyer of the 10 five-star Princess hotels.
Lonrho, which is in the throes of a demerger, said in a separate statement that the disposal would generate net proceeds of 316 million pounds as well as payments of 63 million pounds in dividends and tax relief that it will receive from the chain.
"The proposed sale of Metropole Hotels represents an important step in the separation of Lonrho's mining and non-mining assets...," said Lonrho chairman John Leahy.
"The board of Lonrho continues to make progress with the next steps of the separation process," he added in a statement.
The sale of the hotels, which will be followed by the divestment of the group's African trading operations, is part of Lonrho's plans to turn itself into a focussed mining company and ends 30 years of empire building by founder Tiny Rowland.
Stakis had been the front-runner to buy the conglomerate's Metropole chain -- four-star hotels with extensive conference facilities -- since rival Millennium &amp; Copthorne Hotels  MLC.L pulled out of the bidding race earlier this month.
In a profit forecast, the hotels group said its profit before tax and exceptionals would be not less than 30.6 million pounds in the year to September 30.
Stakis, which said returns on the acquisition were expected to enhance earnings from the first year, also forecast a final dividend of 1.2 pence per share, giving a total payout of 2.15 pence for the full year -- 23 percent more than last year.
Analysts welcomed the deal that helped strengthen Stakis' share price 1.5 pence to 100 pence.
"The numbers stack up. I have no problem with their strategy," said Matthew Nayler, leisure analyst at brokers Williams de Broe.
But some analysts said that Stakis would have to boost profits at the five hotels -- in the cities of London and Birmingham and the seaside resorts of Brighton and Blackpool -- by at least 12 percent for the purchase to be profitable.
Analysts, who have said a sale of the hotels is easier and cleaner than a float amid a glut of companies coming to Britian's market, are now awaiting news on whether Prince al-Waleed has clinched a deal to buy the Princess hotels, which include resorts in Acapulco, Mexico, the Caribbean and the U.S..
Financial sources in the Gulf said earlier this month that the prince had exclusive rights to negotiate a deal and that the price was $300 million. The prince's key western investments include stakes in New York's luxury Plaza hotel, the Four Seasons hotel group, banking group Citicorp and the Disneyland Paris theme park. ($1=.6165 Pound)
