British Telecom (BT) made corporate history on Sunday by unveiling a $20 billion merger with America's MCI Communications in a coup that ensures it a leading position in the world's biggest telecoms market.
The giant merger with MCI, in which BT already has a 20 percent stake, is to be called Concert Plc and marks a vital step in BT's plans to expand overseas as world markets begin to liberalise, following in the steps of America and Britain.
By joining forces with the second-largest U.S. long-distance carrier, BT -- which already has six joint ventures in the top six European markets worth $135 billion -- has placed itself well to tap into the corporate market for long-distance calls, data and mobile services.
BT, which sweetened the alliance for its own 2.4 million shareholders with a 2.2 billion pound ($3.6 billion) special dividend, has been angling to get a foothold in the $200 billion U.S. telecoms market, where it sees tremedous growth prospects.
Concert, a $54 billion group with annual revenues of over 25 billion pounds, will have a significant market share in the world's two most competitive markets as well as being well-placed to gain access to leading-edge technology.
MCI, which has the biggest Internet backbone in the U.S. -- carrying 40 percent of worldwide traffic -- is estimated to have a 20-22 percent share of the U.S. long-distance telephone market and has been dubbed by newspapers "one of the most admired technology and marketing companies in the U.S.".
The MCI deal, which will challenge rival alliances led by U.S. telecoms giant AT&amp;T and Deutsche Telekom, could trigger a fresh round of deal-making between local telecoms alliances ahead of the deregulation of European telecoms markets in 1998.
But BT also has its sights on Asia Pacific markets, the world's fastest growing market, which was worth about $125 billion in 1996. With the MCI deal in the bag, BT said it hoped to be better able to address that market.
Since its plans were foiled six months ago to merge with British rival Cable and Wireless and link up with its "global digital highway" and telecoms businesses in Hong Kong, Japan and Australia, BT has been struggling to find an alternative route into Asia.
Chief executive Sir Peter Bonfield denied that the deal with MCI, which comes without any real presence in Asia-Pacific, was the second best. "It's not the second best -- it's the first best choice," he insisted.
Analysts now expect the enlarged BT/MCI group to start making overtures to major Asian players such as Japan's giant Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corp, the world's largest telecoms group.
"(BT) have made no secret of their ambitions in Asia," said Laurence Heyworth, telecoms analyst at Robert Fleming Securities. "The problem is...NTT is being courted by everybody in terms of international alliances. But as a consequence of this merger, Concert has a stronger potential," he added.
Bonfield said that although he would like to talk to NTT, the company would probably want to devote attention to deregulating its home market before seeking any deals.
BT's deal with MCI depends on both American and British regulatory approval. The U.S. Federal Communications Commission and has to approve foreign ownership of every deal involving more than 25 percent of a company.
However, it has allowed the French and German carriers -- France Telecom and Deutsche Telekom -- to take stakes in Sprint, America's third-largest long-distance provider, and form Global One.  ($1=.6096 Pound)  REUTER
