British Telecom unveiled the largest merger in Britain's corporate history on Sunday, linking up with MCI Communications, the number two U.S. long-distance phone company, to create a $54 billion group.
Six months after alliance talks failed with BT's British rival Cable and Wireless, BT announced that its deal with MCI, to be called Concert Plc, would create one of the world's largest telecoms groups with 43 million business and residential customers in 70 countries.
BT already owned 20 percent of MCI with which it has created the Concert joint venture, providing a whole range of communications services to customers in more than 50 nations.
"The merger combines the substantial financial resources and global position of BT with the growth momentum and market expertise of MCI, known for its success in the competitive U.S. long distance market," BT said in a statement.
Under the deal, which has yet to be agreed by regulatory authorities on either side of the Atlantic, shareholders in MCI would receive up to $3.8 billion in cash as well as 0.54 new Concert American Depositary Shares for every MCI share held.
Under the proposed deal, BT is paying its shareholders a special dividend bonanza of 35 pence a per share, worth an estimated two billion pounds.
BT did not immediately give figures for the total value of the proposed deal, details of which started leaking into the markets late on Friday.
Analysts expect the deal to be worth about $22 billion.
The new telecoms giant, incorporated in Britain, would have headquarters in London and Washington and operate under the BT and MCI brand names.
BT has been looking for a major acquisition since its proposed merger with British rival Cable and Wireless failed in May. BT had been keen to forge that deal because it would have given it access to the lucrative Asian telecoms market -- the world's fastest growing market.
Analysts now expect BT and MCI to start making overtures to major Asian players such as Japan's giant Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corp, the world's largest telecoms group. The company said in a statement that the proposed deal would create a world leading communications power house with annual cash flow of about 7.5 billion pounds.
BT expects the merger would yield savings from combining overlapping services of 1.5 billion pounds ($2.46 billion) over the first five years and 500 million pounds per year before tax after that.
BT also forecast dividends of 19.85 pence per share for the year to March 31, 1997 -- a rise of six percent over last year -- excluding the 35p per share special dividend.
BT, which will release full year results on November 14, has declared a half year dividend of 7.90 pence payable in November, six percent more than in the same period last year.
The deal is believed to be the second largest ever involving a U.S. company -- topped only by the 1989 buyout of RJR Nabisco by Kohlberg Kravis Roberts and Co.
Analysts said a combined company would be a good fit in the ultra-competitive U.S. long-distance phone industry, where MCI's major competitors are AT&amp;T Corp and Sprint.
Current market leader AT&amp;T, which would be the hardest hit by a fiancially muscular new enlarged rival, said on Friday it was confident any MCI/BT deal would receive proper scrutiny by the U.S. government.
One potential problem is a media joint venture between MCI and Robert Murdoch's News Corp. BT would end up with MCI's 13 percent non-voting stake in News Corp and this could cause regulatory difficulties in Britain, analysts say. ($1=.6096 Pound)
