The UK telecoms market is one of the world's most competitive and any attempt to block a planned $20 billion merger between British Telecom and U.S. firm MCI on grounds of restricted trade will fail, analysts said on Monday.
The merger partly hinges on how open the UK market is deemed to be because U.S. rules bar foreign groups from buying more than 25 percent of a U.S. firm unless their home market is deemed to be as competitive as that of the United States.
If it is approved, the merger between BT and America's MCI announced on Sunday to create Concert Plc will represent the largest cross-border takeover in history and the world's second biggest international telephone group.
U.S. telecommunications market leader AT&amp;T, which stands to lose most from such a new heavyweight rival, has urged regulatory authorities to give the planned deal with MCI, the number two U.S. carrier, the "scrutiny it deserves."
But analysts said it was unrealistic for AT&amp;T, British Telecom's arch-rival in international markets, to say that the British market was not competitive enough.
One industry analyst, asked whether he thought the proposed deal would be cleared, said: "Ultimately, I think it will be approved. But some tinkering may be required."
"I don't think it's realistic for AT&amp;T to argue that the market in the UK isn't open -- or that the market in the U.S. is any better," said one analyst who declined to be named.
Britain's market is more open than those of its European neighbours, most of which will only abolish state monopolies over telecoms services by January 1, 1998.
The European Commission cleared the BT's acquisition of its initial 20 percent stake in MCI three years ago.
The merger between BT and MCI to form Concert Plc will have to be approved by the U.S. Department of Justice, the U.S. Federal Communications Commission and Britain's Department of Trade and Industry.
Although BT still controls more than 90 percent of all local UK telephone connections, analysts said there were few barriers to foreign companies wanting to compete here.
AT&amp;T is already planning to establish a foothold in the UK market since the international partnership between BT and Cable and Wireless unit Mercury ended earlier this year.
AT&amp;T has also been tipped as likely to forge alliances with UK cable companies in the local market as well as with mobile networks and new operators such as Cambridge-based Ionica.
A spokeswoman for UK telecoms regulator Oftel said it was too early to say which obstacles stood in the way of BT and MCI completing the proposed deal by the end of next year.
