LONDON - Shares in British Telecommunications (BT) surged on both sides of the Atlantic on Monday as traders furiously dealt the stock higher in the wake of a $20 billion mega-merger with America's second biggest carrier, MCI Communications.
Analysts said the deal with MCI, which turns the BT/MCI combine into the world's second largest international telephone group with annual revenues of over 25 billion pounds ($41 billion), was mainly welcomed because it would force BT to become more capital efficient by increasing its borrowing.
Weekend news of the biggest transatlantic deal in history, linking Britain's dominant telecoms company with a major American player, also prompted some analysts to reassess BT's growth prospects.
Just under 82.5 million BT shares exchanged hands in London on Monday and the stock ended a sharp 22.5 pence higher at 373.5 pence, having touched 392 pence during trade.
Some analysts recommended buying BT shares up to 400 pence on the back of the tremendous growth prosepects in the telecoms market, one of the world's most rapidly changing industries.
The deal, which creates the world's fourth largest telecoms group in terms of sales after Japan's Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corp (NTT), America's AT&amp;T and Germany's Deutsche Telekom also allows BT to limit its dependence on the heavily regulated British telecoms market.
"This deal will force people to look at BT in a new light; look at the international operations, look at the international alliances in Europe, look at what they could be doing with the Internet because MCI is a big player there," said one analyst who asked not to be named.
"All these much higher growth and much more exciting elements of BT in which the company has been quietly building value will come much more to the fore," he added, noting that he was pitching the stock's value at nearer 430 pence.
The merger, which was sweetened with a 2.2 billion pound special dividend for BT shareholders, helps lift the company's debt-to-equity ratio, or gearing, to 65 percent from under five percent.
Analysts have been valuing BT, which had a market value of about 22.6 billion pounds before the MCI deal was announced on Sunday, as a British utility that had about 60 percent of its revenues governed by a regulatory price cap.
But having lined up six European joint-ventures, BT's share of the population in Europe alone for which it may win a licence could rise to 90 million. Armed with MCI, it also hopes to be better placed to win market share in Asia -- possibly with NTT.
"In one year's time, only 15 percent of BT's revenues will be covered by a price cap. And, with their European operations getting off the ground, they will have a very substantial business in international markets," said one analyst.
BT and MCI's alliance, dubbed Concert Plc, still needs to win regulatory clearance in both America and Britain.
Britain's Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) said that it was still unclear whether the merger, which BT believes will be cleared in about 12 months, would fall under its remit for clearance or under that of the European Commission.
One of the issues that determines which regulatory authority rules on the merger will be the turnover of the new company. However, any EC decision would be made in conjunction with advice from Oftel, the British telecoms regulator, and the DTI.
Most analysts believe that while there are hurdles to the deal, the merger is likely to be shown the green light.
Under U.S. rules, a 25 percent stake limit in U.S. communication companies can be lifted if it is in the public interest. Concert Plc, as a major competitor both in the U.S. and internationally, would help drive down call rates. ($1=.6107 Pound)
