British Telecommunications' shares, which surged on Monday after weekend confirmation that the telecoms giant had merged with MCI of the U.S., should be valued at around four pounds each, analysts said on Monday.
News of the biggest trans-Atlantic deal in history, linking Britain's dominant telecoms company with America's second largest international carrier, has helped instititions on this side of the Atlantic reassess BT's growth prospects.
By 1306 GMT, almost 56 million shares had exchanged hands as the stock surged 28.5p to 379.5 pence down from an earlier 386p.  
"This deal will force people to look at BT in a new light; look at the international operations; look at the international alliances in Europe; to look at what they could be doing with the Internet because MCI is a big player there," said one analyst who asked to be named.
"All these much higher growth and much more exciting elements of BT in which the company has been quietly building value will come much more the fore," he added, noting that he was pitching the stock's true value at nearer 4.30 pounds.  
Analysts were split on how much of the share price rise was attributable to the $20 billion MCI merger, which included a 2.2 billion stg special dividend for BT shareholders.
But they said the market had been valuing the 22.6 billion stg group more as a UK utility, with 60 percent of its revenues governed by a regulatory price cap. However, having lined up six European joint-ventures, BT's share of the population in Europe for which they will have a licence could rise to 90 million.  
"In one year's time, only 15 percent of BT's revenues will be covered by a price cap. And, with their European operations getting off the ground, they will have a very substantial business in international markets," the analyst added.
Another analyst said that news of the special dividend alone had helped lift BT's shares by as much as 22 pence. Analysts have welcomed the move by BT, which has negligible gearing, to increase borrowing to make it more capital efficient.
"I think its a four-pound stock," he said. "The market did want to see capital restructuring."
The deal helps lift BT's gearing to around 65 percent.  
"The majority of the share price rise is a function of what is happening to the balance sheet rather than it being an indication that MCI was the right thing to buy," he added.
One analyst at brokers Deutsche Morgan Grenfell said that the MCI deal yielded a leverage benefit of about 0.4-0.5 percentage points off the weighted average cost of capital through BT being more highly geared.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 7987
