Shares in Cable and Wireless, Britain's second biggest telecoms group, lost more ground on Tuesday as analysts said the $20 billion creation of Anglo-U.S. Concert Plc had thrown the group its biggest challenge to date.
Uninspiring results from Cable and Wireless' (C&amp;W) lucrative Hong Kong subsidiary, Hong Kong Telecommunications Ltd, on which the British group relies for about 75 percent of attributable profits, also helped depress the stock.
C&amp;W, faced with a change of government in Hong Kong next July and growing competition in the territory, has also been dogged by talk that it may have to sell part of its Hong Kong stake in return for a worthwhile position in China. "I think the Hong Kong Telecom figures this morning served to remind people that that is where most of the money comes from," said John Tysoe, telecoms analyst at SG Strauss Turnbull. "Not a particularly sparkling set of figures."
The Hong Kong unit lifted net profits 12.1 percent, under some analysts' expectations, to HK$5.39 billion.
While C&amp;W's shares ended five pence lower at 470.5p, executives of its Hong Kong unit insisted that they were unconcerned by the mega-merger, announced over the weekend, between British Telecommunications and MCI Communications to form the second biggest international carrier.
But analysts said the huge merger, creating a $54 billion company, posed a substantial threat to telecom rivals and could make it harder for C&amp;W to expand in the United States.
"What we saw at the weekend has thrown down the gauntlet to everyone else," Tysoe said. "It is a challenge to absolutely every other operator and I'm not sure that half of those other guys have got a coherent response."
Had Cable and Wireless' own merger talks with BT not broken down in May, that deal, valued at about 33 billion pounds ($54.54 billion), as a deal would have easily eclipsed the BT/MCI merger.
But BT's new strategic plans makes it one of the biggest players in America behind market leader AT&amp;T.
Cable and Wireless' own U.S. operation brings in annual revenues of about 0.5 billion pounds -- a far cry from BT's share, which now jumps to around $18 billion a year.
Analysts agree that BT has proved to the market that Cable and Wireless (C&amp;W) is bid proof, partly because it is hard to value its Hong Kong stake. What the do see happening however, is that C&amp;W will seek to increase its foothold in the increasingly competitive U.S. telecoms market and link up with new partners.
"The important thing for C&amp;W is to get more of a presence there and my guess is that they will do that in an alliance," Tysoe said.
Few industry analysts took market rumours seriously that BT's latest expansion plans would prompt its arch-rival in the international market, AT&amp;T, to bid for C&amp;W -- or even launch an immediate takeover of mobile phone operator Vodafone.
As for an alliance partner for C&amp;W, the bets were on NYNEX Corp. Its subsidiary NYNEX CableComms is the largest minority shareholder in Cable and Wireless Communications, an alliance creating Britain's largest cable operator.
NYNEX also has an international diversification strategy centered around the Far East, similar to that of C&amp;W. Other potential U.S. partners could be Pacific Telesis (PacTel), which is being taken over by SBC Communications. However, PacTel is more interested in central or south America, analysts said. ($1=.6051 Pound)
