Virginia-based Dominion Resources executives Tuesday began merger talks with British utility East Midlands Electricity in an effort to agree on a takeover price.
Dominion's chairman, chief finance officer and attorneys began meeting in London with East Midlands Chairman Nigel Rudd, Chief Executive Norman Askew and their advisers -- the merchant bank Schroders -- a source close to the British regional electric company said.
No further details were immediately available.
Richmond, Va.-based Dominion Resources owns Virginia Power.
Dominion and East Midlands agreed to talk despite East Midlands' insistence it would reject any offer from Dominion Resources pitched at around 6.08 pounds sterling per share ($10.05), which would value the British company at 1.2 billion pounds ($2 billion).
In the fifth potential U.S. bid for one of Britain's 12 cash-rich regional electricity companies, Dominion said last week that it was considering an offer "at a price not much in excess of 608 pence per share."
But East Midlands, the first of its wealthy peers to launch a stock buy-back in an attempt to redistribute cash to shareholders, scorned the price as undervaluing the Nottingham-based utility's prospects.
East Midlands, the target of consistent bid speculation as seven of 12 regional electricity companies have fallen to predators and an eighth, Northern Electric, is facing its second hostile bid, saw its stock end 8.5 pence (14 cents) higher at 6.12 pounds ($10.12).
Dominion's stock closed up 12.5 cents at $39.75 on the New York Stock Exchange.
Some traders and analysts said the London market remained unconvinced the American utility would launch a bid.
Nigel Hawkins, utilities analyst at the Yamaichi brokerage, said Dominion would need to start merger talks at 650 pence ($10.74) per share, but added East Midlands was unlikely to recommend a bid much below 7 pounds, or 700 pence ($11.57).
"I do not believe East Midlands would recommend a bid siginficantly below 700p per share," he said. "I am not saying they would refuse it at the 690p ($11.40) level."
Traders also emphasised that Dominion could still walk away from the talks amid regulatory and political uncertainties.
A Dominion Resources spokesman has said the U.S. company was well aware of the uncertainties that surround the purchase of a British electrical utility.
A lull in a wave of bids for electric companies came to an abrupt halt last month when CE Electric -- jointly owned by CalEnergy Co. and Peter Kiewit Sons' Inc. -- launched a hostile 650 million-pound ($1.07 billion) bid for Northern Electric.
The Nebraska-based utility has built up a stake of around 29.5 percent in a series of market raids on Northern Electric, which became the first regional electric company to be faced with a takevoer attempt in December 1994.
A costly shareholder package in defence against the unwanted attentions of conglomerate Trafalgar House left Northern Electric with high debts.
