The top executives of U.S. utility Dominion Resources were locked in their first bid talks with British power supplier East Midlands Electricity on Tuesday to try and hammer out a takeover price.
A source close to the British regional electricity supplier said a meeting between Dominion's chairman, chief finance officer and lawyers and East Midlands' chairman Nigel Rudd and Norman Askew, the chief executive, and their advisers -- merchant bank Schroders -- was starting in London at 1700 GMT.
No further details were immediately available.
Talks were agreed despite East Midlands' insistence that it would reject any offer from the Virginia-based utility pitched at around 608 pence per share, which would value the British company at 1.2 billion pounds ($2 billion).
In the fifth potential U.S. bid for one of Britain's 12 cash rich regional electricity companies (RECs), Dominion said last week that it was considering an offer "at a price not much in excess of 608 pence per share".
But East Midlands, the first of its wealthy peers to launch a share buy-back in an attempt to redistribute cash to shareholders, scorned the price, stating that it would undervalue the Nottingham-based power supplier's prospects.
East Midlands, the target of consistent bid speculation as seven of 12 RECs have fallen to predators and an eighth, Northern Electric, is facing its second hostile bid, saw its shares end 8.5 pence higher at 612 pence.
But some traders and analysts said the market remained unconvinced that the American utility would launch a bid.
Nigel Hawkins, utilities analyst at brokers Yamaichi, said Dominion would need to start bid talks at 650 pence per share, but added that East Midlands was unlikely to recommend a bid much below 700 pence.
"I do not believe East Midlands would recommend a bid siginficantly below 700p per share," he said. "I am not saying they would refuse it at the 690p level."
Traders also emphasised that Dominion could still walk away from the bid talks amid regulatory and political uncertainties.
A spokesman for Dominion Resources has said the U.S. group was well aware of the uncertainties that surround the purchase of a British electricity company.
The popular opposition Labour Party has threatened to impose a windfall tax on utilities if it comes to power in the next general election, due by May 1997.
But the U.S. group may feel its bid will win approval from regulators. Britain has so far cleared three U.S. bids for regional electricity companies.
A lull in a wave of bids for electricity companies was brought to an abrupt halt last month when CE Electric -- jointly owned by CalEnergy Co and  Peter Kiewit Sons' Inc -- launched a hostile 650 million pound bid for Northern Electric.
The Nebraska-based utility has built up a stake of around 29.5 percent in a series of market raids in Northern Electric, which became the first REC to be faced with a takevoer attempt in December 1994.
A costly shareholder package in a defence against the unwanted attentions of conglomerate Trafalgar House, now owned by Norway's Kvaerner, has left Northern Electric with high debts. ($1=.6050 Pound)
