British Telecommuncations Plc, the telecoms giant, beat even the most optimistic analyst forecasts on Thursday with robust second quarter and first half profits and insisted it was growing despite ever stiffer competition.
BT, which plans to merge with America's MCI to create one of the world's biggest telecoms groups, said profits before tax, redundancy and restructuring charges rose 7.4 percent in the second quarter and 5.2 percent in the first half.
But after a hefty 235 million pound ($388.2 million) redundancy charge and a 60 million pound charge for the repurchase of government-held bonds, half year pretax profits came in at 1.6 billion pounds and 730 million pounds in the second quarter -- slightly below figures for the same periods in 1995.
"The results for the half year show an encouraging position with sustained high growth in demand for our telephony services and significant sales increases in our new markets and advanced products," said chairman Sir Iain Vallance.
BT, whose shares jumped 8.5 pence to 369 pence in heavy trade, has managed to hang onto its 20.5 million residential customer lines over the last 12 months despite predictions that competition from cable companies would dent its market share.
The group also said its biggest business, inland calls, grew one percent to over seven percent in the quarter on a 12 month moving average basis after price cuts and marketing initiatives.
"We're growing, we're not going backwards," finance director Robert Brace told Reuters in an interview, noting that turnover in the six months rose 4.5 percent to 7.37 billion pounds.
"I think telecoms is one of the most exciting growth industries in the world...When we open (the markets) up, drop the prices, raise the quality of service and really market hard, the growth levels are double digit."
BT, which has formed six joint ventures worth $135 billion to gain access to the European markets, said it planned to "get very aggressive" in the next two years as the continental telecoms markets are opened up to competition, around 1998.
Asked where BT saw the main profit growth, Brace said:
"All prices in France and Germany are very high compared with the UK. If markets open up and we compete, prices will come down. But we will take substantial market share, particularly in the business area where quality of service really matters."
BT has operations in 30 countries and employs about 130,000 staff worldwide. Since privatisation in 1984, about 110,000 jobs have gone. The firm, which cut another 3,200 staff in the first half of this year, expects about the same number of voluntary redundancies in the second.
As part of its European offensive, BT has won a licence in the Netherlands, plans to win both fixed and mobile licences in Germany and has bought into a mobile licence in France where it also thinks it will win the second fixed licence.
Brace said high-speed digital ISDN (Integrated Services Digital Network) lines and overseas operations were growing at about 50-100 percent per year and that the company had high hopes for its intranet initiative with software giant Microsoft Corp, where it also sees booming demand.
BT said on Wednesday that it and MCI, whose proposed merger is the biggest transatlantic deal in history, were linking up with Microsoft to offer transnational firms private communications networks based on the internet.
Asked whether BT, which announced its $20 billion merger with MCI on November 3, planned similar deals, Brace said few other large communications groups offered the same prospects.
"I'm not sure that there are similar deals as MCI -- because there aren't many companies that size in the world one would wish to merge with."
As previously announced, BT is raising its interim dividend by six percent to 7.9 pence. As part of the MCI deal, BT is also paying a special dividend of 35 pence which it expects to pay in September 1997 at the same time as the final dividend.
($1=.6054 Pound)
