British Telecommications beat even the most optimistic analyst forecasts on Thursday with robust second quarter and first half profits and insisted it was growing despite ever stiffer competition.
BT, which plans to merge with America's MCI to create Concert, one of the world's biggest telecoms groups, said profits before tax, redundancy and restructuring charges rose 7.4 percent in the quarter and 5.2 percent in the first half.
But after a hefty 235 million pound ($388.2 million) of redundancy costs and a 60 million pound charge for the repurchase of government-held bonds, half year pretax profits came in at 1.6 billion pounds and 730 million pounds in the second quarter -- slightly below the corresponding 1995 figures.
BT, whose shares were 8.5 pence higher at 369p in heavy trade after a high on the day of 371, managed to hang onto its 20.5 million residential customer lines despite predictions that competition from cable companies would dent its market share.
"We're growing, we're not going backwards," finance director Robert Brace told Reuters in an interview, noting that turnover in the six months rose 4.5 percent to 7.37 billion pounds.
"I think telecoms is one of the most exciting growth industries in the world," he said. "When we open (the markets) up, drop the prices, raise the quality of service, and really market hard, the growth levels are double digit."
The group also said its biggest business, inland calls, grew one percent to over seven percent in the quarter on a 12 month moving average basis after price cuts and marketing initiatives.
But chief executive Sir Peter Bonfield told a news conference BT was probably losing one to two percentage points of a growing British telecoms market, and that this trend was likely to continue, forcing BT to turn abroad for profit growth.
"BT will lose profits in the short term," said James Ross, telecoms analyst at ABN AMRO Hoare Govett, who expects BT to post a full year pretax profit of 2.1 billion pounds. But he said BT was well placed to fight competition at home and abroad.
"They are the group that has done the best (abroad) so far and in the UK, they have protected their position," he said.
Brace said BT planned to "get very aggressive" in the next two years as European telecoms markets are opened around 1998.
BT expects to win more than 30 percent of revenues from its six continental European joint ventures after liberalisation. Those ventures, worth about $135 billion, could start contributing profits after five to seven years, Bonfield said.
The group plans to take a substantial market share of the lucrative big business, data and mobile services markets.
Bonfield said BT, which expects 1996/97 capital expenditure to be around 2.7-2.8 billion pounds, still saw a link-up with a partner such as Japan's Nippon Telegraph and Telephone a high, long-term priority for a ticket into booming Asia.
"I'd really hate to be knocked out by another competitor just because we weren't treading the boards," he said.
While Japan was mulling the future structure of NTT, BT would make sure it was "parading outside the door", he said.
BT operates in 30 countries and employs about 130,000 staff worldwide. Since privatisation in 1984, about 110,000 jobs have gone. Another 3,200 staff left in the first half of this year with about 3,000 more voluntary redundancies expected this year.
Asked whether BT planned similar deals to its $20 billion MCI merger, Brace said: "I'm not sure that there are similar deals as MCI -- because there aren't many companies that size in the world one would wish to merge with," he said.
BT had already planned a six percent half year dividend rise to 7.9 pence. As part of the MCI deal, BT is also paying a 35p special dividend in September 1997 on top of the final dividend. ($1=.6054 Pound)
