After 11 days of number crunching, telecoms analysts remain split over the financial merits of British Telecommunications's (BT) $20 billion proposed merger with America's MCI Communications.
Some insist the deal is at best neutral, with synergy benefits just about offsetting the 30 percent premium BT paid.
BT, which posted second quarter pretax profits ahead of expectations at 730 million pounds ($1.21 billion) on Thursday, has been traditionally considered a less inspiring stock than faster-growing, smaller UK rivals like Cable &amp; Wireless.
But when the telecoms giant announced on November 3 its plans to link up with MCI to form one of the world's biggest international telecoms groups, some brokers promptly recommended buying BT's shares up to 400 pence.
However the stock failed to rise substantially on the MCI move -- and some analysts changed their "buy" recommendations back to "hold".
MCI investors, bailing out after the deal with the larger and slower BT, have also been blamed for BT's lagging shares.
But some analysts said they thought the shares were now fairly valued and brushed aside BT projections of double digit growth from the new enlarged BT/MCI group, to be called Concert.
"(The deal) changes the way BT looks but it doesn't change the price it should be at," noted one analyst.
But not all analysts are so bearish. Daiwa's telecoms analyst John Clarke said he believed the deal would boost BT's five year earnings per share compound growth from 5.5 percent in 1996/97 to between seven and eight percent.
"The problem is that the benefits from the acquisition won't become apparent for a couple of years," he said. "But it has given BT the confidence to signal that it can increase the rate of its dividend growth (to six percent), which presumably it wouldn't have done otherwise."
BT is paying its shareholders a 35 pence special dividend as part of the deal, as well as forecasting a final 1995/96 dividend rise of 6.1 percent to 19.85 pence.
The split in analysts' views on the merger, trumpeted as the biggest transatlatic deal ever, highlights the complexities of valuing telecoms stocks.
BT, whose long-distance businesses are faced with ever fiercer competition, is pitched against companies such as Vodafone, whose sole business as a mobile telephone operator is booming. Vodafone is also seen as a potential takeover target.
BT's relative performance has lagged rivals in the FTSE telecoms sector by almost six percent since early June 1995 and the wider FTSE All-Share index by over 20 percent.
Although BT is a prolific cash generator, its gross dividend yield has topped seven percent in the past year, reflecting the opportunity cost of investing in a highly regulated stock where growth prospects may be limited.
Analysts polled by Edinburgh Financial Publishing, a third party data provider, see the dividend yield slipping to near six percent in the year to March 1998. But it remains stubbornly above smaller rivals.
C&amp;W and Vodafone's gross dividend yield is nearer 2.5 percent, according to EFP.
According to Reuters 3000 analysis, BT's price earnings ratio (PE) is currently only 11.5 compared with Vodafone's hefty 24, while C&amp;W, with its prize Hong Kong Telecommunications stake, has a PE of 17.4.
A sector rating of nearly 21 -- against a market PE of around 15.25 -- underlines the growth prospects as well as the possibilities of takeovers or demergers that some investors see in some parts of the telecoms industry.
But some analysts argue that comparing PE ratios is no longer a valid way of deducing future earnings potential.
"For companies other than mega carriers like BT, it's not really a PE story anymore, it's a strategic value story," said Andrew Harrington, telecoms analyst at Salomon Brothers.
"When assessing the growth potential moving forward, you've got to look at each stock with reference to the operating environment compared to the others," he added.
Harrington doubts BT's predictions of double digit growth for Concert, pitching growth forecasts nearer 8-9 percent, dented by a loss of margin and earnings suffered by BT at home and abroad in the face increasing competition.
"Just as it makes a lot of sense for BT to invest a lot of money in the U.S., so it makes a lot of sense for other big international carriers to invest a lot of money in the UK.
"At the end of the day, BT is not going to compensate for the fact that there's going to be another turn of the screw in tariff declines in the next five years in the UK," he said. ($1=.6054 Pound)
