Twelve years as a privatised business have left British Telecommunications Plc (BT) leaner and more efficient, with its staff halved -- but with few growth prospects in one of the world's most competitive markets.
Persistent wrangles with industry regulator Don Cruickshank over uncompetitive practices have helped depress BT's relative market performance. Its shares have lagged rivals in the FTSE telecoms sector by almost six percent since early June 1995 and the wider FTSE All-Share index by over 20 percent.
But analysts say the millions of hopeful investors signing up for the latest European telecommunications sell-off -- Germany's $12 billion sale of about 23 percent of Deutsche Telekom -- have little to fear under a more lenient regulatory regime than that faced by its British counterpart.
"The overall spirit of Deutsche Telekom's regulatory regime is supportive," says broker ABN AMRO Hoare Govett in London. "The current regime provides investors with a high level of earnings visibility. It runs until 2001, whereas most European regulatory arrangements expire in 1998."
BT, which first stepped onto the privatisation launchpad in November 1984, now employs about 130,000 staff and has a gearing level, or debt-to-equity ratio, of around seven percent. Since 1994, around 110,000 jobs have gone. BT LOOKS ABROAD
Ever fiercer competition at home has forced BT to seek growth abroad. This month, the company launched an assault on America's $100 billion a year local telephone market with a $20 billion merger with MCI Communications. The deal would create the world's second biggest international carrier.
BT still controls nine-tenths of the UK residential market, but stiff competition for international and business calls and tough regulation have helped the group forge a deal -- however defensive -- analysts say may turn it into a world class firm.
"BT has exploited its lead...in doing a deal with MCI while the UK is squeaky clean as far as open markets are concerned -- certainly by comparison with anyone else," said one analyst.
As the technological revolution sweeps the market and the cost of delivering an ordinary telephone call plunges, customers can already avoid excessive international charges by using several sorts of wireless telephone, cable telephony in some countries, callback services and Internet telephony.
Since 1991, the British international telecoms duopoly between BT and its much smaller rival Cable and Wireless' Mercury Communications unit was ended, allowing rivals to carry calls by leasing BT and Mercury lines.
International competition will be complete from January 1, 1997, when all 46 rivals to BT and Mercury, such as U.S. telecoms giant AT&amp;T, will be free to build and operate their own infrastructure without having to make costly settlement payments for using other networks.
The rest of Europe is only due to break up telecoms monopolies, which have relied on national and international restrictions to shore up their profits, by January 1998. EASIER REGIME FOR DEUTSCHE TELEKOM
While BT has to cut its prices under an inflation minus 7.5 percent (RPI-7.5) formula at the moment, a cap that will be eased to RPI-4.5 percent from August 1997, Deutsche Telekom will operate under a price cap requiring it to cut tariffs by only three percent below inflation in each of two years to 1998/99.
Deutsche Telekom, due to start trade next week, revealed to analysts during syndicate meetings that past high investment levels have left it with a gearing level of more than 400 percent. It will cut staff to 170,000 from 207,000 by 2000.
But the company is now generating five to 10 billion marks ($3.32-$6.64 billion) of net cash annually, and analysts in London expect interest costs to fall by an average of 0.5 billion marks per year.
While restructuring and other factors have depressed Deutsche Telekom's net profits, earnings are expected to recover strongly during 1997 and beyond, analysts say.
($1=1.5059 Mark)
