Vodafone Group, Britain's biggest mobile phones firm, posted a sharp 21 percent rise in first half profits on Tuesday and insisted that the mobile market was likely to maintain a robust 20-25 percent growth rate next year.
Vodafone also announced it was buying The People's Phone Company, its biggest high-street retailer and service provider of mobile phones, for about 77 million pounds ($129 million).
Vodafone, which is licenced to serve over 250 million people in 13 countries, now has five wholly-owned service providers which, along with investments in another four, represent over 70 percent of its subscriber base with more than 410 branded shops.
Pretax profits in the first half of the year rose to 252 million pounds -- after a 17.2 million pound exceptional credit on asset disposals -- on sales of 771.5 million pounds, 16 percent higher than last time.
The dividend, up 20 percent at 2.36p per share, also came in at the top-end of expectations, helping the shares to close 11 pence higher at 254.5 pence.
Outgoing chief executive Sir Gerald Whent dismissed newspaper articles heralding what he called "doom and gloom" in the mobile phone market, saying that he expected a similar growth in net new connections to this year.
"Vodafone has only just begun," he stated.
His successor, Chris Gent, told a news conference that the total market for mobile communications grew by 1,428,000 in the first six months of the year -- six percent less than in the same period last year.
The group netted 2,654,000 subscribers at the end of September 1996 in its core British market, with overall growth in the period of 203,000 compared to 371,000 last year.
But Gent said the rate of decline was slowing and figures for October and November indicated a better quarter than the last two -- even before the key Christmas period.
"It may be that in previous years figures were inflated by customers attracted to cellular before they were ready to make a long term commitment," he said.
Despite a 1.3 percent dip in market share as rivals such as smaller digital mobile phones group Orange leave their indelible mark, Vodafone said it still had 42 percent of the mobile phone market and remained the market leader.
Vodafone's total customer base has swollen to 2,654,000 on its analogue network and 945,000 digital customers.
"Vodafone rarely disappoints and it certainly hasn't this time around," said Evan Miller, telecoms analyst at brokers CS First Boston. "Rumours of the demise of the UK mobile phone market have proved premature. There is life in the market and Vodafone is taking more than its fair share of it."
Vodafone, which celebrated its fifth anniversary as a fully independent company last month, has generated robust profits which last year amounted to 473 million pounds with operating cash flows of 621 million pounds.
A proposed $20 billion merger between British Telecommunications and America's MCI sparked rumours that U.S. telecoms giant AT&amp;T may want to increase its presence in Britain by acquiring Vodafone.
But Gent told Reuters in an interview that the group had not had talks with AT&amp;T and doubted such a deal would emerge. "Anything is possible, but we haven't been approached," he said.
As the British mobile market becomes increasingly competitive, Vodafone has invested in mobile businesses through western Europe and the Pacific Rim which contributed a maiden 9.9 million pound profit before interest, tax and a 3.9 million pound charge for its Hong Kong operation.
Foreign interests, including a stake in France's Societe Francaise du Radiotelephone (SFR), a stake in the German operator E-Plus Mobilfunk, and operations in Australia, South Africa, Greece and Hong Kong, turned in a loss of about 17 million pounds in the first half of last year.
But the company is on track for reaping 30 percent of profits from overseas operations by 2000, Gent said.
($1=.5970 Pound)
