A war of words between Northern Ireland Electricity (NIE) and its watchdog broke out on Friday after the company rejected stringent price cut proposals and asked for a Monopolies and Mergers Commission (MMC) referral.
Charles Coulthard, Northern Irish deputy director general for electricity supply, accused NIE of trying to raise prices by rejecting his plans that would chop more than 300 million pounds ($467 million) off revenues over a five-year period.
"...when I had expected that NIE would be working with me to tackle the problem of Northern Ireland's high electricity costs they instead have chosen for the first time since privatisation to deliberately seek to increase the price which customers in Northern Ireland must pay for electricity," he stated.
Patrick Haren, NIE chief executive, scorned the statement as "garbage" and "quite disgraceful". He reminded Coulthard that under NIE's proposals, average domestic customer power bills would fall by 35 pounds next year, rising to 50 pounds per year by 2002.
"I have never heard anything so oustandingly outlandish," he told reporters. "Where on earth the man got this...from is beyond me. We unreservedly refute the nonsense of it."
"If this is what passes for dialogue at Offer (the Office of Electricity Regulation) it is quite obvious why we need to have our review assessed by the MMC."
NIE's troubled shares hit another year low of 322 pence, a loss of 11 pence. Most analysts had been surprised at the savage review, but did not believe the group would risk further uncertainty by asking for a lengthy MMC investigation.
Nigel Hawkins, utilities analyst at Yamichi, said the MMC referral may prompt a similar move by National Grid, the electricity transmission network, which last week urged its shareholders to help fight its own price review.
"They (NIE) have a stronger balance sheet than National Grid, so if they think they have a lousy deal then National Grid could well follow suit," Hawkins said. NIE chairman David Jefferies is also the chairman of the National Grid.
NIE is proposing a 22 percent one-off price cut next year followed by a three percent cut in power bills in each of the next four years -- a level it calls tough but sustainable.
However Offer's Northern Irish office wants prices across NIE's three main businesses cut by an average one-off 31 percent, or 68 million pounds, next April followed by a two percent cut in annual charges in the following years.
Bills in Northern Ireland have traditionally been about 20 percent higher than in England and Wales, partly because of the sparse population in the area. It has around half the customers of the smallest English and Welsh regional electricity groups.
NIE also blames escalating oil prices and the high prices independent generating companies charge. They account for about 60 percent of customer bills.
($1=.6420 Pound)
