British Telecommunications (BT) and its American partner MCI will "move heaven and earth" to link up with Japan's restructured telecoms giant Nippon Telegraph and Telephone (NTT), analysts said on Friday.
BT welcomed news that the Japanese government had decided to split NTT into three parts under one holding company as part of its efforts to reach a compromise while liberalising the world's second biggest telecoms market.
"BT...welcomes the news that NTT is to be given the opportunity to operate on a truly international basis," a company spokesman told Reuters.
The British telecoms giant, which announced last month that it wanted to merge with America's second biggest long-distance carrier MCI to create Concert Plc, has openly stated that the enlarged group should give it more clout to woo NTT as part of its ticket into the booming Asian telecoms markets.
But he declined to say whether news that Japan will restructure NTT into two regional and one long-distance group would help BT in its quest to link up with the Japanese titan.
"We've always said we'd like NTT to be our partner in Japan," he said, but added: "We can't say whether this makes it easier and better..."
Analysts said that Japan's decision to restructure NTT, the world's biggest telecoms company, had been well flagged and it was now up to BT, MCI and their proposed combined company, dubbed Concert Plc, to forge a deal.
But the difficulty was how to establish partial ownership of an asset in Japan without significant earnings dilution.
"If BT can form a partnership with this new holding company structured NTT -- with access to the international market -- then that's game, set and match," said John Tysoe, telecoms analyst at brokers Societe Generale Strauss Turnbull.
"My feeling is that Concert will probably move heaven and earth try and do a deal with NTT now -- and NTT would probably be crazy to take on anyone else as a partner. Concert has got the product set which everyone wants."
Taking any significant stake in NTT would not only be hugely expensive but dilute earnings. Foreign companies would find themselves paying a lot of money for few earnings simply because the price earnings ratio of NTT is so high, analysts noted.
"There are still foreign ownership restrictions on NTT which will not be lifted until next year," said Andrew Harrington, telecoms analyst at Salomon Brothers.
"But we do know BT wants to establish some form of global alliance with NTT, be it in the form of a marketing agreement, some sort of equity swap or a straightforward equity stake.
"I dont think BT knows what it is going to do yet."
If the creation of Concert wins regulatory approval next year, it will be one of the largest end-to-end telecoms services providers for multi-national companies as the worldwide telecoms market is rapidly being liberalised.
Rivals include French and newly-floated German telecoms groups France Telecom and Deutsche Telekom, that have linked up with U.S. long-distance carrier Sprint to form Global One -- and U.S. telecoms giant AT&amp;T, which has set up World Partners with 16 companies.
NTT, which currently is a purely domestic operator with a stranglehold on the domestic Japanese market, has a market capitalisation that at around $120 billion, eclipses all others.
Japan's Posts ministry said earlier today that the NTT restructuring may not be put into place until 1999-2000.
