Britain's Airtours proved on Wednesday that package holidays is a sunny business by beating forecasts with record profits and looking to spend up to 250 million pounds ($413 million) on further acquisitions.
Pretax profits in the year to the end of September soared 46.1 percent to 86.8 million pounds, topping even the most optimistic forecasts of 82 million pounds.
Earnings per share jumped 39 percent to 45.63 pence and Airtours raised dividends for the year 14.3 percent to 16 pence.
As the summer holiday buying season gets into full swing, Airtours -- one of Britain's three big quoted tour operators -- has seen bookings rise a sharp 57.2 percent on last year.
With winter bookings up 12.6 percent in Britain, a sharp 92 percent higher in Scandinavia and 58.9 percent up in Canada, chairman and chief executive David Crossland predicted an encouraging outlook for all the group's major markets.
"They were very good figures," said one analyst, adding that he had nudged up his full year forecasts for 1997 to 103 million pounds from 100 million pounds. Airtours's shares bucked a weak market trend and rose nine pence to 712 pence.
Crossland told Reuters that the group was keen to boost its cruising business, buy a new U.S. or Canadian company or find another country in Europe where it could have a similar businesses to those it already owns in Scandinavia and Britain.
"We're probably in a position to spend between about 200 and 250 million pounds on the right sort of acquisition," he said, adding: "We have the resources to be able to do that today."
Airtours, whose dividends are covered more than three times by earnings, has a robust balance sheet and about 425 million pounds of cash. It said there would be significant opportunities for expansion which it would "exploit as they arise".
Record profits were fuelled by strong results from its Scandinavian operations where Airtours owns Premiair, the largest leisure airline in the region, and careful pricing in Britain with fewer packages on offer, the firm said.
Summer 1997 will see about the same number of packages as this year, but they will attract more long haul, flight and cruise and "all inclusive" holiday makers -- packages which have a higher sales price and better margins, Crossland said.
"We shall maintain our capacity at or about the same level as summer 1996 and if this position is maintained across the industry the rewards could be substantial," he noted.
The thee big operators -- Airtours, First Choice Holidays and Inspirations -- have tried to encourage early bookings and load prices on late bookings for both the 1995 and 1996 summer seasons.
But last month saw Francis Baron, the chief executive of loss-making First Choice, ousted and Inspirations issue a profit warning due to troubles with its Caledonian Airways arm and a setback in tour operations caused by aircraft delays.
The operators' future is also clouded by a government decision last month to refer the industry for a monopolies probe in a row about promoting package holidays through their travel agency arms and offering holiday discounts in exchange for expensive travel insurance.
Chancellor Kenneth Clarke's latest budget also jacked up holiday insurance tax from 2.5 to 17.5 percent from April and doubled airport departure tax from next November.
But Crossland said holiday makers seemed unperturbed. "People are bringing their buying position forward because there were less late deals in the market last year and they are tending to buy the more expensive products as well," he said.
($1=.6047 Pound)
