Telefonica de Espana, the leading telephone group in the Spanish speaking world, on Friday dismissed concerns that new rivals would force its prices and profits down and said it saw robust growth.
"The wind is behind us. The growth is there," Juan Villalonga Navarro, Telefonica's new chairman and chief executive, told Reuters in an interview in London.
The $20 billion company, which serves a market of more than 300 million customers mainly in Spain and South America, faces its first home competitor in the form of state broadcaster Retevision SA next year.
The Spanish government, which also plans to float the last 21 percent tranche of Telefonica early next year, will award a third licence in early 1998, completing telecommunications liberalisation by the end of the same year.
Villalonga, 43, who joined Spain's biggest company in June, insisted that the firm would weather the uncertainty of rivals moving into its markets by streamlining businesses and riding on a wave of increased demand -- especially for mobile telephones.
Spain's mobile telephone market was growing faster than any in Europe and in four years, penetration would jump from seven to 27 percent, he said.
Double digit growth is also expected in South America. In Peru, it is forecast to rise to 10 percent from six percent, Chile will see growth of 21 percent from a current 14 percent and growth in Argentina will jump to 28 percent from 10 percent.
"Obviously we will lose market share (through competition) but this will be compensated for by the growth of the market and an increase in efficiency," Villalonga stated.
Telefonica plans to slash its 69,000-strong workforce in Spain by 11,000 over the next four to five years.
Telefonica has been long hailed by analysts, who have called it both "one of the best stocks in Spain" with a rising income stream and falling financial costs and "one of the best strategically positioned operators in Europe".
Villalonga thanks what he calls the company's "unbelievable track record of success" for its strategy of breaking into new markets by taking minority stakes, keeping the old management and linking up with "very, very strong local partners".
Analysts say Telefonica's robust third quarter profits in August confirm 20 percent earnings growth estimates for the year -- a second year of high growth.
But rather than a one-off to impress prior to the final sale of government stock, analysts such as brokers UBS say they believe the company is more than able to sustain high earnings growth and say the shares, that have surged more than 20 percent since October, should be bought up to 3,300 pesetas.
The stock ended trade at 2,875 pesetas on Friday.
There have been delays in releasing details about the impending flotation of the state's last 197 million Telefonica shares -- at current share prices worth about 566 billion pesetas ($4.3 billion). Spain's financial media is tipping a 60 percent of the total offer will go to retail investors.
While Villalonga declined to comment on the sell-off, newspapers say five to six percent of the offer will be put aside for Spanish institutional buyers, with the rest going to foreign institutions.
Broker Morgan Stanley, global coordinator for the international tranche of the offer, argues that competition will take longer to become a harsh reality than suggested by the official European Union January 1, 1998 timetable and in the meantime investors face "years more of nice, fat cash flows".
But the broker noted recently: "We think we are right on this, although we are becoming distinctly more nervous."
($1=130.0 Peseta)
