Britain on Thursday opened its doors to 44 new international telephone operators, saying it would create a fully open long-distance telecommunications market 12 months ahead of the rest of Europe.
U.S. telecoms giant AT&amp;T, Channel Tunnel operator Eurotunnel and the Global One alliance between Deutsche Telekom, France Telecom and Sprint are now among those free to compete against dominant players British Telecommunications (BT) and Mercury.
While the rest of Europe is only aiming for telecom liberalisation in 1998, a rash of new rivals -- mainly from the United States -- will be able to offer a full range of telecoms services between Britain and the rest of the world from January 1, 1997.
"The UK has proved to the world that liberalisation pushes down prices and improves services," Science and Technology Minister Ian Taylor said in a statement.
"Phone prices are down 40 percent overall since 1984, and I expect these new licensees to put further downward pressure on international rates," added Taylor, who is keen for a more open telecommunications market to attract inward investment.
In the largest single move towards opening up the international telecom market, which BT values at just under 2.0 billion pounds ($3.33 billion), 46 companies applied for licences in July, 44 of which have now been granted.
Until now, international rivals to BT and Mercury -- which is owned by Britain's second largest telecoms operator Cable and Wireless -- have only been able to operate by paying to lease lines from two British companies.
But own-facilities services are cheaper to provide.
The move may also help dampen opposition by AT&amp;T, America's largest long-distance carrier, to BT's proposed $20 billion merger with America's MCI Communications Corp.
Regulatory clearance hinges on how open the authorities deem Britain's telecom market is. With BT keen to take on the U.S., the world's largest telecoms market -- worth about $200 billion -- regulators are keen to ensure that the same competitive benefits are available to U.S. companies.
BT welcomed its new rivals, adding that it was hopeful of winning approval for its U.S. mega-merger. "This (move) indicates how open the UK market is," a spokesman said.
Analysts say that expectations of growing competition and the inevitable falling margins at home have already been discounted in telecom companies' share prices.
"This has been very well flagged," noted one.
Mobile telephone operator Vodafone Group, having clinched its licence, jumped 6.5 pence to 246.5p.
BT's shares rose four pence to 397p and Cable and Wireless' stock added 1/2p 474.5 pence by early afternoon.
Analysts have found it hard to predict how hard revenues will be hit by BT and Mercury's loss of market share as telecoms companies turn their attention overseas to help boost earnings.
But Cable and Wireless' Mercury is expected to suffer more than BT because international traffic makes up a much higher proportion of traffic -- and thus contributes a higher proportion of profits.
($1=.6003 Pound)
