Orange Plc said on Monday its customers will be able to use their mobile phones to chat, transfer data and send faxes in Germany, France, Switzerland, Malaysia, Thailand and Singapore by the end of 1997.
Announcing a roaming agreement with Swiss state-owned telecoms monopoly Swiss PTT, Orange Group technical and operations director Colin Tucker said he hoped customers would also soon be able to "roam" freely in Hong Kong and Scandinavia.
"I suppose the thing to say is, Watch this space," he told a news conference in Geneva.  
The introduction of digital equipment has helped fuel the battle to add value to the basic mobile telephone by allowing free roaming from country to country and far more reliable and secure connections.
Orange's 573,000 subscribers will be able to sign up for these enhanced services if they pass stringent credit checks and pay a 250 stg deposit to help curtail the fraud that has dogged similar previous agreements.
Orange already has a full roaming agreement in Germany and a partial one in France, centred on Paris. Talks are under way to add a number of European and Asian nations to the list.  
As with all roaming agreements, the financial details of the Swiss deal remain a trade secret. Initially, only subscribers in Geneva will be able to use Swiss PTT's Natel City network but Orange aims to boost coverage to Basel and Zurich by early 1997.
Orange says its offer of roaming services between the UK and other countries is part of its aim to provide customers with the best value for money. It notes that a significant proportion of users regularly use its established German services.
"Adding Geneva as another roaming service demonstrates our commitment to providing an international continuity of service," Tucker said.  
The system that Orange uses is much like that of market leaders Vodafone Group and British Telecom's 60 percent-owned Cellnet, in that they are based on the GSM (global system for mobile communications) sister technology called DCS-1800, which operates at 1800 MHz as opposed to 900 MHz.
Most of Cellnet's and Vodafone's subscribers are on the increasingly crowded analogue networks while Orange, along with rival Cable and Wireless- and U S West -owned Mercury One 2 One, is wholly digital.  
As mobile phone companies vie to lift the market out of its yuppie ghetto and into the mass market, the challenge for newcomers like Orange -- with its monthly rental packages that include free minutes and per-second charges -- is to attract customers who still have no mobile phone.
It also has to catch those as they move from the older analogue networks to the new digital technology. Orange, which last month reported gaping first-half pretax losses of 125.2 million stg, has seen its shares fall well short of the 205 pence level of its March flotation that valued the company at about 2.5 billion stg.
But the company, partly owned by Hong Kong conglomerate Hutchison Wam Poa and British Aerospace, says its expects to turn in a profit or pay shareholders a dividend by 1998.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
