Institutional investors in British utility Northern Electric said on Friday they were likely to sell up if told to do so by the company, despite their objections to the price offered in U.S. group CE Electric's winning bid.
Northern Electric, which operates in northeast England, was poised to announce whether it would officially concede defeat and recommend the 782 million pound ($1.3 billion), or 650p- per-share, hostile offer by the U.S.-controlled energy group.
"There will be a statement from us in the next 72 hours or so," a company spokesman told Reuters.
Institutions said they were awaiting Northern's response after CE Electric on Tuesday declared its bid unconditional having secured a slim 50.3 percent majority of acceptances.
"We thought that the price offered was too low and I think now it is a question of getting Northern's judgement on it and making up our minds," said a fund manager at one institution who declined to be named. "But we would have to give a lot of thought to being a minority shareholder," he added.
Another institutional investor also said it was unlikely to keep its stake. "I doubt if we would be standing aside. (Selling) would be our normal procedure," said a spokesman.
In normal circumstances, a firm recommends even a hostile offer after the bid has been declared unconditional.
But there has been little about CE Electric's fight for Northern that has been normal -- and at least one institution admitted to harbouring a slim hope Northern could still pull something out of the hat.
Northern Electric, which last year became the only one of the 12 regional electricity companies (RECs) to fight off a hostile bid, lost the battle after an unprecendented extension to the bid tipped the votes in CE Electric's favour.
The Prudential Corp, one of Northern's biggest shareholders, then attempted to defeat the takeover in the eleventh hour by trying to persuade investors who had accepted the offer to sell their Northern shares to the insurer instead for the same price.
CE Electric is keen to win at least 90 percent of the shares -- the amount needed under British takeover rules before it can carry out a compulsory purchase of the remaining ones -- and its message to any institutions thinking about hanging on to minority stakes was terse.
"If these reports about some shareholders deciding that they will not accept the offer are true, it raises a number of questions about their investment policy. But obviously it is up to them to decide what they want to do," a CalEnergy spokesman.
While Northern's core business is heavily regulated, most institutions invest in utilities for their robust dividends -- which is a matter for the board, not the industry regulator.
Some institutions said they remained baffled that Northern's bid for independence had failed because of a technicality.
The Takeover Panel last Friday extended the bid, after CE Electric narrowly failed to win control, because Northern's broker BZW had belatedly reported it had charged Northern an extra 250,000 pounds in a performance-related fee.
One institution said on Friday it remained convined that Northern was worth 700-720 pence a share, saying that if CE's bid had failed, the U.S. group may have come back to discuss a higher price -- or a fresh bidder could have been attracted.
Failing that, the value of the company would have been reflected in its share price in the long term, it said.
Only two of 12 regional electricity companies now remain independent -- Southern Electric and Yorkshire Electricity. Six have been bid for by American companies.
($1=.5943 Pound)
