British Telecommunications Plc is likely to brush off Japanese telecom giant Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corp's statement that it hopes to move into the global market independently, analysts said on Thursday.
BT, along with most of its global telecoms rivals, has long sought to link up with NTT and gain a foothold in the lucrative Asian markets. The company's top bosses, who regularly travel to Japan, are meeting NTT executives this month, BT confirmed.
NTT, which only last month won regulatory approval to offer international services as part of a move to restructure the company, said earlier this week that it hoped to pursue an independent approach to gain customers in the global market -- rather than seek tie-ups with interational rivals.
However, analysts said NTT's views, published in a newspaper interview, were more likely to be a negotiating ploy.
"I suspect the interpretation is that this is an entirely rational approach by NTT to indicate that it can, if necessary, go alone," said Laurence Heyworth, telecoms analyst at Robert Fleming Securities.
"Obviously that does improve its negotiating position with regard to potential partners as well," he added.
BT confirmed that chairman Sir Iain Vallance, who is in India with British Prime Minister John Major as part of a tour to boost British trade, will travel on to Japan on Friday to meet NTT executives.
Sir Peter Bonfield, BT's chief executive, will also meet NTT and other organisations in Japan at the end of this month. But the company said these visits had long been scheduled and were not a knee-jerk reaction to NTT's independence stance.
"This is something that has been planned for a long time and yes, they will be meeting people from NTT and indeed other organisations in Japan...as you would expect. It is an important area," a BT spokesman said.
BT has an office in Japan and this year appointed its first regional director in Japan in a move to highlight the importance of the area. It already has a minor link with one of NTT's units, NTT Data, which distributes its Concert Internet Plus services.
But BT also reiterated that while NTT, the world's biggest telecoms company, would be a good partner, there were others it could talk to.
BT has small stakes in mobile telephone operations in Japan.
Most global telecoms groups, for whom the key to success in the increasingly competitive market is global reach, are keen to move into Asia -- an area where few are well represented.
"I think that every major telecommunications grouping is harbouring hopes of linking up with Japan. Clearly NTT is the largest telecom company in the world and provides local access to one of the most impenetrable markets in the world as well," Heyworth said.
BT last November announced a $20 billion merger with America's MCI Communications in a move partly to increase its clout and make it more attractive to potential Asian partners.
