Cable &amp; Wireless (C&amp;W) on Friday brushed aside speculation that its landmark merger with three companies had run into hurdles and said it had got the man it wanted to run what will be Britain's biggest cable firm.
In a long-awaited statememt, C&amp;W said it would appoint Graham Wallace as chief executive of Cable and Wireless Communications, formed by merging C&amp;W's Mercury unit, Nynex Corp's NYNEX CableComms Group, Bell Cablemedia Plc, and Videotron Holdings Plc.
"Graham Wallace is the one we wanted," C&amp;W chief executive Richard Brown told Reuters in an interview.
"He is the first choice and we're delighted to get him."
Wallace, who will join C&amp;W on February 1, is currently a director at leisure and media company Granada Group. But he brings with him useful experience in television from a stint on the board of satellite broadcaster BSkyB.
C&amp;W, is mainly a telecommunications business and has little previous experience in television.
But one analyst gave the appointment a lukewarm reception.
"It's not an obvious choice," said the analyst. "He strikes me as very competent, but does he know anything about the cable business? I'm not quite sure why they didn't go for one of the insiders. There were some strong people, I thought."
Although C&amp;W's shares were languishing 2.5 pence lower at 485.5 pence in late afternoon trade, NYNEX CableComms saw its shares rise 5.5 pence to 108.5 pence.
With C&amp;W, Britain's second biggest telecoms company, planning to finalise the cable merger in spring, the lack of a chief executive at the new company had fuelled some speculation that a clash of cultures was hindering talks.
Although Brown conceded that the merger was complicated, he insisted: "That is not true...There's a great deal of activity and we really are right on track.
"There is an exciting spirit of cooperation to bring this to reality," he said.
Brown, who will take the chair of the company, tipped to be worth 5.0 billion pounds ($8.36 billion), said a finance director would be the next announcement.
The proposed cable merger was announced last October -- and most such deals spell job cuts.
Although Brown said he was not legally allowed to comment ahead of Cable and Wireless Communications's planned listing in London and New York, he warned that the new group would "clearly" reap efficiencies.
"I cannot quantify what that is going to be, but we are working on that and we will achieve that," he said.
Cable and Wireless Communications, which will be well-placed to compete against dominant telecoms company British Telecommunications, will provide local, national and international data and mobile telecommunications with multi-channel television and Internet services.
($1=.5979 Pound)
