British telecommunications company Energis said on Friday that its parent, the National Grid electricity transmission network, might sell a majority stake in the company to one or more strategic investors this summer.
The group, which supplies telecoms services to about 14,000 business customers via the Grid's high voltage electricity pylons, also said it was poised to announce a continental deal in a move that will slash the cost of European telephone calls.
Chief executive Mike Grabiner, who moved from the country's dominant phone company British Telecommunications a year ago, said Energis had talked to all global carriers, with the exception of BT, in its search for international partners.
And since the birth of a new cable giant -- Cable and Wireless Communications -- the company is also looking to gain access to key metropolitan areas.
"I think both Energis and the Grid initially see the Grid selling a minority stake in the business," Grabiner told Reuters in an interview. But he added: "For the right mix of partners, I think they could go below 50 percent -- but still maintain a very large strategic and influential interest in the company."
Energis has been burning a 100 million pound ($168 million) per-year hole in the pocket of the Grid, which was demerged from the 12 regional electricity companies and floated in 1995.
Some analysts say that a significant equity partner in loss-making Energis, that has been valued at more than 600 million pounds, could help inspire the Grid's lacklustre shares.
However, Grabiner said talks with U.S. telecoms giant AT&amp;T were "not very active". Some analysts tip the Global One alliance between America's Sprint, France Telecom and Deutsche Telekom as a potential partner.
Global One has little British access and Energis has already signed a "correspondent agreement" with Sprint, America's third international carrier, to end each other's transatlantic calls.
But Energis is keeping its options open. It has also talked to "selected international strategic investors". "(A partner) hasn't got to be a global carrier. It has to be a partner who can support us and add value to the business," Grabiner stated.
Energis was set up in 1993 and operates one of the country's most advanced networks by wrapping 4,500 kms of fibre optic cables -- capable of transmitting images and data as well as voice -- around the earthwires between overhead power pylons.
But Energis still has to rely on local operators to originate and end calls.
A five billion pound merger between Cable and Wireless's Mercury unit, NYNEX CableComms, Bell Cablemedia and Videotron to create the country's biggest cable group has increased the pressure on Energis to get local access.
To be competitive with BT and Cable and Wireless Communications, Energis is considering linking up with other cable players, local operators or building its own network.
In the meantime, with an international licence safely under its belt, Energis is looking to spark an aggressive price war on European busines telephone routes with an "imminent" new correspondent agreement with a major telecom player.
The government broke the BT/Mercury duopoly on owning international calls networks last month, awarding 44 new international licences. Rivals, which used to be forced to lease line capacity from BT and Mercury at high prices, can now buy permament line capacity from others -- and save a lot of money.
"We have a very small market share, a dramatically reduced cost base and every incentive to be aggressive on price to grow our market share. And we will do that," Grabiner said.
Last October, Energis offered to undercut BT by about 50 percent with a 10 pence-per-minute charge for selected business customers on direct dialled calls to America. "European prices have further to go than North American prices," Grabiner noted.
($1=.5958 Pound)
