British telecommunications company Energis said on Friday that its parent, the National Grid electricity transmission network, might sell a majority stake in the company to one or more strategic investors.
Energis, which supplies telecoms services to 13,000-14,000 business customers via the Grid's high voltage electricity pylons, is seeking both an international partner and one that will give it local access to key metropolitan areas.
"We have an excellent core national network and a growing customer base," chief executive Mike Grabiner told Reuters.
"International connectivity and local access are the two things to do next," he added in an interview.
Grabiner, who came from the country's dominant 'phone company British Telecommunications one year ago, said Energis had talked with all global carriers, with the exception of BT, in its search for an international partner.
"I think both Energis and the Grid initially see the Grid selling a minority stake in the business," Grabiner said.
But he added: "For the right mix of partners, I think they could go below 50 percent -- but still maintain a very large strategic and influential interest in the company."
Energis is on track for signing up an international partner this summer, Grabiner said, noting: "We're very much still in active discussions."
However, Grabiner said talks with U.S. telecoms giant AT&amp;T were "not very active". Some analysts tip the Global One alliance between America's Sprint, France Telecom and Deutsche Telekom as a potential partner.
Global One has little British access and Energis has already signed a "correspondent agreement" with Sprint, America's third inernational carrier, to end each other's transatlantic calls.
But Energis is keeping its options open. It has also talked to some international "strategic investors". "(A partner) hasn't got to be a global carrier. It has to be a partner who can support us and add value to the business," Grabiner stated.
He conceded that a five billion pound cable link-up between Cable and Wireless, NYNEX Cablecomms, Bell Cablemedia and Videotron, has highlighted Energis' lack of local loop access.
"In a sense our discussions have broadened," he said.
Energis, which needs to be able to match the cost structure of BT and the new cable company Cable and Wireless Communications, is considering whether to link up with a cable company, other local operators or build its own network.
Some analysts say that a significant equity partner in loss-making Energis, that has been valued at more than 600 million pounds, could help inspire the Grid's lacklustre shares.
The Grid is committed to investing 100 million pounds per year into the loss-making telecoms subsidiary for the immediate forseeable future.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 7987
