Angry British businesses expressed dismay on Tuesday after news of another overhaul of telephone prefixes in what is promised to be the final phase of a search for "future proof" phone numbers.
Telecommunications watchdog Oftel announced plans to create billions of new numbers, although Britain has barely recovered from "PhONEday" in April 1995, when the last batch of new numbers was created and millions of old ones were made obsolete.
"These changes mean more disruption and cost to businesses," said Simon Sperryn, chief executive of the London Chamber of Commerce &amp; Industry. "...business is bound to be lost because of customers ringing the outdated number."
PhONEday cost telecoms giant British Telecommunications alone 100 million pounds ($166 million).
Each time numbers change, companies have to pay thousands of pounds in notifying business contacts and to change stationery and logos on delivery vans and shopfronts.
London dialling codes will now be lengthened by a uniform 020 prefix in the year 2000. The current London codes of 0171 and 0181 will be shortened to 7 and 8, respectively, to be dialled after 020.
Northern Ireland, Cardiff (Wales) and the southern English coastal cities of Southampton and Portsmouth will also each get a new prefix starting with 02. Prefixes of 03 to 06 are being kept for future generations.
In an attempt to quell mounting anger and confusion, Oftel director general Don Cruickshank, who was once memorably quoted as saying he was "not very good" at forecasting demand for numbers, pledged the new plan would be robust and flexible.
"By early in the next century we will have completed transition to one of the most clear, flexible and customer-friendly numbering schemes in the world," he said.
But the opposition Labour Party called for his suspension pending an inquiry into what it called a renumbering "shambles".
Labour consumer affairs spokesman Nigel Griffiths said Oftel had ignored advice that PhONEday would not create enough new numbers and another costly upheaval would be needed.
"Sadly this was ignored. How can the public have any confidence that Mr Cruickshank has got it right?" he asked.
Perhaps surprisingly, BT has backed Cruickshank's new attempt to solve the problem of surging demand for telephone numbers. Cruickshank also drew praise from the Telecommunications Managers Association, a professional consumer group, which said the old system had lacked logic and structure.
A range of numbers with the prefix 05 will be reserved for corporate use, so companies can move around the country without changing numbers -- or just keep one number for all sites.
Mobile, paging and personal numbers are set to take the prefix 07 by 2001, special freephone and local rate services will have the prefix 08 and premium rate numbers will adopt 090 by 1999.
Nevertheless, Cruickshank voiced uncertainty about long-term future use, musing: "If you star-gaze way into the next century I have a sneaking suspicion e-mail and voice recognition may well replace numbers."
