As Japanese telecoms titan NTT mulls an investment with British Telecommunications (BT) in France, analysts said on Thursday any such deal would be a major coup for Britain's dominant telecoms operator.
One investment banker told Reuters that Nippon Telegraph and Telephone, the world's biggest telecoms company, had approached probably more than two investment banks to evaluate an investment alongside BT in the French telecoms market.
"I am aware approaches have been made and I am also aware that strategically and commercially this is an opportunity which has been given a lot of attention within the senior management of NTT," he said.
With further details largely confidential, the investment banker said only that BT was also exploring whether to strengthen its 1.1 billion pound ($1.8 billion) investment in a 25 percent stake in France's new telecoms operator Cegetel.
Cegetel, which was set up by Cie Generale des Eaux, is seen as the main rival to France Telecom.
"What is being looked at these initial stages is much more to do with access to international traffic and strategically, from NTT's perspective, how it can enter the market," he said.
BT declined to be drawn on reports that NTT was evaluating a 300 million pound ($490.3 million) investment -- or whether it would welcome such a link. But along with its American partner MCI, BT has been openly courting NTT along with MCI for many years.
And major deal in Japan has become increasingly urgent since the NTT was last month freed by the government to pursue international business.
But a BT spokesman would only say: "If NTT have appointed investment bankers that is their decision."
All three global telecoms alliances are vying to get a foothold in the lucrative Asian markets so that they can sell their services to multinational firms.
"If BT were able to get NTT to take this step in France that would be a significant coup for BT because it would be the first step towards tying them in to (BT's) global Concert alliance," said Andrew Harrington, telecoms analyst at Salomon Brothers.
"Japan is the last major frontier for the world telecoms companies...And if you're going to service multinationals, you've really got to be in Japan," he added.
NTT is the obvious partner choice as it controls virtually all of the local network in Japan as well as having a large presence in Asia.
And there are three main global alliances eager to link up with the group; BT and MCI's Concert, Global One, which incorporates France Telecom, Deutsche Telekom and America's Sprint and U.S. telecoms gaint AT&amp;T's loosely-knit global alliance.
But while speculation is swirling that NTT may first move in France, the investment banker said he would be surprised if the group wasn't looking for alliances right across Europe.
France is one of the most important European markets, but companies such as Italy's STET are also looking to see whether they can forge international partnerships with other operators.
"I would think NTT would be looking at a toe-hold in the top four or five markets in Europe," he said. "(It seems) discussions within NTT have moved onto a more advanced stage and I would be surprised if their efforts were being focused exclusively on France. But that is pure speculation." ($1=.6119 Pound)
