British companies tipped as possible targets for a windfall tax under a Labour Government are unconvinced by the opposition party's promise not to discriminate unfairly between "utilities".
Labour, which is far ahead of Prime Minister John Major's Conservative Party in opinion polls, has said only that it plans to tax what it calls "the excess profits of privatised utilities" if it wins the next election, due by May 22.
With speculation mounting that the party plans to raise up to 10 billion pounds ($16.6 billion) from such a tax, companies as diverse as electricity, water, gas, telecoms, airline and airport firms are being tipped as possible targets.
"If Labour are not going to increase taxes anywhere else -- and utility taxes are not exactly unpopular -- they could decide to go and dig more deeply into the stores of privatisation wealth," said Nigel Hawkins, utilities analyst at Yamaichi.
Hawkins speculates that on a rough calculation based on market value, the 15 electricity groups might be hit by a two billion pound bill, the 10 big water companies with one billion pounds, British Telecommunications with 1.5 billion and British Gas with 500 million.
To raise 10 billion pounds, Labour might stretch the phrase "utilities" to include firms such as former airports authority BAA, Associated British Ports, British Steel, British Aerospace and possibly some bus firms.
Perhaps unsurprisingly, while Labour said it did not want to "discriminate unfairly between companies", none of the firms contacted by Reuters believed they should be affected by Labour's tax proposals.
Labour has argued that Britain's utilities were sold too cheaply on privatisation and have benefited from relatively benign regulation allowing them to stack up windfall profits.
Electricity and water giant United Utilities denied it had benefited from a windfall, BT, the country's dominant telephone company, insisted it was neither a monopoly nor a utility and BAA would not even contemplate such a tax.
"We just think it would be a crazy thing to do...the likelihood is just so small,"a BAA spokesman said.
A spokeswoman for British Gas said the firm had made no provisions for a profit tax. "We prefer to see any details of any proposals before commenting on them. It's all hypothetical at the moment," she said.
But analysts are starting to pencil in calculations.
"I work on a basis, as a very rough guideline, of a tax of between five and 10 percent of total market capitalisation," Hawkins said. "In some cases it means in a single year a utility has no retained earnings."
But ahead of its first budget, the Labour Party declines either to define what it means by privatised utilities, or to disclose how much it plans to raise.
Labour has consistently condemned the so-called "fat cat" executives of the privatised electricity and water companies for what it calls short-changing consumers while lining their own pockets and those of their shareholders with hefty dividends.
But short of conceding that it does not consider British Airways a utility, the party will not be drawn on which other companies will fall into its tax net.
"We will consult with the regulators before we make any announcement about the definition of the tax, who it will apply to, its scale. And that won't happen until we're in government," an aide to Labour's finance spokesman Gordon Brown said.
The party, which has taken extensive legal advice, added: "No amount of lobbying by companies or the Conservatives will make any difference. In the way we intend to introduce it, we're 100 percent convinced there will be no legal, financial or technical obstables to the introduction of a windfall tax." ($1=.6035 Pound)
