British Telecommunications Plc (BT) might give some ground to U.S. rival AT &amp; T Corp in a quest to win regulatory approval for its $20 billion merger with U.S. carrier MCI Communications Corp, a source familiar with negotiations said on Wednesday.
The proposed merger, the biggest transatlantic deal in history, is being examined by British, American and European regulators. Regulatory clearance from America hinges on whether the British telecom market is deemed to be as open as America's.
AT&amp;T, the world's second biggest telecoms group after Japan's Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corp, has charged that it does not have the same competitive advantages in Britain as BT will have in the U.S. after its MCI take-over.
The source said BT might look at some of the prices it charges AT&amp;T, which has been active in Britain for some years. The American giant wants BT to lower its transit' costs -- charged for transporting calls from the coast to AT&amp;T's network in cities.
The company also wants what is dubbed "equal access" to the British market. This would mean that customers would not have to call special numbers or press other buttons on their telephones before being connected with their chosen telecoms operator.
AT&amp;T complains that customers often forget to dial an access code to get onto its service before making calls, which means that BT gets paid for the call.
While the source said BT was unlikely to give ground on equal access, because it was not cost-effective, he said BT might consider its transit charges. "It is something that BT may look at," the source said, adding: "I think interconnect costs are always looked at in the UK."
MCI is America's second biggest international carrier and BT, keen to gain a greater access to the world's biggest telecoms market, wants to buy the 80 percent of MCI it does not already own.
EU sources say that the European Commission is expected to launch a full investigation into the alliance later this week.
The proposed merger, announced last November, was submitted to the Commission for clearance last December, and it has until Thursday to decide whether to clear it following a preliminary investigation -- or launch a deeper probe.
An in-depth probe into whether the deal could violate European fair competition rules could last up to four months.
But BT's EU affairs official Mike Corkerry told Reuters in Brussels: "We're not picking up any negative vibes about the merger...but there may be some nervousness because it is just so big."
BT, which along with MCI is holding briefing on Thursday to discuss British and American regulation, expects the deal to be cleared around autumn.
