Misys, Britain's fast-growing, 950 million pound ($1.5 billion) software supplier, posted record half-year results on Wednesday and said it was eyeing up to five international acquisition targets worth up to $30 million each.
Chairman Kevin Lomax told Reuters that Misys, which has snapped up software trading firms in South East Asia, Ireland, the U.S. and Europe, was keen on businesses that operated within a strong international financial services market.
"They (possible acquisition targets) are worth mainly between $2.0 million and $30 million...," Lomax said.
Misys, whose banking division alone now supplies software to 12,000 banks with 4,000 separate installations, has become one of the world's largest application software companies as consolidation in the industry gathers pace.
And with 18.7 million pounds of cash and undisclosed, but low debt levels, Lomax said the company had plently of headroom in its cash flow and borrowing facilities to enable it to embark again on the acquisition trail.
Only last month, Misys announced the planned $60 million acquistion of Summit Systems, a New York computer company specialising in financial derivatives trading software.
Supplying software to banks and insurers has brought rich rewards to Misys. The group raised pretax profits in the half year by 23 percent to 23.7 million pounds on revenues of 129.5 million pounds -- 10 percent higher than in the last half year.
Lomax said he saw the possibility of "creating quite a bit of shareholder value" by buying regional software companies, particularly in the banking industry.
The group has bought software businesses in risk management, private banking, corporate electronic banking, derivatives trading, capital markets trading --- areas where banks and securities firms want to expand and control their activities.
In the last 12 months, Misys's shares have more than doubled to 1140 pence from 567 pence as the group systematically targets international financial institutions that need new software at lower costs but with a greater security of transactions.
Lomax insists that he is unworried by the share price, which at about 20 times prospective earnings, no longer looks cheap. Competitors' price/earnings ratios are comparable, he says.
But the stock has slipped recently, and was trading 2.5 pence weaker at 1115p by 1115 GMT -- despite the strong results.
In terms of international banking, Misys is three to five times bigger than its competitors. Large rivals such as Reuters Holdings Plc and America's SunGard Data Systems impinge only on parts of its market, Lomax noted.
"Nobody of any serious calibre or size competes across the board with us."
The group lifted its half year dividend 15 percent to 4.57p.
($1=.6199 Pound)
