Misys, Britain's fast-growing, 950 million pound software supply giant, said on Wednesday it was looking at four or five international acquisition targets worth up to $30 million each.
Chairman Kevin Lomax told Reuters that Misys, which has snapped up software trading firms in South East Asia, Ireland, the U.S. and Europe, was keen on businesses that operated within a strong international financial services market.  
"They (possible acquisition targets) are worth mainly between $2.0 million to $30 million -- and we might do one, we might do four," Lomax said.
With 18.7 million pounds of cash and an undisclosed, but low gearing level, Lomax said the company had plently of headroom in its cash flow and borrowing facilities to enable it to embark again on the acquisition trail.
Supplying software to banks and insurers has brought rich rewards to Misys. The group earlier raised pretax profits in the half year by 23 percent to 23.7 million pounds on revenues of 129.5 million pounds -- a 10 percent rise.  
Lomax said he saw the possibility of "creating quite a bit of shareholder value" by buying regional software companies, particularly in the banking industry.
Misys, whose banking division alone now supplies software to 12,000 banks and 4,000 installations, has become one of the world's largest application software companies as consolidation in the industry gathers pace.
In the last 12 months, its shares have almost doubled to 1115 pence from 567 pence as it systematically targets international financial institutions that need new software at lower costs but with a greater security of transactions.  
Lomax insists that he is unworried by the share price, which at about 20 times prospective earnings, no longer looks cheap. Competitors' PE ratios are comparable, he says.
But the stock slipped 2.5p to 1115p despite record results.
The company has bought software businesses in risk management, private banking, corporate electronic banking, derivatives trading, capital markets trading --- areas where banks and securities firms want to expand and control their activities.
"Internal production is not meeting the time to market requirements that these companies have -- so they tend to look outside to other (software) products," Lomax says.
Only last month, Misys announced the planned $60 million acquistion of Summit Systems, a New York computer company specialising in financial derivatives trading software.
In terms of international banking, Misys is three to five times bigger than its next competitor. Rivals such as Reuters Holdings and America's SunGard Data Systems impinge only on parts of its market, Lomax noted.
"Nobody of any serious calibre or size competes across the board with us."
The group lifted its half year dividend 15 percent to 4.57p.
London Newsroom +44 171 542 7987
