British Telecommunications admitted on Thursday to not sharing the same culture as its merger partner MCI Communications, America's second largest international carrier.
But after reporting robust third quarter profits, helped by "healthy" demand for its products and services, BT's chief executive Sir Peter Bonfield told reporters, "We are open minded that these things (mergers) have their pitfalls on culture."
Commentators have dubbed BT "staid" and MCI "spunky". But Bonfield said MCI staff he had met so far had been "amazingly enthusiastic" about the two companies' planned $20 billion merger, which BT expects European and American regulators to clear by this autumn.
After a 39 million pound ($64 million) charge for redundancies, BT's third quarter pretax profits rose to 909 million pounds ($1.45 billion) from 829 million pounds last time -- towards the upper end of analysts expectations.
BT announced last October that it planned to buy the 80 percent of MCI that it did not already own. The new group, called Concert Plc, aims to service multinational companies end-to-end and be represented in all the world's key nations.
BT also hopes to become the second telecoms operator in continental Europe as key markets are eased open to competition in 1998 and is itching to get into lucrative Asian markets.
BT has one of the most comprehensive network partnerships across Europe, having set up joint ventures in about eight continental European markets worth more than $140 billion.
In a move to boost its German venture, BT announced that Norwegian telecoms operator Telenor had agreed in principle to take a 10 percent stake in VIAG InterKom, the alliance BT has set up with German engineering conglomerate VIAG AG.
Telenor brings with it vital expertise from operating in one of the world's most saturated markets for mobile telephones. Having won a mobile and fixed-line licence in Germany, BT said VIAG InterKom would be the first major telecoms copany to exploit the convergence between the two services.
In December, BT beat arch-rivals Deutsche Telekom and France Telecom by clinching a deal with TeleDanmark in Switzerland's second telecom network Newtelco.
While global telecoms groups jockey for position in a race to secure lucrative services to multinational companies, Japan is seen as the last major frontier.
BT has been wooing Japan's Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corp, the world's biggest telecoms titan, for years.
While NTT takes its time to decide how best to enter the international market, BT's finance director Robert Brace told Reuters that the group did not expect an MCI-type deal in the Asian telecoms markets "in the next few years".
"I think we will continue to develop on a global basis as and when the opportunities arrive," he said.
Bonfield, who was in Japan last week, said NTT was too big a company to risk linking up with a single company.
"But it may come up with a preferred partner -- and we would like to be that partner," he said. BT, which already has a technology agreement with NTT, is keen to use the $150 billion group's lines to sell its Concert services to business clients.
BT's share price, which has surged to new year highs of 450p in the run-up to results, seesawed despite what SocGen's analyst John Tysoe called "a good, cheerful presentation".
Tysoe has edged up his full year forecast to a pretax profit of 3.2 billion pounds, largely because of a 50 million pound reduction in the level of expected redundancy charges.
BT saw net cash inflow swell to 4.4 billion pounds in the first nine months and has now got a hefty 211 million pounds of funds on its balance sheet.
