Schroders Plc, one of the great British merchant banks, on Friday delivered record half-year profits along with a warning that conditions for its businesses may become more uncertain.
"Although the second half has started reasonably well, it will not be easy to match two successive record half years," the the bank said while posting a first-half pretax profit of 115.9 million pounds ($181.5 million) compared to 85.6 million in 1995.
"With elections imminent in the U.S. and UK and with equity markets in those countries testing all-time highs, conditions for our businesses may become more uncertain," Schroders added, sending its shares spinning lower.
Schroders, which lifted its half year dividend 33 percent to 6.0 pence -- the top-end of forecasts -- said the environment for the financial sector had been benign, with financial markets, banking and leasing the major contributors to profits.
Analysts expected the merchant bank, whose shares have seen some hot money thrown at them as bid speculation refuses to die down, to report pretax profits of 106-125 million pounds.
But although first-half results were in line with forecasts, Schroders' shares dived 57.5 pence lower to 13.90 pounds as the market took stock of the company's cautious outlook.
"Talk about uncertain business conditions is not what investors wants to hear," noted one London market-maker.
Some analysts warned that they may scale back profit forecasts despite a healthy growth in profits at Schroders' investment banking arm.
The division saw profits rise to 50.7 million pounds from 41.7 million and Schroders said it had gained a number of prominent new clients. Earnings from its securities businesses in North America and Europe grew "satisfactorily", but activity in Asia/Pacific operations was more subdued, it stated.
The merchant bank's asset management division was boosted by a strong inflow of new businesses and total funds under management rose 13 percent to 83.4 billion pounds.
Schroders said it had built up an "outstanding performance record" in emerging markets, adding that a significant proportion of new business inflow related to new appointments to manage funds in emerging markets.
Pretax profit at the division jumped to 65.2 million pounds from 43.9 million in the same period last year, partly reflecting a delay as profits from new funds feed through.
Some analysts say Schroders' controlling family holding may hinder a takeover. But others believe that the bank may not be able to hang onto its independence for more than two years as the desire for fresh capital for its investment banking arm becomes overwhelming.
This could either lead to a full-scale merger or as a tie-up such as the one brokered between merchant bank Rothschild and ABN Amro, analysts say. ($1=.6385 Pound)
