British households are likely to pay less for water and get a better service from cash-rich privatised utility companies in the next decade, the industry regulator promised consumers on Wednesday.
Water watchdog Ian Byatt told privatised water companies -- whose bills and fat executive wages have fuelled vitriolic criticism from consumer groups -- that he expected them to pass on significant efficiency savings to customers in 2000.
"Lower costs mean falling bills," Byatt warned them in a letter setting out his proposed objectives and timetable for the price review, which will be completed in December 1999.
"At the next review, I will expect companies to demonstrate improving standards for their customers and efficiency gains will allow prices to come down in real terms, despite continuing capital investments," he said.
Byatt, who plans to call this summer for comments on his plans, will impose new price curbs on 29 water and sewerage companies in England and Wales from April 1, 2000.
A spokesman for the Water Services Association trade group said that lower bills depended on what new quality and environmental obligations were be set by Europe and Britain -- and how much needed to be spent on new water resources.
But the Ofwat National Customer Council consumer group said that in the absence of competition, it was looking to Byatt to take "the toughest action possible" to get water bills down.
"In my view, water companies have rewarded their shareholders handsomely but have treated their customers much more mean-spiritedly," said deputy chairman Clive Wilkinson. "Customers have had enough of big profits and rising dividends and, at best, being handed back the small change."
Water groups are the only utilities to have raised prices since privatisation in 1989, blaming costly infrastructure investments and new swimming and drinking water quality control directives from the European Union.
The opposition Labour Party, which is expected to levy a one-off tax on the profits of privatised utilities if it comes to power in the next election, is widely considered to have discovered one of the few "popular" taxes.
Headlines such as: "Like water off a duck's back" greeted Byatt's last review, which came into effect in 1995, as shares surged. Consumer groups charged that Byatt had been too lenient.
But Byatt said one of the new review's main aims would be to ensure that water companies' savings over the last five years should be quickly given to customers.
He also does not want spending on water quality, maintaining supplies and reducing leakage -- which sparked criticism during a drought in 1995 -- to be passed onto household bills.
Amid charges that regulators are out of touch with the industry and underestimate its cash-spinning powers, Byatt is mulling appointing senior industrialists to help find a balance between consumer bills and maintaining companies' efficiency incentives.
London's Thames Water charges the least for water -- not being responisble for any coastline. Average bills, at 180 pounds ($294) per year, are some 80 percent higher than in 1989.
Exeter-based South West Water, with its long coastline, has the highest bills at about 330 pounds per year -- a 121 percent rise -- according to 1995-96 figures. ($1=.6120 Pound)
