Human rights activists and the computer industry joined in a rare show of cooperation on Thursday, urging more effective policing of pornography and violence in the anarchic "virtual wild west" of the Internet.
    Stories proliferate about pornography, sexual   violence
against women and children, bomb-making recipes, incitement to racial hatred and do-it-yourself fraud schemes that are available at various computer Web sites.
"We acknowledge the problems, we're not abdicating responsibility," said Janet Henderson, lawyer and rights strategy manager for Internet services at British Telecommunications.
"We do have the well-being of customers and ultimately their fundamental freedoms at heart," she told the first European conference on combating violence and pornography in cyberspace.
Lawyers have been studying how to police what appears to be a regulatory vacuum without national boundaries -- while trying to distinguish between what is illegal and what is, more subjectively, harmful.
BT, which launched its Internet access service last March, has adopted what it calls a "taste and decency" policy. Any illegal material found through its access to the computer network is reported to the Internet Watch Foundation, which was created last October.
The foundation, which will pass on information about potentially illegal material to the police, also wants to encourage legal material to be classified, allowing users to block access to certain subjects with filtering software.
Henderson said the Internet allowed anonymous worldwide distribution of vast amounts of extremely violent material and child pornography. But access providers could not be the "moral guardians of the nation".
"Slow but sure is the approach we are taking," she said.
Speakers agreed that without knowing the names of "obscene" websites, even spending hours wandering through cyberspace was unlikely to reveal anything more perturbing than walking into a newsagents. Only with "a great level of intent and technical expertise" was it possible to find obscene material, they said.
But German human rights campaigner Monika Gerstendorfer noted that the Internet made it easier for groups, such as extreme political organisations, to communicate and gather forces worldwide.
German Chancellor Helmut Kohl's cabinet last year approved a bill that will ban websites spreading Nazi propaganda, distributing hardcore pornography to minors and conducting fraudulent business.
The German division of the world's second largest online service, CompuServe GmbH, has said it would consider moving its operations to a neighbouring country if German laws forced Internet companies to control porn on their networks.
