Shareholders in Anglo-American conglomerate Hanson Plc Friday overwhelmingly approved the final part of the group's ambitious four-way split-up.
The approval clears the way for its Energy Group division to be spun off on Monday. About 98 percent of shareholders voted for the plan.
The vote ended an era that saw Hanson, under takeover king Lord Hanson and his late partner Lord White, become a star performer in the 1980s as it grew into one of Britain's largest conglomerates.
But with a stock market that showed its mistrust of conglomerates by sharply marking down their shares, Hanson last January announced that it would tear itself up into separate tobacco, chemicals, energy and building companies.
Energy has two main parts, U.S.-Australian Peabody Coal, the world's largest private coal producer, and Eastern, Britain's fourth-largest electricity generator and distribution business.
Analysts said the company has good growth prospects but is difficult to value because of its diversity.
"I genuinely think if there is a chance of growth this is it, but valuing Energy is difficult because it is a very different animal from other utility stocks," said one analyst who asked not to be named.
David Campbell, an analyst at Craig Middleton, said he forecasts earnings growth of around 12 percent annually over the next two years.
Analysts said the potential for using electricity expertise to help Peabody Coal expand in this area in the United States could help Energy's growth.
"Peabody could be the most interesting. It's a clear chance to expand into electricity in the U.S.," one said.
Energy has already said it is mulling a string of acquisitions in Britain and North America and has started talks with a U.S. power marketing company.
The company will join a British electricity sector that has been whittled down by take-overs over the last two years as regional electric companies were bought, leaving just two out of an original twelve created at privatissation in 1990.
There has been some speculation Peabody Coal could be spun off from the British electricity interests, but on Friday, Hanson chairman Lord Hanson ruled this out.
"No, I have had enough of demergers (split-ups) and I think (the two) fit very well together," he replied to a shareholder question.
The group, which is expected to start with market value of around 2.8 billion pounds ($4.5 billion) and is being sold with 1.4 billion pounds of debt ($2.3 billion), will be large enough to rank among Britain's biggest blue-chip companies and America's Fortune 500. Shares of the company will be listed in London and New York.
The split-up will give shareholders one Energy share for every 10 existing Hanson shares held. Every eight shares in the remaining Hanson group will be consolidated into one new share at the same time.
Hanson's first two split-ups, of Britain's Imperial Tobacco Group Plc and U.S.-listed Millennium Chemicals Inc., took place last October.
