Shareholders in Anglo-American conglomerate Hanson overwhelmingly approved the group's final plank of its ambitious four-way demerger on Friday, clearing the way for its Energy Group division to be spun off on Monday.
About 98 percent of shareholders voted for the motion, ending an era of wheeler-dealing that created Britain's once mighty conglomerate which, under takeover king Lord Hanson and his late partner Lord White, became a star performer in the 1980s.
But with a stock market that showed its mistrust of conglomerates by sharply marking down their shares, Hanson last January announced that it would tear itself up into separate tobacco, chemicals, energy and building companies.
"I am very pleased with the outcome of the meeting," Energy Group's chairman Derek Bonham told Reuters after the shareholder vote on the final demerger of the Energy Group and a share consolidation.
"And I am personally very excited about the prospects for the Energy Group in the future."
Energy, which will be listed in London and New York, has said it is already mulling a string of acquisitions in Britain and North America, which some analysts say could be worth up to 1.4 billion pounds ($2.3 billion).
Bonham also confirmed that the group was still in acquisition talks with a U.S. power marketing company.
The group, which is expected to start with a market value of around 2.8 billion pounds and is being sold with 1.4 billion pounds of debt, will be large enough to rank among Britain's biggest FTSE 100 blue-chip companies and America's Fortune 500.
Bonham dismissed speculation that Energy would embark on a further sub-demerger of its two main components -- U.S.-Australian Peabody Coal and Britain's largest regional electricity company Eastern Group -- referred to by one shareholder as an "unhappy marriage".
"No, I have had enough of demergers and I think (the two) fit very well together," he told the shareholder meeting.
Energy executives want the company, which says its year dividend will be an indicative 22 pence, to be viewed as a growth stock rather than a utility.
Peabody is the world's largest private coal producer -- still a cheaper fuel than gas in the U.S. -- and Eastern Group is the only fully integrated electricity and gas company in England and Wales.
"Energy will be substantially cash generative until it starts making acquisitions," noted David Campbell, electricity analyst at brokers Greig Middleton.
The demerger will give shareholders one Energy share for every 10 existing Hanson shares held. Every eight shares in the remaining Hanson group will be consolidated into one new share at the same time.
Hanson's first two demergers, of Britain's Imperial Tobacco and U.S.-quoted Millennium Chemicals, took place last October.
Unofficial grey market trading has already begun in both Energy and the new Hanson shares ahead of the split.
Energy saw its shares trade at 520 pence, a loss of 6.5 pence on Friday, while new Hanson shares, the rump building group that retains the old household name, were quoted at 287.5 pence, a loss of six pence.
Bonham, who newspapers say takes home a basic pay package of 450,000 pounds annually, also fielded questions from at least four shareholders who said they were "nauseated" and "aghast" at the executive pay and bonus packages that company directors awarded themselves.
He said that long-term incentive plans, geared to total shareholder return, ensured that executives only got paid what they deserved.
($ = 0.619 British Pounds)
