Sema Group, the fast-growing Anglo-French information technology group, said on Friday it was banking on growth from its telecoms and business systems operations in 1997.
But director of communications Marie-Claude Bessis told Reuters that although the group was seeking to expand into Germany and the U.S., Sema plans to focus on maintaining robust organic growth this financial year.
"1997 will be a year of integration...It will not be a year of acquisitions like 1996 and even 1995," Bessis told Reuters by telephone from Paris.
"From 1997 we will see the opportunities...But the objective will be to integrate the acquisitions, to maintain a strong organic growth and to accelerate the telecom and business system market," she said.
Spending on technology is surging in the fast-growing telecoms market and Sema has signed agreements with Global One -- the alliance of Sprint, Deutsche Telekom and France Telecom, which is an indirect shareholder in Sema -- and AT&amp;T.
The group is developing value-added services and two-way messaging for AT&amp;T's wireless arm and is integrating the computer systems of Global One.
Sema's first rights issue to raise 99 million stg for acquisitions and growth last year has left the group with 18 million stg of cash and no gearing.
And acquisitions such as the purchase of France Telecom's stake in IT systems integration business Telis last year have given Sema substantial new resources and know-how in the fixed telephone market.
A recent acquisition spree has brought not only Telis, but British Rail's business services arm and a majority stake in Olivetti's Sytax processing unit into Sema's fold. The first two are expected to add 170 million stg to group turnover in 1997.
Sema, which is quoted on the London and Paris stock exchanges, earlier reported a 35 percent rise in annual year pre-tax profits to 50 million stg on sales of 927 million stg -- a rise of 37 percent.
Organic growth rose a sharp 20 percent and its order book jumped 66 percent to 1.25 billion pounds. But Bessis said she expected average annual growth of around 13 percent from all businesses, including the slower technology arm which includes control and command systems for the Royal Navy.
Sema's telecoms systems business saw 44 percent growth and its business systems, which includes the high-margin outsourcing and systems integrations operations, saw 46 percent growth over the year, Bessis said.
The company, whose shares have surged from 532p to 1275 pence over the year, was one of the best performers on the stock exchange last year.
And Sema says it is unconcerned at its soaring price earnings ratio of around 40 times which could make the shares look expensive.
It's a good sector and it's a company which is growing spectacularly," Bessis said. "We've had five years of tremendous results -- not just one year."
But the shares slipped 23.5p to 1226.5p by 1115 GMT.
Double-digit compound growth is expected to be fuelled by the vast workload as companies prepare computer systems for European Monetary Union and what has been dubbed the "millenium problem" -- adjusting computers to handle dates from 2000.
The bill for these preparations has been tipped by consultants and analysts to be anything from 32-360 billion pounds.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 7987
