If every person in Russia and Germany turned on their televisions, that would equal the number of Chinese who have watched a primetime documentary on the life of China's paramount leader Deng Xiaoping.
"There is a rather high viewership," said one official of China Central Television (CCTV) when asked how many of China's 1.2 billion people were watching the 12-part documentary launched with much fanfare on New Year's Day.
He estimated the ratings at 28 percent of the estimated 800 million Chinese who have access to a television -- or 224 million people sitting in front of their screens every evening at 8.00 p.m. (1200 GMT) for the past 12 days.
That compares with about 40 million who watch the nightly evening news -- a stultifying menu of Communist Party leaders meeting visiting heads of state or issuing political pronouncements and images of factory output successes.
It outstrips ratings of recent popular soap operas, although it cannot match the number who watch the spectacle of song and dance that transfixes China on Lunar New Year's Eve.
Deng Xiaoping has faced scant competition from other channels for the eyes of China's television audience.
Usual primetime viewing offers a choice between game shows, soap operas imbued with socialist propaganda or saccharine love stories imported from Singapore or Hong Kong.
The decision to run the series, after four years of shooting and post-production, followed a surprise, last-minute edict from China's propaganda tsars, CCTV officials said.
Officials were unable to explain why it was necessary to wait until early December to schedule broadcast of a documentary that had been in the works for so long.
Political analysts said the paean was aimed at stressing the importance of Deng in the year when Hong Kong will return to Beijing sovereignty under an accord he brokered, but when poor health will prevent him from attending the ceremony.
Speculation abounds of Deng's fragility, ranging from rumours of his sudden admission to hospital in recent days to reports that he remains at home with little change in his health but no longer mentally alert.
Deng has not been seen in public for nearly three years -- a result of his own desire to retire from the front of stage to a behind-the-scenes role, as well as his failing health, analysts say. In his last appearance he looked weak and faltering.
CCTV's advertising department had long ago sold all space for advertisements to accompany a soap opera due to be shown in early January at the usual rates of about 70,000 yuan ($8,400) per 15 seconds when the sudden reprogramming order arrived.
It was regarded as inappropriate to interrupt with advertising each 45-minute episode on the man whose pragmatic market policies turned a backward Stalinist state into an economic powerhouse.
As a result, viewers have been regaled with a breathless commentary on the achievements of China's architect of reform sandwiched between 15 minutes of advertisements ranging from sanitary napkins, instant noodles and soap to pumpkin seeds, insurance, toothpaste and shampoo.
CCTV's advertising department said it had not received any complaints from customers expecting to sell their karaoke machines or chocolate during a soap opera and instead found their products linked to a tribute to China's political boss.
