China has set up a special bureau to fight corruption, and the new organisation is empowered to tackle extreme cases involving the most senior officials, the official Xinhua news agency said on Tuesday.
The Special Case Investigation Section (SCIS) had been set up to to investigate more serious or extreme cases of corruption this year, Xinhua said, in a hint that Beijing may be ready to take on more high-ranking officials over graft.
The SCIS would target "extremely severe legal cases and disciplinary offenses by officials at or above the department level in central government offices and those at or above the vice-governor level in local areas", it quoted an official with the Supreme People's Procuratorate as saying.
The SCIS is part of the Law and Discipline Department of the Procuratorate.
"This has been a major step by the Procuratorate to make a breakthrough in solving cases of neglect of duty by state employees, or violations of citizens' rights, abuse of power, and other major crimes," the official said.
The SCIS was now organising a 50-member team and would start its work as soon as possible, he said.
China's procurators have said they face an uphill task to tackle corruption that has sprung up nationwide and at all levels of the Communist Party and government since paramount leader Deng Xiaoping launched his market reforms in 1978.
Harsh penalties, including the death penalty in extremely large or high-level cases, have failed to deter greedy officials.
Communist Party chief Jiang Zemin has warned repeatedly that graft is a virus that could eventually topple the party if it is allowed to spread unchecked.
It was not clear whether the new task force would be empowered to take on the case of disgraced former Beijing municipal party boss, Chen Xitong, who has been under investigation since April, 1995 for suspected corruption.
In 1995, Chen became the first member of the ruling Politburo to be sacked for corruption since the 1949 communist takeover. He has yet to be charged.
A former colleague, Beijing vice-mayor Zhang Baifa said last month that Chen could face disciplinary action for alleged dereliction of duty but was unlikely to face charges of graft.
Chen's case had been one of the most difficult, China's top corruption official said last year, describing the problems of fighting graft in the face of powerful interference.
Chen and his associates had prepared well for investigation, changing bank accounts, altering contracts and making sure their testimony was consistent, Luo Ji, director of the Supreme People's Procuratorate's General Anti-Corruption and Bribery Administration said.
Official graft was almost unknown in China under the authoritiarian rule of the late Chairman Mao Zedong, but has boomed as Deng's reforms have opened up loopholes in the system and unprecedented opportunities for officials to profit from their positions.
Chen's departure from power came only after Beijing vice-mayor Wang Baosen committed suicide after coming under investigation in a $37 million corruption scam.
