China warned the Vatican on Tuesday not to meddle in its religious affairs, specifying that missionary work and appointments of bishops were the prerogative of Beijing.
"China acts in line with its own national circumstances in administering its religious affairs," Foreign Ministry spokesman Shen Guofang told a news briefing.
Chinese authorities keep a tight grip on religious activities amid nervousness in the ruling Communist Party that unauthorised religious gatherings could lead to local instabilty that would threaten its rule.
Asked to comment on a meeting scheduled for Tuesday between the Pope and Taiwan Vice-President Lien Chan, Foreign Ministry spokesman Shen told the Holy See not to interfere.
Beijing is bound to be further angered by the meeting, and wants the Vatican to sever ties with Taiwan, which China has regarded as a rebel province since their civil war ended in 1949.
Lien will be the highest-ranking Taiwanese official to visit the Vatican.
China also appeared irked by a statement by Pope John Paul on Monday that the Vatican would closely watch how Catholics in Hong Kong were treated after the British colony is handed over to Beijing in July.
"We would hope to have no interference in our religious affairs, and when we talk about interference, the scope is very wide, not only including missionary work but also in appointments of bishops," Shen said.
"These should all be independently determined by China and there should be no interference by the Vatican," he said.
In his annual "state of the world" address to diplomats accredited to the Vatican, the 76-year-old Pope said on Monday the Holy See would be monitoring events in Hong Kong after the July 1 handover from Britain to Beijing.
The Pope was "trusting that respect for differences, for the fundamental rights of the human person and for the rule of law will accompany this new journey forward".
Last year the Pope appointed Shanghai-born Monsignor Joseph Zen, 64, as coadjudicator bishop of Hong Kong, which means he will eventually succceed Cardinal Joseph Wu as Catholic leader.
By appointing a bishop with right of succession before the handover, the Pope sought to guarantee continuity for the church in Hong Kong and effectively bypassed consultations with Beijing that would probably become necessary after July 1.
Beijing does not allow Catholics to recognise the Pope's authority.
Chinese Catholics who want to worship openly must belong to the state-controlled Chinese Catholic Patriotic Association. Those loyal to the Pope worship secretly.
China's Catholic and Protestant churches, both tightly controlled by the state, claim several million believers but many more are believed to worship at underground churches.
