China urged the United States on Wednesday to grant it permanent Most Favoured Nation (MFN) trading status, despite U.S. congressional doubts over whether Beijing will keep its promises on recovering Hong Kong.
"Granting China permanent MFN status is good for the healthy development of Sino-U.S. relations," an official with the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation (MOFTEC) said.
"We will never change our position and attitude to the United States."
Chinese hopes of winning over Washington from its annual review on renewal of MFN appeared to fade this week as visiting U.S. Congressman Jim Kolbe said China was unlikely to win permanent MFN status this year.
"I do not believe this year we will grant permanent MFN status to China," the Arizona Republican said on Tuesday.
U.S. concerns over whether China will keep its promise to leave Hong Kong untouched after the British colony reverts to Chinese rule this year would slow Beijing's hopes, he said.
"We want to monitor Hong Kong for a year before we make any change," Kolbe told reporters in Beijing.
President Bill Clinton would have to certify the move in June. China recovers sovereignty at midnight on June 30.
MFN grants China the same tariff treatment accorded other U.S. trading partners.
"The U.S. annual review of MFN status is totally wrong," said an official at MOFTEC's research institute.
"It is a product of the Cold War," said the official who declined to be identified. "Times have changed, but the United States still sticks to this view. It is unreasonable."
China hailed Clinton's decision in 1995 to delink the annual renewal of MFN from China's human rights record.
Beijing has since been pushing hard for the United States to end the whole annual review process that precedes renewal of MFN status to China and to grant permanent rights.
"China's attitude is clear, that these benefits should be granted mutually," the research institute official said.
"This is not some kind of special favoured treatment that they gave us. This is part of normal trade relations so it is not necessary to review it every year," he said.
"Our position is determined, you must give us this every year and do not need to review it," he said, adding that U.S. business groups were also opposed to the review system.
Some U.S. senators have urged Washington to grant China permanent MFN status on grounds the annual review was a disadvantage to the United States and caused uncertainty to business.
The doubts over Hong Kong were unlikely to interrupt a smiling campaign by Chinese leaders after President Jiang Zemin granted a rare meeting meeting to Kolbe and other members of the U.S. House of Representatives to try to boost ties with the American Congress.
Beijing and Washington have been trying to mend ties that were badly strained by a series of disputes over the last two years ranging from Taiwan, which China considers a renegade province, to trade and human rights.
Last November, Jiang and Clinton agreed on an exchange of presidential visits in 1997 and 1998, which would be the first since President George Bush came to China in early 1989.
