China hinted to Guatemala on Thursday that it should sever ties with Beijing's arch-rival Taiwan if it hoped to persuade Beijing to lift its U.N. veto on sending peacekeepers to the Central American nation.
"The attitude and position of the Chinese government is very flexible on this matter," Foreign Ministry spokesman Shen Guofang told a news briefing.
Asked about ongoing talks at the United Nations between China and Guatemala after Beijing exercised its veto in the Security Council last week to kill a U.N. plan to monitor disarmament and a ceasefire in Guatemala, Shen said Beijing's door was open.
Shen lashed out at Guatemala's decision to invite Taiwan Foreign Minister John Chang to last month's peace signing ceremony in Guatemala City as a violation of the spirit and principles of the United Nations, but held out an olive branch.
"We still think the door to discussions between China and Guatemala is open," he said. "We would like to hold talks with the Guatemala government at any time."
Shen stopped short of saying Beijing wanted Guatemala to break off diplomatic relations with Taiwan.
"The United Nations admits only one China, so if a country keeps so-called diplomatic relations with Taiwan then it violates the spirit and principles of the U.N.," he said.
"Therefore the Guatemala government should make arrangements to respect the principles of the U.N.," he said.
U.N. diplomats said China had requested the meeting with Guatemala in New York to try to repair the effects of its controversial veto that barred U.N. observers from monitoring a Guatemalan peace pact. The meeting was likely to continue on Thursday, diplomats said.
The fact that China and Guatemala were talking despite a lack of diplomatic ties fuelled worries on Taiwan that Beijing might succeed in tempting Guatemala to follow South Africa's recent example and sever ties with Taipei in favour of Beijing.
Shen was rather more direct.
"We hope the Guatemala government will take concrete actions to get rid of the obstruction and guarantee they will never support Taiwan either inside or outside the U.N.," he said.
China is angry with Guatemala not only for recognising Taiwan but for joining a number of other small Latin American countries since 1993 to sponsor a General Assembly resolution aimed at securing U.N. membership for the Asian economic powerhouse.
Shen urged Guatemala not to support what he called Taiwanese activities aimed at gaining independence for the island that Beijing has regarded as a renegade province since the end of the Chinese civil war in 1949.
It was the first time China had exercised its U.N. Security Council veto in nearly 24 years, and underlined its determination to try to force Taiwan into diplomatic isolation.
Taipei on Thursday denounced Beijing for using its Security Council seat to squeeze Latin American states.
"We should altogether condemn communist China's acts of using its influence in the U.N. Security Council to interfere in the internal affairs of Central and South American countries," said Foreign Ministry deputy spokesman Chen Yung-tso.
Taiwan has given generous economic aid to several small, impoverished nations around the world in its bid to break out of a diplomatic isolation imposed by China. Taiwan was expelled from the United Nations in 1971 and replaced by Beijing as the rightful representative of China.
China has never spelled out publicly what Guatemala was expected to do. But diplomats said it sought a pledge to refrain from sponsoring further pro-Taiwan U.N. resolutions and to stop receiving high-ranking Taiwanese visitors.
