China lashed out on Friday at U.S.-based Human Rights Watch, saying some political prisoners the group defended were convicted rapists and swindlers, and accused it of adopting a Cold War mentality.
The chapter on China in the World Report 1997 released by the human rights monitoring group last month "contains malicious and slanderous attacks against China's human rights situation and is frivolous and unjust", the official Xinhua news agency said.
Beijing regularly retaliates against criticism of its human rights record, regarding it as interference in its internal affairs and saying its priority is to fulfil the right of its 1.2 billion people to food and clothing.
"The report terms those criminals who have been convicted of crimes such as hooliganism, swindling, bribery and embezzlement and endangering the state security as 'dissidents' and 'political prisoners'," Xinhua said, quoting an official of the China Society for the Study of Human Rights.
"This cannot but make the readers suspicious of its true intentions," he said.
In the past year, China has effectively silenced its tiny community of dissidents, jailing several for lengthy terms for crimes ranging from hooliganism to plotting to subvert the state and sentencing others to up to three years of re-education through labour.
"They are feeling under pressure as a result of groups such as ours on human rights," Robin Munro, who runs the Hong Kong office of Human Rights Watch/Asia, said by telephone.
"Rather than respond to the criticisms it is much easier to try to discredit and undermine the charges," he said. "It is hard to take this kind of vituperative diatribe seriously."
The report contained the first official confirmation that Guo Haifeng, a leader of 1989 student demonstrations for more democracy, had been sentenced -- receiving a five-year jail term last November for the catch-all crime of hooliganism.
"He later raped six women, married or unmarried, in defiance of laws, by tempting them with the ways of talking about love affairs or buying houses, which constituted hooliganism," Xinhua said.
Chinese courts frequently sentence people to jail for hooliganism in cases where sex outside marriage, rather than rape, may have occurred. Sex outside marriage is an offence in China, while rape is punishable by death.
Guo had confessed to his crimes, Xinhua said, dismissing the Human Rights Watch report that Guo had been jailed for helping another dissident flee the country.
Xinhua attacked Human Rights Watch for describing Xiao Biguang as a political prisoner when he had been ordered in 1994 to serve three years of re-education through labour for swindling.
"They know perfectly well that he was sentenced for his activities in the underground church in China and in labour relations," Munro said of Xiao.
The Chinese human rights researcher accused Human Rights Watch of maintaining a Cold War mentality, of political bias against a socialist China and said it had become "the most aggressive vanguard of the anti-China force".
"If Human Rights Watch persists in acting as the instigator and troublemaker in creating conflicts over the issue of human rights, it will certainly become a hindrance and stumbling block in the development of the world human rights cause," he said.
