Xi Yang was a Hong Kong reporter looking for a scoop.
China jailed him for stealing state secrets as a warning and then freed him when it needed a chip to smoothe choppy waters as its plans for governing Hong Kong ran into a storm.
After two of the more difficult weeks so far in China's march toward its July 1 resumption of sovereignty over the British colony of Hong Kong, Beijing abruptly freed Xi Yang on Saturday from a 12-year sentence for spying and stealing state secrets.
"There really isn't much room for any other interpretation," said one Western diplomat in Beijing.
"They needed to make a gesture to Hong Kong to show they cared about human rights and releasing Xi Yang was probably one of the easiest ways to do that -- and at very little cost."
Beijing prison authorities notified Xi Yang at 8.00 a.m. (0000 GMT) on Saturday morning that he was being released on parole, and 12 hours later he arrived in Hong Kong -- a free man for the first time since his arrest in October 1993.
Xi was paroled because he "showed signs of repentance", the official Xinhua news agency said, but gave no more details.
China viewed his article in the Hong Kong Ming Bao newspaper on Beijing's interest rate policy and its gold reserves as a theft of state secrets and central bank clerk Tian Ye was jailed for 15 years for leaking the information.
Diplomats said the harsh sentence against Xi Yang had served its purpose both as a warning to the free and feisty media in Hong Kong as to limits on their coverage after Beijing resumes sovereignty and to stop reporters from uncovering news not published in the state-run Chinese media.
"By locking him up they made their point about press freedoms," said one Asian diplomat.
"Whether they jailed him for two years or 50 years, it doesn't matter because they have succeeded in reinforcing the notion to Hong Kong journalists that they can't export their press freedoms into China," he said.
"They have made their point that 'don't think you can have it your way'," he said.
The timing of Xi's parole was no coincidence, diplomats diplomats said.
"It's been a tough couple of weeks for them over Hong Kong, and here was a gesture of reconciliation they could make at very little cost," the Western diplomat said.
China and Hong Kong's outgoing colonial masters have become embroiled in a row over Beijing's plans to dilute civil liberties by rolling back the Bill of Rights and laws on freedom of association in Hong Kong after the handover.
China's decision aroused protest in Hong Kong and sparked expressions of concern from the United States.
Xi Yang's release Yang offered an opportunity to Beijing to demonstrate to Hong Kong it can be flexible on human rights, diplomats said.
Beijing has found from past experience that releasing a dissident at strategic moments can smoothe the path of international diplomacy.
China freed veteran democracy activist Wei Jingsheng in 1993 when it was vying to win the 2000 Olympic Games and paroled dissident Chen Ziming a year later in a successful bid to persuade Washington not to revoke its Most Favoured Nation trading status on grounds of human rights violations.
