China tightened its grip on the media on Sunday with directives on how to write news, ordering journalists not to advocate sex, violence and superstition and to fill their reports with patriotism and socialism.
The latest guidelines from China's propaganda mandarins come amid an ongoing crackdown on ideas that step out of line with party precepts, and which has been billed as a campaign to promote spiritual civilisation, or civic responsibility.
Quoting Communist Party chief Jiang Zemin's Stalinist description of reporters as "engineers of the human soul", the All China Journalists' Association issued a communique to reporters to submit to the "supervision of the party and the people".
The association set up a hotline for the public to report journalists who break the new rules, in a move reminiscent of the witchhunts of the ultra-leftist 1966-76 Cultural Revolution and other political campaigns espoused by Chairman Mao Zedong.
To ensure China's reporters were familiar with what they should and should not do, the China News Workers' Association issued a detailed six-part directive via the official Xinhua news agency.
Top of the list was "wholeheartedly to serve the people".
To achieve this goal, the directive urged reporters to fulfil their supervisory role by "bravely criticising and exposing erroneous words and actions and corrupt phenomena that harm the people's interests".
Party chief and state president Jiang has personally mounted a drive to stamp out corruption, a plague he has warned could topple the party, and has used propaganda to back his cause.
However, the new directive also specifies events from which reporters should steer clear and the tone in which they should cover topics that are acceptable.
Urging reporters to uphold a "correct" tone in public opinion, it tells them to promote patriotism, collectivism and socialism.
"News reports must not advocate sex, murder, violence, ignorance and superstition and other bad taste content that harm the spiritual health of the people," it said.
This was essential for political stability as well as the happiness of the masses, it said.
The directive also called on reporters to respect the constitution and the law, telling them not to publish reports that determine the nature of a case or a crime before the courts have delivered their verdict.
China has long used the state-controlled press to publicise crimes or criminals it wants to hold up as examples with little regard to whether sentence has been passed.
Neither will reporters be allowed to use the media to spread propaganda that differs from party decisions, the directive said, in a rare signal that some more independent-minded newspapers may be straying from the party line.
Reporters must also strictly protect the secrets of the party and the state, uphold the truth in news and not use the media for their own personal ends, it said. It gave no hint as to how reporters should reconcile the possibly differing demands of the truth and the party.
Last week, China's propaganda tsars ordered journalists to stop violating socialist ethics by asking for money, gifts, credit cards or houses in return for positive reporting, and banned warned them against insider trading.
Reporters "must voluntarily oppose worship of money, hedonism and individualism", the directive said.
China's communist rulers keep a tight grip on the media, which they view as a propaganda tool that must serve party interests. Propaganda officials have called on journalists to back party policies and give priority to "positive" reporting.
