The number of bankruptcies in China soared by more than 160 percent in 1996 to exceed the total of the previous seven years but experts on Tuesday warned that many more insolvent firms waited in the wings.
"This is a startling figure," bankruptcy expert Cao Siyuan said in a telephone interview.
A total of 6,232 firms declared bankruptcy in China last year, an increase of 161.3 percent compared with 1995 when 2,385 companies went under, said Cao, architect of China's existing bankruptcy law and who now runs his own consultancy business.
The 1996 figure compared with the total of 5,395 firms that went bankrupt from 1989 to 1995, said Cao.
He attributed the sharp rise in the number of bankruptcies to the progress of China's market-oriented reforms launched in 1978 by paramount leader Deng Xiaoping to replace Stalinist-style central planning with a sink-or-swim system.
"Many of the firms that went bankrupt last year were already effectively bankrupt but had delayed their final procedures or announcement," Cao said. "It was a situation where they had no choice but to declare bankruptcy."
He estimated the number of bankruptcies this year could soar as China pushed ahead with reforms to force its thousands of loss-making state enterprises to turn a profit or go under.
"Bankruptcies could exceed 10,000 this year if the government doesn't interfere," Cao said.
Bankruptcy has long been controversial in China even after the bankruptcy law was passed in 1988 and the law has generally been used only to liquidate smaller enterprises because of fears of mass unemployment and unrest.
Bankruptcies would increase dramatically if all firms that actually were no longer viable were allowed to go under, Cao said.
The current rate of bankruptcies was about 0.06 percent of China's estimated 10 million companies, including private and collective firms as well as the 100,000 strong state sector.
"I think a level of 1.0 percent would be more reasonable," Cao said, dismissing fears among some sectors of the government that the level of bankruptcies was too high.
Beijing's communist rulers have been trying to promote the use of mergers rather than bankruptcies to liquidate firms that have no hope of getting out of the red.
Mergers far exceeded bankruptcies, but no specific numbers were available, Cao said.
Only a tiny number of China's bankruptcies were a result of a decision by banks to foreclose, Cao said, adding that this phenomenon needed attention.
Of the 2,385 bankruptcies in 1995, only 47, or two percent, were a result of applications from the banks, while in 1996 the number was just 72, or just 1.2 percent of the total, Cao said.
One reason for the reluctance of banks to foreclose was because many branches had extended loans to enterprises without following the correct procedures, he said, adding that managers were afraid of possible repercussions if the level of bad debt became public knowledge.
Officials have said state commercial banks would write off 30 billion yuan ($3.6 billion) in bad debts of state enterprises in 1997, up from 20 billion yuan in 1996.
Many of the bankruptcies last year were in China's fast-developing coastal provinces where reforms had made greater progress, Cao said.
Far fewer were reported in booming southern Guangdong province were firms were more reluctant to admit defeat or in the capital, Beijing, where officials feared bankruptcies would result in layoffs and possible social unrest, he said.
