At least 30 people were killed and dozens more injured in a fire that destroyed a hotel in central China early on Wednesday, with many hurt when they leapt from windows to escape the flames, officials said.
Officials said two people suspected of starting the deadly blaze had been arrested and the manager of the Yanshan Hotel in Changsha, capital of central Hunan province, was on the run.
The fire broke out at about 2.00 a.m. (1800 GMT) in a restaurant on the second floor of the Yanshan Hotel and the flames spread swiftly up to the seventh floor, officials said.
More than 100 people, including the dead, had been taken to hospital by 8.00 a.m., and 30 people were confirmed dead, the official Xinhua news agency said.
A local hospital official said the number of casualties could be much higher.
"We have reports that as many as 200 people may have been killed or injured," an official of the Hunan Number One Hospital said by telephone.
Many guests jumped from windows of the hotel as flames blocked exits on all six of the burning floors, Xinhua said.
About 10 fire engines and 1,000 firemen and rescue workers were sent to rescue hotel guests and to fight the blaze, which took about five hours to extinguish, officials said.
The Hunan Number One hospital had admitted 22 victims, of whom 13 were dead on arrival, most from smoke inhalation, the hospital official said.
"At least eight people were burnt to death at the scene," a local broadcast official said by telephone. "Many more died later in hospital."
Many of the injured were in serious condition.
"In the burns ward we have people who were burnt and we have people with internal injuries from jumping out of upper stories," said a nurse at the Hunan Number Two hospital.
"There are also people with broken bones who jumped out of windows. There are rather a lot of patients with broken bones," she said.
A Changsha government official said police had arrested two people believed to have started the blaze, but it was unclear whether the fire was arson. Police were searching for the hotel manager, who had fled, she said.
Officials said the seven-storey hotel was completely gutted by the fire, the deadliest reported in China since a blaze in December 1994 in a cinema in the northwestern Xinjiang region killed 323 people, most of them children.
"I cycle past the hotel every day to go to work," said one official. "It has been completely burnt."
The number of fire disasters in China in 1996 declined by 3.5 percent compared with the previous year to 36,856, Xinhua quoted an official of the Ministry of Public Security as saying on Wednesday. There were a large number of casualties, the official said, but gave no details.
China implemented safety measures in hotels, restaurants and cinemas in 1995, sharply cutting the number of major fires after a string of fire disasters in 1994 killed 2,600 people and injured 4,000, making it China's deadliest year on record.
