China's new central depository has ambitious goals to clean up the chaotic state debt market and implement risk controls to prevent losses from a chain of debts, and analysts said it may have the clout to do just that.
Formally registered last month, the China Government Securities Depository Trust and Clearing Co was created by the central bank, the People's Bank of China, and the Ministry of Finance and six other shareholders with capital of 180 million yuan ($21.6 million).
"Our primary goal is to solve the problem of risk on the state debt market," said Wang Ping, executive vice-president of the clearing house. "We want to bring risk down to its lowest possible level."
Other goals include providing a centralised clearing system and uniting nationwide back office operations, Wang told Reuters in an interview.
Another major aim was to prevent borrowers wanting funds amid a national credit squeeze turning to loopholes on China's fledgling repo markets, resulting in huge levels of debt estimated at 50-60 billion yuan ($6.0-7.0 million).
The central bank planned to issue debt to clear up the outstanding chain of debt that had resulted from institutions engaging in the banned practice of turning to the repo market while holding bills worth as little as three percent of the value of funds raised, Wang said.
The clearing centre has been quietly carving out a niche for its operations aimed at regulating the chaotic and disparate system since it won a battle with Shanghai's Foreign Exchange Trading System to handle China's repo market.
Wang said the Beijing-based securities depository hoped to have united all bond and repo back office operations within 1997, and had ambitious goals for its future.
"We want to promote the merging of financial policy and monetary policy," Wang said.
"With the support of the People's Bank and the Ministry of Finance, we are moving toward international market practices and hope to set up a foundation for the opening to foreigners of China's debt market," he said.
However, he said that this target remained several years in the future and would depend on China's ability to make its yuan currency convertible on the capital account. Officials have said they would like full convertibility by the year 2000.
The securities depository also appeared poised to become the main channel through which the central bank would conduct its open market operations.
In 1996, the first year the central bank conducted open market operations, turnover was more than 4.0 billion yuan, Wang said. "The amount this year will be significantly larger.
"The People's Bank will put into effect a double-track system of direct and indirect control," he said. "On one hand it will control the scale of loans while on the other it will greatly expand open market operations and discounting."
The central bank aimed to end direct controls by 1998, he said. It would also issue short-term debt of one-year and below maturity to trade with state banks this year, he said.
Officials declined to reveal the planned size of central bank open market operations, but some sources said turnover could soar as high as 200 billion this year.
Wang acknowledged that the new securities depository had run into some opposition, citing unidentified interest groups in some regions as well as market players who did not fully understand the need for a regulated system.
The bulk of China's state debt is traded through the Shanghai and Shenzhen securities exchanges, as well as through dozens of smaller centres scattered across China.
"So we need administrative measures to help us to do our work," he said.
