China extended its campaign to eradicate ideas out of line with Communist Party ideology on Thursday with an order to publishers to issue more good books, no bad books and fewer mediocre books.
The directive issued at a meeting called by the China Press and Publications Administration urged a strengthening of professional ethics in China's publishing industry.
China's propaganda mandarins have been locked for several months in an authoritarian campaign to stamp out ideas that differ from party precepts, and which has been billed as a drive to promote spiritual civilisation, or civic responsibility.
"We should insist on the strategy of publishing the best books," said a directive issued by the administration.
"We must publish more good books, not publish bad books and minimise publication of mediocre books," said the directive issued in the People's Daily, mouthpiece of the Communist Party.
The new directive banned publishing houses from selling off publication codes, without which no book or magazine can be published in China, and from accepting money or other favours from authors in return for printing their works.
"We want to publish healthy, useful books that can spread knowledge," an administration official said in a telephone interview.
"For example, good books are books about science, books that you can learn from," an official of one publishing company, said, adding that writings of authors such as former Minister of Culture Wang Meng and urban novelist Wang Shuo were "good" books.
"Bad books are books that violate policy on religion, are subversive or pornographic or depict violence," the administration official said.
In recent years, pornographic and violent novels have flooded book stands, commanding an enormous market among Chinese starved of entertainment during Mao Zedong's ultra-leftist 1966-76 Cultural Revolution.
Private entrepreneurs eager to make money on the flourishing book market have sparked a flourishing sale in publication codes. Every book published in China must have a numbered code.
An official of the China Publishers' Association said bad books included those that advocated ethnic separatism -- a problem in restive Tibet and the Moslem Xinjiang region -- and books about China's leaders and which revealed state secrets.
"The publishing of too many bad books will affect our national image," the association official said.
Officials refused to reveal the titles of "bad" books named on a list of some 100 publications distributed at this week's meeting.
However, one publisher said "bad" books included the highly popular pornographic novel "Dream of the Rose" that was published by a private entrepreneur and "Weird Sex Customs", a book banned last year after its fantastic description of Islamic life angered China's Moslem minority.
Mediocre, or vulgar books, included martial arts novels and love stories, popular among's China's tens of millions of peasant farmers and migrant rural labourers, the association official said.
China this week tightened its grip on the media, with directives on how to write news, ordering journalists not to advocate sex, violence and superstition and to fill their reports with patriotism and socialism.
