Talks between China and the United States on a new textile accord neared a deadline on Friday for a trans-Pacific trade war, but industry experts said they expected an agreement within hours.
Chief U.S. textile negotiator Rita Hayes held talks through Thursday night and into Friday evening with Chinese officials to try to iron out problems in renewal of a 1994 textile accord and to resolve a dispute over U.S. penalties on Chinese exports.
U.S. officials said they were hoping for an agreement before the Friday deadline expires at midnight on January 31 Eastern Standard Time, but differences over market access in China appeared to be delaying progress.
Hopes for a deal were high, with Hayes and her team believed to be putting the finishing touches to the text of an agreement, said U.S. industry representatives on the sidelines of the talks.
"We fully expect they will reach an agreement," said one U.S. industry representative.
"I expect the reason for the talks not wrapping up is market access," said National Retail Federation vice-president Robert P. Hall. "This is an issue that is not traditionally part of apparel bilaterals."
Hayes had been upbeat about progress in the talks on Thursday, citing significant headway on the issue of market access and saying she hoped for a deal by the end of the day. However, that failed to materialise.
Washington could make significant cuts to China's textile quotas if agreement could not be reached before the January 31 deadline, Hayes said earlier. The United States would not give China another extension of the deadline, she said.
The Sino-U.S. textile pact had been scheduled to expire on December 31 but was extended by one month to give both sides time to hammer out a compromise.
Washington and Beijing were also seeking to ease tensions in a dispute over Chinese exports of textiles via third countries. The United States has threatened multi-million dollar penalties and raised the spectre of a cross-Pacific trade war over the issue.
Washington slapped $19 million worth of penalties on imports of Chinese textiles last September, saying Beijing was shipping textiles through third countries to evade quota restrictions.
China has threatened to retaliate by temporarily banning imports of some U.S. textiles, farm goods and alcoholic drinks but has delayed such action to allow time for further talks.
Textiles are just one of a range of issues dogging a Sino-U.S. relationship that has long been strained by disputes over topics ranging from trade to human rights to Taiwan.
A U.S. delegation left Beijing on Friday after talks on human rights with Chinese officials and following a year in which all remaining members of the nation's tiny pro-democracy movement have been either imprisoned or driven into exile.
U.S. trade official Lee Sands wrapped up two days of talks in Beijing on Friday to discuss China's delayed accession to the World Trade Organisation (WTO), long a source of cross-Pacific friction.
Beijing, which wants to join the global trade club on the favourable terms accorded to developing countries, has accused Washington of blocking its entry.
