China hit back on Saturday over a U.S. report that it had silenced all dissent by the end of 1996, voicing firm opposition to such charges and accusing Washington of interfering in its internal affairs.
"The Chinese government protects and promotes the human rights and basic freedoms of all its peoples according to the constitution and relevant laws, and its achievements are clear for all to see," Foreign Ministry spokesman Tang Guoqiang said.
The Foreign Ministry statement was China's first response to the annual U.S. human rights report released on Thursday that accused China of effectively silencing all public dissent against the Communist Party and government by the end of last year.
"The U.S. government turns a blind eye to the facts and distorts and condemns China's human rights situation, seriously violating the basic principles of international relations," Tang said.
"China voices its firm opposition to this," he said.
"The U.S. side should stop its wrong methods of using the pretext of human rights to interfere in China's internal affairs," Tang said.
In the annual human rights report on 193 countries, the United States accused China of detaining, jailing or driving into exile all known dissidents.
This year's hard-hitting report was released during a dramatic improvement in Sino-U.S. ties that have long been rocked by disputes over issues ranging from rights to trade to Taiwan.
Tang defended China's human rights record, stressing that the government's human rights priority was the feeding and clothing of its 1.2 billion people.
"At present, China politics is stable, its economy is developing, its society is advancing, its ethnic peoples are united, its people are living and working in peace," Tang said.
"The facts prove that placing the people's rights to live and to develop in first place... fits with the basic interests of the whole people," he said.
Analysts said Beijing's response was unusually mild, in a sign China is eager to keep up the positive momentum in cross-Pacific ties.
However, the father of leading dissident Wang Dan said on Friday that China's 1996 jailing of his son, a former leader of the 1989 student-led demonstrations for more democracy, was clear evidence of the kind of abuse the U.S. report condemns.
All nations had the right and responsibility to concern themselves with human rights in other countries, said Wang Xianzeng, whose 27-year-old son was last year sentenced to 11 years in prison for plotting to overthrow the government.
The recent Sino-U.S. rapprochement has survived Wang Dan's last October jailing after a four-hour trial that was denounced by human rights activists as a politically orchestrated sham.
New Secretary of State Madeleine Albright, who is to visit China next month, has said she will pursue a policy of inclusion rather than isolation towards China and, while keen to foster human rights, does not want to hold the overall relationship hostage to one issue.
