U.S. and Chinese negotiators were locked in last-ditch talks into the night on Saturday to try to hammer out a new textile accord and a deal on market access as a new deadline loomed for a cross-Pacific trade war.
However, U.S. officials hinted that an agreement could be virtually in the bag with negotiators expected to work virtually through the night to put the finishing touches to a final text.
Chief U.S. textile negotiator Rita Hayes said earlier she was confident of accord on renewing a 1994 textile accord and resolving a dispute over U.S. penalties on Chinese exports on the fifth day of talks with officials at China's Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation.
"We felt like we had made tremendous progress and we are looking to complete negotiations today," she told Reuters before leaving for the ministry. "You're always positive you can reach an agreement but you have to balance it out."
The United States had extended by a day the deadline of midnight January 31 in Washington (0500 GMT) for agreement on a new textile accord.
"I felt like it was important to extend it, the deadline, for one day... so we could get a fresh start this morning," Hayes said of the talks that went virtually without a break for 48 hours on Thursday and Friday.
"We did not complete the agreement... so we felt like we'd have one extra day to complete it," she said before resuming negotiations that dragged late into Saturday without agreement as a new deadline loomed.
U.S. officials had said they hoped for a deal by the end of Saturday.
The Sino-U.S. textile pact had been scheduled to expire on December 31 but was extended by one month to give both sides time to hammer out a compromise. Officials declined to say whether the threatened multi-billion penalties on China would be imposed if the deadline extension expired without accord.
Chinese officials refused to comment, saying only talks were continuing.
Washington slapped $19 million worth of penalties on imports of Chinese textiles last September, saying Beijing was shipping textiles through third countries to evade quota restrictions.
China has threatened to retaliate by temporarily banning imports of some U.S. textiles, farm goods and alcoholic drinks but has delayed such action to allow time for further talks.
Hayes said the U.S. side was still focusing on two major demands -- its market access package and a level playing field for the textile industry.
"The two main things that we have been consistently concerned about are the market access that China has to the United States... and also making sure that it is balanced, that we have a market access package from China," she said.
Disagreement over market access in China appeared to be a major stumbling block, industry representatives said earlier.
However, they said hopes for a deal were high, with Hayes and her team believed to be putting the finishing touches to the text of an agreement.
Washington could make significant cuts to China's textile quotas if agreement could not be reached before the previous deadline of January 31, Hayes has said.
Washington and Beijing were also seeking to ease tensions in a dispute over Chinese exports of textiles via third countries.
