China's President Jiang Zemin and Premier Li Peng have paid a formal Chinese new year call on reclusive paramount leader Deng Xiaoping, state media said on Wednesday.
However, the first report issued in China's state-controlled media on Deng since a similar visit by Jiang last year avoided any comment on the health of the 92-year-old man whose sweeping reforms transformed a backward Stalinist state into an economic powerhouse.
"President Jiang Zemin and Premier Li Peng along with other top leaders have paid a visit to Deng Xiaoping, to wish him a happy Spring Festival, good health and long life," the People's Daily said in a front-page report.
Deng, has not been seen in public since the 1994 Chinese lunar new year festival when he visited Shanghai and appeared frail and faltering, and he is now believed to be in fragile health and with fading lucidity.
He lives in a closely-guarded compound with his family down an alley behind the former imperial palace of China's emperors in the heart of Beijing.
Jiang and his Politburo colleagues also visited China's other ageing veteran leaders who ruled China with Deng for most of the 1980s and early 1990s and whose influence remains strong, the People's Daily said.
They included Deng's close ally Peng Zhen, 96, former president Yang Shangkun, 89, former parliament chief Wan Li, 80, retired politburo member Song Ping, 79, and former vice-premier Bo Yibo, 88, the People's Daily said.
"The veteran leaders asked Jiang and his colleagues to send their seasonal greetings to the Chinese people," the brief report said, apparently avoiding any direct message from Deng who is sometimes rumoured to be no longer capable of speech.
China's elderly leaders continue to exert great influence after their retirement in a society where age is revered and in a communist system in which officials spend years building up power networks.
Speculation has abounded about Deng's health, ranging from rumours of his sudden admission to hospital a few weeks ago to reports that he remains at home with little change in his health but with failing mental capacities.
However, a family member said last week that Deng remained at home and in good health, and denied that he was in hospital.
She said he was able to read "with the help of others", a hint that while he may no longer be able to read, he is able to understand when others read to him.
The official Chinese media has rarely carried reports on Deng since he disappeared from public view, partly because of failing health and his own desire to retire to play a behind-the-scenes role.
Deng retired from his last official position in 1990 and his only post is honorary chairman of China's Bridge Association, a title that reflects his lifelong passion for the game.
Deng was in the public eye at the start of the new year when state television ran a 12-part breathless documentary on his life, but without any details of his present circumstances and without interviews with his wife or children.
