A hardline Chinese magazine has issued a blistering attack on China's most prominent living author and former culture minister in the first open salvo of a power struggle before a crucial Communist Party meeting.
"Really what kind of person is Wang Meng?" begins the bitter tirade in the January issue of the magazine Zhongliu, or Mainstay, available on Thursday.
"What kind of role has Wang Meng been playing in China's cultural, ideological battlelines and political life as a whole?" said the article written under the pen-name Gong Yizhou, which means "all in one boat".
The article in the Communist Party magazine levels the virtually subversive charge that Wang Meng failed to support the rule of the Communist Party and has fallen short in battling bourgeois liberalism, a communist codeword for Western ideas.
"As a high-ranking official of the Communist party, have his words and actions met the basic requirements of a party member?" it said.
"He has never written even the most basic self-criticism of this series of major mistakes on these important questions," the article charged.
"We are measuring a party member against basic party standards and this is definitely not too high a demand. Should we tolerate party members with different views to...look down on and make fun of (the party)?" it said.
"He played an especially abominable role in mistakenly supporting the 1989 turmoil," it said, referring to the pro-democracy student demonstrations centred in Beijing's Tiananmen Square that were crushed by the army on June 4, 1989 with heavy loss of life.
Wang, 62, appointed minister of culture in 1986, was removed from the job in August 1989 in a purge of liberal officials and those close to disgraced Communist Party chief Zhao Ziyang.
"This is one of the fiercest attacks we have seen against anyone actually mentioned by name for several years in China," said one China analyst.
"This is not just an attack against Wang Meng, but against his people and against his successful re-emergence in the last couple of years," he said. Wang was re-elected as vice-chairman of the Chinese Writers' Association last December.
A Chinese analyst described the vitriolic article as reminiscent of the language of the ultra-leftist 1966-76 Cultural Revolution, when Wang was purged and sent into internal exile in the westernmost region of Xinjiang.
"An attack like this marks the first public step in the power struggle that is bound to lead up to the party congress," the China analyst said, referring to the crucial meeting due later this year that will see a major reshuffle of the most powerful players on China's political stage.
Such party meetings in China are almost always preceded by a bitter struggle for power and position and characterised by oblique attacks on leading players through those perceived to be their supporters.
Wang Meng only laughed when asked to comment on the article. "I have heard of this, but I have not seen it," he said when reached by telephone.
Wang is best-known for his 1957 novel "The Young Man from the Organisation Department" that depicts the red tape and rigid thinking of communist officials.
He is also renowned for his award-winning short story "Hard Porridge" that involves a family, headed by an ageing patriarch, that has difficulty changing its ways. Wang vehemently denied charges that the story, written in early 1989, was an attack on paramount leader Deng Xiaoping.
