China plans "education" sessions among its restive Moslem Uighur minority after an anti-Chinese riot in the northwestern Xinjiang region left nine people dead and nearly 200 wounded, officials said on Thursday.
Officials would launch an education campaign throughout the region to teach Xinjiang's Uighurs about the importance of patriotism and to persuade them not to take part in such unrest in future.
"We are preparing a circular to distribute throughout Xinjiang on this incident," Zhang Yuliang, director of the propaganda department of the Xinjiang regional Communist Party committee, told Reuters by telephone from the regional capital, Urumqi.
"We will carry out a session of education for the masses to teach them about ethnic unity," he said.
Authorities have issued emergency circulars calling on local officials to deal a blow to separatism in the frontier region.
Police in Yining near China's border with Kazakhstan were interrogating the suspected ringleaders of the two-day riot against Chinese rule that rocked the town last week, officials said by telephone.
One Yining government official said authorities had revised the toll from the riot, saying nine people had been killed, including four policemen. Officials previously said 10 people died.
At least 198 people had been wounded, including about 50 who were seriously injured, the official said.
Police had arrested 200 to 300 people after the riot last week in which about 1,000 people, mostly Uighur farmers or unemployed youths, rampaged through Yining, smashing and burning cars, looting shops and demanding China pull out of Xinjiang, officials said.
A Chinese source has said the riot erupted after a Uighur criminal suspect resisted arrest by police.
The riot was one of the largest, most violent demonstrations for independence in the mainly Moslem region of Xinjiang -- which means New Frontier in Chinese -- since the 1949 communist takeover.
However, many of those detained had since been released,
"The vast majority of those arrested were members of the public who had been hoodwinked into taking part and they have been released," Zhang said.
"But as for the leading criminals, they will be dealt with according to the law," he said. "We will do our best to ensure swift and severe punishment of criminals."
Police were interrogating suspected ringleader Abudu Heilili, 29, of the Uighur ethnic minority, he said.
"For people like this, who have taken part in many such incidents, we are investigating to see whether more sinister forces are working behind them," he said.
Officials have accused unidentified "hostile foreign forces" of fomenting the unrest in Yining, 50 km (30 miles) from the border with Kazakhstan, where many exiled Uighur separatists live.
Turkic-speaking Uighurs are in the majority in Xinjiang, where ethnic Han Chinese make up 38 percent of the population.
Xinjiang authorities last year stepped up a crackdown on separatists and underground religious activity after clashes, bombings and assassination attempts on officials and Moslem leaders regarded as pro-Beijing.
