North Korea hailed strongman Kim Jong-il as a god on his 55th birthday on Sunday, but a shooting in South Korea and a diplomatic stand-off in Beijing cast the "Dear Leader" in a less than divine light.
The Cold War climate on the Korean peninsula chilled further after a prominent North Korean defector was shot and seriously wounded near Seoul and South Korea accused Pyongyang of the attempted assassination.
Birthday celebrations for the Dear Leader, as Kim is known in his Stalinist homeland, had been intended to smooth his formal accession to supreme power after the death of his father, the Great Leader Kim Il-sung, three years ago.
Instead, Kim has been embarrassed by the surprise defection of a top adviser, talk of a power struggle and a worsening food crisis.
The party appeared subdued, scaled down due to severe food shortages caused by two years of flooding to little more than fireworks and a gymnastics display by 10,000 children. Scheduled live coverage was abruptly cancelled without explanation.
Pyongyang diplomats voiced cult-like adoration for the Dear Leader as they kept vigil outside the South Korean mission in Beijing where ideologue Hwang Jang-yop, the most senior North Korean ever to defect, sought asylum five days ago.
In Seoul there were signs the North may have infiltrated the South to seek retribution.
South Korean cabinet ministers accused Pyongyang of sending two gunmen to try to kill Li Il-nam, nephew of Kim Jong-ils ex-wife, outside his home near Seoul on Saturday, and ordered tighter security for defectors and government leaders.
The assassination attempt appeared to be a warning to Seoul and to potential asylum-seekers, Seoul officials said.
Chinese security was tight around the South Korean mission in Beijing where Hwang has taken refuge. Armed Chinese police set up a fortress-like defence wall, laying anti-tyre spikes across approaches and bringing in a huge water cannon truck.
"If the South uses force to move him to South Korea we will respond with force," said one Pyongyang diplomat keeping watch.
"We are determined to prevent them from taking him to the South," said the official, who declined to give his name.
He repeated Pyongyangs charge that Hwang was kidnapped, but said the North did not want to see violence. Seoul has dismissed the accusation.
Hwang, 73, was expected to remain stranded in the mission for some time, with Beijing unlikely to give in to his request for asylum in Seoul until after Kims birthday celebrations to avoid further embarrassing its old communist comrade.
The Pyongyang diplomat said he was certain Hwang would never forget such an important day in the North Korean calendar.
"The Dear Leader is a pillar in our minds," the diplomat said. "Hwang, deep in his mind, will be thinking of this day and we believe he will celebrate it as well."
But in letters reportedly written by Hwang and released by Seoul, the man who ranked 24th in Pyongyangs hierarchy has charged that his homeland was a dictatorship racked by famine, and said he would rather die than go back.
Hwang has become the focus of a Cold War tussle between the two Koreas, arch-enemies since their 1950-53 war ended only in a truce -- and a severe embarrassment to China.
Beijing played for time as it agonised over a diplomatic quandary -- how to usher Hwang out of Beijing without offending its old socialist ally or its new capitalist friend.
It has urged calm on the Korean peninsula, where two of the worlds largest armies face each other, while it investigates.
But while Seoul placed police on full alert, in Pyongyang thousands of child gymnasts celebrated Kims birthday.
"The Great General Kim Jong-il is trusted absolutely, eternally and fully as if he were god," North Koreas official newspaper Rodong Sinmun said.
"The Korean people regard him as their god because he defends the destiny of the motherland, nation and people," it added.
