Rumours say the health of China's paramount leader Deng Xiaoping is failing. Officials say there is little change and he is all right for a man of 92.
Western diplomats say the longer Deng lingers the less impact his death will have on the delicate balance of power at the top of China's ruling Communist Party.
One barometer of Deng's health in China's highly secretive system is the travel of top leaders and close family members, with few willing to be abroad if Deng was close to death, diplomats said.
China's elderly leaders exert great influence after their retirement in a society where age is revered and in a communist system in which officials spend years building up power networks.
Hong Kong's Apple Daily newspaper reported at the weekend that the 92-year-old architect of China's sweeping economic reforms had been rushed to hospital on Thursday after a massive stroke that followed an earlier, mild stroke.
The ailing leader was in the Number 301 military hospital in western Beijing under observation, the mass-circulation newspaper said, quoting sources in Beijing.
He had been taken to hospital before the Chinese lunar new year, which fell on February 7, after an earlier mild stroke and later released, it said.
Deng was well enough to meet visitors during the new year festivities, although he had a cold, the newspaper said.
Similar rumours sent Hong Kong stocks tumbling on Friday.
There was little sign in Beijing of any major change in the fragile health of the man whose policies transformed a backward Stalinist state into an economic powerhouse.
"I think, for someone of that advanced age, the state of his health should be described as all right," said a Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman at a meeting of European and Asian foreign ministers in Singapore.
The state of Deng's health was evident from the fact that Foreign Minister Qian Qichen attended the high-profile meeting in Singapore, Guo said.
"Otherwise, Minister Qian wouldn't be here," Guo said.
In another indication that Deng's health may not be in crisis, Vice-Premier Li Lanqing, a member of the powerful party politburo, left Beijing on Saturday to visit Israel and Iran.
That trip would certainly have been cancelled if Deng was near death because no senior leader wants to be abroad when the patriarch goes to meet Marx, one Western diplomat said.
Rumours about Deng's health surface periodically.
However, a family member said last month that Deng remained at home and in good health.
She said he was able to read "with the help of others", a hint that while he may no longer be able to read, he is able to understand when others read to him.
Deng has not been seen in public since the 1994 Chinese lunar new year festival when he visited Shanghai and appeared frail and faltering. He is now believed to be in fragile health and with fading lucidity.
State-run Chinese media rarely carry reports on Deng since he vanished from public view, partly because of failing health and his own desire to retire to play a behind-the-scenes role.
Deng retired from his last official position in 1990 and his only post is honorary chairman of China's Bridge Association, a title that reflects his lifelong passion for the card game.
Deng was in the public eye at the start of the new year when state television ran a 12-part documentary on his life, but without any details of his present circumstances and without interviews with his wife or children.
