South Korea went on alert on Monday for possible attack by the rival North, but said it wanted talks to defuse rising tensions as a high-level Pyongyang defector spent a sixth day stranded in Seoul's embassy in Beijing.
The defection of the most senior official ever to betray his Stalinist homeland was just one of a maze of problems troubling Pyongyang -- beset by an imploding economy, food shortages caused by two years of floods and talk of a power struggle.
Senior North Korean official Hwang Jang-yop turned 74 on Monday with no sign of progress to celebrate in his appeal for political asylum in the South and he remained marooned in Seoul's heavily-guarded consulate office in Beijing.
South Korea braced for possible attacks by Pyongyang as the Cold War crisis escalated, but said confrontation over the defector holed up in Seoul's embassy in Beijing would not scuttle its efforts for detente.
Another prominent defector, Li Il-nam, a nephew of North Korean leader Kim Jong-il's ex-wife, remained in a coma after being critically wounded at the weekend by suspected North Korean agents near Seoul.
Security around South Korea's ports, airports and other public places has been beefed up and 10,000 police and soldiers searched for the two suspected North Korean agents who shot Li.
Seoul Foreign Minister Yoo Chong-ha said problems stemming from Hwang's defection were just the start of headaches for Seoul because of a crisis in the North.
"I believe the North Korean regime's crisis will deepen as time passes because there's no likelihood of improvement in its economic hardship and food shortages, and signs of laxity in its social order," Yoo told a meeting of South Korean diplomats.
South Korea's security-related ministers on Sunday agreed that a desperate North Korea could resort to guerrilla attacks after Hwang, a top adviser to North Korean leader Kim Jong-il, sought asylum last Wednesday.
Dour warnings from North Korean officials in Beijing of the consequences of any attempt to move Hwang to the South gave a hint of Pyongyang's willingness to retaliate.
"If they make him go to Seoul, I think there will be war," said one North Korean official who declined to be identified.
"We want him back," he said, in an echo of earlier threats to use force if Hwang was compelled to go to Seoul.
South Korean diplomats and Chinese police guarding the mission brought in extra blankets and mattresses in a sign they expected a lengthy stand-off over Hwang.
However, dozens of North Korean officials disappeared on Monday afternoon from outside the building where they have kept a round-the-clock vigil since Hwang turned up in a taxi with an aide last Wednesday.
North Korea's ambassador was believed to have met officials at China's Foreign Ministry on Monday, but it was not known if they discussed Hwang's defection.
China, an unwilling third party in the feuding between the two hostile ends of the Korean peninsula, has appealed to both sides to act calmly to resolve the affair.
Western diplomats said China had said privately it wanted little to do with the imported crisis in its backyard, saying Hwang was now effectively in South Korea. It is unwilling to favour an old communist comrade or a new capitalist friend.
The United States has urged Pyongyang to avoid provocative actions and has said it is closely monitoring developments between the two Koreas, arch-enemies since the 1950-53 Korean civil war ended only in a truce.
Analysts say the North has suffered huge loss of face over the defection of Hwang, who was ranked high in the hierarchy of his Stalinist homeland and was the architect of its governing ideology of Juche, or strict self-reliance.
