The deteriorating health of China's paramount leader Deng Xiaoping has forced Communist Party chief Jiang Zemin and other leaders to cut short out-of-town trips to return to Beijing, sources said on Monday.
Jiang, who is also state president and head of the army, returned at the weekend, cutting short an unpublicised visit to the communist revolutionary base of Ganzhou in central Jiangxi province, said one Chinese source close to the party.
Premier Li Peng also flew back to Beijing at the weekend, abruptly curtailing a tour of the booming, southern province of Guangdong, said the source, who asked not to be identified.
"Jiang Zemin and Li Peng cut short their trips and rushed back to Beijing because Deng Xiaopings health was deteriorating," the source said.
"They went to see Deng...over the weekend," the source said. "His health is not looking good."
The 92-year-old Deng, whose pragmatic policies transformed a backward Stalinist state into an economic powerhouse, lives in a tightly-guarded compound behind the Forbidden City of Chinas emperors in central Beijing.
Diplomats have said one barometer of Dengs health in Chinas highly-secretive system is the travel of top leaders and close family members, with few willing to be out of town or abroad if Deng were close to death.
Vice-Premier Li Lanqing was on a visit to Israel and Iran and Defence Minister Chi Haotian is in the Philippines.
Chinese sources have reported increasing rumours in Beijing in the past few days that Dengs health may be failing.
The State Council, or cabinet, declined on Monday to comment on the rumours.
A Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman said last week Deng was all right for a man of his age.
Hong Kongs Apple Daily newspaper reported at the weekend that the architect of Chinas sweeping economic reforms had been rushed to hospital on Thursday after a massive stroke that followed an earlier, mild stroke.
Rumours about Dengs health surface periodically and Hong Kong stocks tumbled last Friday on one rumour.
Deng has not been seen in public since the 1994 Chinese Lunar New Year festival when he visited Shanghai and appeared frail and faltering. He is now believed to be in fragile health and with fading lucidity.
Chinas elderly leaders exert great influence after their retirement in a society where age is revered and in a communist system in which officials spend years building up a power base.
State-run Chinese media have rarely carried reports on Deng since he vanished from public view, partly because of his failing health and his own desire to retire to play a behind-the-scenes role.
Deng retired from his last official position in 1990 and his only post is honorary chairman of Chinas Bridge Association, a title that reflects his passion for the card game.
Deng was in the public eye at the start of the new year when state television ran a 12-part documentary on his life, but without details of his present circumstances and without interviews with his wife or children.
Western diplomats say the longer Deng lingers the less impact his death will have on the delicate balance of power at the top of Chinas ruling Communist Party.
