China appealed for calm while South Korea called for a military alert amid fears a diplomatic deadlock over a senior Pyongyang defector marooned in Beijing could push the hermit North to take extreme action.
However, signs emerged that North Korea and its leader Kim Jong-il might be ready to give up the fight to recover scholarly ideologue Hwang Jang-yop -- possibly as a result of mediation by Beijing to end the Cold War crisis in its backyard.
South Korean officials said talks continued with Beijing over the fate of Hwang, ranked 24th in Pyongyang's hierarchy, who spent his seventh day behind the white walls of Seoul's consulate office in Beijing.
Hwang could be the first in a stream of high-level defectors to betray their Stalinist homeland, beset by two years of floods, food shortages and talk of power struggles, South Korean media reported in Seoul.
South Korean Prime Minister Lee Soo-sung called for "extraordinary alertness" and military readiness against North Korea, saying Hwang's defection had sent shock waves through the divided Korean peninsula.
A Seoul newspaper said it had documents revealing plans by other North Korean officials to flee.
"The defection of secretary Hwang Jang-yop, who belongs to the core force of the North Korean leadership, vividly displays the shaking of the ideological foundation that has supported the North Korean system amid economic disasters," Lee said.
Seoul would spare no diplomatic efforts to allow Hwang to be granted political asylum, he said.
Lee told parliament that Pyongyang had increasingly deployed offensive forces near the border with the South, despite an economic crisis and chronic food shortages.
A military spokesman said Lee was referring to the North's defence build-up in recent years and no additional troops had been deployed at the tense border in the past week.
But China took no chances and sent three armoured personnel carriers to reinforce approaches to Seoul's mission, apparently not reassured by signs Pyongyang could be coming to terms with the loss of one of its greatest ideological thinkers.
The softer tone set when Pyongyang's Foreign Ministry said it would dismiss Hwang if he defected was echoed by supreme leader Kim, who said those who lacked the grit to defend Pyongyang's fiery brand of communism should go their own way.
"As the revolutionary song goes: Cowards, Leave If You Want To! We will defend the red flag to the bitter end," a political essay broadcast by state radio quoted Kim as saying.
Pyongyang officials had previously been steadfast in their accusation that Seoul abducted the architect of North Korea's governing ideology of Juche, or strict self-reliance. South Korea has dismissed the charge as preposterous.
North Korea's ambassador met Chinese Foreign Ministry officials in talks that apparently resulted in Pyongyang's change in tune and withdrawal of diplomats from a vigil outside the mission where Hwang is marooned, Western diplomats said.
Beijing, an unwilling third party in the feuding between the two hostile sides in the last Cold War standoff, repeated its plea to both to act with restraint to resolve the affair.
The United States has urged Pyongyang to avoid all provocative actions and has said it was closely monitoring developments after an assassination attempt against a former North Korean defector near Seoul on Saturday night.
The tussle over Hwang's defection was the latest flare-up in tense relations between the two Koreas, arch-enemies since the 1950-53 Korean civil war ended only in a truce.
