South Korea on Tuesday urged "extraordinary alertness" against the rival North, warning that the defection of a senior North Korean official now marooned in Seoul's Beijing embassy showed the hermit state was unstable.
As China reinforced security at the South Korean mission, there was little sign of progress in the diplomatic deadlock with the two rival Koreas on what to do with Hwang Jang-yop, the most senior North Korean to betray his Stalinist homeland.
It was Hwang's seventh day in Seoul's consulate office.
Appeals for calm from China, an unwilling third party in the latest Cold War crisis, appeared to yield fruit with North Korea showing signs of backing off from its hard line over its highest ever defector.
But South Korean Prime Minister Lee Soo-sung called for "extraordinary alertness" against the North.
"The defection of secretary Hwang Jang-yop, who belongs to the core force of the North Korean leadership, vividly displays the shaking of the ideological foundation that has supported the North Korean system amid economic disasters," he said.
Hwang, one of 11 powerful secretaries of the ruling Workers' Party along with North Korean leader Kim Jong-il, sought refuge at Seoul's mission in the Chinese capital last Wednesday.
Lee told parliament the communist North had increasingly deployed offensive forces near the border with the South, despite an economic crisis and chronic food shortage at home.
While repeating its appeals for calm, China was prepared for disturbances.
Police guarding the mission where Hwang is stranded went on higher alert, and three armoured personnel carriers filled with helmeted paramilitary police rumbled into the sedate diplomatic quarter to back up squads of police armed with assault rifles.
"We hope all parties can deal with this matter calmly... and calmly face and appropriately handle this incident to maintain peace and stability in the Korean peninsula," a Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman said.
Seoul and Beijing were working to find a solution to the three-way diplomatic crisis that has thrown relations among China and the two Koreas into turmoil, Seoul officials said.
"Negotiations with the Chinese government are still going on," said South Korean embassy spokesman Chang Moon Ik, but declined to give details.
He dismissed reports that three-way talks between Beijing, its old communist ally Pyongyang and its new capitalist friend Seoul were under way to break the deadlock over Hwang's fate.
The North has hinted it may accept Hwang's defection, saying it would dismiss him if he sought asylum.
"It is certain North Korea is changing its attitude," said Kim Kyung-woong, a senior official of Seoul's state South-North Dialogue Office.
North Korea's Foreign Ministry said late on Monday it would fire Hwang if he sought asylum in Seoul but warned of "decisive countermeasures" if it were proved he had been kidnapped.
North Korea had earlier maintained Seoul kidnapped Hwang, architect of the Stalinist nation's governing ideology of Juche, or strict self-reliance. Seoul called the charge preposterous.
The tussle over Hwang's defection was the latest flare-up in tense relations between the two Koreas, arch-enemies since the 1950-53 Korean civil war ended only in a truce.
The United States has urged Pyongyang to avoid all provocative actions and has said it was closely monitoring developments after an assassination attempt against a former North Korean defector near Seoul on Saturday night.
South Korea accused Pyongyang agents of shooting 32-year-old Li Il-nam in an attack that left him critically ill with a bullet still lodged in his skull. Doctors in Seoul said he was on life support and unlikely to regain consciousness.
