China was silent on Tuesday on the fragile health of paramount leader Deng Xiaoping after Communist Party chief Jiang Zemin and other leaders cut short out-of-town trips to visit the ailing patriarch.
The State Council, or cabinet, declined on Tuesday to make immediate comment on the rumours that the health of Deng, 92, had deteriorated recently or that he had suffered a stroke.
In Taipei, Taiwan's top policymaker on mainland affairs described Deng's condition as serious and said the government would closely watch developments.
Party chief Jiang, who is also state president and head of the army, returned at the weekend, cutting short an unpublicised visit to the communist revolutionary base of Ganzhou in central Jiangxi province, said one Chinese source close to the party.
Premier Li Peng also flew back to Beijing at the weekend, abruptly curtailing a tour of the booming southern province of Guangdong because of Deng's deteriorating health, said the source, who asked not to be identified.
The two leaders had returned to Beijing where they visited Deng, the source said.
Deng, whose pragmatic policies transformed a backward Stalinist state into an economic powerhouse, lives in a tightly-guarded compound behind the Forbidden City of China's emperors in central Beijing.
Diplomats have said one barometer of Deng's health in China's highly-secretive system is the travel of top leaders and close family members, with few willing to be out of town or abroad if Deng were close to death.
Vice-Premier Li Lanqing was abroad on a visit to Israel and Iran, and Defence Minister Chi Haotian was in the Philippines, where officials said he would not change his travel plans.
Chinese sources have reported increasing rumours in Beijing in the past few days that Deng's health may be failing.
However, a Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman said last week Deng was all right for a man of his age.
Hong Kong's Apple Daily newspaper reported at the weekend that the architect of China's sweeping economic reforms had been rushed to hospital on Thursday after a massive stroke that followed an earlier, mild stroke.
Doctors said that if Deng's stroke had been a haemorrhage he could have died within hours, while if it was a thrombosis, or formation of a blood clot, he could last days or weeks.
Rumours about Deng's health surface periodically and one such rumour caused Hong Kong stocks to tumble last Friday.
The worries over Deng's health deflated Taiwan's main stock index by 1.161 percent to 7563.76 on Tuesday morning while Hong Kong's major index slipped 0.80 percent to 13039.03.
Deng has not been seen in public since the 1994 Chinese Lunar New Year festival when he appeared frail and faltering on a visit to Shanghai. He is now believed to be in fragile health and with fading lucidity.
China's elderly leaders exert great influence after their retirement in a society where age is revered and in a communist system in which officials spend years building up a power base.
Deng retired from his last official position in 1990 and his only post is honorary chairman of China's Bridge Association, a title that reflects his passion for the card game.
Deng was in the public eye at the start of the new year when state television ran a 12-part documentary on his life, but without details of his present circumstances or interviews with his wife or children.
Western diplomats say the longer Deng lingers the less impact his death will have on the delicate balance of power at the top of China's ruling Communist Party.
