Beijing's parliament began the process on Wednesday of upgrading the southwestern city of Chongqing to become China's fourth municipality along with such cities as Beijing and Shanghai.
Approval by the National People's Congress for the proposal will give Chongqing, a port on the Yangtze river in southwestern Sichuan province, the power to make its own decisions and handle its own finances without recourse to provincial authorities.
Chinese sources said the decision had met opposition from provincial authorities in Sichuan, reluctant to lose control of the largest city and biggest industrial base in China's most populous province of more than 103 million inhabitants.
With ratification of the proposal by China's rubber-stamp parliament virtually assured, Chongqing's area will expand to include two outlying cities and a prefecture, enlarging its population from 14 million to 30 million, the Xinhua news agency said.
The decision will pave the way to accelerate relocation of about one million people who must move to make way for the huge lake that will be created after the Three Gorges dam blocks the Yangtze river, downstream from Chongqing, it said.
A municipality has the same status as a province in China and falls under the direct authority of the central government. The other three municipalities are Beijing, Shanghai and the northern port city of Tianjin.
Supporting the motion from the State Council, or cabinet, to upgrade Chongqing, Premier Li Peng told parliament the move would give the city control of the Three Gorges scheme, thus boosting management of the world's largest water control project.
It would also help Chongqing to fuel economic development in western China, which has lagged far behind the boom in eastern coastal areas fuelled by paramount leader Deng Xiaoping's market reforms, Li said.
"The upgrading of Chongqing will help promote the economic and social development of the southwest area and the upper reaches of the Yangtze River," Li said.
It would also ease pressure on the Sichuan provincial government in managing the huge population of the city.
More than two-thirds of the estimated one million people who must be moved out of the way of the Three Gorges hydro power project would be resettled in Chongqing and its satellite cities of Wanxian, and Fuling, Minister of Civil Affairs Doje Cering told parliament.
"Chongqing municipality could handle the general administration of the relocation work," he told a parliament standing committee session that opened on Wednesday.
In recent interviews, officials in Chongqing said the move would raise the political profile of the mega-city.
As a municipality, Chongqing envisaged an economic boom that would narrow the gap between impoverished inland provinces in the west and their wealthy coastal cousins in the east, officials said.
For years after the communists swept to power in 1949, Chongqing -- wartime capital of rival Nationalists from 1938 to 1945 -- took a back seat to Chengdu, capital of the southwestern province of Sichuan.
Its elevation to municipality at the full session of parliament next month would end its backward role, officials said.
