When Deng Xiaoping took power in 1979 an urban Chinese needed a year's salary to buy a black and white television.
When he died 18 years later, the average city dweller could afford a refrigerator, a washing machine and a colour television -- some could even buy their own home.
Deng took over a China wracked by the 1966-76 decade of the radical Cultural Revolution and an economy stultified by three decades of Stalinist central planning.
"Let some people get rich first," Deng said in an axiom that underlined his rapid-fire approach to the economic reform that marked his rule.
The goal of Deng's economic reforms, which he first tried and failed to implement in 1960s, reflected his more pragmatic policies after Mao's sweeping idealism.
Both men wanted to keep the Communist Party in power but Deng believed that economic prosperity and money in the pockets of every Chinese would be a safer guarantee.
"Without a vision of his own to impose on society, Deng has been willing to adopt policies of non-intervention," wrote Barry Naughton in "Deng Xiaoping: The Portrait of a Chinese Statesman".
He dared to sweep away rigid planning in favour of free market forces, allowed private business into the command economy and decided to open China's door to the rest of the world.
In so doing, he saw the average per capita income of urban Chinese soar by 1,500 percent to about 5,600 ($674) in 1995 from 316 yuan ($38) a year in 1978. Earnings of rural residents leapt by more than 2,500 percent to 3,600 yuan ($433) a year in 1996 compared with just 116 yuan ($13) in 1978.
On the world stage, its foreign trade has ballooned from an asterisk when Mao died in 1976 to 11th in the world and an engine of Asian growth in 1997.
Deng's first attempt at reform from 1976 to 1978 was also the first in a series of boom-bust cycles, a recurrent fact of economic reform for years. The economy overheated and had to be reined in as Deng rushed to allow Chinese to get rich.
But the tone was set. Deng and his day-to-day policy-makers wanted to revive the economy and they chose to do so by getting rid of over-bureacratisation and allowing greater autonomy.
They started by introducing the responsibility system for farmers, under which China's 800 million peasants were allowed to sell on the free market any produce they grew over and above the quota for which they were "responsible" to the state.
Agricultural output skyrocketed, farmers' incomes soared and rural enterprise was born.
That success prompted Deng to introduce the "factory manager responsibility system" that freed managers from the control of the Communist Party secretary ubiquitous in every state unit.
"Whoever is given responsibility should be given authority as well," Deng said in 1978.
He battled orthodox Marxist ideologues to legalise private enterprise.
He set up experimental Special Economic Zones on the coast where foreign investment and capitalist practices were allowed to flourish -- and then to seep into the rest of China.
He lifted decades of controls on prices of many items, a move that brought bursts of fierce inflation but also allowed the marketplace to take command and meant that goods filled shop shelves that had been left empty by decades of state planning.
The ultimate goal was to force enterprises to take responsibility for their own profits and losses and sink or swim amid market competition.
Many factories -- some state-owned, many collective and private -- responded to that challenge.
However, many government enterprises have been unable to compete, forcing the state to maintain subsidies to lumbering loss-making national industries for fear mass unemployment could trigger civil unrest to destabilise Deng's fragile new system.
About 70 percent of China's 100,000 state-owned enterprises operate in the red and state banks are burdened with enormous bad debts -- up to 30 percent of their portfolios -- because they must extend policy loans on orders from the government.
Deng's economic policymakers have tinkered with the spectre of bankruptcy but have repeatedly pulled back from the brink of a solution that raises shades of capitalism.
The existence of a quasi-private economy alongside the huge and still-dominant public sector has fostered dislocations such as profiteering, corruption and inflation.
Introduction of macro-economic controls has been slow amid reluctance to let go entirely of state levers.
Deng preferred to set in motion the big picture and to use his unparalleled political clout to push through economic policies rather than to get involved with the policy basics.
When he did, he called on occasion for bolder and faster growth -- preferring what he called "short-term pain" to ensure long-term gain but resulting in sometimes harmful policies that had to be followed by periods of moderation.
"Deng was a politician, a manager and a generalist whose most successful role was as the political godfather of economic reform," Naughton wrote.
