China's paramount leader Deng Xiaoping died late on Wednesday of complications from Parkinson's disease and a lung infection, the Communist Party announced.
The official announcement listed Deng's age as 93. He was born on August 22, 1904, but China adds a year to a person's age after the lunar new year, which fell earlier this month.
Announcement of Deng's death came in a letter to the Communist Party, the People's Liberation Army and the people of various ethnic groups throughout China and issued by the official Xinhua news agency.
Deng, the man whose pragmatic policies transformed a backward Stalinist state into an economic powerhouse, died at 21.08 (1308 GMT) in Beijing, Xinhua said.
The party and government "proclaim with profound grief to the whole party, the whole army and the people of all ethnic groups throughout the country that our beloved Comrade Deng Xiaoping... passed away", Xinhua said.
Deng was in the advanced stages of Parkinson's disease with complications of lung infections and died of respiratory failure after he did not respond to emergency treatment, Xinhua said.
Chinese sources close to the party said doctors performed an emergency tracheotomy on Deng before he died.
The streets were quiet and calm after China's announcement came in the middle of the night, but additional police were seen around the Zhongnanhai government compound in central Beijing and some major intersections.
Two armed police carrying assault rifles stood guard at the end of the lane in central Beijing where Deng had lived and questioned reporters who tried to stop in the area.
Visitors in small groups were going in and out of the compound where Deng lived, on a leafy alley behind the Forbidden City that once housed China's emperors.
Analysts said they expected a relatively stable transition of power since Deng's anointed successor Jiang Zemin has already amassed the positions of Communist Party chief, state President and head of the armed forces.
The official Xinhua news agency began to issue a lengthy obiturary filled with praise for the man who ruled China from 1978 until he retired from his last official post in 1990, but whose influence remained supreme until his death.
"Comrade Deng Xiaoping was an outstanding leader enjoying high prestige acknowledged by the Party, the army and the people of all ethnic groups throughout China," Xinhua said.
It called him "a great Marxist, a great proletarian revolutionary, statesman, military strategist and diplomat, and a long-tested communist fighter, the chief architect of China's socialist reforms, opening up and modernisation drive, and the founder of the theory of building socialism with Chinese characteristics".
The long stream of titles that did not omit any of the adjectives that China's Communist Party associates with a senior leader in a eulogy, was an official mark that the party planned to ensure Deng was buried with full party honours, analysts said.
Deng had not been seen in public since the 1994 Chinese Lunar New Year festival, when he appeared frail and faltering in a visit to Shanghai.
Chinese sources told Reuters earlier this week that Communist Party chief and state President Jiang Zemin and Premier Li Peng both cut short out-of-town trips last weekend to return to Beijing to visit the ailing patriarch.
