When China wanted to hide the death of an emperor on the road 2,000 years ago it filled his carriage with fish to disguise the smell.
Now it uses enigmatic language to throw a smokescreen around the state of its leaders' health.
Paramount leader Deng Xiaoping, who remains China's most powerful leader even though he formally retired from his last official post in 1990, is 92 and frail, and has not been seen in public for more than three years.
China's Communist Party leaders have shrouded Deng and his health in a veil of secrecy, issuing only terse statements saying he is as well as can be expected for a man of his advanced years, or that there has been "no big change".
"This is Chinese culture," said one Western diplomat. "The emperor can't be seen to be dying until he actually dies."
The power struggle on the death of a Chinese emperor -- or communist strongman -- has traditionally been bloody, and analysts say the departure of Deng is unlikely to be an exception.
When China's first emperor, Qin Shi Huangdi, died while travelling in the south in 210 BC, his prime minister filled the emperor's carriage with fish for two weeks to hide the smell of the rotting corpse, fearing a power struggle before he could reach the capital.
China's communist leaders will probably not conceal the death of Deng for as long as two weeks -- the death of Mao Zedong in 1976 was announced within 12 hours of his passing.
But they are doing their utmost to prevent hard information on any deterioration in Deng's health from reaching the 1.2 billion Chinese whose fate could hang in the balance.
The instinct for self-preservation and a Chinese abhorrence of any talk of death may be two motivations behind the secrecy of Deng's anointed successor, Communist Party chief and state president Jiang Zemin, and his colleagues.
"There is always a nexus between the health of the nation and its leader," said a Western sinologist who declined to be identified. "In a culture so concerned with life and longevity... death is the ultimate horror."
One Chinese analyst agreed.
"In China's current system, the fate of the nation depends on the fate of the leader," he said.
"They are not only afraid that news that Deng is close to death could spark a really fierce power struggle, but they also worry about public instability," he said.
Deng is not the only powerful communist veteran of Mao's generation who still lives, and any elder who outlives Deng could step into his shoes as kingmaker and force a power struggle around Jiang.
Most diplomats say Jiang has already consolidated his position as Deng's successor in the party, government and military and say major blood-letting is unlikely after Deng's death. Jiang has even disbanded Deng's personal office.
"I don't think it's going to come as a shock to anybody when he finally does pass away," another Western diplomat said.
"It's not going to really mean a big shake-up in the leadership here or tanks rolling down the street," she said.
Still Beijing prefers to keep Deng's situation a secret. China's communist rulers inherit a system of based on veneration for age.
"It is highly disrespectful to the leader to discuss his health in public," said the Western sinologist.
