The fragile health of China's 92-year-old paramount leader Deng Xiaoping on Wednesday stirred intense speculation among Japanese and Hong Kong newspapers after the country's leaders cut short out-of-town trips.
Deng was critically ill after suffering a brain haemorrhage, the Japanese daily Nihon Keizai Shimbun said, quoting sources in the Chinese capital.
"According to diplomatic sources in Beijing, the health of China's paramount leader Deng Xiaoping, who has implemented policies of reform..., worsened and he was in a critical condition on February 18," the newspaper said.
Chinese sources said on Monday that Communist Party chief Jiang Zemin and Premier Li Peng had both cut short out-of-town trips last weekend to return to Beijing to visit Deng.
The newspaper said sources close to senior officials in the People's Liberation Army said that Deng had "recently suffered a brain haemorrhage".
The Chinese leadership had told senior party and government officials not to leave the country unless obliged to do so for pressing diplomatic reasons, it said.
Hong Kong's Ming Pao newspaper said Deng was recuperating at home with a team of doctors attending to him.
Deng, whose pragmatic policies transformed a backward Stalinist state into an economic powerhouse, lives in a tightly-guarded central Beijing compound close to the Forbidden City, home for centuries to China's emperors.
On Tuesday, China had played down fears that Deng's health was deteriorating.
"There has been no big change in comrade Deng Xiaoping's health," Foreign Ministry spokesman Tang Guoqiang told a news briefing.
He declined to say if there had been a small change or what could count as a major change in the health of the ailing patriarch.
Rumours about Deng's health surface periodically and often have a direct impact on China-related bourses, where Deng's demise is seen by some as a potentially destabilising factor.
Worries over Deng's health helped to push shares on Shanghai and Shenzhen stock exchanges sharply lower by their close on Tuesday and also rocked share prices in Taiwan and Hong Kong.
The markets recovered slightly on Wednesday, but traders remained cautious about Deng's health.
In an apparent bid to calm the markets, major Chinese newspapers prominently featured economic tsar Zhu Rongji attending a seminar on the economic theories of Deng, architect of China's sweeping economic reforms.
The Chinese Securities newspaper, read by most traders in the market, announced the seminar in a front-page box to draw attention to the fact that Deng was still alive.
Deng has not been seen in public since the 1994 Chinese Lunar New Year festival, when he appeared frail and faltering. He is thought to be in fragile health and with fading lucidity.
Taiwan's United Daily News on Tuesday quoted the island's top official on mainland affairs, Chang King-yuh, as saying Deng's condition was serious. Officials said they were closely monitoring his health.
