China's crown rests uneasily on the head of Deng Xiaoping's anointed successor, Jiang Zemin.
Deng's death after an 18-year rule opens the door to a power struggle in the communist political elite, throwing into relief Deng's major failure -- his inability to set in place a firm succession structure.
Many diplomats and political analysts said they expected Jiang to tighten his grip on the top job after seven years building a powerbase under the wing of his patron.
But the absence of a proper structure and the removal of his mentor leaves him exposed in one of the most precarious positions in the world.
"With Deng's death the political ring of confidence that so protected Jiang Zemin has been torn asunder and he must now face an uncertain political future and political ills by himself," said Australian sinologist Geremie Barme.
Deng was the last leader of China's communist era who could back his claim with an impeccable revolutionary pedigree -- a founder of socialist rule, a victorious veteran of the Long March and battles that swept the Communist Party to power and a colleague of Chairman Mao Zedong.
Jiang's resume is not so impressive.
But, aware of his weakness, he has devoted much of his time to building up his powerbase -- particularly in the military -- after his two predecessors were purged following student demonstrations.
He has amassed the positions of party boss, state president and head of the armed forces.
"Jiang Zemin is a student of Chinese history and Chinese politics and he is very clear that the military hold the key to political power. As the Mao Zedong dictum said, 'political power comes from the barrel of the gun'," said Hong Kong-based analyst Tai Ming Cheung.
But, he said, the military's support is not unqualified and Jiang will have to "provide additional finances and allow the military an important say".
Barme said Jiang's capture of China's three top jobs was unprecedented in the 20th century -- but also dangerous because he was now the only real target for a takeover bid.
Diplomats and analysts said that while Jiang appeared comfortable in the immediate aftermath to Deng's death, he could not afford to be complacent.
"There is a lot of horse trading that has already been taking place, and with Deng's passing it complicates matters a little, perhaps not significantly," said Cheung.
But Jiang was now facing the real test of his career, and of Deng's succession plans, diplomats said.
"It has been Jiang Zemin's good fortune that Deng Xiaoping lasted this long," said one Western diplomat.
