China on Thursday began six days of mourning for paramount leader Deng Xiaoping after an 18-year rule that transformed China from backward Stalinist state to economic powerhouse. He was 92.
A letter from the ruling Communist Party, the State Council, and the Central Military Commission to China's 1.2 billion people expressed profound grief at the death of "a great Marxist, a great proletarian revolutionary, statesman, military strategist and diplomat".
China's Foreign Ministry announced six days of mourning, indicating Deng's funeral could take place on February 25.
The gravel-voiced veteran of military battlefields and backroom political struggles died at 9.08 p.m. (1308 GMT) on Wednesday in Beijing, the official Xinhua news agency said.
Deng, whose pragmatic market reforms propelled China onto the world stage as an emerging economic superpower, was in the advanced stages of Parkinson's disease. He died of respiratory failure after he did not respond to emergency treatment.
Chinese sources close to the party said doctors performed an emergency tracheotomy to try to save Deng, reportedly in the crimson-walled Zhongnanhai government compound just off Tiananmen Square.
The party and government "proclaim with profound grief to the whole party, the whole army and the people of all ethnic groups throughout the country that our beloved Comrade Deng Xiaoping... passed away", Xinhua said.
His career spanned much of the 20th century, from the last emperor to the birth of China as a nuclear power. He swept to power in 1978 after being purged three times and retired only in 1990.
He led China from Mao Zedong's ultra-leftist fervour to a nation at its most stable and prosperous for nearly 200 years, and his influence reigned supreme until his death.
He died without achieving one of his dreams -- to be present in Hong Kong when the colony, wrested from China at gunpoint by the British as spoils of victory in the opium wars, returns to Beijing's sovereignty at midnight on June 30 this year.
No foreign dignitaries would be invited to the funeral, Chjina said.
Flags were flying at half-mast in Tiananmen Square and at the Great Hall of the People, as well at Chinese embassies around the world "to express the incomparable esteem and profound grief of the whole Party, the whole army and the people".
Condolences poured in for Deng, who had not been seen in public since the Chinese lunar new year festival in 1994 when he appeared frail and faltering on a visit to Shanghai.
U.S. President Bill Clinton said he was saddened to learn of Deng's death, calling him an "extraordinary figure on the world stage over the past two decades".
Japanese Prime Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto said he was saddened and pledged to "continue to work with China's leaders for the long-term stability of our bilateral relationship".
Canadian Prime Minister Jean Chretien voiced regret but said his feelings were mixed due to Deng's record on human rights.
Deng died almost within sight of Tiananmen Square, where troops and tanks of the People's Liberation Army, acting on Deng's orders, crushed student-led demonstrations for more democracy with heavy loss of life in 1989.
Diplomats said immediate factional struggle was unlikely in the China's internecine political world, because Deng's anointed heir, party chief Jiang Zemin had a firm grip on power.
Factory manager and technocrat Jiang has already amassed the positions of party chief, state President and head of the armed forces. But Jiang is 70, and will soon have to confront his own succession dilemma.
An official obituary on Deng from Xinhua urged China's 1.2 billion people to rally behind his heir.
Chinese responded with shock and sadness to news of Deng's demise, but without the great outpouring of grief that greeted Mao's death in 1976.
"Then we cried like we lost our father and mother," said one driver parked near Deng's central Beijing residence. "Now everyone is indifferent."
Streets were quiet and calm on Thursday, although extra police patrolled outside Zhongnanhai and military cars with flashing lights drove along main city streets.
Police stood guard around the compound in central Beijing where Deng lived, turning away mourners bringing wreaths.
Stock markets in China, Hong Kong and Taiwan were highly volatile on Thursday, contrary to forecasts by market pundits who expected a moderate response to Deng's death.
Reaction in U.S. markets had been muted and many other Asian markets also showed little if any response to the news, focusing instead on domestic considerations.
The People's Daily newspaper splashed a black-and-white portrait of a smiling Deng over much of its front page and all newspapers ran a black masthead.
"Comrade Deng Xiaoping was an outstanding leader enjoying high prestige acknowledged by the Party, the army and the people of all ethnic groups throughout China," Xinhua's lengthy obituary said.
It called Deng "a long-tested communist fighter, the chief architect of China's socialist reforms, opening up and modernisation drive, and the founder of the theory of building socialism with Chinese characteristics".
