Deng Xiaoping's most daring attempt at reform of China was also among his most dismal failures -- politics.
It was an omission that will haunt his successors.
His anointed heir, Communist Party chief and state President Jiang Zemin, will also almost certainly inherit a power struggle in a country where political structures have yet to fully enshrine the handover of power.
Deng, who died late on Wednesday aged 92, had raised the prospect of democracy, ensuring tens of millions of peasants have the right to elect local representatives.
But he failed to build a structure that would solve the centuries-old problem of how an emperor could hand down power after he passed from the scene.
Deng regarded political reform, complemented by economic invigoration, as crucial to the survival of Communist Party rule.
"In essence the purpose of political restructuring is to overcome bureaucratism, develop socialist democracy and stimulate the initiative of the people and of the grass-roots units," Deng told a Japanese visitor in September 1986.
The main aims he emphasised after he gained power in late 1978 were separation of party and government roles, rejuvenation of the leadership and re-establishment of party democracy.
"For Deng, democracy is a way of making the communist party state more efficient," wrote David Goodman in "Deng Xiaoping."
He never envisaged a system of universal suffrage and was therefore forced to crush those who went too far by demanding Western-style democracy and finally to settle for superficial reform that would not allow any threat to party supremacy.
His combination of rapid economic reform alongside gradual political change saved China's Communist Party from the fate of its Soviet cousin -- where rapid political reform toppled a regime that did not press ahead on the economic front.
He ended up creating a system in which the party held sway as a virtual parasite to a parallel government, economic and social structure and where corruption and abuse of power flourished in the loopholes.
Deng separated functions of party and government to stop the party interfering to replace government, to prevent over-concentration of authority in party and in individual hands and to end absence of responsibility in the bureaucracy.
The party should guide, not govern, in Deng's view.
By the time of his death, the government was responsible for administration, it was the executor of decisions on policy that were the prerogative of the party.
Deng pulled no punches in injecting new blood into a party leadership riddled with ageing veterans after the upheaval of the 1966-76 radical Cultural Revolution.
He battled stiff opposition to shunt elders into a temporary holding pen -- the Central Advisory Commission, which he was finally able to retire in 1993.
To try to ensure an orderly succession, he set an example by stepping down from a string of public offices, abandoning all his positions by the end of 1989.
But he was forced to appoint and then sack two heirs apparent.
His third choice, Jiang Zemin -- also chosen by Deng personally to head the party -- survived until Deng's death, but with no orderly succession pattern yet in place to prevent the usually brutal and often bloody succession struggles that have followed the deaths of Chinese emperors for centuries.
Encouragement of party-led democracy -- emphasis on the need to stimulate individual and group initiative -- was the third plank in his political reform programme.
"In the final analysis, all our other reforms depend on the success of political reforms, because it is human beings who will -- or will not -- carry them out," Deng said in 1986.
"Without political reform, economic reform cannot succeed because the first obstacle to overcome is people's resistance."
Deng drew the line when the enthusiasm of the people for political reform became too extreme with open calls for democracy, and he sent the army to kill unarmed students who urged greater openness in the spring of 1989.
He did allow limited democracy, with villages all over China empowered to elect district leaders from a pool of more than one candidate but free speech and publication of ideas and assembly were going too far.
Those limits may influence a final judgment on his standing in Chinese history.
"In the annals of history there is only a small chapter devoted to those who advanced economic progress," wrote Lucian W. Pye in "Deng Xiaoping: Portrait of a Chinese Statesman".
"The big chapters are reserved for those leaders who brought political freedom and security to their people."
