China's President Jiang Zemin, speaking publicly for the first time since the death of Deng Xiaoping, vowed on Friday to push forward the reforms that his mentor launched 18 years ago.
"The Communist Party of China, the Chinese army and people of various ethnic groups are determined to turn grief into strength," Jiang told Kazakhstan President Nursultan Nazarbayev, who is on holiday in China.
Speaking for the first time in public since Deng died, aged 92, on Wednesday, Deng's designated heir pledged to "hold high the great banner of Deng's theory to build socialism with Chinese characteristics".
China would unite to pursue Deng's reforms and opening up "unswervingly and confidently", the Xinhua news agency quoted Jiang as saying.
Jiang repeated almost word for word the official obituary of the pragmatic reformer whose belief that China's people should be allowed to get rich ended a decade of chaotic rule by Mao Zedong, who believed his people should be "red" -- communist.
However, it was Jiang's first personal and public commitment that he planned to press on with Deng's capitalist-style reforms that have transformed China from a backward Stalinist state to an economic powerhouse.
"We would run China's undertakings still better, and make greater contributions to the cause of peace, development and progress of the mankind," Jiang was quoted as saying.
The death of Deng was "an immeasurable loss" to the Party, army and people of China, Jiang said.
Jiang, who also holds the posts of Communist Party chief and head of the armed forces, emerged on Deng's death to rule China after seven years in waiting as his heir apparent.
Diplomats say Jiang may soon find himself embroiled in a power struggle with other pretenders to power in the highest echelons of the ruling party.
China's leadership has carefully displayed a united front.
China-watchers say this may be a facade.
"It'll be like a duck swimming -- on the surface it'll be calm but underneath it'll be turbulent," said one Chinese analyst, quoting a Chinese proverb.
In imperial China, the transfer of the "mandate of heaven" to a new emperor was rarely smooth. Deng only came to power in late 1978 after a two-year battle with Mao's appointed successor, Hua Guofeng.
The latest power shift has so far been seamless, but analysts said later upheavals could not be ruled out.
Jiang's first test will be at the crucial 15th Party Congress, which is expected to be held in October and is to elect a new central committee, politburo and party chief. The post of party chief, or general secretary, is the most powerful in China.
At least one contest will be over a crusade by Premier Li Peng, 68, to try to retain his slot on the politburo standing committee -- the most powerful decision-making body in China.
Li must step down as premier in 1998, after completing the maximum two terms, and is keen to make a play for the top party post so that he can remain in the hierarchy after he retires from the government job, analysts say.
