China eulogised Deng Xiaoping on Friday, hailing the diminutive patriarch as a giant whose stature could never be matched and pledging the army's loyalty to his political heirs.
As flags around the capital flew at half-mast on the second day of official mourning for Deng, who died on Wednesday at 92, the judiciary sounded a cautious note, issuing a nationwide call for stability.
Security was discreet and the atmosphere calm in the capital. People hurried to work as usual on a bright and crisp Friday morning.
But hundreds of grieving people gathered in Deng's birthplace Paifang, a tiny village in southwestern Sichuan, some kneeling on the ground and weeping.
Police armed with assault rifles moved in to ensure order, local officials said. No incidents were reported.
"Comrade Deng Xiaoping... became a great son of the people, a giant who will never be matched," the People's Daily said in a commentary. "The people of the motherland love and esteem him."
State radio and television poured out glowing tributes for a second day to the 150 cm (5 ft) communist revolutionary who transformed China from an isolated economic pygmy into a burgeoning behemoth.
Communist cells in the military vowed to ensure the world's biggest armed forces remained loyal to his heir, Jiang Zemin, who holds the jobs of Communist Party chief, state President and head of the three-million-strong armed forces.
"The party committees of the military say they will continue to lead the armed forces to rally more closely around the Central Committee and the Military Commission with Jiang Zemin at the core," Xinhua news agency said.
Analysts said Jiang was determined to ensure a smooth transition, especially in the first days after Deng's death when opponents will be poised to seize on any policy error.
The Supreme People's Court, China's top judicial body, ordered all courts to ensure strict law enforcement and to safeguard social stability, Xinhua said.
The chief economist for the State Statistical Bureau issued a special announcement that Deng's passing would not harm the economy, which is shooting up by 10 percent a year.
Political transitions in communist China in the past have been fraught with difficulty and the deaths of senior leaders have triggered mass protests more than once.
Political analysts said Deng's passing was unlikely to be marked by unrest.
Many predict a power struggle sooner or later, but fought behind the scenes, well away from public scrutiny.
After nearly eight years wielding effective power under Deng's wing, Jiang has built up a powerbase and is seen as the man most likely to lead China's 1.2 billion people into the 21st century.
Most people followed their daily routines despite the loss of the gravelly-voiced socialist reformer who set the world's most populous nation on the road from revolutionary communism to a capitalist-style market economy.
Popular reaction has been subdued, ranging from shock and sadness to indifference.
"I have no feelings. Deng was nothing to me," said a 62-year-old snack vendor. "The old go out, the new come in."
A few wept. "I felt very bad when I heard the news," said a farmer from Shanxi. "He was a great man."
State media was effusive. The people had vowed to turn their grief into strength to carry on the reforms Deng launched in 1978.
Authorities have decreed six days of mourning until the funeral on Tuesday when 10,000 people will gather in the Great Hall of the People.
In a letter to the leadership, Deng's widow and family appealed for a simple farewell for the lifelong Marxist.
When he retired in 1989, Deng himself said: "I hope you will see to it that both my retirement and my funeral are simple."
Deng wanted his corneas to be donated to an eye bank and his body dissected for medical research. His ashes were to be scattered at sea, said his widow, two sons and three daughters in their letter.
It was a vivid contrast to the treatment accorded Deng's formidable predecessor, Mao Zedong, when he died 21 years ago. After a national outpouring of grief, he was embalmed. His remains are displayed in a mausoleum in Tiananmen Square.
"As a complete materialist, Comrade Xiaoping always has a philosophical view of life and death," said the Deng family letter, written four days before he died.
China had long been prepared for the departure of its paramount leader. Deng was last seen in Shanghai in 1994, a daughter supporting his fragile frame, his chain-smoker's voice reduced to a hoarse whisper.
