China's President Jiang Zemin has emerged to rule China after seven years in waiting as heir apparent to Deng Xiaoping and, at 70, among his most pressing tasks will be to identify his own successor.
Diplomats said finding an heir could be crucial for Jiang if he is to ward off attacks from ambitious younger men or from power-hungry elders who want to run the show from behind a bamboo curtain -- the means chosen by China's Empress Dowager 100 years ago.
"Jiang Zemin, who while Deng Xiaoping was alive was the young successor, has become at the moment of Deng's death the incumbent leader who is immediately faced with a succession crisis," said Australian Sinologist Geremie Barme.
China's leadership has carefully displayed a united front since Deng died on Wednesday aged 92.
China-watchers say this may be a facade.
"It'll be like a duck swimming -- on the surface it'll be calm but underneath it'll be turbulent," said one Chinese analyst, quoting a Chinese proverb.
In imperial China, the transfer of the "mandate of heaven" to a new emperor was rarely smooth. While the latest power shift so far has been seamless, analysts said later upheavals could not be ruled out.
Jiang must now confront his own mortality and fend off other aspirants to power, among them Qiao Shi, the former security tsar who now heads parliament, economic supremo Zhu Rongji and Premier Li Peng.
He will also face assault on his authority from the last two surviving veterans of Deng's generation, former president Yang Shangkun, 89, and former head of parliament Peng Zhen, 95, whose communist credentials are second only to those of Deng.
In a system where Deng held supreme power until he drew his last breath -- even though he retired from his last post in 1990 and never held a top job -- political pedigree and traditional respect for age rank high.
Political acumen will be crucial.
In the seven years since he was launched into China's top job, Jiang has toiled to make his position unassailable, battling to boost support while picking his way through the political minefield at the top of the party.
Analysts say he certainly now ranks as first among equals in a society that finds itself without an all-powerful strongman for the first time this century, but he may have tried too hard.
"Unlike Deng Xiaoping, Jiang has shown himself to be an unwise political strategist for he has, in an unprecedented move in post-imperial Chinese history, claimed and maintained control of all three major arms of power," Barme said.
"It is strategically suicidal," he said. "It is not wise to be front man in everything."
Analysts said the time may have come for Jiang, well above the official retirement age of 65, to act quickly.
"If he was a wise leader, he would quickly manoeuvre himself into a position where he could appoint a successor who could carry out his legacy -- just as Deng appointed a successor," Barme said.
"So Jiang is faced with the urgent task of devolving power to younger leaders, but may not have the wisdom to carry out such a strategic reformulation of his position".
Diplomats agreed that Jiang's amassing of top jobs could hurt rather than help his survival after Deng.
His most immediate challenge comes from Premier Li Peng, who completes his second and final term next March, but whose future post must be decided, albeit in secret, at the crucial 15th Party Congress in October.
Li wants another job. He wants to be president -- or better still head of the party -- and he can argue that Jiang should give up at least one of his jobs, Chinese political analysts say.
But Jiang cannot afford to give up his job as head of the party, and doesn't want to stop being president. Therein lies the future power struggle.
"Jiang Zemin enjoys the trappings of power," said one Western diplomat. "He likes the pomp and ceremony, the fanfare and red-carpet treatment. He likes to bask in the limelight.
"That is a reason why the Li Peng question is so problematic," he said.
"If Jiang were willing to give up the presidency then the retirement of Li Peng from the premiership would not create so many problems."
