China's Deng Xiaoping launched the greatest economic boom on earth and justified his reforms to doubting Marxist ideologues with one deceptively simple phrase.
The maxim that Deng used as an ideological figleaf to cover his near-heretical treatment of Marxist economics was "socialism with Chinese characteristics".
The phrase that would justify private enterprise, ownership of property and lifting of price controls in a state run by the Communist Party saw the light of day in Deng's opening speech to the 12th party congress on September 1, 1982.
"We must integrate the universal truth of Marxism with the concrete realities of China, blaze a path of our own and build a socialism with Chinese characteristics -- that is the basic conclusion we have reached after summing up long historical experience," Deng told the elders of the central committee.
The congress was crucial for Deng's nascent economic reforms, already running into resistance from his orthodox Marxist colleagues who feared -- rightly as it turned out -- that his employment of market forces would erode three decades of Stalinist command economics.
"Deng's greatest contribution of all was that simple phrase 'Chinese characteristics'," said one Western diplomat.
"It ensured that you could do anything you thought was appropriate. It should be engraved on his tomb."
That single phrase enabled Deng to dump the revolutionary fervour nurtured by the late chairman Mao Zedong in favour of doing pretty much what he wanted.
"This was a huge leap forward compared with the Mao era," said a Chinese political scientist. "This sentence guided China on to the path of modernisation. It marked the shift from Mao's path to Deng's path and enabled Deng to do an enormous number of things."
It ended the sole system of public ownership. Collective and private enterprises were born. It also ended cradle-to-grave care and control by the party.
Chinese could be sacked, they could resign. They were free to find their own jobs. They could move house. They had to pay for their own education and medical care.
The command economy gave way to market forces.
What Deng created was no longer socialism, neither was it capitalism.
It was somewhere in between. It was socialism with Chinese characteristics.
