China's most powerful man has boldly asserted he will outperform his mentor Deng Xiaoping, the late leader who dumped Communist economic orthodoxy to wrench the world's most populous nation into the modern era.
Jiang Zemin, Deng's anointed successor with top posts in the Communist Party, the government and the military, waited just two days after Deng died on Wednesday before implying that the reformist had left much undone.
"We would run China's undertakings still better, and make greater contributions to the cause of peace, development and progress of the mankind," Jiang told visiting Kazakhstan President Nursultan Nazarbayev on Friday.
To ordinary Chinese Jiang's words, his first statement since the end of the 18-year long Deng era of market reforms under Communist control, were an unmistakeable rebuke.
"Of course that's a criticism," said a Chinese worker without hesitation.
Jiang spoke even before the last rites were observed for Deng, whose no-frills memorial rites are scheduled for next Tuesday in Beijing's enormous Great Hall of the People.
To some analysts, Jiang's remarks showed self-assurance, but also smacked of disrespect and arrogance that he may regret in the event of backstage power plays that are the traditional aftermath to the death of a strongman in China.
Chinese leaders have projected an image of seamless transition, mindful of the political tumult that enveloped China following the death of Mao Zedong in 1976.
But the seeds of a power struggle became visible even as Deng lay on his deathbed.
The February issue of a magazine called Zhongliu, or Mainstay, controlled by ultra-leftists, obliquely criticised Deng's successor in what a political analyst described as "the first cannon fired by leftists at Jiang Zemin".
In China's arcane political world, power struggles are fought behind the scenes and traditionally emerge into the public eye only when they erupt in the state media.
The language used by the magazine was reminiscent of the chaotic 1966-76 Cultural Revolution that Mao used to purge his opponents, analysts said.
"The magazine is trying to stir up debate reminiscent of the Cultural Revolution... to oust Jiang Zemin," one said.
In a deliberately understated response to Deng's death, Chinese authorities made little effort to organise memorial activities.
In central Beijing's Tiananmen Square, site of the 1989 student-led protests smashed by the military acting at Deng's behest, at least two people have been detained while trying to show final respects to the late leader.
State television has run endless paeans to Deng and showed formal mourning activities organised by Chinese officials in Hong Kong, Washington and other foreign cities.
In China itself, the citizenry have been left to do things themselves.
In Deng's home village of Paifang in southwestern Sichuan province, tens of thousands of mourners have thronged to the courtyard of his birth since the community's favourite son died. Deng himself left Paifang at 16 and never returned.
In the Sichuan capital Chengdu, people began spilling into People's Square on Thursday and by nightfall the crowd swelled past 10,000, many carrying candles, witnesses said.
"For us here it's tumultuous," a worker at a hotel on the square said.
In the southern boomtown of Shenzhen, a special economic zone near Hong Kong that was Deng's brainchild, hundreds of people filed past a giant Deng billboard which had been turned into a makeshift shrine.
The billboard stands in a square beside one of Deng's most stunning innovations, the Shenzhen Stock Exchange, which Deng said proved that markets were acceptable not only in capitalist societies but also under socialism.
Deng's reforms unsheathed the double-edged sword of rising incomes and galloping inflation but many Chinese said on Saturday they were much better off than in the pre-Deng era.
"Mao made the Chinese stand up but Deng made us rich," said Yang Baisong, a 41-year-old taxi driver in Beijing.
