It began with a whimper, culminated in an economic explosion and was one of the most far-reaching events of the 20th century.
Deng Xiaoping's 1992 move to kick-start an economy faltering after the 1989 Tiananmen massacre strengthened his conservative opponents was a high point of his career and launched an economic boom that has reverberated around the world.
In January 1992, Deng, then 87, toured the boomtown of Shenzhen that borders Hong Kong in what has gone down in history as his "nan xun" or Southern Tour.
For more than two months not a newspaper in China's Communist Party controlled media machine published even a word of Deng's unprecedented visit, underlining the extent to which China's paramount leader -- by then retired from all formal posts -- had lost control of the powerful propaganda apparatus.
Hardline leftists who opposed Deng's bid to place his stamp of approval on the flourishing Shenzhen Special Economic Zone that was his brainchild blocked for weeks any news of his tour.
But in late March of that year, Deng and his loyalists succeeded in pushing aside the propaganda tsars and his "Southern Tour" burst upon the Chinese public through primetime state television and splashed across whole pages of state-run newspapers.
It marked the start of a new era in the reform process that Deng had launched in 1979.
That southern tour unsheathed a double-edged sword of rising incomes and galloping inflation but many Chinese said on Saturday they were much better off than in the pre-Deng era.
"Mao made the Chinese stand up but Deng made us rich," said Yang Baisong, a 41-year-old taxi driver in Beijing.
"I can make 8-9,000 yuan ($960-$1,080) a month," Yang said. "That's pretty good and this car is my own."
China's economy is the fastest growing on earth, sizzling at 9.7 percent last year after three years of double-digit growth.
Deng, always impatient with economic reform, had acted out of deep frustration with the slow pace of economic change after hardliners regained the offensive in the wake of the bloody crackdown on student-led pro-democracy dissent in Beijing's Tiananmen Square on June 4, 1989.
Opposition to reform had come from top level bureaucrats, Marxist purists and Deng's own gerontocratic peers whose power and privilege stemmed from four decades of central planning.
The media barrage of March 1992 marked a strategic turning point in Deng's campaign to outflank conservative opponents in the capital.
At the same time, it exposed his own weakness in that he had to head south to areas where reform had found their strongest hold to push his agenda because he was unable to win a hearing in the bastion of conservativism in Beijing.
The Southern Tour marked an unprecedented interference in the political process and revealed China's worst-kept secret -- that he was the man really running the country.
It was Deng's first public appearance in more than a year -- he had deliberately faded from the scene to boost the stature and credibility of his chosen heir, Communist Party chief Jiang Zemin who was appointed after the Tiananmen Square crackdown.
In scarcely-veiled criticisms in Shenzhen, Deng revealed the extent of his disappointment with his anointed successor and with Premier Li Peng -- both too weak or too conservative to press the radical economic change that Deng believed was the only way to ensure the party retained power.
"We should be even bolder than before in conducting reform and opening to the outside and have the courage to experiment," he said in Shenzhen.
"We must not act like women with bound feet," he said.
