China's President Jiang Zemin issued a pledge on Saturday to outdo late paramount leader Deng Xiaoping in pursuing the capitalist-style reforms that his patron vowed would carry China through the next 100 years.
Jiang, who with Deng's death at 92 on Wednesday became undisputedly the most powerful man in China, waited a scant two days before hinting that "the chief architect" of reforms that have transformed the face of China in just 18 years had only started a job that he (Jiang) meant to finish.
"We would run China's undertakings still better, and make greater contributions to the cause of peace, development and progress of the mankind," Jiang told visiting Kazakhstan President Nursultan Nazarbayev.
To ordinary Chinese, Jiang's first public words following the death of the man credited with creating China's extraordinarily successful combination of communism and capitalism were an unmistakeable rebuke.
"Of course that's a criticism," said a Chinese worker without hesitation.
However, Jiang was also swift to nail his colours to Deng's reforms and opening to the outside world that transformed an isolated Stalinist state into a fledgling economic superpower.
Jiang, who is also China's Communist Party chief and the head of the military, was hand-picked by Deng to be his successor and holds most of the cards needed to replace him.
But for some analysts, his swift attempt to assume Deng's personal mantle smacked of arrogance that could prove dangerous if a power struggle were to erupt.
China's secretive leadership has projected an image of seamless transition following Deng's death, mindful of the political tumult that enveloped the country following the death of Mao Zedong in 1976 before Deng emerged.
But there were hints of discord even as the 92-year-old Deng lay dying.
The February issue of a magazine called Zhongliu, or Mainstay, controlled by ultra-leftists, obliquely criticised Deng's successor in what one political analyst described as "the first cannon fired by leftists at Jiang Zemin".
In China's arcane political world, power struggles are fought behind the scenes and traditionally emerge into the public eye only when they erupt in the state media.
The language used by the magazine was reminiscent of the chaotic 1966-76 Cultural Revolution that Mao used to purge his opponents, analysts said.
"The magazine is trying to stir up debate reminiscent of the Cultural Revolution... to oust Jiang Zemin," one said.
Clearly fearing a repeat of the student-led demonstrations that marked the last funeral of a party luminary in 1989, police threw a security net around Tiananmen Square in the heart of Beijing and plainclothes officers patrolled university campuses.
Deng's memorial rites are scheduled for Tuesday in the cavernous Great Hall of the People on the edge of the square.
On Saturday, a People's Liberation Army honour guard rehearsed the cremation that is expected on Monday at a special cemetery for party heroes, shouldering a glass coffin with a live soldier inside -- apparently simulating China's late paramount leader.
State television has run endless paeans to Deng and showed formal mourning activities organised by Chinese officials in Hong Kong, Washington and other foreign cities.
At home, however, China has kept official reaction to Deng's death deliberately low-key, making little attempt to organise memorial activities that might spin out of control.
In central Beijing's Tiananmen Square, site of the 1989 student-led protests smashed by the military at Deng's behest, at least two people have been detained while trying to pay final respects to the late leader.
Tens of thousands of mourners thronged to the courtyard of his birth in his home village of Paifang in southwestern Sichuan province. In the Sichuan capital of Chengdu more than 10,000 people gathered in People's Square on Thursday to mark the passing of their province's favourite son.
In the southern boomtown of Shenzhen, a special economic zone near Hong Kong where Deng first experimented with grafting capitalist-style markets on to a socialist economy, hundreds of people filed past a giant Deng billboard which had been turned into a makeshift shrine.
In Shanghai, which quickly reverted to its nimble trading ways under Deng's guidance, the city's familier profit mantra was joined by a new chant drifting skyward from the Jade Buddha Temple.
"The monks are praying for world peace and Deng Xiaoping," an attendant said. "So that Deng will go to heaven."
