The king is dead, long live the king.
Chinese President Jiang Zemin has for seven years been designated to step into the shoes of paramount leader Deng Xiaoping, and since Deng's death last week he has done so with almost foolhardy alacrity, analysts said on Sunday.
Western diplomats say they have been picking up signals for several months that Jiang has been trying to carve out his own place in history, distancing himself from his mentor, Deng, who died last Wednesday in Beijing aged 92.
But Chinese political analysts warn that Jiang is playing for major stakes against players who are not short of chips and who may have no qualms about cheating.
"Jiang Zemin is not a strongman. He's no Mao Zedong and he's no Deng Xiaoping," said one Chinese political analyst. "He can't do whatever he likes."
On the second day of official mourning after Deng's death, Jiang appeared to have taken a bold first step in the shadowy political minuet danced by those who rule China from the highest echelons of the Communist Party.
Jiang vowed even greater successes than those achieved by Deng in pushing ahead with the diminutive patriarch's capitalist-style reforms.
"Jiang Zemin committed a political blunder," said one well-connected political analyst. "He said it too early. He could have waited.
"He's giving his political rivals something with which to attack him," he said.
"Deng Xiaoping had qualities that differed from Mao Zedong. But what does Jiang Zemin have?" he asked.
That question may be on the lips not only of political analysts but of Jiang's rivals to rule China.
Since imperial China, the transfer of the "mandate of heaven" to a new emperor -- or party chief -- has rarely been smooth. The latest power shift so far has been seamless, but upheavals cannot be ruled out, analysts said.
In recent days, Jiang has come under veiled attack from leftist hardliners who are nostalgic for Mao's authoritarian rule and who see Deng's death as an opportunity to push their conservative policies.
Jiang, 70, must now confront his own mortality and fend off other aspirants to power, among them Qiao Shi, the former security tsar who now heads parliament, economic supremo Zhu Rongji and Premier Li Peng.
Jiang appears strong, after amassing the top jobs in the party, the government and the three-million-strong armed forces. But analysts say his opponents are well-placed to expose his weaknesses.
"For Jiang Zemin right now, he is much in the running," said one Western diplomat. "He has especially in the last year made a very decisive break from being under Deng's shadow.
"He had been always very cautious to keep within Deng's policy line," he said. "But in the past year, he has significantly defined himself as someone who is very separate from Deng."
He may have been over-ambitious in taking all of China's top three positions.
The only other communist official to hold those three posts was Mao's chosen successor, Hua Guofeng, a colourless rural bureaucrat who was deposed within two years by Deng.
As one of the 459 members of Deng's Funeral Committee, Hua is expected to make a rare appearance at the memorial rites on Tuesday, a poignant reminder to Jiang -- who is expected to deliver the eulogy -- of what happens to those who lose out in a power struggle in China.
