Chinese President Jiang Zemin has refused a request from his predecessor, disgraced Communist Party chief Zhao Ziyang, to attend the funeral of paramount leader Deng Xiaoping, a Chinese source said on Sunday.
Jiang gave Zhao no reason for barring him from attending the memorial rites for the man who personally appointed both men to China's top job, the source told Reuters.
Deng, who handpicked Zhao as his successor in 1987 only to sack him two years later for sympathising with student demonstrators gathered in Beijing's Tiananmen Square, died in the capital on Wednesday aged 92. His memorial rites will be held in the Great Hall of the People on Tuesday.
Zhao was in the scenic city of Hangzhou in eastern China where he had gone to spend the Chinese lunar New Year earlier this month, said the source who is close to Zhao.
Zhao had sent a request to Jiang and other top leaders the day after Deng died, asking for permission to return to the capital after learning of Deng's demise, the source said. Zhao lives under virtual house arrest in Beijing and can move around China only with the approval of the top leadership.
Jiang rejected Zhao's request even though Deng's family and some party veterans had agreed to allow him to attend the funeral, the source said. Deng's family could not be reached for comment.
"Not only will the leadership not let him attend the funeral, they also will not let him return to Beijing," said the source who asked not to be identified.
Zhao renewed his request on February 21, but the leadership had yet to respond, the source said.
Surveillance of Zhao was expected to tighten in the run-up to a crucial party congress later this year as Jiang, who has held the post of party chief since Zhao was sacked, tries to consolidate his power, the source said.
Zhao has not been seen in public since May 19, 1989 when he visited students occupying Tiananmen Square and, with tears in his eyes, beseeched their leaders to call off their pro-democracy demonstrations. The next day hardliners clamped martial law on the capital.
On June 3 and 4, troops firing automatic weapons and backed by tanks stormed the city centre, retaking the square and crushing the demonstrations with heavy loss of life.
Zhao was accused by his enemies of backing the "counter-revolutionary turmoil" and trying to split the party.
Diplomats say China's current leadership remains nervous of the influence of Zhao, whose relatively liberal political and economic policies made him popular while in office.
Party mandarins fear Zhao could be a wild card if he were to re-emerge from his virtual house arrest in a post-Deng power struggle, diplomats said.
Zhao has refused to acknowledge making mistakes, giving him some clout among Chinese who disagree with the verdict of hardliners that the 1989 protests were seditious, diplomats said.
The source said 77-year-old Zhao was in good health. He spends much of his time reading books and indulges his passion for golf about once a week.
