Whatever the worries about Hong Kong's return to China this year, business isn't one of them. At least, that's the official line.
"With 100 days to go, it's no big deal from the point of view of business. It's a fait accompli," said Stewart Aldcroft, director at Templeton.
But scratch the surface of Hong Kong's international business community, and niggling doubts emerge.
"Our half (of one country, two systems) is that Hong Kong will retain its present way of life. And I think that remains to be seen," Brigadier Christopher Hammerbeck, executive director at the British Chamber of Commerce, said, rather stiffly.
March 23 will marks the 100-day countdown to the handover to China at midnight on June 30, a date dismissed by most corporate types in party-mad Hong Kong as another opportunity to dress up and play hard.
That's because the actual business of the handover was taken care of years ago.
Ever since Deng Xiaoping flung open China's doors to foreign investment in the late 1970s, Hong Kong has been forging ties with the mainland, actively investing from Guangzhou to Shanghai and building bridges to Beijing with joint ventures, franchises and huge infrastructure projects.
China has reciprocated by listing state enterprises on Hong Kong's stock exchange, investing heavily in the territory's hot property market and establishing a firm Hong Kong foothold for the People's Liberation Army, parts of which have been reinvented as vibrant business machines.
MAINLAND INTERESTS
"There are many, many companies registered in Hong Kong that are primarily owned and backed by mainland interests," said Tai Ming Cheung, analyst at Kim Eng Securities.
Then there are the red chips, companies listed and based in Hong Kong but operating in China, whose 15-year success story bodes so well that their sizzling shares have helped fuel a stunning 22-percent rise in Hong Kong stocks over the past year.
The bellwether property market has risen more than 40 percent in the same period, turning many Hong Kong residents into instant millionaires.
At the same time, the economy is steaming along with growth rates of five percent or more. And while inflation shows signs of re-emerging, it is not yet cause for serious concern.
Relief from pent-up inflationary pressure was only one of the many benefits bestowed upon Hong Kong by an open China, whose land and resources provided welcome expansionary room for the territory's frenzied but constrained economy 15 years ago.
Economists said the economic integration between Hong Kong and Southern China is now virtually complete, with labour mobility the only remaining division in a vast, sprawling metropolis stretching from Hong Kong to Shenzhen and beyond.
"Harsh economics have driven it, the realities of the cheapness of labour north of the border," said Hammerbeck.
THE POLITICS, HOWEVER, ARE DELICATE
Experts warned that while borders are clear, the line between economics and politics is finely-drawn and easily overstepped.
"People are already politically pessimistic. They are already politically sensitive. It is the economic performance that holds them together," said Michael DeGolyer, political analyst at the University of Hong Kong.
While Hong Kong's booming stock and property markets indicate high confidence about the territory's commercial fate under China, big business is quietly but keenly alert to any challenge to the features that made Hong Kong one of the great business wonders of the world.
Rule of law, free markets, free flow of information, tight fiscal control and strong education are an oft-repeated mantra by a business community determined to protect what it views as the essential ingredients in Hong Kong's magic formula.
The "one country, two systems" policy devised by Deng to guide Hong Kong's return to the Motherland guarantees the territory's autonomy, but it has yet to be implemented or tested. Its success is crucial.
"Because we haven't yet reached the post-handover period, we have not yet seen the extent to which (future chief executive) Tung Chee-hwa and thus, also, the future Hong Kong government can exert their independence," said Templeton's Aldcroft.
TUNG ON A TIGHTROPE
Tung's task to uphold a capitalist system inherently at odds with China's communist regime is a balancing act few envy, even though most big business in Hong Kong has banked heavily on his ability to pull it off.
Tung's decision to leave the the territory's team of civil servants virtually intact was greeted warmly, but China's plan to repeal some civil liberties laws was viewed with caution.
"If we get rid of these laws so promptly, what other laws are going to be got rid of because they're inconvenient? That does not give confidence. But at the same time, we must not make too many assumptions," Aldcroft said.
While the handover's success is considered more assured in Hong Kong than overseas, the Hong Kong stock market is over-bought.
Recent consolidation has removed some of the froth, but enough funds are sufficiently overweight to cause disruption should anything "go wrong," said David Semple, regional strategist at Peregrine Asset Management in Hong Kong.
"There is very negative sentiment from the United States," he said. "And if it does go wrong, there will be a very large element of 'I told you so'."
