Jardine Fleming appears to have come in from the cold as one of China's unwanted.
The investment banking arm of one of Hong Kong's oldest trading houses, or hongs, has been appointed underwriter for a large Hong Kong listing by a Chinese company following three years of exclusion from such deals.
Jardine Fleming director David Dodwell said the company is almost certain it will underwrite Ningguo Cement Co, the biggest supplier of cement to Shanghai and one of the fourth batch of Chinese enterprises approved to be listed overseas.
The appointment follows news of a letter penned by Lu Ping, director of the influential Hong Kong and Macau Affairs Office in Hong Kong, to various government agencies in China, including the China Securities Regulatory Commission.
Dodwell said the Ningguo appointment, believed to be the first of three China deals in the works, signals the end of a long campaign to get Jardine Fleming, 50 percent owned by Jardine Matheson Holdings Ltd, back into China's good books.
"We had seen evidence of companies in China not putting Jardine Fleming on a shortlist because of their impression that the company was not favoured in Beijing," Dodwell said.
Although Jardine Fleming has not actually seen the letter, word of the letter from Lu Ping was welcome.
"It would be fair to say that without explicit action from Beijing significant business breakthroughs in China would continue to be dogged," Dodwell said.
"Clearly if indeed it is true that letters have been sent to a number of agencies in Beijing by the Hong Kong and Macau Affairs Office, that must be of help to us," he said.
Jardine Fleming has just been appointed co-lead on an upcoming flotation by Dalian International (Holdings), the investment arm of the Dalian municipal government.
Other deals are also in the works.
Ningguo is Jardine Fleming's first underwriting appointment since 1994, when Jardine Matheson delisted from the Hong Kong Stock Exchange in favour of a London listing, acquired in 1992.
Jardine Fleming has been working actively to thaw relations with Beijing, which took offense to Jardine's support for political reforms proposed by Hong Kong's colonial Governor Chris Patten.
Many hours have been spent fostering improved relations with Beijing, the company said.
Jardine Fleming's extensive activities on the mainland were repeated in many face-to-face sessions with senior Chinese officials, culminating in a January meeting between Lu and Jardine Matheson director Charles Powell.
