China's resounding declaration of support for the Hong Kong dollar makes a successful assault on the currency even more unlikely, foreign exchange experts said on Wednesday.
"The only way you're going to get a remote chance of a successful speculative attack is if there is such a crisis of confidence it begins to affect retail bank deposits. Otherwise, I just don't see it," said Jim Rohwer, Asian emerging markets strategist for C.S. First Boston in Hong Kong.
Chen Yuan, deputy governor of the People's Bank of China, China's central bank, reiterated at a Bank of England seminar in London on Tuesday that Beijing stands ready to defend the Hong Kong dollar from attack if need be.
"We are prepared to offer liquidity support to the (Hong Kong Monetary Authority) for the purpose of stabilising the exchange rate of the Hong Kong dollar," Chen said. "We also stand ready to use our foreign reserves to support the Hong Kong dollar, if necessary."
The Hong Kong dollar peg was set in 1983 at HK$7.80 to the US dollar when jitters connected to the 1997 handover sent it into a tailspin. The peg still remains Hong Kong's first line of defence against economic instability associated with the handover at midnight on June 30 next year.
The peg has an impressive track record. It withstood the fallout from the Tiananmen massacre in June 1989, when the Hong Kong stock market plunged, and also the global stock market crash of 1987.
"Nineteen ninety-seven is just a date on the calendar at this point," said one currency trader. "There is no uncertainty. You're either here or you're not here. It won't be Independence Day. There are no aliens."
An opportunistic attack upon the currency in January 1995 was quickly warded off by Hong Kong's de facto central bank, the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, which immediately raised interest rates to punishing levels.
Experts said a speculative assault upon the currency would almost certainly be doomed given Hong Kong's foreign exchange reserves of around US$60 billion.
As well as access to China's reserves of $90 billion, Hong Kong has repurchase agreements with several Asian nations that hoard U.S. dollars, partly to protect relatively fragile and export-dependent economies.
Such a deep war chest is a formidable deterrent to all but the richest and most determined of speculators.
"The only thing that can break the peg at this point is political instability that causes capital outflows," another trader said.
But the extent of the political unrest would have to be extraordinary, given the Hong Kong dollar's immunity to the political instability in Beijing in June 1989.
"It would have to be a real debacle. You have to imagine something much, much worse than Tiananmen," said Bill Overholt, director of research at Bankers Trust in Hong Kong.
Hong Kong does not have sufficient reserves to defend a sustained run on the territory's banking deposits, but there are few signs so far that retail investors are concerned.
Rohwer said that confidence appears to be improving with the Hong Kong dollar moving at the stronger end of its trading band. Also, the proportion of banking deposits held in foreign currency is falling, reaching 45 percent at the end of the April this year compared to 54 percent in 1991.
