Hong Kong conglomerate Hutchison Whampoa Ltd reported healthy 1996 earnings in line with expectations on Wednesday, but analysts warned the outlook remains mixed despite upbeat comments from tycoon Li Ka-shing.
"Basically it was in line with what the market was forecasting, propped up by the HK$4.1 billion exceptional from the Orange flotation earlier in the year," said ING Barings analyst Nam Park.
"But the outlook is pretty mixed," he said. "I think I'll be revising my numbers downwards."
Hutchison is 48.9 percent owned by Cheung Kong (Holdings) Ltd and has interests in property, energy, telecommunications, container terminal operations and retailing.
Despite weakness in most of its major divisions last year, Hutchison maintained earnings momentum by spinning off British mobile phone operator Orange Plc in April 1996.
The exceptional gain -- described by one analyst as recurrent income because Hutchison maintained its dividend payout ratio -- helped to boost 1996 net profit to HK$12.02 billion (US$1.55 billion) compared to HK$9.57 billion in 1995.
Although the company failed to give a detailed financial breakdown, analysts said the numbers suggested the company's telecoms and property divisions performed poorly last year while parts of the container business did reasonably well.
The outlook is slightly better in 1997 thanks to Orange, which has been performing better than expected, and the spin-off of a Hongkong Electric Holdings Ltd holding into subsidiary, Cheung Kong Infrastructure Holdings Ltd.
"It's a pretty mixed outlook," said Park. "But I think the real swing factor could be the telecoms side."
Hutchison chairman Li Ka-shing said the company's cellular telephone subscriber base is now about 340,000 and costs would plunge with the changeover from analogue to digital systems.
"With its solid base of recurrent quality income, strong cash flow and financial position, the Group is well positioned to move forward to the next century with confidence," Li said.
But analysts said Hutchison faces an increasingly competitive telecoms market in Hong Kong, and 49-percent-held Orange remains a loss-making business despite early strength.
Analysts said the property division would continue to suffer from a lack of property developments, despite Li's comments that investment income offset any decline in property development income and rental income would remain strong this year.
"It'll be 1998/99 before it's back to property being a source of significant growth," said John Hetherington, analyst at Asia Equity.
The container terminals division, however, seems set to improve. Analysts said Li suggested that Hongkong International Terminals Ltd (HIT) enjoyed double digit growth.
"Given that other operators saw a three percent drop (in container traffic) HIT was obviously the other beneficiary," said Raymond Chong at Yaimichi Securities.
The medium-term outlook is much more positive, thanks to Hutchison's exposure to Chinese exports.
"Medium term I'm very bullish. I'm bullish on China trade flows and Hutch is all up and down the coast of China," said Hetherington.
He is forecasting 1997 earnings of HK$3.60 per share, an estimate another analyst described as "very aggressive".
Earnings per share in 1996 were HK$3.32.
(US$1 = HK$7.74)
