U.S. House Speaker Newt Gingrich said on Thursday he expected to discuss with China allegations of illegal funding to the Democratic Party by Beijing during his visit, even though he considered it a domestic issue.
"Obviously I think this will come up in Beijing...(but) this is not a Chinese problem," Gingrich, on a 10-day Asian tour, told the American Chamber of Commerce before leaving for Beijing on Thursday evening.
The Washington Post has reported that the Federal Bureau of Investigation warned six members of the U.S. Congress last year they had been targeted by China to receive illegal campaign funds from foreign corporations.
U.S. Vice President Al Gore said he talked about the issue on Tuesday in Beijing with Chinese Premier Li Peng, who has denied the reports. Gore said that the probe into the allegations should not disrupt China-U.S. ties, but proof of payments would make it a serious matter.
Gingrich, who was in Hong Kong on a two-day visit and was due to arrive in Beijing hours after Gore leaves, said the campaign financing scandal should be treated as a domestic issue, albeit a serious one.
"This is an American problem," Gingrich said. "It is an American law violated by Americans engaging in acts which are illegal in our system, and we have an obligation to police our system."
He said the United States would defend its political system from foreign interference, and called upon Asian nations for cooperation on investigations.
"My only point in Beijing and in Taiwan would be, if we need information about specific people and specific companies, we hope you will give us the information," he said.
The China allegations followed other reports of irregular fund-raising by the Democratic Party involving Asian nations and American-Asians based in the United States.
Gingrich said the media's portrayal of the fund-raising affair as a complicated international issue was incorrect.
"It's not complicated at all," he said. "About a year and a half ago, a group of people sat down and decided they couldn't win the election if they didn't raise every penny they could from every source they could, and if they actually obeyed the law, it'd be too complicated."
U.S. President Bill Clinton this month blamed much of the controversy on a political system that was "out of whack".
