Tears flowed and eight bells tolled at a farewell for the Royal Navy in Hong Kong on Friday as Britain shut its HMS Tamar naval base in an end-of-empire retreat leading up to the colony's July 1 return to China.
Except during the Japanese occupation between 1941 and 1945, eight bells have rung three times a day for more than 100 years at HMS Tamar, marking the Royal Navy's watch over one of Britain's most prized colonial possessions.
First Sea Lord Admiral Sir Jock Slater, Governor Chris Patten and other dignitaries spoke of dignity and pride as the White Ensign was lowered, furled and folded at the base on Stonecutters Island in Hong Kong harbour.
"The White Ensign has just been lowered over this shore base but the values that it has stood for will, I hope, remain in this place: respect for law and for person, trust, duty and service," Patten told more than 200 sailors.
"But there is no cause for thinking sad thoughts, that there is dishonour in these endings. Nothing has melted away. There have been no defeats," Patten said.
"What the Navy has done is help to provide the stability that enabled commerce and industry to flourish and let Hong Kong develop into what it is today," said Commander Oliver Wright, who served 40 years with the Royal Navy from 1941 to 1981.
In a ceremony that drew tears from oldtimers saddened by the decommissioning of Britain's last naval base east of Suez, more than 200 seamen in stiff, white uniforms marched through the gates to an upbeat rhythm set by the Royal Marines' brass band.
HMS Tamar shut 100 years to the day that a vessel of the same name first arrived in Hong Kong waters. Its closure ended a 156-year association between the Royal Navy and Hong Kong.
The first naval officer to set foot in Hong Kong was probably Sir Edward Belcher, who landed on 25 January 1841 and drank to Queen Victoria's health on Possession Mount on Hong Kong Island. The Union flag was raised the following day.
Many younger naval officers were pragmatic about the end of such a long relationship,
"Hong Kong's time is up," said radio operator Steve McSevich. "It's reverting to Chinese rule and there's no shame in that. The Chinese will leave it pretty much as it is."
China, whose navy will occupy another site on Stonecutters Island, was not represented at the ceremony, another sign of the stalemate in Sino-British negotiations as the transition nears.
The only Chinese present were locally hired personnel, many of whom now have until June 30 to find new jobs.
The future of the HMS Tamar site is uncertain, but the three Peacock class patrol craft based there have been bought by the Philippines, which will take possession soon after July 1.
