Hong Kong democracy activists will raise the stakes this week in a bid to bring international pressure on Beijing over its plans to curtail political and civil liberties in the territory.
Martin Lee, the leader of Hong Kong's Democratic Party who is in the United States to lobby against China's plans, will meet with U.S. Secretary of State Madelein Albright on Monday and U.S. President Bill Clinton and Vice President Al Gore sometime in the week.
Lee received a warm welcome last week in an address to the U.S. Senate's Foreign Relations Committee, in which he pleaded for U.S. support for democracy in the territory after it reverts to Chinese rule.
"How the U.S. and other Democratic countries of the world react to China's many breaches of the joint declaration will make the difference in whether Hong Kong remains the free society it is today or whether the democratic elections, human rights and the rule of law Hong Kong people have heretofore known and cherished will be extinguished," Lee told U.S. senators on Thursday.
Despite assurances of substantial automony under handover agreements, Beijing has begun moves to change civil liberties laws, including the Bill of Rights, a 1992 election law and a law on creation of political parties.
Future chief executive Tung Chee Hwa last week unveiled additional plans to restrict public protests and foreign funding for political organisations from July 1, when Hong Kong reverts to Chinese control after more than 150 years as a British colony.
Beijing considers the most recent proposals essential for compliance with the Basic Law, Hong Kong's post-handover constitution. But democracy activists in Hong Kong see them as further signs of an erosion of basic rights and freedoms now enjoyed by the territory's 6.4 million people.
"It is tantamount to taking away the rights...recognised by the constitution, that are recognised by international covenants," Democratic Party member Albert Ho said last week.
The proposals also have been condemned by the colonial government and last week drew admonition from the Clinton administration, which called them "disturbing".
Beijing reacted angrily to the comments, accusing Washington of meddling in Chinese affairs.
But a poll by a Hong Kong newspaper indicated that dissatisfaction with Tung was growing at home as well.
The poll of 803 people residents, released by the Ming Pao newspaper on Sunday, showed Tung's popularity has hit a new low since his office unveiled the plans to amend Hong Kong's civil liberty laws.
The newspaper said the rating of Tung's fitness for the post of chief executive had slipped 5 percent to 4.65 points on a scale of zero to 10. Meanwhile, his "trustworthiness" rating sank 10 percent to 4.35.
It said the survey was done after Tung's office made proposals on two key laws -- the Public Order Ordinance and the Societies Ordinance, to curb protests and foreign funding for political groups in Hong Kong after the British colony reverts to China on July 1.
As the sovereignty transition nears, however, nothing is expected to derail Beijing from implementing its plans.
"To Beijing, time is running out for dilly-dallying on procedural and formal matters. It is time for action and decision because there is work to do in the next 80 days," the South China Morning Post newspaper said.
Meeting across the border in the Chinese city of Shenzhen to avoid threats of legal action by the Democrats, future Hong Kong lawmakers on Saturday agreed on a formula to enact laws that would govern the territory after July 1.
Condemned by the Democrats as unconstitutional and illegal, the Chinese-annointed Provisional Legislature is proceeding with readings of about a dozen bills that Tung believes must be passed before July 1.
But concern is mounting that the Provisional Legislature, in its haste, will ram through loophole-filled laws that will be easy to undermine.
"Laws full of loopholes and ambiguities -- and a legislative process vulnerable to challenge -- would become a source of more friction and legal dispute," the South China Morning Post warned.
