Europe's envoy in Hong Kong on Thursday said the European Union had lost credibility by falling into public disarray over a resolution at the United Nations designed to censure China for human rights violations.
"We are now not as credible an interlocutor matching the commercial clout we have because we are not united," Etienne Reuter, head of the European Commission in Hong Kong, said in an interview with Reuters.
"We haven't helped our own image, and we haven't helped the cause of furthering human rights in China... It has certainly weakened our position here," the envoy said.
The Geneva resolution, sponsored by Denmark and backed by the United States, failed to win EU support when France said that recent human rights improvements by China suggested dialogue was better than confrontation.
This is the first year the EU has failed to back the resolution since the 1989 Beijing massacre, when China crushed democracy protesters in a bloody crackdown around Tiananmen Square.
"This means that...when (people in Hong Kong) look for help or support they will tend to look first to North America or maybe even to Japan, rather than believe the Europeans have the cards to play. That is, I think, the sad reality," Reuter said.
Denmark, the United States and human rights activists condemned the EU's silence, which fell in the year that Hong Kong reverts from British to Chinese rule.
The United States is also usually seen as the most outspoken defender of human rights in Hong Kong, but Reuter argued Europe also should have a role to play.
Under the "one country, two systems" formula, Hong Kong will retain considerable autonomy for 50 years as a Special Administrative Region within China.
But as the July 1 handover nears, concern is rising that many key freedoms enjoyed by Hong Kong people will soon be lost.
Moves by future Hong Kong leader Tung Chee-hwa to trim civil liberties have provoked condemnation from many sides in Hong Kong and prompted criticism from the United States.
Beijing responded by telling the United States to stop meddling in China's internal affairs.
The EU's Reuter said he hoped the "Geneva debacle" reminded Europe that its future influence in Hong Kong depended upon unity, particularly as the handover approaches.
"The indications for a smooth transition...are good, so I would not like to paint a dark scenario for the future, but I certainly think it is important for the Europeans to realise they can only be effective here if they are united," he said.
The incident also had drawn attention to Europe's urgent need for a common foreign policy, one geared more to common interests rather than values.
"You will always have realists versus idealists, and people thinking, 'Why should it be our job to be the world's policeman or the world's preacher?' (This) is a discussion which concerns everybody in Europe and not only France," he said.
An outstanding deal by an Airbus Industrie-led consortium to build a 100-seat plane in a Chinese joint venture had little to do with France's objection, Reuter said.
"I don't think people should think it's only because of a couple of Airbuses that France did not support the concept of the resolution in Geneva," he said.
French President Jacques Chirac is due to sign the deal during a visit to China in May, although Beijing said recently that more work was needed to finalise the contract and called upon the European side to offer better terms.
