British soldiers fought their way through jungle, attacked an enemy camp and took prisoners in Hong Kong on Tuesday, but it was only a mock battle and the last such exercise by the army after 156 years of colonial rule.
With only 70 days left before Britain hands Hong Kong back to China, the Black Watch regiment headed to the hills of the New Territories to play jungle war games and ignore, for a few hours, the fast-approaching end of British rule.
Shots ripped through the air and red flares spewed smoke as sweat-drenched soldiers laden with gear waded across rivers, charged up and down hills and crawled through lush and heavy undergrowth in a practice assault on an enemy camp.
The Black Watch -- dubbed the "Highland Furies" by the French after the Battle of Fontenoy in 1745 -- are nearly half-way through an historic tour of duty in Hong Kong.
On June 30, the pipes and drums of the regiment will sound the end of British colonial rule.
But on Tuesday, sweat and slog rather than ceremony was the order of the day.
The camp and two prisoners-of-war were successfully taken, marking the end to the British army's permanent access to a valued training ground for jungle warfare skills.
"I'll miss it. We'll miss it, because you don't get training like this on a regular basis on a tour," said Corporal John Lyon, 28. "This area you can train throughout the whole time you're here."
Lieutenant-Colonel Alasdair Loudon, commanding officer of the Black Watch in Hong Kong, said the New Territories have become something of a secret weapon.
Few would guess that less than one-hour's drive from the concrete jungle of Hong Kong Island lie stretches of hot, humid and heavily overgrown countryside which represents a challenge for British troops.
"For us, it's harsh terrain. We're not used to the heat, we're not used to the hills and when you get away from tracks the undergrowth is very difficult. So it's demanding," he said.
The Black Watch also had a busy day on Monday -- they were escorting an advance party of China's People's Liberation Army (PLA) soldiers as they drove from the border to the Prince of Wales barracks in the territory's Central business district.
The 40-strong PLA party are to lay the ground for up to 10,000 Chinese troops likely to be stationed in Hong Kong after the handover.
Loudon said his regiment's main task as June 30 approaches is to ensure the handover goes smoothly.
"Our most important task is to get out on June 30 and have a fine parade so that the handover of British sovereignty has gone in a smooth and dignified way," he told reporters.
At least 100 of the Black Watch soldiers will be involved in the ceremonies with another 100 providing logistical support. The regiment flies back to Inverness in northern Scotland after the ceremonies.
"To a man, they will have had a very interesting time here. They will have done some good training, they've done a good job," Loudon said.
"And I'm sure when they get back to Inverness, where it's warm only two days a year, they're going to miss Hong Kong very much," he said.
