Hong Kong police are gearing up for all imaginable trouble during this year's handover to China -- from fireworks and street parades to protest rallies and guerrilla attacks, police said on Wednesday.
Assistant police commissioner Lee Ming-kwai outlined plans to cope with an event that government officials have said will be the biggest international media spectacle since South Africa's 1994 post-apartheid elections.
The centrepiece of the celebration around the handover is a joint Sino-British flag-changing ceremony at midnight on June 30 to be attended by about 4,000 dignitaries, including more than 60 well-known VIPs.
Of these 60, about 30 are foreign ministers, with the remainder made up of former prime ministers and presidents or chief executives of major corporations, Lee said.
About 7,200 journalists have registered to report on the event and police have been notified of more than 180 public celebrations.
The mix of fireworks, street parades, demonstrations and large-scale ceremonies across notoriously crowded and congested Hong Kong is posing a logistical and security nightmare.
"We have difficulties because, I must say, this is a unique historical occasion," Lee told a news conference.
"A lot of people want to celebrate, a lot of people want to celebrate extravagantly or in large scale," he said.
Police appealed through local media for cooperation from the British colony's 6.4 million population to ensure the huge jamboree celebrating its return to Chinese rule goes smoothly.
Lee said about 2,000 officers will be at hand for the handover ceremonies with the remainder of the 28,000-member force, along with 5,000 auxiliaries, working in the community, where many local celebrations are planned.
On Wednesday, police called on the public for early notification of public parties to allow coordination of events and keep the streets safe from clashes between different groups.
A special police task force created to handle handover security started planning and training a few years ago.
It is now bringing in X-ray machines, metal detector archways and explosives detectors along with extra explosives sniffer dogs and handlers to deal with the event.
Lee stressed that the force was ready to confront even the most extreme scenario, including guerrilla attacks.
"We've got plans to handle that sort of situation," he said, responding to questions about recent bomb threats in Britain by the Irish Republican Army (IRA).
"I cannot envisage a picture the same as London. In terms of social order, in terms of crime rate, Hong Kong is in a far better position and there is no indication the IRA will come to Hong Kong and cause a problem," Lee said.
"But, of course, we have to take note and take precautions."
To gain experience, police travelled to a number of large-scale events, including World Bank meetings in Washington and Madrid, and four Conservative Party meetings in Britain, one of which was under heightened security because of an IRA threat.
Hong Kong has had no history of terrorism since the left-wing riots of China's Cultural Revolution spilled into the territory in the 1960s.
But in recent years, protests by pro-democracy groups have become common. There have also been bomb hoaxes recently, ostensibly by citizens upset by spiralling house prices.
And last week, vandals damaged a new bridge which former British prime minister Margaret Thatcher is due to inaugurate on Sunday.
