Hong Kong regulators said on Thursday they are closely watching a dispute between Taiwan and Hong Kong over two Hong Kong-listed call warrants linked to the Taipei index.
"This is something we're keeping an eye on," Bill Weeks, spokesman for Hong Kong's Securities and Futures Commission (SFC), told Reuters.
Taiwan is threatening legal action after the Stock Exchange of Hong Kong on Wednesday listed the two call warrants linked to the Taiwan weighted index, one issued by Peregrine Derivatives Ltd  and the other by Union Bank of Switzerland.
Weeks said the SFC approved the concept of listing derivative warrants in Hong Kong, but the precise form of the warrants was left up to the Hong Kong exchange.
The Taiwan Stock Exchange on Wednesday said the Taiwan weighted index was its proprietary product and that it had "serious concern and objection" to the new products.
Sources said that rather than a regulatory issue, the current dispute appears to be more a legal matter involving copyright and trademark.
"Because these companies have not been authorised by the Taiwan Stock Exchange to use its index, the exchange has issued an urgent letter to the two firms to express serious concern and objection and reserves the rights for necessary legal actions," the Taiwan exchange said in a statement on Wednesday, shortly after the products were launched.
The Hong Kong stock exchange hit back by pointing out that similar products were listed and traded in Luxembourg.
These call warrants would improve Hong Kong's status as a trading centre for regional products and boost market liquidity, the Hong Kong exchange said.
"The exchange believes that the listing of the products will improve the liquidity of the underlying cash market and is in the best interest of all markets," the Hong Kong statement said.
The Hong Kong exchange is charging ahead with plans to list more regional derivative products. It has not imposed a transaction tax on any regional derivative warrants or convertible bonds.
Hong Kong stock exchange chief executive Alec Tsui said on Wednesday the exchange was publishing a monthly report on the latest developments supporting the listing and trading of convertible bonds or derivative warrants on underlying securities listed on 15 regional exchanges.
They are Tokyo, Osaka, Korea, Shanghai, Shenzhen, Taiwan, the Philippines, Thailand, Malaysia, Singapore, Jakarta, Australia, New Zealand, Bombay and the National Stock Exchange of India, Tsui said.
-- Hong Kong News Room (852) 2843 6470
