The jury is still out on whether China will cut rates later this year, but Hong Kong is keeping its fingers crossed.
If China cuts rates, Hong Kong stands to gain -- sort of.
Economists said only certain sectors in Hong Kong would benefit from a Chinese rate cut, reflecting the uneven integration beween the two economies.
Trade and investment move easily across the border but banking and monetary systems remain separate.
China's inconvertible currency and capital account create an inevitable divide between banking systems, while both Britain and China have agreed to maintain two separate monetary systems under the "one country, two systems" policy that will guide Hong Kong back to Chinese rule on July 1.
"So the interest rate cut, if it materialises, won't have a significant impact on Hong Kong's economy but, of course, it does have an impact on those companies which have operations in China, particularly red chips," said George Leung, economic adviser at Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation.
A rate cut would cut the financing costs for many red chips -- Hong Kong-listed companies with financial backing in China -- and, in all likelihood, this would fuel the red chip fever that already holds the Hong Kong stock market firmly in its grasp.
The companies most likely to gain are those who borrow in Chinese yuan rather than those red chips based and managed in Hong Kong, which normally borrow in foreign exchange.
Hong Kong's trade figures would also improve, Leung said.
In 1996, Hong Kong reported total exports of HK$1,397.7 billion (US$179.19 billion), of which re-exports -- goods shipped through Hong Kong for processing elsewhere -- accounted for HK$1,185.8 billion (US$152.03 billion)
China was responsible for a substantial HK$417.8 billion (US$53.56 billion), or 35 percent, of Hong Kong's re-exports.
China cut rates twice last year, and although state economists have insisted that current rate policy is "appropriate", economists in Hong Kong said China's economic and political backdrop is ripe for a dash of monetary easing.
First quarter gross domestic product rose 9.4 percent year-on-year against a 1996 growth rate of 9.7 percent.
Inflation is falling, with retail price inflation up 2.6 percent year-on-year in the first quarter and consumer price inflation 5.2 percent higher. China holds a 1997 inflation target of six percent but economists now expect this number could drop as low as three percent.
"On a macro(-economic) basis, with a healthy external environment, low inflation, slowing growth and rising unemployment, the appropriate policy is to ease monetary policy," said Kevin Chan, economist at Salomon Brothers.
Lower rates would also ease the burden on China's state-owned enterprises, which are laden with debt.
Hong Kong's return to Chinese sovereignty on July 1 and an important Communist Party Congress slated in October add a political imperative to the mix, said Dong Tao, senior economist at Schroders Investment Management.
"Traditionally, there aroured by all the Chinese, not just on the mainland but in Hong Kong and Taiwan," said Tao.
But these positive signs must be weighed against a Chinese leadership always wary of overheating, and anxious to avoid any possibility of a market crash, he said.
