A widespread shake-up is hitting the highly competitive funds management industry, stripping a number of Hong Kong's key players of their jobs.
"The whole industry is in turmoil at the moment," said Christopher Day, formerly of Thornton Management (Asia) Ltd.
Day left Thornton in the wake of its amalgamation last November into the other fund units of Dresdner Bank, including RCM Capital and Kleinwort Benson Investment.
He is one of at least four senior dismissals during the past few weeks, according to industry sources. All were the result of consolidation in the industry with finance houses scrambling for position in the exploding mass market for retail mutual and pension funds.
"A number of companies want to become the Proctor &amp; Gamble of fund management," Day said. "Virtually every European bank thinks it'll play in this market."
Big financial companies are merging, seeking distribution networks powerful enough to gain dominance in this sector. The best example was Morgan Stanley Group Inc's US$10.7 billion merger with Dean Witter, Discover &amp; Co last February, he said.
"Dean Witter is a distributor, although it may not be called that," Day said. "Branding and distribution are the key. Marks &amp; Spencer sells mutual funds, so does Virgin "
Banks are keenly interested in funds management because they want to shift income away from loans to investment management income, which they perceive as higher quality, said another senior industry figure who was about to leave his company.
"And there's growing income from fund management where on the loan side you increase profits by driving volume," he said.
But he warned that banking and funds management do not necessarily blend well due to a difference in cultures.
"A loan-driven bank in Europe just does not have the entrepreneurial flair to drive fund management volumes, and in banks, nobody has any skill to manage these egotists," he said.
This sort of culture clash could jeopardise compliance, he warned. Fund managers, often seen as unmanageable by the more conservative banks, end up being left alone while compliance officers -- usually lawyers -- have a poor understanding of the fund industry.
Some fund managers also said they were becoming uncomfortable in the new supermarket-style fund houses, and this was one factor that accounted for a mushrooming of niche operations.
Fund managers were under pressure to design mass market products and have assumed more of a marketing role to adapt to an increasing focus on the consumer.
"Small boutiques are rising up full of people (fed) up with the large houses," said the second fund manager
The boutiques seem to function well. Joseph Paul, customer service manager at Rothschild Asset Management Asia Pacific, said his group has little interest in the high-turnover, mass market best exemplified by Jardine Fleming Unit Trusts in Hong Kong. But Rothschild proved that even niche players are not immune to fall-out from this industry shake-up.
In late 1995, Rothschild lost its entire funds management team to National Westminster Bank, which merged one of its units with Wheelock and Co Ltd
The merger folded last November, with NatWest buying out Wheelock's stake, partly because NatWest had sealed a deal with huge British pension giant Gartmore Plc
-- Hong Kong Newsroom (2843 6470)
