Hong Kong's future leader Tung Chee-hwa returned from meetings with top Chinese officials on Wednesday taking a softer line on controversial plans to restrict civil liberties after the handover to China.
Looking relaxed, the former billionaire shipping magnate said he was prepared to tolerate public calls for his resignation and even burning of his effigy after he takes the helm on July 1.
"I don't mind people calling for my resignation, burning my effigy. It's not a problem with me," Tung told reporters.
But he cautioned that he prized public order.
"Hong Kong society is now very stable, very good. It is something we are very proud of and I said it would be sad if in such a successful and peaceful society, lives started to change," he said.
Tung's relaxed approach and easy demeanour belied the storm of controversy created by his proposals, which would require police permission for public demonstrations and prohibit foreign funding for local political parties.
While defending his proposals as "really far less restrictive" than laws in most North American cities, Tung stressed the importance of good Sino-U.S. relations - a subject that surfaced in his talks in Beijing with Chinese Foreign Minister Qian Qichen and chief of Hong Kong policy Lu Ping.
"(Qian) has been in the United States recently, and I'm very glad that the relationship is developing well. It is a very positive development and that has very important implications for Hong Kong's future," Tung said.
His inner cabinet has already started to draw up legislation to change the laws - just hours after one of Tung's key advisers hinted that some relaxation of the original plans was possible after a three-week public consultation period.
"There are many proposals that have been put forward to us," Henry Tang told reporters earlier on Wednesday. "In the consultation exercise, there are more liberal (proposals) than what is in the consultation document."
Tung said he told Qian that handover arrangements were going well, and said they had agreed that there should be no change in existing tourist visa arrangements for all countries with Hong Kong consulates.
"We have talked about quite a few things but basically its been some time since we saw each other and ... he would like to know how everything is and I was able to assure him that everything was coming along very nicely," Tung said.
In a television broadcast earlier on Wednesday, Tung repeated his commitment to a democratic society in Hong Kong.
"Actually over the next 10 years, we have a very progressive but orderly development of a political structure which will become increasingly democratic," Tung said in an interview with CNBC Asia Television.
He was referring to the gradual democratisation envisaged in the Basic Law, Hong Kong's post-handover constitution promulgated by China in 1990.
Tung said Hong Kong was following a path of development set by other Asian nations.
"In Asia... economic success and freedom has preceded political development," he said. "And in Hong Kong, of course, we have tremendous economic success and economic freedom, and political freedom...is something as a colony we really never had until about six years ago... we are now developing it."
