While the issue of Hong Kong's civil liberties after its return to China has grabbed the international spotlight, the territory's people remain concerned about a more insidious threat -- corruption.
Future leader Tung Chee-hwa's efforts to cool local and international fears about plans to curb civil rights have eclipsed an issue that has persistently taken top spot in local surveys as the biggest concern tied to Hong Kong's return to China on July 1, analysts said.
"This is the thing people are most concerned about," said Michael DeGolyer, a political scientist at the Baptist University of Hong Kong.
"We asked people which post-1997 aspects worried them most in July 1996, December 1996 and February 1997. It (corruption) was number one out of a total of seven various aspects...three times in a row. It's been number one there for over a year."
Political analysts said the implications of a rise in corruption associated with Hong Kong's handover to Chinese rule were enormous.
Fears abound that the Chinese style of doing business, called "guanxi" or being connected to the right people, will erode the rule of law, which is considered essential to confidence in Hong Kong and its longer-term competitiveness.
"The prosperity of Hong Kong is very much based on upholding the rule of law, its respect for due process. These are very important factors for Hong Kong to function as an international and regional financial centre," said Professor Joseph Cheng of the City University of Hong Kong.
Political analysts said that while there was clear evidence of growing Chinese influence in Hong Kong's business, people were less concerned about "guanxi" seeping across the border than they were about individual Hong Kong businessmen exploiting the new style of doing business to their advantage.
"The business community sees the establishment of relationships in China as very important business assets, and we all know corruption facilitates the establishment of such relationship networks," Cheng said.
"Businessmen usually say they support fair competition while they make relationship contacts. So we could see this spread of relationship networks and the willingness to use bribery to seal business deals."
DeGolyer said it was essential that Tung started to promote Hong Kong's continued integrity aggressively, with a strong focus on the Independent Commission Against Corruption (ICAC).
The anti-graft agency has been widely acknowledged as crucial to Hong Kong's reputation as a respectable place to do business.
"He should be incessantly beating the drum about the ICAC," DeGolyer said. "He should be hammering away about its independence, its being above board, that he will support it."
The powerful ICAC was set up in 1974 when corruption was endemic in Hong Kong.
Cheng added that corruption, while not an immediate risk, could be devastating over the longer term.
"The whole process is a very gradual one. Corruption spreads gradually, and you don't just say 'There's corruption and I withdraw my investment.' It takes time," he said.
