U.S. interest rates have been the focus for most investors in Asia lately, but one key development that has escaped much notice is the increasing divergence of the region's markets, Guinness Flight Asia Ltd said.
"Investors are becoming much more discerning, and market performance across the region is now highly divergent," Guinness Flight said in its second quarter Asian outlook.
"Rather than simply investing in Asia, funds are flowing to those markets where the investment story is strong and avoiding those where it is weak," the fund manager said in the recently released report.
This placed a greater onus on fund managers to get their asset allocations correct.
It was too easy for investors get caught up in the hype about the "Asian growth miracle", but rosy expectations for earnings growth have traditionally been linked to high headline rates for gross domestic product growth and less to what companies have been achieving, it said.
"High levels of bank lending growth and overheating property markets can also produce flattering results in the short term, but the longer-term sustainability of such earnings growth is more questionable."
But long-term growth was available, it said. Asia is a highly dynamic region, but some growing pains are inevitable, reflected in the cyclical slowdown in a number of key export industries or structural problems in Thailand and South Korea.
"Nevertheless, companies that are well-managed and well-positioned have an excellent environment in which to prosper," Guinness Flight said.
To gain access to that growth, investors need to have a clear idea of which markets are the strongest. Stock picking has become increasingly important, it said.
By focusing on companies that constitute the bulk of index capitalisation, investors may miss many of the best opportunities. This partly reflects the undeveloped nature of these markets where blue chips account for the lion's share of turnover, commission and research, the report said.
Concentrating on small and medium-capitalisation stocks is time-consuming and difficult because the information sources are fewer, but Guinness Flight argued it was essential.
"Management quality is the key criterion," it said. "This is very much 'growth investing' as good sustainable earnings growth and strong cashflow are indispensible if a company is to be successful and provide a good return to shareholders. Asia is a growth story and this is where it is happening."
Guinness Flight called China a key prospect. Although tiny as an equity market, China has profound influence and a slow easing of monetary policy there boded well for the earnings outlook of Chinese companies over the next few years.
Guinness Flight is holding an overweight position in Hong Kong and raising Singapore to overweight in expectation of an electronics recovery. It is moving to underweight in Malaysia following greater economic uncertainty there.
Indonesia remains overweight on strong economic fundamentals, while Taiwan has been raised to neutral on strong domestic liquidity. The Philippines has been cut to underweight on a deteriorating current account, while South Korea continues to fail to address structural problems.
Thailand has shown no real signs of recovery, although indications are that the market may have reached its bottom, the report said.
The following is Guinness Flight's second quarter percentage weightings against the Morgan Stanley Capital Index Asia ex-Japan. (Figures in brackets show Guinness Flight's weighting versus Morgan Stanley's weighting):
Overweight: Hong Kong (34 vs 26.5), China (1 vs 0.5), Indonesia (7 vs 6.5), all unchanged. Singapore, increased (14 vs 12.5). Neutral: India, increased (7.0 vs 7.0), Philippines, reduced (4 vs 4), South Korea, (5 vs 5), Thailand, (5 vs 5) both unchanged. Underweight: Malaysia, reduced (16 vs 20), Taiwan, increased (7 vs 11.5).
