Hong Kong witnessed another vote in favour of the status quo on Wednesday when future leader Tung Chee-hwa appointed Financial Secretary Donald Tsang to manage the US$19 billion Land Fund after July 1.
The move was interpreted as a vote of support for the outspoken Tsang, whose continued influence as one of Hong Kong's most senior civil servants has long been viewed as an indication of top tier stability as the handover to China approaches.
"That is interesting. That would indicate Donald Tsang is not being marginalised as some people were speculating," said Bob Broadfoot of the Political and Economic Risk Consultancy.
Broadfoot was referring to Tung's decision to appoint Tsang chairman of a Land Fund Committee to be established when Hong Kong becomes a Special Administrative Region of China on July 1.
The Land Fund's management threatened to turn into something of a political football when Tsang's post-handover status was debated earlier this year.
A bitter opponent of Tung's proposals to alter Hong Kong's Bill of Rights, Tsang's continued tenure as Financial Secretary after Hong Kong reverts to Chinese control in 48 days was considered less than certain.
Tsang was eventually confirmed, but in February, Tung said he was considering changes in the reporting structure at the territory's de facto central bank, the Hong Kong Monetary Authority (HKMA).
Instead of reporting to Tsang, Tung suggested that HKMA chief Joseph Yam might report directly to the chief executive, effectively sidelining Tsang.
But no changes have been announced. And Tsang's appointment as controller of the Land Fund was interpreted as a sign that changes were unlikely.
"That puts him back in the reporting arrangement between Tung and Yam, doesn't it?" said Broadfoot.
Tung said on Wednesday that the HKMA will manage the fund under Tsang's direction.
The Land Fund was established in 1984 to assuage Chinese concern about Britain's intentions. The fund, made up of proceeds from government property sales, now exceeds HK$150 billion -- equivalent to Hong Kong's fiscal reserves.
Half of land sales proceeds were remitted directly to the colonial government. The other half was held in escrow in the Land Fund to revert to the post-colonial government.
The fund has become so large that its inclusion into the existing reserves, or Exchange Fund, threaten to boost the Hong Kong dollar and put pressure on the Hong Kong-U.S. dollar peg.
Any change to Hong Kong's independent monetary system could undermine corporate confidence in the territory after the transition, experts said.
The status of the territory's top three civil servants is being watched closely in Hong Kong.
Tsang, Chief Secretary Anson Chan and the future secretary for justice are automatic members of Tung's inner cabinet, or Executive Council.
-- Hong Kong Newsroom (852) 2843-6352
