Temperatures are rising as Hong Kong prepares for its midsummer transition to Chinese rule, and nowhere is it hotter than at the territory's newspapers.
Those on the front lines of freedom of speech -- one of the hottest issues of the transition -- are fighting back against accusations of pro-China bias and self-censorship, charges that are difficult to prove and even more difficult to dispute.
Chief among the accused is the South China Morning Post, Hong Kong's leading English-language daily.
Ever since 1995, when it canned the popular cartoon "The World of Lily Wong", which had taken regular swipes at China, the English-language Post has been snubbed and dubbed the "Pro China Morning Post" by its foes.
More recently, it came under attack for hiring a founding editor of China's state-owned China Daily as a consultant.
Much of the concern was rooted in the location of the consultant's office close to editor Jonathan Fenby, who firmly denies being under Beijing's thumb.
"I am the editor," Fenby told Reuters. "He will not be involved in editorial decisions."
SPOTLIGHT TURNS TO CANTONESE DAILY
Similar charges have been made against Ming Pao, one of Hong Kong's best-selling Chinese-language newspapers.
A recent front-page story in the Asian Wall Street Journal outlined a shift in editorial focus at the independent daily.
Ming Pao's reputation for diligent reporting of Chinese politics and dissident activity had faded, the Journal said.
For example, when Tung Chee-hwa was picked in December to lead Hong Kong after it returns to Chinese control on July 1 after 156 years as a British colony, one Ming Pao headline read, "Tung impresses one most by his character".
But concrete examples of bias are hard to come by -- and that's not surprising, according to journalism professor Tim Hamlett at Hong Kong Baptist University.
"People don't march down the corridors and say, 'Our focus is changing'," he said. "People just pick up what's wanted from hundreds of tiny details. Is your story the front-page lead, the inside-page lead or is it buried at the back?"
Perhaps more telling, one in five journalists admitted hesitating to criticize China, according to a survey conducted by Chinese University of Hong Kong in early May.
More than half said they thought most working journalists in Hong Kong were hesitant to criticize their future sovereign, while one-third felt that most journalists also tempered their criticism of large corporations in Hong Kong.
The findings supported a 1995 survey by the Hong Kong Journalists' Association, in which 90 percent said self-censorship was occurring in Hong Kong.
In the HKJA survey, 80 percent expected things would change after the handover while the more recent Chinese University survey revealed a "wait and see" attitude among most Hong Kong journalists, with more than half worried that press freedom would change past the handover.
"Although Hong Kong journalists highly support the values of press freedom, they seem to develop considerable uncertainty about Hong Kong's future," the survey's authors wrote.
UNCERTAINTY, CAUTION ORDER OF THE DAY
Senior Chinese leaders have warned the Hong Kong press against advocating independence for the territory or for Taiwan and there are ample precedents for journalists who may wonder what will happen to them if they ignore these warnings.
In 1994, China sentenced Ming Pao journalist Xi Yang to 12 years in prison for espionage for using central bank information on interest rates and gold sales -- the sort of scoop that would have won Xi professional kudos in the West.
Xi was released earlier this year as a goodwill gesture -- but at about the same time, Chinese authorities arrested an SBC Warburg analyst and questioned her for a month after she, too, obtained and used central bank information.
Then there is Jimmy Lai, the controversial entrepreneur who in a 1994 column called Chinese Premier Li Peng "a turtle's egg", a terrible insult in Chinese.
Lai's Giordano clothing shop in China was forced to close shortly after his column ran. Lai has since sold his Giordano stake, but the company still has difficulty on the mainland.
More recently, Lai has found it hard finding an underwriter for one of his companies, Next Media Group, which he wants to list on the Hong Kong stock exchange.
Freedom of speech is considered crucial to the continued commercial success of Hong Kong, whose large and developed financial markets require free flowing, high-quality information to function efficiently.
But democracy is a relatively new concept in Hong Kong.
Fenby argued that, rather than a shift in favour of China, the South China Morning Post has shed its former identity as a colonial mouthpiece and become an independent daily reflecting Hong Kong's new realities.
Fenby even said colonial officials had made a forceful request to remove a story that embarrassed Patten from the front page -- a charge government spokesman Kerry McGlynn denied.
"I'm not shocked by that...(but) Tung's office hasn't called. Neither has Xinhua," Fenby said. "(Freedom of the press) is what we do here, and that is what we are going to continue doing through July 1."
