Rising corruption, declining English standards and an erosion in the overall quality of life cloud Hong Kong's future under China, the British Chamber of Commerce in the territory said on Thursday.
A survey of 196 British businesses operating in Hong Kong revealed key uncertainties for British business after the July 1 transition to Chinese sovereignty, despite an overall air of confidence in the future.
Half of those surveyed expected the rule of law to deteriorate, 72 percent forecast a decline in the quality of English and 85 percent were bracing for a rise in corruption.
"The overall message is one of British business confidence in Hong Kong, but that should be tempered by the realisation that business confidence is fragile," British chamber president Patrick Paul told reporters.
"Hong Kong has competitors within the region, such as Singapore and other locations, and I don't think Hong Kong can afford to be complacent," he said.
The survey revealed broad satisfaction with Hong Kong's communications network, its taxation and legal systems and its level of education.
But dissatisfaction surfaced in the costs of doing business, poor Sino-British relations and standards of English.
Looking to the future, most British businesses were optimistic about increased access to China, and they anticipated improvement in Sino-British trade as soon as handover-related hurdles were overcome.
But business costs, availability of skilled labour, English standards, quality of life and maintenance of the rule of law were all highlighted as sources of concern.
Echoing other surveys of ordinary Hong Kong people, a possible rise in corruption was by far the greatest source of worry associated with the return to Chinese sovereignty.
"The concern is whether or not that independent approach to dealing with corruption will be maintained," said chamber of commerce executive director Christopher Hammerbeck.
Paul said concerns about corruption flowing across the Chinese border into Hong Kong were offset by a highly transparent system that would quickly reveal any tampering, as well as an alert international business community.
"The British business community and the international business community will be watching," he said. "If corruption becomes so bad that Hong Kong becomes a bad place for business -- I don't believe it will happen, but if it does -- business will doubtless vote with its feet."
Even with a small rise in corruption, Hong Kong would remain one of the least-corrupt areas in Asia, he said.
Hammerbeck admitted that, as well as pollution, possible post-1997 discrimination against the British played a role in expectations of a deterioration in quality of life.
"It is a concern but that's not to say it will happen," he said.
