China no longer expects to join the World Trade Organisation this year but sees better relations with Britain under the new Labour government, a delegation of Hong Kong business leaders said on Wednesday.
"China's membership in the WTO is unlikely to be settled this year," General Chamber of Commerce chairman James Tien told reporters after returning from meetings in Beijing with Chinese Premier Li Peng and the top Chinese official responsible for Hong Kong affairs, Lu Ping.
A number of outstanding issues with the United States remain. These concern the opening of the Chinese market, particularly in the area of services, and would probably delay China's WTO membership, Peng told the delegation.
But relations with Britain were poised to improve following the May 1 election of Prime Minister Tony Blair's Labour government, ending 18 years of Conservative rule.
"(Li said) he looked forward to a better relationship with the Labour government in the UK and that would help Hong Kong's transition after July 1," Tien said.
Former Conservative prime minister Margaret Thatcher was responsible for the 1984 Sino-British treaties governing the return of Hong Kong to Chinese rule at midnight on June 30, ending 156 years of British colonial rule.
Tien also revealed that China did not support attempts to tighten visa requirements for foreigners or restrict their right to work in the territory -- a proposal made in a private member's bill tabled by Hong Kong unionist legislator Chan Yuen-han.
"The Chinese government was not supportive of that position," Tien said.
The issue was raised in a discussion about Hong Kong's continued competitiveness, said chamber member Eden Woon. Attempts would be made to remove uncompetitive tax treatment for foreign firms investing in China through Hong Kong, he added.
Foreign companies now investing in China through Hong Kong must pay tax in both locations, reducing Hong Kong's competitiveness as a gateway to the Chinese market, Tien said.
A number of states, including Singapore, have worked out tax and investment treaties with China, providing a greater incentive for foreign companies to avoid Hong Kong, Tien said.
Because Hong Kong will be a Special Administrative Region of China, a separate treaty is not appropriate, but steps would be taken over the next few months to remove this potential hurdle, Tien said.
