When it comes to dollars and cents, Hong Kong is showing high confidence in its future -- and that is clearing some doubt on other fronts about the impact of China's takeover, according to political analysts.
"The high-performing economy here is underpinning confidence and social order," said Michael DeGolyer, political analyst at Hong Kong's Baptist University.
With the handover to China 41 days away, Hong Kong's economy is transmitting nothing but positive news.
The bellwether property market is booming.
The territory's Hang Seng index of blue chip stocks is constantly reaching for record highs, spurred by optimism about improved access to China and recent debt rating upgrades from rating agency Standard &amp; Poor's.
A current Reuters survey of the territory's top companies confirmed overwhelming business confidence about the future.
Ordinary Hong Kong people are holding more and more of their financial assets in the local currency, a Credit Lyonnais survey revealed on Tuesday. A growing number of citizens are also sinking money into China-related stocks.
The Credit Lyonnais survey also portrayed a growing divide between political and economic confidence, also highlighted by DeGolyer's research.
While two-thirds of Hong Kong people are confident about the territory's political and economic future, only 40 percent were confident about its political future in isolation.
This proves the importance of a stable and prosperous economy to Hong Kong's future, DeGolyer said.
"The economy continuing to perform well is absolutely vital in making the transition a success. If the economy goes down the tubes, it will take political and social order with it."
A key factor undermining political confidence is future Hong Kong leader Tung Chee-hwa's plans to roll back some civil liberties.
China argues that the legal changes simply return Hong Kong to the status quo before democratic changes initiated by departing colonial governor Chris Patten.
Planned changes requiring police permission for protest rallies and banning foreign funding for political groups are no more severe than those in most Western nations, Tung has said.
But Western governments object to changes in the context of China's pledge to allow Hong Kong to continue its own way of life for 50 years.
Given the political uncertainties, DeGolyer said it is crucial that Hong Kong's incoming administration ensures that the economy functions well.
Hong Kong had only to look at nearby Macau to see how important it is that the economy not be placed at risk.
With China already established as its sovereign, Macau is still administered by the Portuguese, but it has serious problems of crime and social disorder with increasingly frequent shoot-outs and killings.
"If the (Hong Kong) economy is messed up, if there are failures in the economy and rises in corruption like we see in Macau, then we will have the same kind of problems Macau is having right now," DeGolyer said.
