Financial market pundits in Hong Kong are closely watching the territory's top civil servants for any sign of discontent in the government as the British colony speeds towards its merger with China on July 1.
Credited with integrity and common sense, the continued tenure of the top echelon of Hong Kong's civil service is often cited as the key to a successful transition 41 days away. (Corrects from "less than 40 days away")
Speculation is intense in Hong Kong financial and political circles that friction has emerged between top officials such as Chief Secretary Anson Chan and Financial Secretary Donald Tsang, and future leader Tung Chee-hwa over policy.
"At the end of the day what we are most concerned about is whether the current status of the current coterie is maintained and that there will not be some substantial policy mistake," said a senior broker, who declined to be named.
"The likelihood of that would be increased if, for example, Donald Tsang was not in office."
Other financial market experts agreed, but warned against focusing on any one individual.
"I wouldn't have any disagreement with those views, but I'm wondering to what extent any one person (is irreplaceable)," said Eric Nickerson, currency analyst at Bank of America.
"I would think that they'd try to move away from that, and that would be a positive if that could be achieved."
Recent comments by Chan calling for a credible legislature as soon as possible after the handover rekindled speculation about her future as second-in-command to Tung, who was chosen by a China-controlled committee to govern after Britain departs.
"We have an obligation to the community to ensure that they are represented by a credible and authoritative legislature in which they, and the international community have confidence," Chan told a business conference in Manila on Monday.
"Otherwise, the credibility and authority of the future administration itself will be weakened."
Chan did not specifically mention the China-appointed provisional legislature, which will replace the current council on July 1. But pro-China politician Lau Siu-Kai told a newspaper Chan's remarks implied she did not feel the provisional body was a credible and authoritative legislature.
This might undermine her future working relationship with the interim body, Lau told the South China Morning Post.
Donald Tsang has also been the subject of speculation following his opposition to changes to civil liberties laws.
"Tsang and Chan are the only senior members of the inner circle who have spoken out against the current measures and at the end of the day, that's what matters," the broker said.
"We need people who are prepared to maintain the status quo in terms of Hong Kong's foreign exchange policy and the general course of monetary policy."
Both China and Hong Kong have stressed repeatedly their commitment to the "one country, two systems" policy guiding Hong Kong back to the motherland, but political scientists said some friction was inevitable.
"These senior civil servants will say that we have been doing very well, there is no need to make changes while the other side says that these are colonial things and if changes need to be made we have no hesitation," said Joseph Cheng, professor of political science at City University of Hong Kong.
Both sides will have to be flexible and adjust, he said, and warned that an early resignation would send a bad signal.
"It's not so much the individual. It's that people will ask why a top civil servant wants to leave. What is wrong? And this will affect confidence in Hong Kong," he said.
