Recent interventions by some Asian central banks to defend their currencies did little to reassure disaffected institutional investors, who continue to avoid the region in droves.
Instead, the prospect of snapping currency pegs confirmed some deep-rooted concern about the region's economic fundamentals and growth prospects over the coming year.
"People have turned off Asia," said David Semple, regional strategist at Peregrine Asset Management.
"We're in a situation where we have a turndown in investment and economic growth. High income growth has not translated into high economic growth. And then there's asset price inflation."
Exports have failed to recover as quickly as expected, prompting a downgrade in growth projections by some analysts.
Corporate earnings have also hit a trough, disappointing investors hoping for better exposure to the region's much-hyped economic growth rates.
"There were net outflows last week. We've had nothing but net outflows all this year," one head trader said.
In the meantime, the new buzz phrase in Asian investment circles, "asset price inflation", or the concoction of economic fundamentals that attracted the attention of speculators earlier this month, has highlighted some deeper problems.
"The bottom line is that they have to adopt a more flexible approach to their currencies," Semple said.
The argument goes something like this: Small, high-growth Asian nations lure foreign investment in offshore currencies, boosting foreign exchange reserves and putting strengthening pressure on the domestic exchange rate.
Because the currency is fixed, central banks instead raise interest rates to dampen inflationary pressure created by the availability of lots of cheap money, much of which found its way into the booming property market.
This, however, attracts even more foreign money seeking exposure to lucrative interest rate returns.
However, the real problem develops when the foreign investment leaves.
In the short-term, central banks under pressure have few alternatives but to spend money shoring up the currency.
If investors remain unconvinced, either by the currency defence or the economic fundamentals that attracted the speculation in the first place, a vicious cycle of disinflation gets underway with banks struggling under the weight of loans turned bad on assets worth less than the amount borrowed.
"I think Southeast Asia is now in the early stages of a correction of the asset spiral that occurred over the past five years," said R.K. Basu, UBS Securities economist in Singapore.
"We are now seeing an unwinding of this process in places like Thailand in particular, and there are fears that other countries in the region could face a deflationary spiral similar to what Japan has gone through over the past six years."
So far, Southeast Asian nations under pressure have imposed credit controls rather than capital controls, but Basu still considers the Philippines and Indonesia at risk from the bout of deflation now expected to hound Thailand for two years or more.
"The Philippines is quite vulnerable to a reversal of the banking system's net foreign liabilities, which are the same thing as short-term capital inflows. If those capital inflows reverse, the amount of liquidity in the system will abate very quickly and that will cause asset prices to decline," he said.
