A spectre of central planning seems to have settled over Hong Kong just as its future sovereign, China, tries to loosen the last chains of Stalinist economic doctrine.
Economic intervention heads the agenda of a number of hand-picked advisers to future Hong Kong leader Tung Chee-hwa, many of them urging action to keep Hong Kong competitive in a region full of booming Asian "tiger" states.
Proposals so far include a government-funded science park, tax breaks to lure multinationals, a venture capital fund for high-tech businesses and most recently, a cross-border zone with an industrial park on the Hong Kong side and would-be immigrants on the Chinese side.
It all suggests a major policy shift on July 1, when Hong Kong reverts to Chinese control -- and a marked departure from the sort of free-wheeling past that saw Hong Kong dubbed "the world's freest economy" by the U.S.-backed Heritage Foundation.
The idea of state funding for business is anathema to Hong Kong, where a strict separation between government and business has long been considered essential to economic success.
"Hong Kong is like a Rolls Royce. All you need to do if you're in charge is slip into the drivers's seat, switch on the ignition, and away you go. I don't quite see the point of lifting the bonnet to tinker with the engine," said departing colonial governor Chris Patten.
Financial Secretary Donald Tsang, the man who balances the territory's books, recently gave a speech pledging government help for the economy -- but only after the private sector had taken the lead.
A SIGN OF THE TIMES ... AND NEW FACES
This is a hot topic in Hong Kong as it speeds towards unification with China on July 1. It is also one of the most important signs that faces are changing along with the times.
Over the past 15 years Hong Kong's economic success was virtually guaranteed by its location next to southern China's economic boom, the biggest on record.
But wage rates in southern China are no longer cheap. Vietnam and central Chinese provinces closer to Shanghai now offer lower pay than Guangdong, and even tougher competitors lurk on the horizon in India and elsewhere.
Hong Kong already suffers from stratospheric wage rates and property prices. And with most large Asian centres scrambling for service income higher up the economic food-chain, Hong Kong faces stiff competition from rival "baby dragons" such as Singapore.
Unnerved by an almost complete dependence upon services, Singapore recently altered its foreign exchange policy to support a lagging industrial base and declining exports.
Over the past 15 years, Hong Kong has experienced a similar decline in its own export base. Services now account for a rising 85 percent of gross domestic product while domestic exports continue to decline.
They are being replaced by soaring re-exports, goods shipped through Hong Kong for processing -- most of them to China -- in a trend that reflects the relocation of virtually Hong Kong's entire manufacturing base into southern China.
It all begs the question of just how vulnerable Hong Kong wants to become to the fundamental economics of regions outside its immediate influence.
Economists say diversification is a good idea to minimise risk associated with such a high dependence upon services, and opportunities could become more available after July 1.
Hong Kong entrepreneurs could soon gain easier access to Chinese land and labour that will enable the development of a high-tech sector, said economist Kevin Chan at Salomon Brothers.
"After July 1 we may be able to draw directly on resources from the mainland that would enable us to develop a high-tech manufacturing sector," he said. "We will have a better foundation on which to do this."
SHAPING HONG KONG IN THEIR OWN IMAGE
Many of the well-educated, well-heeled businessmen who hold Tung's confidence believe that intervention is essential to secure Hong Kong's long-term future.
With HK$330 billion (US$42.3 billion) in fiscal reserves, they have the means as well as the determination to effect great change. And if there is any opposition to the new proposals, it is unlikely to win a sympathetic hearing.
Most of these privileged tycoons and technocrats espouse elitist, almost anti-democratic views, having been raised in the autocratic, do-or-die tradition of Asian family business.
"There has been too much pandering to public opinion by the legislature," Leung Chun-ying, the property surveyor asked to map out a long-term housing strategy for the territory, told the Far Eastern Economic Review recently.
Two sources have been most outspoken about the new mood of intervention that marks the men closest to Tung.
Henry Tang, head of the Federation of Hong Kong Industries and a member of Tung's inner cabinet, is reported to have been asked to map out an industrial policy for Hong Kong.
James Tien, a pro-intervention businessman, is a high-profile member of the Provisional Legislature, the interim body that will replace the existing legislature on July 1.
