Cathay Pacific Airways Ltd said on Monday it expects most of its grounded Airbus Industrie A330-300 aircraft to be back up and running within three weeks.
The British Civil Aviation Authority (CAA), meanwhile, urged PT Garuda Indonesia to ground its A330-300 fleet, the Civil Aviation Department (DCA) of Hong Kong said.
Cathay's fleet of 11 Airbuses was grounded on Saturday, the day after a Rolls-Royce Trent 700 engine failed on a Hong Kong Dragon Airlines (Dragonair) flight and forced the plane to make an emergency landing on one engine in the Philippines.
It was the fifth time since November that a Cathay Pacific or Dragonair A330-300 had made a single-engine landing. Rolls-Royce said on Friday that gearbox bearings were to blame for the problems with the Trent 700s, which were introduced in March 1995.
Dragonair, owned 25.5 percent by Cathay, has also suspended operations of its fleet of four A330-300 aircraft.
Roland Fairfield, engineering director for Cathay Pacific, told reporters that Rolls-Royce had proposed a modification to the Trent 700 engine gearbox, which the companies hoped to start incorporating into the Airbus fleet within one week.
"We expect the aircraft to commence re-entering service on a progressive basis in approximately one week's time," he said.
"The rate at which the remainder of the fleet enters service is going to be very much a function of how fast manufacturers can supply modification kits and we can get them embodied into the gearboxes, but I would expect at this stage that from the commencement of re-entry of the aircraft into service, the entire fleet will be back flying within two weeks of that date."
Hong Kong's DCA said in a statement that the British CAA call for Garuda to ground its A330-300 fleet had prompted the DCA to tell Garuda that its services to Hong Kong "should only be operated by aircraft other than" Trent-powered A330s.
But Garuda said earlier it would only ground the airplane if there were an order from the aircraft maker or from the engine maker.
Stressing their primary commitment to safety, Cathay and Dragonair declined to give any indication of costs of the suspension, or its impact on 1997 profits.
"Clearly at the appropriate time in the appropriate way we will be discussing these issues," said Tony Tyler, director of corporate development.
"It is too early to make such comments we are all aware there are regulations covering what we can and cannot say ...stock market regulations ... and at this stage we are not in a position to comment on that particular feature of this issue."
But analysts expected some erosion of 1997 profits, which some had forecast at HK$4 billion before the suspension. One analyst said the impact would depend largely on how long the fleet remained dormant.
Another analyst, Mark Simpson at Schroder Securities, said he was reducing his earnings forecasts for Cathay, but added that Rolls-Royce would almost certainly help defray Cathay's costs and reduce the bottom line impact.
Cathay declined to reveal whether any compensation agreement with Rolls-Royce was under discussion.
"We're not in the habit of disclosing the financial arrangements that go on with our suppliers," Tyler said.
