The grounding of Cathay Pacific's Airbus fleet is just the latest blow for Hong Kong's flagship carrier, and analysts warned the picture was unlikely to improve soon.
After a turbulent five years, Cathay Pacific was starting to represent good fundamental value, with strong management, a healthy balance sheet and promised expansion with the April 1998 opening of Hong Kong's new airport at Chek Lap Kok.
"There have been some problems but now things seem to be going their way," said K.Y. Ng at BZW Asia.
However, that has not translated into a positive share price performance, and many Hong Kong analysts -- including Ng -- have a sell recommendation on the stock.
"I'm not saying this counter is poor fundamentally," said Andrew Fernow at Vickers Ballas. "But we don't think it can perform in line. The market is being driven by China-related factors and U.S. interest rates and Cathay isn't benefitting."
Cathay's share price barely moved on news that its Airbus 330-300 fleet had been grounded because of problems with its Rolls-Royce Trent 700 engine.
From a high of HK$14.80 last June, the stock has been trading at about $12 per share for the past four months, failing to gain from record highs on Hong Kong's Hang Seng index. The stock closed Tuesday's morning session at HK$11.70.
"It's a laggard," another analyst said.
Most analysts said they were negative on Cathay before the Airbus grounding, but they were also unconvinced by reports of massive losses associated with the problem.
They estimated costs at about HK$200 million after compensation, and said it was unclear at this point how they would be managed. Some costs would be offset by a stronger yen.
Those analysts forecasting 1997 earnings at HK$3.6 billion were holding steady while those with higher estimates of HK$4.0 billion or above were expected to make downward revisions.
At a news conference on Monday the company declined comment on expected losses.
The engine failure is the latest blow for Cathay, which also faces labour unrest and a decline in Japanese tourism heading into what had expected to be a strong summer as travellers flock in for the territory's July 1 handover to China..
"That (Japanese tourism) would be a bigger factor than the loss of the engines," said Mark Simpson at Schroder Securities.
Analysts said Cathay's problems started with a strike in 1993 and culminated with China National Aviation Corp's (CNAC) threat last year to compete directly with Cathay in Hong Kong.
In a compromise deal, CNAC instead bought 36 percent of Hong Kong Dragon Airlines (Dragonair), mostly from Cathay Pacific and Swire Pacific Ltd
One of Hong Kong's oldest British "hongs" or trading houses, Swire owns 44 percent of Cathay with another 25 percent held by China's CITIC Pacific Ltd Swire and Cathay together hold about 26 percent of Dragonair.
China's evident interest in grabbing a piece of Hong Kong's lucrative aviation sector has cast a cloud over Cathay's future.
"What will the competitive picture be in Hong Kong (after Hong Kong reverts to China on July 1)," asked Fernow. "One can conclude it's not going to get better, it's going to get worse. The extent to which they will get routes in China is not known."
If it does, Cathay will be competing against Dragonair, persuading some analysts to forecast a disposal of Cathay's stake in the airline. Others were expecting Cathay to move into high-margin North American routes dominated by overseas Chinese.
But rumours persist that, in the face of such uncertainty, Swire will divest its Cathay stake -- a rumour Swire has denied.
"What do you expect them to say," said another analyst. "I'm getting tired of people putting the boots into this company."
