Nicholas-Applegate Capital Management said on Wednesday it had agreed to buy Credit Lyonnais' Asian fund management unit in a deal industry experts described as yet another sign of industry consolidation.
"This would seem to be a fairly good purchase," said Christopher Day, former managing director at Thornton Management (Asia) Ltd. "It's another sign of consolidation."
U.S.-based Nicholas-Applegate has agreed to buy Credit Lyonnais International Asset Management-Asia (CLIAM-Asia) for an undisclosed sum, improving Nicholas-Applegate's access to Asia while extending CLIAM-Asia's reach around the world.
"This will further strengthen Nicholas-Applegate's seasoned team of global managers and give us improved access to markets and analysts in Hong Kong, Singapore, China and other Asian countries," Nicholas-Applegate managing partner Arthur Nicholas said in a statement.
Paul Mack, managing director of CLIAM-Asia, said the deal would benefit his group by providing access to global distribution networks and enhancing its existing product line.
"We expect to be launching a number of new retail products utilizing the Applegate skills and also we have access to Applegate's distribution mechanism, which will allow us to sell to America, which we haven't been able to do," Mack said.
Although no purchase price was disclosed, analysts said Nicholas-Applegate probably paid in the upper reaches of a usual band between 1.5 percent and three percent of total assets managed by the target, in this case US$700 million.
That works out to about US$21 million. Nicholas-Applegate, based in San Diego, manages total assets of US$30 billion.
Mack denied that its debt-laden French parent bank, Credit Lyonnais, put its Asian fund unit on the auction block to raise some cash to meet anticipated privatisation requirements.
"Credit Lyonnais were approached by Nicholas-Applegate with a view to buying the operation. We were not for sale by Credit Lyonnais. It was a buy rather than a sell," Mack said.
Credit Lyonnais has been rescued by the French government twice from collapse under the weight of its lending excesses, and has been under pressure to sell non-French assets to meet conditions set by the European Commission for approving further state aid for the bank.
But the deal has raised speculation that Credit Lyonnais will divest its successful brokerage in Hong Kong, and heighten interest in more mergers and acquisitions among fund managers.
"Asset management and broking are some of the few parts of Credit Lyonnais making money right now," said Day, now an independent consultant after having been laid off as a result of industry consolidation. "And I would imagine a lot of people will be phoning up other asset managers," he added.
No layoffs are expected among CLIAM-Asia's 70 staff in four offices in Hong Kong, Singapore, London and San Francisco. In fact, Mack is expecting some personnel expansion to meet Nicholas-Applegate's requirements.
CLIAM-Asia will take the name of Nicholas-Applegate Capital Management.
