Hong Kong's top civil servant Anson Chan has signalled an open rift and rising tension in the new Beijing-approved administration to take over when Britain hands control back to China on July 1.
In two outbursts in as many weeks, the Chief Secretary has called for prompt elections, a credible legislature and respect for civil liberties - a clear warning to China.
Amid widespread doubt on the scope of freedom under Chinese rule, she said she was prepared to quit if asked to accept policies that clashed with her principles.
Chan, 57, is Hong Kong's top career administrator. She is deputy to departing colonial governor Chris Patten and has been asked to stay in the post as second-in-command to future leader Tung Chee-hwa.
Tung, a conservative and former shipping magnate, is waiting to take over at the head of a new administration that includes an assembly already chosen to replace the elected legislature.
Her tough words seemed to reflect speculation in Hong Kong of rifts opening up between Tung and his top officials, such as Chan and Financial Secretary Donald Tsang.
Her remarks were seen as a warning broadside just 28 days before the handover."She is playing here her only trump card and I'm surprised she's had to play it this early," David Newman, political science professor at Lingnan College, told Reuters.
"I like to think I'm a loyal civil servant, but loyalty is not everything in my eyes," Chan told Newsweek International in the latest of a flurry of interviews by Hong Kong political leaders as the handover nears.
"There might be issues that are points of principle, and, as a matter of conscience, you feel you can't accept those decisions," she said. "When that happens, you start asking yourself 'Do I stay or do I go?' And I think most people would know what my answer would be."
"She is signalling she will have difficulty stomaching what the political appointees are going to try to do," Newman said.
"It is going to be very difficult for someone with high and sincere beliefs and a liberal mind to stand silently and watch what is going to go on around here," he said.
Touching on arguably the most important element of the handover to China, Chan expressed strong support for the gradual introduction of democracy.
But she called for public participation in the drawing up of the electoral system to ensure that Hong Kong does end up with a "credible" legislature.
Her comments appeared as Tung chided Britain for introducing democratic reforms without China's consent.
"The issue is that to go ahead without the consent of the future sovereign should not happen, it shouldn't have happened," Tung said in a British Broadcasting Corporation interview.
The reforms have become a major source of friction between Britain and China, prompting Beijing's vow to scrap Hong Kong's elected legislature on July 1. But departing governor Patten is far from remorseful.
"As it is, people in Hong Kong now have a few benchmarks," he said on Monday. "They know what a free election is like."
Chan's outspoken views drew praise from some commentators, but an editorial in the Hong Kong Standard newspaper said Chan had set "a dangerous precedent". "Open challenges of this nature must not be allowed to happen," it said.
Bob Broadfoot, head of a think-tank, the Political and Economic Risk Consultancy, said the type of restrictions on the right to comment imposed on civil servants elsewhere did not apply in Hong Kong, where civil servants lead the government.
Broadfoot said he believed Chan and Tsang had decided to stay on to support Hong Kong through the transition, but he predicted their resignations within one year.
Chan is widely respected. "A charmer and sophisticated with a core of steel," says one political insider.
She warned against any assault on the independence of the civil service by people with "vested interests" who were willing to invite China's intereference for their own benefit.
Chan said Tung was a man of principle but lacked  "a really deep understanding of how government machinery works".
