One of Asia's most powerful women is drawing up a battleline in Hong Kong ready for an era of political uproar unseen elsewhere in the People's Republic.
Twenty-seven days before Britain hands the colony back to China, Hong Kong's top civil servant, is targeting a powerful group of businessmen surrounding future leader Tung Chee-hwa.
She is tough, charming Anson Chan. The 57-year-old Chinese administrator, dubbed "an iron fist in a velvet glove," is one of Hong Kong's most popular personalities.
Headlines daily feature her in a tug-of-war for the political soul of the billionaire ex-shipping magnate, a China appointee under pressure to win the confidence of Hong Kong and the world.
A conservative without a political track record, he was suddenly called on to be Hong Kong's future chief executive, replacing the departing, reformist colonial governor Chris Patten.
As part of the colonial legacy, civil servants rather than elected politicians run the Hong Kong government, so the voice of Chan, their chief, carries unusual clout.
She acts as Patten's deputy and is also to become Tung's second-in-command.
Chan has chosen to assert her sweeping authority in the dying days of colonial rule in a face-off against a group of influential pro-China business cronies chosen by Tung to advise him on how to run Hong Kong.
The 6.4 million people of Hong Kong, unsure of the future under the red flag after the July 1 handover, are anxiously watching to see if an imminent showdown will crack open the new power structure.
Both Chan and the advisers will sit on the Executive Council, an inner cabinet positioned between the Chief Executive and the legislature.
"She's not exactly cracking the whip over Tung, but raising the flag over her own continued centrality," said Michael DeGolyer, political analyst at Baptist University of Hong Kong.
"She's saying Tung is ours, and he's not going to belong to, basically, sycophants and plutocrats."
Chan, in a Newsweek interview this week, said she was less concerned about direct interference by China in Hong Kong's autonomy than she was about groups who might court interference "either for misplaced motives or, worse still, for narrow, selfish, vested interests.
"Maybe some people feel that decisions affecting business are not in their interest. They may feel they should go up and appeal to various leaders. That would be very bad for Hong Kong," Chan said.
Pro-China politician Lau Siu-kai said the comments indicated that disagreements between Tung and his senior civil servants had reached crisis levels.
"It shows some senior officials are sceptical over the integrity, capability and poiltical orientation of the people appointed by Mr Tung," Lau told the South China Morning Post.
But DeGolyer dismissed speculation that her words signalled a widening rift between Tung and his senior civil servants.
"It's not so much a rift as it is (a demonstration) to other civil servants that she is the person in charge, and she will remain in charge. There will be no change," DeGolyer said.
"(She is saying) there is no difference between a governor appointed by far-away London and a chief executive appointed by far-away Beijing. They will continue on with business as usual."
He described the new government as an engine going nowhere without a civil service to kick the transmission into gear.
"The engine can sit there are rev. all it wants but if the gears are not engaged, they're not going anywhere. And that's where she sits," he said.
Analyst Bob Broadfoot of the think-tank Political and Economic Risk Consultancy, said Chan significantly decided to speak out now because Executive Council rules will prevent her from doing so once the new government takes power.
Tung's decision to reappoint Chan, along with the entire top echelon of Hong Kong's civil service, was welcomed by the business and international community for its stabilising effect.
But in the Newsweek interview, Chan warned that Tung was unfamiliar with "the way government machinery works."
