Increasing signs of an economic upswing in China have raised the question of how far speculation can be held responsible for a sudden flush of liquidity sweeping through China-related stocks in Hong Kong.
Brokerage W.I. Carr on Thursday said that improving economic fundamentals in China could be at least partly responsible for the red chip fever that has fuelled Hong Kong's outperforming stock market for months.
Dismissing any suggestion of a speculative bubble ripe for collapse, it said the soaring rally in Hong Kong red chips, or companies with financial backing in China, confirmed the beginning of a long and strong business cycle in China.
"The market is telling us something about where the Chinese economy is going and where company earnings in China are going in the future," said John Mulcahy, managing director of Indosuez W.I. Carr Securities in Hong Kong.
Red chips have gained on expectations of big returns from strong connections and asset injections by parents, often municipal and provincial governments. Many are trading at more than 35 times 1997 earnings, compared with the average Hong Kong blue chip ratio of 15.
Much of the rally is driven more by "a wish and promise" than evident earnings performance but growing signs of economic recovery in China suggest economic fundamentals could also be playing a role, Mulcahy said.
Corporate restructuring, rising productivity, disinflation and strong exports are far more responsible for strong Chinese markets than a sudden burst of liquidity from central bank credit easing last year, said economist Michael Taylor.
"Just as in other bull markets, this market is probably telling us something," Taylor said.
"And I believe the evidence is coherently pointing to ... the start of a long, sustained business cycle here based on restructuring and being characterised by disinflation and good trade performance," he said.
But Dong Tao, senior regional economist at Schroder Securities, disagreed. He said market rallies in Hong Kong and on the Shanghai and Shenzhen exchanges were being driven by liquidity seeking better returns than those offered by a depressed Chinese industrial sector.
"I don't think a turnaround in company profits will arrive this year. I haven't seen a turnaround in demand. I haven't seen that the price wars hurting companies' bottom lines are over," Tao said.
China's economy is currently split between a struggling real economy, dominated by debt-laden and loss-making state-owned enterprises, and excessive liquidity, he said.
Timing is the key, Tao said. China is still struggling with flat domestic demand and huge overcapacity following the 30-percent growth rates in fixed asset investment that marked the booming early 1990s -- but that will end at some point.
Taylor argued that improvements are already surfacing, with cuts of up to 15 percent of the workforce in places such as Shanghai linked to rising productivity -- boding well for an early improvement in corporate earnings growth.
But the risk of disinflation throughout Asia threatens to undermine China's gains and puts pressure on exporters to stimulate the real economy, Taylor said.
Chinese media recently reported that exports are not expected to maintain the 26.9 percent growth rate recorded between January and April this year.
China's focus on exports to solve its economic problems has excerbated political tensions, with the China-U.S. trade surplus expected to exceed US$50 billion this year compared to about US$40 billion last year.
-- Hong Kong Newsroom (852) 2843 6470
