An unskilled labour force is Hong Kong's biggest stumbling block to a successful future under China, Hongkong and Shanghai Bank economic adviser George Leung said on Friday.
"We need people, not machinery," Leung told Reuters, referring to Hong Kong's transformation into a service economy from the low-skilled manufacturing days of the past.
"This is the most serious issue in Hong Kong," Leung said.
"And it's not a case of dumping money at the problem. We need to come up with a helpful programme to train people and raise their quality. Otherwise, we will have no resources to expand our economy."
An exploding service sector scrambling to meet the demands of the awakening Chinese economic giant has created a huge demand for properly qualified people in Hong Kong.
Investment bankers snowed under by listing applications from Chinese companies constantly complain they cannot find qualified workers, allowing barely-skilled expatriates to walk into highly-paid jobs far beyond their grasp back home.
The demand for all types of service professionals, such as lawyers, accountants, doctors, traders, analysts and others, has skyrocketed, putting upward pressure on overall wage rates and fuelling inflation.
The shortage can only get worse. China's economy is expected to double in size over the next decade, and Hong Kong's school system is unequipped to meet the new demand.
A shortage of school space is forcing Hong Kong's future workforce to attend school in shifts, and studies show Hong Kong students score lower in mathematics and science tests than rivals elsewhere in Asia.
This problem threatens to turn into a crisis within the decade, Leung warned. Under current circumstances, Hong Kong will be unable to find sufficient expatriates to meet its needs, possibly allowing centres such as Singapore, Kuala Lumpur and Tokyo to step in to meet demand.
Standards of English, the language of international commerce, are already considered to be lower in Hong Kong than in Singapore.
They will worsen further following the reversion of sovereignty to China on July 1, with an increasing emphasis on Mandarin as the common language of China rather than English, a legacy of a period considered shameful to China.
"We have got to place more emphasis on this otherwise we will be at a disadvantage," Leung said.
Anybody who doubted the importance of English to Hong Kong needed only turn to Tokyo, said Leung, where a lack of language ability had caused Japan to lag Hong Kong and Singapore as an Asia-Pacific financial centre, despite Japan's bigger markets.
Hong Kong's future leader Tung Chee-hwa has appointed a special task force to review the education system, which Leung said was a good idea.
"At least they know it is one of the most important factors affecting Hong Kong," Leung said.
But he is waiting to see what recommendations surface, calling for practical steps to massively upgrade the labour force's skill sets to match Hong Kong's new economic identity.
-- Hong Kong Newsroom (852) 2843 6470
