With the memory of Thailand's banking sector implosion still fresh, alarm bells are starting to sound about banks' property exposure in Hong Kong.
Massive capital inflows into the territory, most driven by optimism about Hong Kong's reversion to China at midnight on June 30, have fuelled an explosion in bank loans for property.
The enthusiasm evokes memories of the building boom that helped push Thailand to the brink of economic collapse earlier this year, with banks weighted under by bad loans.
Widely viewed as Hong Kong's most accurate confidence indicator, soaring property prices are considered by many people to be yet another sign that all is well with the territory's handover to China just around the corner.
But others are urging officials to check out the foundations on which the boom is built.
"There appears to be an assumption among Hong Kong bankers -- not to mention their clients -- that they can print as much money as needed to keep property and other asset prices in orbit indefinitely," said Hugh Peyman in a recent report by Dresdner Kleinwort Benson (DKB).
David Lui, director at Schroder Securities, took up the same issue at a public forum on Tuesday.
"If property prices continue to rise, that will affect the soundness (of the financial sector)," Lui said.
The Hong Kong Monetary Authority (HKMA), the territory's de facto central bank, warned late last month that additional restraints in mortgage lending might be required, taking some of the steam out of Hong Kong's hyperactive stock market.
Profit-taking hit property counters on Wednesday despite the Hang Seng Index's overall recovery from early lows. The blue-chip index was up 105 points, or 0.73 percent, at 14,545 at midday, while the property sub-index was down 0.48 percent.
DKB dismissed the HKMA's warning as "tepid".
"The horse may already have bolted," Peyman said. "The pressure on the HKMA not to (do) anything to stop the current asset price orgy is clear enough, particularly with the handover only a month away."
Outstanding property lending has risen 26 percent in one year. Property and construction now account for 47 percent of all Hong Kong lending, Peyman said.
"These massive increases in property lending have taken place against a backdrop of the lowest new supply of residential flats in 23 years," he said.
Mortgage loans now account for 22 percent of all loans, and loans to developers have hit HK$363 billion (US$46.5 billion) -- up 18 percent over six months and 30 percent over one year.
Hong Kong's fixed exchange rate and open capital account leave the HKMA very little room to manoeuvre to calm the frenzy, except to resort to aggressive hands-on lending restrictions.
Local banks are already restricted to a 40 percent property exposure, but the HKMA has no control over foreign banks who usually enter late in a boom and give the biggest boost to lending as they grab for market share at any cost.
DKB said the figures are worrying enough to suggest tougher HKMA action to dampen down credit expansion before the September International Monetary Fund/World Bank meeting in Hong Kong.
But other analysts adopted a more sanguine view.
The start-up of a new mortgage corporation later this year will eat up some of the banks loans as property debts are securitised, said Clive McDonnell, economist at SocGen Crosby.
More important than lending restrictions are plans already announced by the new Hong Kong government to increase supply.
"There has been a level of excess liquidity and that's been feeding through into property prices," McDonnell said. "However, long-term trends will affect the short term. People will not pile into property if trend supply increases."
Financial Secretary Donald Tsang has already pledged to release 51 hectares of land for development over the next five years, which translates into about 30,500 units each year.
-- Hong Kong newsroom (852) 2834 6441.  http://www,hk97.com
