Institutional investors applauded China's attempts to cool down stock market speculation last week but warned that Hong Kong's volatile reaction was unlikely to end any time soon.
"Undoubtedly, the very considerable volatility requires someone to be very brave indeed to participate, and it will continue to remain that way for quite some time to come," said Stewart Aldcroft, director of sales and marketing for Templeton Franklin Investment Services (Asia) Ltd.
Hong Kong's Hang Seng index of blue chip stocks closed Friday's see-saw session up 188.21 points or 1.35 percent at 14,112.55 following a total drop of 907 points in five consecutive trading sessions ending on Thursday.
The index swung wildly on a variety of factors, including China's move to curb speculation, jitters about the property market and a downgrade by Merrill Lynch.
As usual of late, the real action was in red chips, that unruly bunch of China-related stocks that have taken investors on a roller-coaster ride since February.
The sector, made up of companies with financial backing from China, responded very badly to news that Beijing intended to clamp down on the stocks, many of which listed in Hong Kong with promises of future asset injections of uncertain value.
Now trading in excess of 30 times 1997 earnings, the red chips have outperformed the rest of the Hong Kong market by a wide margin. But last week they shed about one-third of the gains they have made since January, according to one estimate.
"The extent to which there has been speculation about which red chip is going to get the next asset insertion and how valuable it will be has clearly got out of hand," Aldcroft said.
Templeton and other international institutions with established valuation criteria have avoided the sector while retail and smaller brokerages leapt on board, speculating about the value of promised assets and connections.
How do you establish a multiple for influence? one asked.
Although the larger institutions appear to have steered clear on these sorts of concerns, plenty of smaller funds have invested, according to funds authority Micropal.
China fund performance figures to June 6 show GT up by 56.6 percent, Barclays up 51 percent, ImPac up 47 percent, Nomura and Guinness Flight up 45 percent, Invesco up 38 percent, HSBC up 35 percent and Jardine Fleming up 34 percent.
"You couldn't get that type of performance if you hadn't been invested in red chips," Aldcroft said.
But both Jardine Fleming and HSBC said they limited their exposure to the biggest and most credible red chips.
"Among them there are good quality companies with solid earnings growth," said Jardine Fleming investment director Patrick Wong, who put JF's red chip weighting at 15 percent.
Prudential Asia's senior portfolio manager, David Descalzi, said he had avoided the sector completely -- a difficult position to take when profits were there to be had.
"No fund manager likes to be left behind," he said. "But there has to be a recognition that this is speculative and there will be a correction, which is what has happened."
But Prudential is buying into market weakness, and Descalzi said if the red chips run again, they will be harder to ignore.
"Hong Kong is still one of the only viable stories out here, with the possible exception of Korea, and we want to take advantage of that," he said.
