Hong Kong's Financial Secretary Donald Tsang took a political gamble by accepting a knighthood from Queen Elizabeth in the last days of British colonial rule, political analysts said on Monday.
Some believe his acceptance of the honour could antagonise China and ensure his early resignation from a sensitive post as the second most powerful bureaucrat in executive-led Hong Kong.
"All these guys are going to be transitional figures. Call me in a year and see if he's still around," said one leading political scientist who declined to be identified.
But others argue that China ignores such honours, which have been liberally bestowed upon members of Hong Kong's old and new elites.
"So I don't think it's that big an issue, especially given this environment where the Chinese are trying to absorb the British establishment," said Joseph Cheng, professor of political science at City University of Hong Kong.
Tsang, effectively finance minister, has made little public reference to the award, except to say that he remains committed to Hong Kong after 30 years in the civil service.
But some analysts said his decision to accept the honours, routinely given to top civil servants in Hong Kong, was significant just a few days before Britain hands back the colony on July 1.
Tsang's acceptance of the knighthood was thrown into high relief by civil service head Anson Chan's decision to decline the same honour, which would have made her a "Dame" in line with his "Sir" prefix.
The popular Chan, widely considered one of the most powerful women in Asia, first declined to be knighted in 1992 when her name cropped up as a possible contender for chief executive, an appointment she chose not to pursue.
The post went to Tung Chee-hwa, the billionaire shipping tycoon who will replace departing colonial governor Chris Patten at midnight on June 30.
"Not giving (Chan) a knighthood will probably protect her as she is the leader of the civil service," said Sunny Lo, professor of political science at the University of Hong Kong.
But it could also be an attempt to cement a relationship between Tung and Chan, who has very publicly announced her readiness to resign on principle if necessary after July 1.
"The British administration support the alliance between Anson Chan and Tung Chee-hwa and this seems to be confirmed in giving the knighthood to Tsang and not Chan," Lo said.
But he declined to be drawn on whether Tsang's acceptance of the award would make him vulnerable to Chinese antagonism in the same way Chan's refusal might protect her from it.
City University's Cheng argued that the issue was, to all intents and purposes, irrelevant.
"The vast majority of these people accept them," he said, referring to Hong Kong's honoured elites. Such titles are so common they are virtually meaningless, Cheng said.
"The knighthood will not affect Tsang's future career. He's already reached the top level so having the knighthood won't make any difference," Lo said.
