Western Europe's envoy in Hong Kong said on Monday that he expected most European governments to ignore an Anglo-American boycott and attend the inauguration of an unelected provisional legislature on July 1.
"Officially I don't know yet what the position of our various governments will be but certainly from preliminary soundings I would not be surprised if most governments will attend the inauguration ceremony," Etienne Reuter said.
He is the European Union representative in Hong Kong, effectively ambassador for the 15-nation bloc.
To Western dismay, Hong Kong's elected parliament is to be scrapped when Britain hands the territory to China which has chosen an interim assembly instead. Britain and the United States say they will boycott the swearing-in ceremony but other countries like Australia have refused to snub Beijing.
The envoy told Reuters in an interview that European countries are deciding how to respond to China's invitation, and will probably discuss the issue on the fringes of Monday's EU summit in Amsterdam.
Moments after the handover ceremony, Beijing intends to inaugurate the new, China-appointed body as the legislature governing the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region.
British Prime Minister Tony Blair and U.S. Secretary of State Madeline Albright have pledged to avoid the inauguration to protest the dissolution of the existing chamber, which departing governor Chris Patten revised in 1994 with democratic reforms that angered China.
Britain has not asked for the EU's support for its boycott, and the absence of an official request suggests most European governments would probably accept China's invitation to attend.
"Formally, the U.K. has not asked for the partners to do something or support them on this and so far, the EU has never officially expressed a view on the legal status of the provisional (parliament) - although we have said it was unnecessary," Reuter said.
The provisional legislature will govern Hong Kong until elections are held within one year, as promised both by China and future Hong Kong leader Tung Chee-hwa.
"We also appreciate that the chief executive has promised that there will elections in the first year, that is part of the equation," Reuter said.
In all likelihood, China will simply not issue invitations to people who have said they will not attend to avoid losing "face", Reuter said.
Europe hoped for an auspicious start to relations with the Hong Kong SAR, and viewed as positive the appointments of Tung as chief executive and barrister Andrew Li as chief justice, Reuter said.
