Hong Kong's future leader Tung Chee-hwa has sparked fresh suspicions over China's plans for the territory by announcing changes to the lower tiers of government which critics see as a further rollback for democracy.
The move was followed on Tuesday by the release of a survey confirming a continued decline in political confidence in Hong Kong just days before the territory's return to Chinese rule.
On Monday Tung, who takes over as Hong Kong's chief executive on July 1, unveiled a system that will dilute democratic representation on second-tier government bodies through the appointment of a number of pro-China names.
Commentators welcomed the retention of all members of existing local councils and district boards but the Democratic Party, Hong Kong's most popular and vocal political group, saw the addition of pro-Beijing appointees as yet another attempt to roll back democracy in the dying days of British colonial rule.
"Mr Tung has put the old story back. It is a very bad message to the whole world that Hong Kong is going backward in terms of democracy," Democratic Party vice chairman Yeung Sum told government radio in Hong Kong.
"China resumes sovereignty over Hong Kong under the so-called (policy) 'Hong Kong ruling Hong Kong', (but) Mr. Tung has added the appointed system to the two councils as well as the district boards," said Yeung. "It is very ironic."
The confidence survey released on Tuesday was carried out by Baptist University of Hong Kong, which is monitoring local attitudes to the handover under its Transition Project.
"Political pessimism this time seems to have risen over the survey in February," political analyst Michael DeGolyer of Baptist University told Hong Kong radio.
The survey also underlines the division between economic and political confidence, with two-thirds of Hong Kong people confident about their economic future but uncertain about their political fate, DeGolyer said.
The findings confirm a prevailing attitude of "doom and boom" in Hong Kong, he said, with the stock market reaching new highs and red chips, or China-related stocks, roaring ahead on handover optimism while political confidence slides.
"Economic optimism has gone up, political pessimism has gone up. It's almost a kind of a schizophrenic attitude," he said.
Under Tung's changes, pro-Beijing names were handed the lion's share of 116 new appointed seats on urban and regional councils and district boards, the vast majority of whose existing members were elected under democratic reforms introduced i n 1994 by departing colonial governor Chris Patten.
Nine new members will be appointed to the Urban Council, which runs municipal affairs in Hong Kong proper while 11 new appointments will be made to the Regional Council, which performs municipal government functions in the New Territories.
Tung has also added another 96 appointed seats to Hong Kong's 18 District Boards, which advise the government on issues in various districts around the territory.
The changes, which take effect after the handover on July 1, complement plans to replace the territory's existing, elected legislature with an interim China-appointed body.
The interim legislature, which will govern Hong Kong until democratic elections promised within one year of the handover, has become a flashpoint of controversy between China and Western nations who object to the rollback of democracy in Hong Kong.
China, which was angered by Patten's reforms, has promised Hong Kong a staggered introduction of democracy.
