Fears are rising in Hong Kong that a "symbolic gesture" by the Democratic Party early on the territory's first day under China will turn nasty despite the Democrats' commitment to peaceful protest.
Hong Kong's largest party says it will occupy the chamber of parliament, expressing anger at the elected assembly's death as a globally-televised handover ceremony and gala takes place nearby.
"I'm really afraid (if) something goes wrong at this time, and it's not anybody's fault," said Bob Broadfoot, who manages the think-tank Political and Economic Risk Consultancy.
"That would be such a bad thing for Hong Kong right now and who wants that? If something like that happens, fingers will point and everyone will be blaming everyone else."
In a move bound to irritate China, which regularly warns against "subversion", Democratic Party vice-chairman Yeung Sam confirmed a plan to protest the swearing-in of a new legislature after Hong Kong returns to Chinese control at midnight June 30.
The protest will highlight the most contentious issue of Hong Kong's return to China -- the Beijing-appointed interim legislature will replace the existing, democratically-elected parliament, to the dismay of democrats and the West.
Yeung said a delegation of Democrats is determined to enter the Legislative Council (Legco) chamber and, in a symbolic gesture, pledge support for democracy as well as China's resumption of sovereignty over Hong Kong through speeches issued from the chamber's balcony.
The protest will take place just as the new provisional legislature is being sworn in - a ceremony Western leaders including U.S. Secretary of State Madeleine Albright and British Prime Minister Tony Blair have pledged to avoid.
Future leader Tung Chee-hwa and police chiefs were not available to outline how they would respond.
Yeung on Wednesday reiterated his party's support for peaceful, non-violent protest but repeated earlier statements threatening "radical" action if the delegation was obstructed.
"I think it's better we wait and see," Yeung told Reuters, when asked what "radical" meant.
"I can only say we are determined to go back to Legco....We want to declare our determination in a symbolic gesture but we hope this can be carried out in a peaceful manner. So I will stop from speculating what we will do."
He did, however, reveal that "negotiations" were still under way with Tung's office, which has apparently advised the Democrats against holding rallies.
"The thing is, can we come back to the Legco building? We are still talking about that," Yeung said.
The protest plans confirm expectations long held in Hong Kong that the Democrats would use the presence of more than 6,000 journalists from around the world to lobby for democracy in China's newest Special Administrative Region.
The plans are restricted so far to the Democratic Party, Hong Kong's loudest political group, but independent Democrat Emily Lau said other legislative groups had been invited to take part.
"We appreciate people have different ways of expression," Lau said. "Is that confrontation? I certainly don't think that's confrontation...They just want to do some gesture. I don't think it's something that is really that intolerable. So I don't see why (the police would) want to create a scene."
