Taiwan has stepped forward in the delicate run-up to Hong Kong's reversion to China and rejected once more the "one country, two systems" policy guiding the territory's July 1 handover to mainland rule.
In a souvenir edition of the Far Eastern Economic Review, Taiwan President Lee Teng-hui wished Hong Kong well after its return to China but repeated his island's determination never to unify with China under the same terms.
"We hope that Hong Kong will not only preserve its present system of freedom, democracy and openness, but enjoy further development after 1997," Lee said in a paid advertisement.
"However, the (Taiwan) government cannot accept the 'one China, two systems' formula imposed on Hong Kong by Peking (Beijing), because the state of division across the Taiwan Strait differs categorically from Hong Kong's situation."
The statement, a striking reminder of the China-Taiwan issue at a sensitive moment, followed Taiwan's confirmation of annual wargames on June 23-24 in the Taiwan Strait, the scene last year of a tense stand-off between the "two Chinas".
Communist Beijing has considered Taiwan a renegade province since the Chinese civil war ended in 1949 and the defeated Nationalists (Kuomintang) set up a rival government there.
China staged eight months of war games near Taiwan in the run-up to the island's March 1996 presidential election, which Beijing suspected was a bid to pursue full independence.
China fully intends to reclaim Taiwan, by force if necessary, and designed the "one country, two systems" policy with Taiwan -- not just Hong Kong -- in mind.
But Taiwan, which calls itself the Republic of China, has ruled out unification until China's Communist Party gives up its political monopoly and introduces pluralism.
Most political analysts said the ostensibly routine nature of Taiwan's summer military exercises was belied by their timing. Taiwan rejects any link between the wargames and Hong Kong's handover, but few Hong Kong commentators are convinced.
"The timing of the wargames is certainly related to the Taipei government's position on the Hong Kong issue and I think wargames have these political connotations," said Joseph Cheng, professor of political science at City University in Hong Kong.
Michael DeGolyer, professor of political science at Baptist University in Hong Kong, said that the purpose of the exercises was to send a message.
"You have to ask yourself just how subtle is shooting off a bunch of rockets, but it does get across the clear statement that the "one country, two systems" formula by which Hong Kong is being returned to China does not apply to them," he said.
Yet most analysts do not expect any major disruption, citing Taiwan's commitment to a smooth Hong Kong transition and the international community's awareness of issues in the strait.
"Will all this have a significant impact on the handover? No," said Richard Margolis, political analyst at broker Merrill Lynch in Hong Kong.
"The scene is set for the handover. It will be full of symbolism but when the first of July rolls around the overall expectation is that it will be business as usual."
DeGolyer said that now was the wrong time for China to force the Taiwan issue. Although Taiwan originally topped China's reunification agenda, Britain's insistence on settling the Hong Kong issue has guaranteed that the next couple of years will be spent ensuring the territory is functioning well, he said.
"If there's any time at which we could consider the Taiwan issue to be the least likely to blow up in our face, this is probably it," DeGolyer said.
But he warned that Chinese President Jiang Zemin had explicitly pledged to resolve the Taiwan issue in his lifetime, just as former paramount leader Deng Xiaoping stated his intention to settle Hong Kong during his tenure.
