China's move to tighten up controls on red chip shares follows increasing signs that the country is ready to bite the bullet and confront its structural economic problems, economists said.
Both economic and political circumstances are ripe for a new set of policy initiatives following last February's death of paramount leader Deng Xiaoping, Geoff Lewis, chief economist with Dresdner Kleinwort Benson, wrote in a recent research note.
Lewis was not expecting any major policy announcement before Hong Kong's July 1 return to Chinese rule.
Yet on Friday, following the biggest one-day gain ever by Hong Kong's main index, China stepped in and announced new measures to tighten up controls on red chips, the unruly bunch of China-related stocks that have taken Hong Kong by storm.
The announcement followed a gain of 647.87 points, or 4.5 percent, in the Hang Seng index to a record 15,154.36.
China now will require all Chinese-controlled companies to obtain approvals before listing overseas.
Companies will also be required to get approvals for transfers of domestic assets into listed affiliates, a widespread activity that has prompted rampant speculation about the value of future asset injections.
"As economic views converge during the succession, so political stability increases and so does the chance of decisive policy implementation," Lewis wrote.
This apparent, renewed movement in economic policy follows a number of recent warnings from economists that China's growth rates are due to drop below expectations, and that deflationary pressures are mounting.
"We're not only seeing disinflationary pressures coming from within China, we're also seeing it reflected in the region as a whole. There are myriad sources of confirmation for this particular view, and I think China's disinflationary forces are going to become one of the major stories this year," Michael Taylor, economist with W.I. Carr said recently.
Both W.I. Carr and Dresdner Kleinwort Benson believe China's long-term economic prospects remain strong, but DKB has warned that deflation will add to other forces hampering growth rates, which have already started to fail to meet expectations.
China's first quarter gross domestic product grew by 9.4 percent against expectations of 10.2 percent, and reports have surfaced that the government has cut its short-term forecast to about seven percent in order to achieve a reduced long-term forecast of eight percent.
Earlier expectations saw China's economy expanding by 10 percent each year for the next decade.
"China has entered a new, disinflationary phase, and the rapid price rises characterising the early years of the economic reform process are unlikely to recur for the time being," said John Mulcahy, managing director, Indosuez W.I. Carr Securities.
Although the evident shift in government economic policy bodes ill for investors awaiting the return of the rip-roaring market rallies of the pre-1993 era, economists welcomed the new approach as yet another sign of China's economic competence.
"Long term, we are more confident about China's economic future than for many years: the problems are in the short term," Lewis said.
"Our confidence arises from a higher degree of economic literacy among the leadership. They -- in Beijing at least -- all seem to understand the costs of high inflation and the need for structural reform, which must be given a chance to work even if the short-term, consequences are negative."
