After July 1, Hong Kong's role as facilitator of China-Taiwan trade will continue and probably expand, but the territory's reversion to mainland rule is bound to heighten sensitivities between the "two Chinas", experts say.
"I don't think after the first of July we will see a negative effect on triangular trade (between Hong Kong, Taiwan and China) but some of the issues, their handling will become much more sensitive," said George Leung, economic adviser at Hongkong Shanghai Banking Corp.
Direct trade and investment between two of Asia's largest and most vibrant economies have been banned for 48 years, creating a lucrative opportunity for Hong Kong to act as the gateway for indirect Taiwan-China trade and investment.
The ban on direct business, transport and communication links dates from 1949, when China's Communists won the civil war on the mainland and the defeated Nationalists fled to Taiwan, but the rivals' interest in indirect economic ties has overcome the political tensions -- to Hong Kong's benefit.
Hong Kong's return to Chinese sovereignty, set for midnight on June 30, at first seemed to threaten a delicate but workable arrangement. But experts say the "one country, two systems" policy guiding Hong Kong's transition -- and intended by China as the model for Taiwan reunification -- has allowed the continuation of an important triangular trade relationship.
Under this policy, Hong Kong will remain a separate customs territory, reflecting Beijing's promise of a high degree of autonomy as enshrined in Hong Kong's new mini-constitution, the Basic Law.
China and Taiwan also recently sealed a pact that lessens any diplomatic nervousness about Taiwanese and Chinese vessels moving through each other's waters.
After the handover, Taiwanese vessels will remove all flags in Hong Kong waters while Hong Kong ships visiting Taiwan will fly only the flag of the new Special Administrative Region.
"I don't see any particular problem, both the Chinese and Taiwanese governments recognise the economic benefit they both derive from trade linkage," Leung said.
"And the past offers lots of examples that no matter how strained the relationship seemed to be, it had very little impact on economic ties...They argue on the political issues but never on economics."
Experts said the greatest harbinger of change for Greater China trade is not Hong Kong's handover but last January's agreement on direct shipping links between China and Taiwan.
Less than one year after the March 1996 Taiwan Straits missile crisis -- an incident that damaged trade throughout the region and pressured economic growth in Hong Kong -- shipping executives agreed to start direct cross-strait shipping between Xiamen and Fuzhou in China and Kaohsiung in Taiwan.
"Everyone's worried about those sorts of developments. Shipping, aircraft, everything comes through here," said Ian Perkin, economist at the Hong Kong General Chamber of Commerce.
The shipping deal followed a June 1996 air accord which set up a "genuine interaction" between Taiwan, Hong Kong and China through the establishment of Taiwan-Hong Kong air routes.
The deal effectively granted a carrier controlled by communist China unprecedented access to Taiwan.
Michael Martin, assistant economist at Hong Kong's Trade Development Council, said the volume of goods involved in the first shipping deal agreed to last week was too small to have much of an impact, but any broader deal would affect Hong Kong greatly.
"If there were a change such that Taiwan and mainland China were to come up with a new agreement that would allow goods directly from Taiwan to China or the other way, that's a new ballgame. We're talking about a larger volume of goods or products," Martin said.
Hong Kong exports to Taiwan were valued at US$4.2 billion in 1996 with Taiwanese imports to Hong Kong valued at US$15.8 billion, of which US$10.8 billion were re-exported, many of them to China.
TDC figures also showed 11,254 Taiwanese projects in China and an accumulated investment of US$5.64 billion at the end of 1995, but this is by no means the end of the story.
Hong Kong accounts for about 60 percent of all investment in China, some of which is bound to originate in Taiwan but end up disguised as foreign joint ventures. Hong Kong invested US$80 billion in China in 1995.
