Merging the Hong Kong dollar with China's renminbi is impossible in the short-term and unlikely in the long-term, a panel of experts said on Monday.
A currency merger could only be contemplated once China's capital account is fully open, allowing for free movement of financial assets in and out of the country, they told a conference organised by the Far Eastern Economic Review. They said this could take at least five years.
"Economically, the fact that the Renminbi is still not a fully-convertible currency also argues against a possible merging of the Hong Kong dollar with the Renminbi as Hong Kong needs a convertible currency to maintain its status as an international financial centre," said T.C. Chan, head of investment banking for Citibank in Hong Kong.
But Hong Kong can still look forward to 50 years of autonomous control of its monetary system, as enshrined in agreements governing Hong Kong's reversion to Chinese control and the Basic Law, Hong Kong's mini-constitution.
"If we set aside the political considerations, which are largely judgmental, the merging of the Hong Kong dollar with the Renminbi is simply legally not possible," Chan said.
Reforming state-owned enterprises (SOEs) will be key to convertibility for China, said Andrew Freris, Bank of America managing director in Hong Kong.
The SOEs, plagued by debt, have compromised China's banking sector. SOEs must be reformed to return integrity to China's banks, Freris told the conference.
Only when the banking sector has reduced its exposure to the SOEs will China be able to establish a fully-functioning interbank market, which can then act as the vehicle to establish market-determined interest rates, Freris said.
"The market must have the capacity to allow domestic rates (to) rise far enough to attract or repel capital," he said. "If you do not have fully operational market-determined interest rates, convertibility is a non-starter."
Instead of anticipating the eradication of its own currency, Hong Kong should look forward to convertibility of the Chinese yuan for the opportunities it will present, Freris said.
"Hong Kong will be able to derive more business from fund flows in and out of China," he said. "But I do think that two monetary systems will remain separate. The fact the renminbi becomes convertible will not affect the separateness of the two systems."
The idea of two monetary systems co-existing within one sovereign state is not unusual, Freris argued.
Argentina countered hyperinflation for many years by allowing its freely convertible peso to function alongside a U.S. "dollarised" economy.
Brazil and Uruguay are similarly dollarised, with U.S. currency used for all major transactions, he said.
