Hong Kong's business and political leaders are gearing up to face a tough new world when the handover party is over.
Surrounded by rival Asian tiger economies, the territory can no longer rely on its historic role as the outside world's gateway to China to maintain its position as the world's seventh biggest trading economy.
"Our economic challenge is to improve Hong Kong's competitiveness in the new world order," future chief executive Tung Chee-hwa said in an interview with the South China Morning Post.
A quick glance at rivals Singapore, Shanghai, Kuala Lumpur and Tokyo has convinced Hong Kong's new leaders that drastic action is necessary.
Tung said Hong Kong had to become "more compassionate and caring" and tackle problems in education, housing and care of the elderly.
"Only if we succeed in meeting these challenges can we sustain our economic vitality and thereby continue to create wealth and improve the quality of life of all the people of Hong Kong," he declared.
"LIVELIHOOD" ISSUES AT THE FOREFRONT
Tung's blend of economic and social policy into "livelihood" issues masks controversy over the prospect of government intervention in an economy dubbed the world's freest.
With a cash pile of HK$330 billion (US$42 billion) in reserves, Tung and his advisers have plenty of ammunition to fire at improvement targets.
Easy access to the cheap labour regions of southern China allowed Hong Kong's manufacturing base to explode and multiply when China opened its doors to foreign investment in the late 1970s and early 1980s.
Once a manufacturing base dependent on exports of labour-intensive, low-value goods, Hong Kong has been transformed into a service centre geared to China's emergence.
Manufacturing's contribution to Hong Kong's gross domestic product has plunged to single digits from more than 50 percent in the 1970s. Meanwhile, services have soared to 85 percent of GDP and are rising.
The speed of this process has amazed economists around the world -- and has created a new set of challenges for Hong Kong.
WAGES, PROPERTY CRUSH
The most obvious is a shortage of skilled workers.
"We need people, not machinery," George Leung, economic adviser at Hongkong and Shanghai Bank, said. "This is the most serious issue in Hong Kong."
Wage rates are rising, putting pressure on inflation rates even while unemployment rises -- a new phenomenon.
Demand is switching from high-labour, low-skilled jobs to white-collar occupations such as accountants, lawyers, managers and investment bankers.
The education system is ill-suited. Business leaders have called for government action to address a shortage of schools and properly qualified teachers.
"It's not a question of dumping money at the problem," Leung said. "We need to come up with a helpful programme to train people and raise their quality. Otherwise, we will have no resources to expand our economy."
With China's economy expected to double within the decade, Leung believes Hong Kong could face critical labour shortages in the next 10 years unless it acts aggressively now.
Rivals Singapore, Kuala Lumpur, Jakarta and Tokyo are waiting to pounce on failure.
Tung has appointed one adviser to draw up a detailed education policy and asked another for guidance on how to tackle Hong Kong's critical property shortage.
Both wages and property make a major contribution to high costs, Hong Kong's major handicap in the competitiveness stakes. Rents and wages are higher than virtually anywhere else in Asia.
