Hong Kong's stock market has been reaching for record highs in anticipation of business as usual -- or maybe even better than usual -- after China takes control on July 1.
But the optimism is not shared by all.
As the handover approaches, the small but influential group surrounding former shipping magnate and future chief executive Tung Chee-hwa is having an anxiety attack about Hong Kong's competitiveness -- and with good reason, according to some.
Some of Tung's advisers even support intervening in Hong Kong's economy.
Everyone's inability to define, precisely, what it is that has made Hong Kong an economic marvel has prompted fears that some magical elixir will dissipate as soon as China takes charge at midnight on June 30.
A free port and strong markets, easy international access and firm defence of the rule of law are acknowledged as key underpinnings to Hong Kong's economic success.
But these features are common in cities around the world.
Most people believe that Hong Kong survives and thrives on a number of less quantifiable elements. Ranking high among these is the "borrowed time, borrowed place" mentality.
With the date July 1, 1997, etched in the backs of their minds, Chinese emigres worked against time in Hong Kong, using ingenuity and determination to transform themselves into some of the world's wealthiest people.
Often in the space of just a few years, the explosive energy of these time-sensitive tycoons spawned huge and diverse conglomerates, notable for their concentration of authority in the iron fist of the founder and his family.
But with China on the doorstep, Hong Kong has discovered that the days of rags-to-riches are not so much over as very, very different.
And that's where Hong Kong is having difficulty.
HONG KONG INC - JUST AN ACCIDENT?
Those who built Hong Kong Inc and know it best quietly fear its success was due more to accident than design, and that replication in the future will prove increasingly hard.
China's decision to slam its door shut following the 1949 Communist revolution forced Hong Kong to diversify away from its obvious strength as a deep-water port and trading entrepot.
Shanghai industrialists fled en masse to Hong Kong, bringing capital, know-how and drive, and a readiness to exploit cheap refugee labour flooding across the border from southern China.
"Hong Kong's natural advantage as an entry port to China disappeared. What emerged was an advantage in industry. Capital was there, management was there, labour was there," said Richard Wong, professor of economics at Hong Kong University.
It was a magic combination that established Hong Kong as a labour-intensive, low value-added manufacturing centre.
China's re-emergence into the world in the late 1970s merely added to the momentum. Hong Kong businessmen moved factories to where labour was cheaper -- into southern China.
It has been an intensive process that, 18 years later, is considered almost complete.
With the July 1 transition to Chinese rule now upon them, the Shanghai dynasties who made Hong Kong what it is today are asking, what next?
HONG KONG HARE RACING ASIAN TORTOISE
"We do not think that the present system can be sustained on its current trajectory," Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) professors Suzanne Berger and Richard Lester said in their study, "Made by Hong Kong".
MIT argues that, at some point, Hong Kong is going to have to stop seeking lower costs and start adding value. Labour costs are rising in south China, and factories are moving elsewhere.
MIT believes the incoming generation of "Made by Hong Kong" tycoons will have to shed the "make a quick buck" attitude of the past and invest for the long-term -- and they should do so soon because rising regional competition is starting to expose some obvious flaws in Hong Kong's short-term approach.
Almost like the hare that dashed ahead of the tortoise in the nursery tale, Hong Kong's ad hoc path to success could end up taking longer than the slow but steady course plotted by Asian tortoises like Singapore.
Singapore has already outpaced Hong Kong as the world's most competitive economy according to Harvard economist Jeffrey Sachs, who cites its better-educated and skilled workforce.
Singapore's labour and housing costs are lower and its English standards higher than in Hong Kong, reflecting the island's early recognition of its role as an Asian service centre in an increasingly competitive region.
"We are only now starting to talk about crafting competitive plans to attract the industries of tomorrow -- years after Singapore," one Hong Kong businessman told MIT.
