Hong Kong's Financial Secretary Donald Tsang issued a strong message of stability and prosperity on Wednesday, just days before the territory's return to Chinese rule at midnight on June 30.
In an interview with Reuters, Tsang restated the continuation of Hong Kong's independent monetary system and fixed exchange rate after July 1, warning that any change in the system that has underpinned the territory's economic success for nearly 14 years would be unwise.
"It would be foolhardy to make a dramatic change of that system at the change of sovereignty," Tsang said.
"For me, the continuation of the linked exchange rate is fundamental in reassuring international investors that the systems in Hong Kong will remain unchanged."
Tsang, who will remain as the second most powerful bureaucrat in executive-led Hong Kong after the handover, said the maintenance of Hong Kong's prosperity was a matter of national pride for China.
"Hong Kong as a prosperous economic centre is a matter of great national honour for China," he said. "We will continue to be prosperous, the stock market will continue to be strong, all the economic indicators are robust," he said.
Apart from Hong Kong's close proximity to China's expanding economy, Tsang said four key features were responsible for the territory's past economic success and would determine its future prosperity -- rule of law, fair business practice, a corruption-free public service and the free flow of information.
"Our judicial system is respected, our legislative system is respected and we have a very good track record in that everyone will be treated fairly," Tsang said.
"We have a duty-free port, we have a totally convertible currency, making sure the market does not pose any impediment to foreign traders and foreign investors. So that is absolutely important, the level playing field."
So is the free flow of information. Tsang said freedom of political reporting is just as important as economic reporting.
"If I were an investor I would want to know whether my money was sitting on a gold mine or a powder keg," he said.
One of the few areas where there could be change to coincide with the sovereignty switch was management of Hong Kong's massive cash pile, which might now gain from a less conservative investment strategy.
The Land Fund, the US$19 billion cash mountain generated from government property sales, will remain untouched in the short term.
But the Exchange Fund holding Hong Kong's war chest of US$63.8 billion in foreign exchange reserves could tolerate a greater risk profile now that the political uncertainty associated with the transition will soon be past, Tsang said.
But he issued a forceful reminder to those who suggest the money could be spent on infrastructure projects in southern China or on supporting new industrial sectors in Hong Kong, such as a high-technology industry.
"This is our money," he said, warning that legislative approval would be required to move funds outside the territory.
Those who hope to pressure Tsang into supporting their ideas could be in for a battle.
"As financial secretary, I have always been under pressure to change things, to shell out more money for pork-barrelling politics, for subsidising industry, for subsidising transport," Tsang said.
"I have a pretty tough skin on this. I know (where) Hong Kong's longer term interests lie, in my view, and I think we have got international bodies supporting my views and the local community generally agrees with me, too."
-- Hong Kong newsroom (852) 2843 6441
