Tigers ready to pounce or a litter of clawless wannabes?
Surrounded by the burgeoning states of Asia, Hong Kong is wondering just how long it can rely upon its traditional strengths -- proximity to China, developed markets, a huge and free port -- for prosperity into the next millennium.
Rival tiger states from Singapore to Jakarta are sharpening their claws and developing fast, preparing for China's arrival.
They are growing so fast that financial powerhouse Hong Kong has started to wonder how well-prepared it is to defend its position as China's primary financial service centre.
An inadequate education system, declining standards of English, rising costs and an under-skilled labour force are just some of the hurdles facing Hong Kong -- and grabbing the attention of some of Asia's youngest and fiercest tigers.
TIGERS UNSHEATH THEIR CLAWS
Tokyo and Singapore pose the most immediate threat.
Tokyo's loss of business to lower cost, less regulated rivals such as Hong Kong and Singapore was one of the key motivations for the shake-out now hitting Japan's financial sector, termed the Big Bang.
Many of the reforms will take effect before the 2001 deadline, allowing Tokyo to claw back business from Hong Kong's grasp - but the process could take a while, analysts said.
"Immediate gains may not be so large," said Takashi Kiuchi, head of economic research at LTCB Research Institute Inc.
Despite Tokyo's obvious size and strength, Singapore is considered the Asian tiger with the sharpest teeth -- and time is on its side.
"Tokyo is still in the early stage of its liberalisation program," said Eddie Lee, economist at Vickers Ballas in Singapore. "And in five to 10 years time, Singapore would have an earlier foothold in the Chinese market. The Japanese at this point are still trying to sort out their balance sheets. We'll have an advantage."
The city-state has already lured many Asian headquarters from Hong Kong either directly, or by luring those companies that might previously more naturally have gone to Hong Kong.
But Singapore should not get too complacent. Lurking on the horizon lies tiger cub Kuala Lumpur, one of Asia's most promising and aggressive financial centres.
Malaysia's political stability, plentiful cheap office space and political will to deregulate financial markets are attractive for multinationals seeking an Asian location.
Malaysia is cheap, dynamic and motivated, with rentals one-third of those in Singapore and one-quarter of Hong Kong's.
"It's very obvious that the infrastructure is being put in place, put in place very rapidly," said Patrick Tan, assistant director at ABN Amro Hoare Govett in Kuala Lumpur.
"Right now we're number three (behind Hong Kong and Singapore) but it's a question of time and momentum. It's not a question of how many years but more a question how fast - what sort of volume can be built up in the next couple of years."
Even Taipei, undeterred by political awkwardness with China, will be watching Hong Kong carefully over the coming months and years for signs of a loss of openness and evenhandedness.
And Jakarta is working hard to build its role as an Asian middleman for international investors.
"Our investment banking industry is growing at the moment and investment banks from the United Kingdom and the U.S. are coming here," said Agung Prabowo, analyst with Indonesia's state-owned brokerage PT Danareksa Sekuritas.
"We do play a middleman role that can facilitate the new ideas or debt securities or equity securities, and there are investors here as well who can absorb new issuance."
HONG KONG THREAT WITHIN NOT WITHOUT
Despite all the enthusiasm, economists warn that China's smooth economic emergence should not be taken for granted.
Growth rates in China are declining as the nation grapples with massive structural problems.
And the sort of problems afflicting Hong Kong also weigh on other regional centres.
"Hong Kong's probably got more or as many well-qualified people as anywhere else in the region, and also, this economy has managed to adapt itself very well over the years," said Simon Ogus, economist at SBC Warburg in Hong Kong.
The greatest threat to Hong Kong comes not from outside but within, Ogus warned.
"The key question for Hong Kong is: does the underlying legal regulatory structure under which that (China) business is conducted change. In which case, there will be a loss of competitiveness relative to other countries," Ogus said.
