Officials with Volkswagen-First Automotive Works in northeastern China on Monday dismissed a report that the joint venture faced possible closure.
"This report is incorrect," said a spokeswoman of the joint venture, referring to a report by the German news magazine Der Spiegel.
"Production is still continuing," she said in a telephone interview from Changchun.
"We have a 25-year agreement. If the German side withdrew unilaterally, they would have to pay compensation," she said. She added that the two sides would soon hold a ceremony marking the full implementation of the joint venture project.
A spokesman for Volkswagen AG's Volkswagen Asia-Pacific arm in Hong Kong also said production at the joint venture would continue.
"There is no reason to leave Changchun," he said.
Der Spiegel said the Changchun plant was losing money and production of the Jetta car had practically ceased.
The Hong Kong-based official said the factory had produced 14,700 Jetta cars in the first eight months of this year, up 10 percent from a year ago.
The Jetta was not selling as well as the Volkswagen Santana produced at Volkswagen's Shanghai joint venture, but that operation had taken the lion's share of the domestic passenger car market, he said.
However, some changes in the joint venture agreement were being negotiated, including the introduction of new car models as well as the possibility of Volkswagen taking over sales and after-sales service, the official added.
First Automotive Works had been producing Audi 100s at its own production line in Changchun under a seven-year licensing agreement that expired in June. The Audi 200 was now being built at the joint venture, and 400 have been produced since June.
A total of 7,445 Audi 100s were built from January to June this year, the Volkswagen official said.
First Automotive has also sold 4,120 of its Red Flag cars, an Audi-based car that the Chinese company produces separately from the joint venture using a Chrysler Corp engine, according to Volkswagen.
