China has tightened safety measures after a fatal rocket explosion early this year and has found the cause of another launch failure in August, Chinese space officials said on Wednesday.
Further testing was needed for the Long March 3 rocket and that could delay China's launch schedule, they said.
"Launch vehicles will now self-destruct if there is a failure," said Zhang Qingwei, vice president of the China Academy of Launch Vehicle Technology.
"We will also ensure that people (living in the area of space centres) will be moved away when we conduct a launch," he told an international conference on space technology.
A Long March 3B rocket exploded shortly after launch in February, killing six people and injuring 57, according to official reports.
Unofficial sources have put the casualty toll much higher.
China's commercial space drive suffered another setback in August when a communications satellite failed to reach proper orbit after launch aboard a Long March 3 rocket.
"We have determined the cause of the August 18 failure and have taken corrective measures," said Zhang, adding that the problem stemmed from a faulty hydrogen valve on the third stage of the booster rocket.
"We are still conducting ground testing," he said. "There will be delays (in the Long March 3) programme this year but this will not affect other Long March vehicles."
An official of the China Aerospace Corporation, which oversees commercial satellite launches, said a Long March 3 rocket could be launched by the end of the year or early next year.
Two other launches using the Long March 2D and Long March 3A rockets were also expected to be made by the end of the year.
In January 1995, a Long March rocket blew up, killing six people and destroying the Apstar 2 satellite it was carrying.
China once enjoyed a reputation of being a cheap and reliable provider of satellite launch services but the string of failures has shaken its hopes of playing a bigger role in the commercial space business.
