China plans to develop bigger rockets to carry heavier payloads into space and expand its role in the commercial satellite market, Chinese aerospace officials said on Thursday.
The ambitious, long-term goal was to build rockets that could carry 20-tonne payloads -- more than twice the current capacity of the nation's most powerful launch vehicles, they said.
"This is a long-term goal that could stretch into the second decade of the next century," said a spokeswoman for China Aerospace Corp, which coordinates China's satellite launch business.
"China needs rockets to put multiple satellites into orbit -- both for its own domestic use and to help its position in the commercial space market," she told Reuters.
China's existing rockets have the capacity to carry payloads of 9.2 tonnes for lower earth orbits and 3.4-5.0 tonnes for geosynchronous orbits.
It has already launched multiple satellites on a single launch but officials say more development is needed.
"We will begin a development programme as soon as possible to lay a firm foundation for the new development of Chinese launch vehicle technology in the 21st century," said Li Jianzhong, president of the China Academy of Launch Vehicle Technology.
"We will develop technologies, especially some key technologies for a heavy lift launch vehicle with a payload of 20 tonnes," he said in a paper delivered at an international conference on space technology.
He also said China would continue to study reusable space transport systems such as the U.S. space shuttle and manned flights -- although officials said these plans were unlikely to be taken into the development stage anytime soon.
China, which put its first satellite in orbit in 1970, has been trying to expand its role in the commercial space market, despite a series of recent setbacks.
A Chinese Long March 3 rocket, considered one of the nation's more reliable launch vehicles, failed to put a U.S.-built satellite into proper orbit in August.
"It was due to a tiny problem with a valve leakage," a scientist who worked on the rocket told Reuters.
"But that small error meant the whole launch was a failure."
In February, technical flaws had even more disastrous results when a Long March 3B rocket exploded shortly after lift-off, killing at least six people and injuring 57.
China says it still has a high success rate for its satellite launches but the latest setbacks have tarnished its reputation.
Beijing also sees a need to step up its satellite production technology.
"We are behind the West in rocket technology but we are even farther behind in satellites," said the China Aerospace spokeswoman. "We need to be able to build more sophisticated satellites with more transponders."
The development plans will require a lot of funding, and although senior Communist Party officials are backing the space campaign, there are plenty of other government projects that demand a share of the budget.
Chinese officials declined to say how much money would be committed to the rocket development project or the space sector overall.
"I can say that our space budget is merely a fraction of what the United States spends on its space programme," said a senior aerospace official.
