China is preparing to tap overseas capital markets by listing shares of one or two of its chemical companies abroad, a senior Chinese official was quoted as saying on Sunday.
But as Beijing looks for foreign capital to upgrade its technology it plans to tighten foreign access to its own chemicals market by adding new restrictions on joint ventures.
Chemical Industry Minister Gu Xiulian told the Business Weekly that one or two chemical companies were getting ready for share offerings abroad, though she did not name the companies or the exchanges.
She also said that one or two Chinese companies would issue convertible bonds -- bonds convertible into stock -- on a trial basis, though regulatory guidelines were not yet in place.
China securities regulators are known to be preparing another batch of companies for share offers outside the country. It was unclear from Gu's remarks whether the chemical firms would be among those companies.
Tianjin Bohai Chemical Group already has a listing on the Hong Kong stock market as well as on the Shanghai exchange while Jilin Chemical Industrial trades in Hong Kong and New York as well as on China's southern bourse in Shenzhen.
Gu said that China's chemical industry needed to raise funds to make technical upgradings and that stock and bond offerings would help reach these goals.
"We are trying to achieve the shift to a quality, intensive mode (of production) from the quantity, extensive model with the aid of foreign capital," she said.
China will bar foreign companies from holding controlling stakes in joint ventures with big state enterprises in priority areas such as in soda ash and "sensitive materials".
There was no indication of when the move might go into effect, and the policy "does not mean we are totally opposed to stock control by foreign businesses", Gu said.
Gu had previously told reporters that China was planning to review its policies towards joint ventures in the chemical industry.
She had suggested that areas where new technology was vital to the development of domestic industry, foreign companies would be allowed to control joint ventures.
But other areas where China had already developed sufficient expertise would be closed to more than 50 percent foreign ownership.
China is particularly encouraging direct foreign investment in fertilisers, ethylene, synthetic materials as well as fine chemical products -- either as wholly owned or jointly owned operations, Gu told the newspaper.
She also criticised the "westernisation" of well known domestic products, saying that China needed an integration of foreign brands and domestic products.
