China is planning to issue rules to speed development of its key power sector with an expanded role for foreign companies, a Chinese planning official said on Tuesday.
Beijing was reviewing rules governing build-operate-transfer (BOT) projects, which so far have been off limits for foreign companies on major power projects, said Wang Hong of the State Planning Commission.
"The State Council (cabinet) is considering temporary regulations," said Wang, director of the commission's department of foreign finance utilisation.
China has said it needs $20 billion in foreign capital through the year 2000 to meet its targets for power industry development.
Wang said the BOT rules would not be ready in time for the award of the nation's first such power sector project which is expected soon and could cost $600 million to $700 million.
China is now evaluating tenders for the Laibin power project in Guangxi province in southern China, which calls for construction and operation of two 350-megawatt power units.
Beijing says it is using the BOT method on a trial basis.
The winner could be announced within the next month, Wang told Reuters at an energy conference.
Major bidders include industrial giant ABB Asea Brown Boveri AG of Switzerland and a group including Germany's Siemens AG and Hong Kong's China Light &amp; Power Co Ltd.
The winner would construct and operate the plant for a period of time before turning the plant over to China. Its bid would include a plan for domestic electric power rates.
The rules under review would define BOT projects and state when they are acceptable.
They would also specify the approval process, require the use of international tenders and determine the apportioning of risk between China and foreign companies, Wang said.
China generally does not allow foreign entities to hold than a 30 percent stake in key power projects, which are those with a capacity of about 250 megawatts.
Western bankers at the conference said the lack of a clear legal framework for BOT projects coupled with problems in setting domestic electric power rates made it difficult for foreign commercial banks to finance the Laibin project.
