China's leaders have agreed on a need to stimulate the economy but the central bank is trying to keep the policy low-key, a senior Chinese economist said on Thursday.
"There is a broad consensus on a need to stimulate the economy," said Fan Gang, an economist and director of the China Reform Foundation, an authoritative think-tank.
"But the central bank wants to keep this low-key," he told reporters in a broad-ranging discussion of China's economic policy.
China has largely relaxed its three-year programme of economic austerity aimed at wringing inflation out of the economy.
Retail price inflation had reached a worrisome 21.7 percent in 1994 but was brought down to 14.8 percent last year.
In September this year it fell to 5.0 percent, well within the government target of 10 percent for the full year.
At the same time, economic growth has managed to reach about 9.0 percent, though Fan said that a build-up of inventories -- some of that unsaleable -- probably accounted for about 1.5 percentage points of economic growth.
The central bank, the People's Bank of China, has cut interest rates twice this year, partly as a response to the marked gains in bringing inflation under control.
The People's Bank was also trying to lend a helping hand to ailing state industry, which has been saddled with heavy interest payments on its huge debts.
Central bank officials have said that the interest rate cuts did not mean a loosening of monetary policy, and that they would keep policy "appropriately tight".
"Central bank officials want to keep the word 'tight' in the policy," said Fan, adding that they did not want to see a renewed surge of government spending that would once again pump up inflation.
He said, however, that there still were controls on fixed investment that could be eased somewhat.
"The central government needs to accelerate growth without overheating," he said. "We need the highest growth possible."
The economist said there was still plenty of idle capacity in the state sector with many of the employees of state industry on leave from their jobs on partial pay because of a lack of orders.
Much of that was concentrated in the nation's "rust bowl" in the northeast, a bastion of heavy industry that has relied on central planning and been unable to upgrade its antiquated equipment and shed its huge payrolls of excess workers.
"From the point of view of reform, higher growth makes (reform of state industry) easier," he said
Much of China's creaking state industry needed to cut surplus labour to become more efficient, Fan said, although he conceded that this was still a politically sensitive issue.
"Social stability is still a big factor," he said.
