China's Communist leaders may be fretting about the erosion of the ailing state sector at the expense of more nimble private firms.
But for one of the nation's newest banks -- the China Minsheng Banking Corporation -- this is an opportunity.
Formally inaugurated in January, the bank is aiming to lend the bulk of its funds to China's non-state sector, a rapidly expanding area of the economy.
"We are focusing our business on the non-state sector," chairman Jing Shuping said in an interview. "Many banks are not looking at this area or are unwilling to lend to it."
Much of China's creaking state industry is losing money and unable to compete in domestic or export markets. But for now, Communist leaders are unable to shed an ideological albatross, insisting the state retain the leading role in the economy.
"The state sector will still play the dominant role but there will be a growing non-state sector," said Jing. "This will be good for the economy and good for us."
China Minsheng is a non-state entity, founded with the backing of the All-China Federation of Industry and Commerce.
It has 59 shareholders, most federation members. Two of the biggest stakes, worth 90 million yuan ($10.8 million) each, are held by diversified Guangzhou Yitong Group and Xiamen Fuxun Group that has interests from real estate to pharmaceuticals.
The bank is relatively small by Chinese standards with total capital of 1.38 billion yuan and assets of 5 billion yuan.
Jing says it may not be profitable in its first year due to start-up costs but it aims for a 50 percent return on shareholder capital by the third year of operation.
By then, it hopes to have assets of over 10 billion yuan.
It differs from many of China's state-run banks that are unable to recover their loans -- made as policy decisions in support of struggling, government-run enterprises.
"We have no policy loans," said Jing.
China Minsheng has extended over 1.0 billion yuan in loans this year -- all on commercial terms.
"Most loans are for working capital and not for more than one year," he said. "All have collateral or a guarantee."
The bank's headquarters are a short walk from the Beijing city government, but Jing said officials do not stroll over to ask for special favours for hard-hit local companies.
"They go to the other banks," he said. "The state banks are trying to become commercial banks but they still have to make some policy loans."
Besides its headquarters and an office for international business, China Minsheng has three branches in Beijing. One is in the Haidian district where many high-technology, non-state companies have sprung up -- just the type of customer it wants.
The bank cannot lure deposits with higher interest rates since all deposit rates are fixed by the central bank.
Instead, it must compete in terms of service, staying open longer hours and pumping funds into improving technology by installing computer and automated teller equipment.
It has some flexibility on the interest it charges borrowers, though, with a range of 10 percent above or below levels set by the central bank.
In the future, China Minsheng will face more competition from foreign banks -- now barred from taking deposits or making loans in Chinese currency.
"At the moment, they cannot do local currency business," said Jing. "But that will change."
The bank is already looking at new areas of business, such as home mortgages, to meet expected demand as China develops a real estate market.
It may also want to tap domestic or foreign capital markets to ensure it has the financial muscle to stay competitive.
"There could be a movement in this direction in the future," Jing said. "But first we need a good performance over the next three years."
($1 = 8.3 yuan)
