China's oil and chemical trading giant Sinochem hopes to list shares in Singapore as a first step in its plan to become a world-class conglomerate, a top official said on Friday.
"Our objective is to build our company into a transnational conglomerate," President Zheng Dunxun said.
"We are looking at big Korean and Japanese conglomerates as models," he said.
Zheng, speaking to reporters and security analysts at Sinochem's Beijing headquarters, did not say how many shares would be offered or who much money would be raised.
Timing would depend on the Singapore stock exchange, which was now reviewing Sinochem's plan.
However, company officials said the review period might be longer than usual because the firm was a trading operation and had no production in Singapore.
The company had said last June it was confident of the success of its application and expected to be listed in two months.
Sinochem would retain 60 percent control of the listed company, Zhang said.
Sinochem, whose full name is China National Chemicals Import and Export Corporation, had net assets of more than $1.0 billion at the end of last year. Besides oil and chemical trading, its operations range from oil refining to shipping, warehousing and finance.
Sinochem officials said the company accounted for 40 percent of all of China's oil imports and the remaining 60 percent went through a joint venture in which it had a 50 percent stake.
Company officials said Sinochem had net profits of $75 million last year, down from $100 million in 1994. Turnover rose to $18.21 billion from $14.98 billion in 1994.
Asked why profits slid when revenues rose, officials said market conditions were to blame. They did not elaborate.
The Singapore listed unit would be Sinochem Asia Holdings (Company) Ltd and would include oil and other commodities trading operations in Singapore as well as trading vehicles in Thailand and South Korea.
Sinochem Asia Chairman Fu Yong declined to give the value of the assets of the Singapore listed company, but said they would not include Sinochem's big Hong Kong arm.
"Sinochem Hong Kong would be too big to be put into Sinochem Asia," he said.
Asked if this suggested another listing, for the Hong Kong operations, Fu said: "If the Singarpoe listing goes smoothly we might try other centres."
If the offer gains clearance form the Singapore stock exchange, Singapore's United Overseas Bank Ltd is expected to be the lead underwriter.
