China has tried to put new pressure on Taiwan to boost economic ties, courting the island's businessmen with an announcement of rules on direct shipping links, analysts said on Sunday.
But they said Beijing remained far from its goal of securing direct shipping, banned by the rival Nationalist government of Taiwan.
"From what we have seen, this already has put some pressure on the Taiwan authorities," said Fan Xizhou, head of the Taiwan Research Institute at Xiamen University.
"This could help stabilise economic ties but more practical steps are needed," he said, speaking by telephone from the southeastern port city that would likely benefit from any direct shipping links.
Beijing, which views the island as a renegade province, unilaterally announced last week a series of regulations on direct shipping links, giving its blue print for future trade.
Taiwan's Nationalist government has banned direct air and shipping links with China since 1949 when Chiang Kai-shek's Nationalist troops lost the Chinese civil war to the communists and fled to the island.
With tensions easing since the late 1980s, civilian aircraft and vessels have skirted the ban by stopping over in a third country or territory such as the British colony of Hong Kong or Portuguese-run Macau.
Taiwanese businessmen, who have poured over $20 billion into China, are eager for direct transport links, but Taiwanese authorities have been reluctant to lift the ban.
The latest news fuelled hopes among many of Taiwan's businessmen that some of the restrictions might be eased, and it briefly buoyed shipping stocks on the Taipei bourse.
The Nationalists, who say they are committed to eventual reunification with China, see direct transport links as their last bargaining chip in talks with the communists.
China said that direct shipping would be purely a domestic matter, specifying that only Taiwanese or Chinese companies -- or joint ventures including one side or the other -- would be allowed to conduct business on the routes.
"The documents define clearly that direct cargo transport between harbours on the Chinese mainland and Taiwan is regarded as domestic transportation under special management," the official Xinhua news agency said.
They also make no mention of the role that Taiwan authorities would play, saying only that all companies engaged in the trade would need Beijing's permission.
Taiwan has set its own formula for future links but it wants to limit the trade to foreign registered companies through a so-called "offshore" southern port.
Beijing's tactics echo those applied to the British colony of Hong Kong, where it has tried to lure companies with substantial business interests in China to do its bidding politically while it engages in political arm-wrestling with the British administration.
In Hong Kong, at least, those tactics have been highly successful as many of the same tycoons who once courted the British administration have turned to Beijing to look for economic favours in return for their political support.
Whether that works with Taiwan remains to be seen.
"The new shipping rules were clearly designed to step up the pressure on Taiwan," said a Western diplomat.
"But if Taiwan doesn't agree, it's all empty talk."
