The choice of Singapore for the listing of China's big oil and chemicals trader was at least partly a political decision, Chinese officials and foreign securities analysts said.
They said that close ties between China and Singapore helped in the choice of the island state for the proposed offer of Sinochem's shares.
"The decision to list in Singapore was partly due to good relations between China and Singapore," said Fu Yong, chairman of Sinochem Asia Holdings, the Sinochem arm which could be listed in Singapore.
"Singapore is also a stable and prosperous environment," he told securities analysts and reporters invited to the company's headquarters.
So far, Hong Kong has attracted the bulk of the foreign listings of Chinese companies.
Sinochem, whose full name is China National Chemicals Import and Export Corp, is a major state trading company that has used some of the cash from its lucrative trading operations to expand into numerous new businesses.
Under the proposed stock offer, currently under review by the Singapore bourse, Sinochem would place only some of its Asian trading operations -- including those in Singapore -- into the listed company.
It has not said how many shares would be offered or how much money might be raised.
Securities analysts said they were unsure how much profit could be expected from the operations in the listed company. But they added that the parent firm clearly had the financial clout to list assets on any of a number of foreign stock exchanges.
Sinochem's trading turnover swelled to $18.21 billion last year from $14.98 billion in 1994.
Company officials said the firm controls 40 percent of all of China's crude oil imports and has a 50 percent share of the company that accounts for the remainder.
It owns a share of a big joint venture oil refinery in the northeast city of Dalian, has a newly formed insurance joint venture with Manufacturers Life of Canada and has taken a stake in China's fledgling second telephone network.
It is now a major real estate holder, having splashed out with 700 million yuan ($84 million) to build its Beijing headquarters, and it is part owner of an 88-storey commercial tower being built in Shanghai.
Company officials hinted strongly that further stock offerings were to be expected -- most likely in Hong Kong -- if the Singapore listing went smoothly.
Singapore has become a model of sorts for China's vision of the future, according to Western diplomats.
It has raised living standards through rapid economic development while keeping tight political controls, they said.
Singapore has carefully cultivated political and economic ties with China since diplomatic links were forged in 1990. It has pushed hard to make a success of its flagship project in China -- a big industrial park in the eastern city of Suzhou.
If Sinochem's listing proposal obtains final approval, it would not be the only such Chinese state company to offer shares in Singapore as several China-linked firms have already listed.
Fellow Chinese company Guangzhou Investment -- the Hong Kong-listed investment arm of the southern city of Guangzhou -- is also looking to Singapore.
Sinochem said that Singapore's key role in the Asian oil refining and trading business was also a factor in its choice as the place of listing.
Securities analysts said that Sinochem probably would get a better price for the shares in Singapore than in Hong Kong.
But the analysts noted that strong political ties helped gain support from Beijing.
"In this case, politics clearly played a role," said a Singapore-based analyst.
