China has begun a national drive to test all blood products since the discovery of HIV contamination earlier this year, a health official said on Friday.
"We have requested all local health authorities to inspect blood products and report the results to us," said an official at the Ministry of Public Health.
The official, who declined to be named, said the testing followed the discovery in April of some samples of a HIV contaminated product manufactured and sold in the southern province of Guangdong.
The product was known as "Wolongsong" brand blood albumin, a protein.
HIV -- Human Immunodeficiency Virus -- is the virus that can lead to Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS).
"Following the incident we instituted a national inspection of blood products," the official told Reuters.
Asked how the tainted product had been uncovered, she said: "I can't tell you that. This is a very sensitive question."
Results of the tests from several provinces had been turned over to central authorities, she said without giving any further details.
An official at the Foreign Ministry said public health authorities in Guangdong had called for government agencies around the country to stop the sale and use of the 50- millilitre "Wolongsong" albumin.
Guangdong health officials, contacted by telephone, declined to give any information on the manufacturer or say how much of the product had been on the market when the action was taken.
They also declined to say how the item became contaminated, what conditions it was used to treat or how serious the risk was to people who used the product.
Officials in Beijing said that an order had been sent to have the Wolongsong product destroyed.
Official figures show China has 4,305 reported HIV cases and the total is expected to reach 5,000 by the end of this year.
Chinese officials quote health experts as saying they believe the actual number is anywhere from 50,000 to 100,000, as many cases go unreported.
A total of 131 people have been infected with AIDS in China, according to the official media.
China has been grappling with growing drug use and prostitution and experts warn these two problems could increase the number of AIDS cases across the country.
