Heavy losses in metals trading by a young employee at big Chinese conglomerate CITIC showed striking similarities to Nick Leeson's deals that humbled Barings Bank, a top CITIC official said.
CITIC -- the China International Trust and Investment Corp -- had learned a bitter lesson from the 1994 losses and had stepped up its internal controls, group executive director Chang Zhenming said in an interview.
"There were a lot of similarities," Chang said of the CITIC and Barings episodes.
"We realised the seriousness of risk," he said.
CITIC has gained a reputation of being one of China's best run companies, expanding its operations to power, telecommunications, banking and real estate. It is probably best known for its Hong Kong-listed unit, CITIC Pacific.
Its big losses in 1994 were all the more surprising to many foreign businessmen.
The key figure in CITIC's trading was Chen Tongsheng, in his early 30's, who worked at the CITIC Shanghai office.
Like Leeson, who was 28 when his big losses on Singapore's SIMEX exchange emerged, Chen was not a university graduate.
He had worked his way through to his trading position, taking a post as a bank clerk after finishing high school.
Also like Leeson, he is now in jail -- along with his supervisor, the former president of the Shanghai operation.
"Not only was the background of the trader similar (to Leeson) but so were the trading methods as well."
Chang said that losses stemmed from unauthorised trades on the London Metals Exchange, and that broker credits compounded the problem.
"He didn't have any money. He used LME broker credits," said Chang of the Shanghai trader.
Asked if special accounts were used to hide losses -- as in the Barings case - Chang said: "You could say it was exactly the same."
Auditors were also unable to make sense of the trading accounts, he added.
But unlike Barings, CITIC managed to survive the losses, which were about $40 million compared to Leeson's, which neared $1.4 billion.
Chang said the losses still nearly bankrupted the CITIC Shanghai operations.
"We have stepped up our internal controls," he said, adding that other prominent cases - such as Sumitomo's copper trading losses -- had been instructive in reducing future risk.
CITIC's subsidiaries are no longer allowed to conduct operations unrelated to their core activities.
CITIC has also stopped all commodities trading on foreign markets, in line with a central government directive.
Asked if the company might return to the market, Chang said this was unlikely in the near future.
