China International Trust and Investment Corp, one of China's major conglomerates, is focusing its domestic operations on the financial sector where it hopes to see 70 percent of its profits, a top executive said.
"We are making money in the financial sector though manufacturing is having a hard time now," said Chang Zhenming, group executive director.
"We see finance contributing about 70 percent of our domestic net profit in the near term," he said in a recent interview.
Chang chose his words carefully, saying that the finance business would be used "to serve the conglomerate's commercial and industrial operations".
But company officials said that CITIC had been disappointed, with some of its early industrial investments -- such as in the machinery and garment sectors -- and it would like to remould itself as a financial services company.
CITIC reported profit of 2.05 billion yuan ($247 million) last year, up from 1.67 billion yuan in 1994.
Most of CITIC's income is from its huge Hong Kong arm, which includes listed CITIC Pacific Ltd.
But for the group's domestic operations, CITIC Industrial Bank is the main contributor, accounting for net profits of about 1.0 billion yuan last year, up 20 percent over 1994.
Profits from the bank were likely to climb another 20 percent this year, despite the impact on interest income from two cuts in interest rates this year, Chang said.
"We have a good base of corporate clients," said Chang.
He added that this gave the bank a reliable source of low-cost call-money deposits from major companies.
Chang said the bank had also been able to hold the line on bad debts -- a key problem for many of China's banks -- though no figure was given.
"We are a bit more conservative than some of the other banks so we've had fewer bad loans," he said.
The group expected to earn more than 100 million yuan this year from its securities operations, though commodities trading would be break-even at best, the executive said.
CITIC still has diversified domestic interests ranging from power projects and telecommunications to automotive production and real estate.
Finance probably acounts for more than 70 percent of domestic profits at the moment, largely because of poor results from several industrial investments while other more promising projects are still in their early stages.
But Chang said reforms that had created so-called joint stock companies probably would spur the company's development in the financial sector, as more companies would seek loans on commercial terms rather than rely on state funding.
Chang also said the company wanted to expand its financial operations to include property insurance. It was seeking to form a joint venture with other domestic partners though this project still required regulatory approval.
