China's foreign debts reached $109.5 billion at the end of June but the governor of the central bank said the country was confident of paying its bills.
Governor of the People's Bank of China Dai Xianglong said the nation's foreign exchange reserves of about $96 billion -- among the biggest in the world -- were comfortable, but not excessive.
"We are very prudent in our borrowing," he said, adding that the level of debt measured against exports -- or the debt service ratio -- was well within international warning levels.
"On the whole the repayment situation is good," Dai told Reuters in an interview.
"It is hard to say exactly where the debt level will be next year, but every year an additional $10 billion is possible," he said.
He said $10 billion had been the average annual addition to the debt level over the past five years.
"For a country of China's size, (the level of foreign exchange reserves) is not a big sum," he said. "We can only say it is comfortable."
Most of Beijing's debt was long term, but China needed reserves sufficient to maintain repayments as well as to finance four months' worth of imports, he said.
Beijing also had new needs for foreign currency following the recent move to make the renminbi -- China's currency -- convertible on the current account.
He described China's repayment status as good, although he conceded there were repayment problems with enterprises under the direction of local governments.
"There are some local government-run enterprises that are overdue," he said.
But Dai also said foreign banks had a responsibility to ensure that credit went to deserving enterprises.
"Foreign creditors of Chinese enterprises must be selective in their lending," he said.
The central banker said he expected the renminbi to remain stable though he saw upward pressure on the Chinese currency, partly due to an expected trade surplus of more than $10 billion this year.
That would be down from the $16.7 billion surplus China recorded last year and much better than initial forecasts for 1996.
Economists say faster payments of export tax rebates have encouraged many companies to turn to the export market, thereby helping the trade picture.
The renminbi currently trades at about 8.3 to one dollar.
