China could list more railway companies and is studying a plan to create a fund to boost foreign investment in the sector, a railway official said on Monday.
The moves would be aimed at bringing in cash to help modernise the nation's huge rail system and fend off competition from planes and buses, Ministry of Railways senior engineer Zhang Yanzhao said.
China's first railway stock offer -- the Guangshen Railway Co Ltd -- was being watched for its performance as a possible model for future offerings, Zhang told Reuters in an interview.
"If Guangshen is seen as successful, we could use the same method again," said Zhang, assistant director-general of the department for cooperation with foreign countries.
The Guangshen Railway links Guangzhou -- capital of fast growing Guangdong province -- with Shenzhen, which borders Hong Kong.
In May, the company's shares were listed in Hong Kong and in New York as American Depositary Receipts.  
The offer was only a modest success, managing to hold just above its offer price. The Hong Kong shares were now trading at HK$2.925 ($0.38) each compared with an offer price of HK$2.91.
"Any operations listed in the future would have to be making money and would probably be along the east coast," Zhang said.
The key was corporatising the regional railway bureaus under the ministry's supervision. So far, only Guangzhou and Dalian in the northeast have taken this step.
Another form of financing under study is the creation of a fund that could offer fixed income to foreign investors.
"This is still far off," Zhang said without giving details.
The railways have long been the backbone of China's transport sector, but are now facing new competitive pressure for both freight and passenger markets.
Guangshen Railway had to cut ticket prices as of November to compete with bus traffic. The move was expected to hurt revenue and has already pressured the company's share price.
China's railways carried 448 million passengers in the first half of the year, down 14 percent from a year ago, according to official media reports.  
Zhang said that overall China's railways were profitable, although some routes were losing money. And overall, profits were not keeping up with past performances.
"As of last year, we have not been doing as well," he said without giving any figures.
Overstaffing was a key problem because the railway system has 3.3 million workers on its payrolls. But shedding jobs requires tough political decisions because unemployment is seen as a source of potential social unrest.
Government control over rail rates is also a problem. The ministry would like to raise rates but has little room to do so.
"This is a sensitive area," said Zhang.
The ministry is trying to speed up its trains, increase capacity and provide more comfortable passenger cars. It plans to expand electrified rail service to 28 percent of its capacity by 2000 from 19 percent now.
New plans for electric locomotive production are under discussion, and Switzerland's ABB AG and Germany's Siemens AG are among the top contenders.
Discussions are under way with Canada's Bombardier for joint production of modern passenger cars, and plans are moving ahead for a computerised, nationwide ticketing service.  
"If we don't compete we will lose market share," said Zhang.
(US$1 = HK$7.73)
