China has vowed to wind up the lengthy probe of the disgraced former boss of Beijing, saying the case had seriously damaged the Communist Party in the nation's capital.
Beijing party chief Chen Xitong stepped down in April last year, only weeks after his protege and vice-mayor Wang Baosen was targeted in a probe of economic crimes and committed suicide.
"The cases of Chen and Wang absolutely will not just fade away," the Outlook magazine quoted Beijing's current party chief, Wei Jianxing, as saying.
"These cases have had a very bad effect on municipal affairs.. and have destroyed a number of comrades in the party," it quoted Wei -- the Communist Party's top graft fighter -- as saying.
The weekly magazine, published by the official Xinhua news agency, carried the remarks in its latest edition, seen in Beijing on Wednesday.
The 66-year-old Chen has been out of the public eye since his fall from grace, becoming the most prominent victim of a campaign against corruption.
He was deprived of his seat on the party's powerful Politburo and was officially said to be under investigation for "serious mistakes".
Unpublished party documents say that Chen, who ran Beijing for 12 years, first as mayor and then as party chief, had abused his office by amassing $24 million in unauthorised funds and lavishing favours on friends, associates and a long-time mistress.
Vice-mayor Wang was found to have used his position to obtain 116 houses illegally and built himself a villa on the outskirts of the city. He also masterminded a $37 million embezzlement and graft scam, officials have said.
The inability of investigators to announce a conclusion to their investigation had triggered much speculation, particularly in the case of Chen who was said to be refusing to cooperate and was threatening to implicate others.
It also contrasted sharply with the speedy trial and sentencing last week of dissident Wang Dan, who was jailed for 11 years on subversion charges after less than four hours in a Beijing courtroom.
The magazine also said that 22 people had been linked to the probe of the late vice-mayor, including Zhou Beifang, the former chairman of Hong Kong listed affiliates of a major Chinese steel company, and Chen Xitong's secretary, Chen Jian.
Earlier this month, prosecutors filed corruption charges against 30 people, including Zhou, who was detained in February last year.
The magazine also said that a former senior member of the Beijing city assembly, Tie Ying, had been arrested and expelled from the party earlier this year for accepting a large bribe from a Hong Kong businessman. It did not give further details.
The city government had been virtually paralysed since the disgrace of Chen and Wang, Chinese sources have said.
The campaign to clean up the Beijing administration was widely believed to have been a factor in the departure last week of Li Qiyan as mayor.
Corruption was virtually eliminated in the years after the communists came to power in 1949, but has staged a comeback along with economic reforms in the past 17 years.
Communist Party chief and state president Jiang Zemin has declared war on corruption, warning that the scourge was a virus that threatened the party.
Courts frequently impose the death penalty in major corruption cases.
