China gave U.S. President Bill Clinton a signal on Sunday that the election had not cleared away nagging trade disputes, saying it planned tit-for-tat curbs on American imports.
Beijing said it would suspend temporarily its imports of some U.S. textiles, farm goods and alcoholic drinks in retaliation for Washington's imposition of punitive charges on American purchases of Chinese textiles.
The announcement came only days after Clinton's re-election triumph and ahead of a planned visit to Beijing this month by U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher.
Sino-U.S. relations have been strained over the last year by a range of issues from Taiwan to arms proliferation to trade and human rights.
China and the U.S. have said they saw an improvement in relations since the two sides narrowly averted a trade war over copyright piracy and exchanged diplomatic fire over Beijing's political rival, Taiwan, earlier this year.
Beijing said last week that it saw Clinton's re-election as a good opportunity for better ties in a "somewhat improved atmosphere".
The temporary import ban, which would take effect on December 10, was in retaliation for what China called severe violations by the U.S. of a bilateral textile accord.
"The decision was made in response to the U.S. unilateral cut of import quotas of Chinese textiles, which severely violated the bilateral textile agreement," the official Xinhua news agency said.
In September, Washington announced punitive charges against 1996 import quotas for Chinese textile goods, accusing China of using transshipments to avoid U.S. quota restrictions.
The action -- which was expected to cost China about $19 million -- marked the first time Washington had imposed so-called triple charges against repeated violations of a bilateral textile accord.
The U.S. move was made without full consultation and clear supporting evidence, Xinhua said.
Beijing accused Washington of imposing a series of barriers that had seriously affected Chinese textile export to the U.S. as well as China's ability to pay for American imports.
China said it had urged the U.S. to withdraw the penalties but its pleas had been ignored, leaving it no choice but to take action.
China's import suspension would also apply to U.S. fruits and animal husbandry products, though there was no indication of which specific items would be barred within the broad product categories.
The Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation and the General Administration of Customs would have a detailed list ready before December 10, according to Xinhua.
China also said it opposed any attempt to impose the will of one side upon others in trade matters, and called on the U.S. to avoid such measures in future.
"Once again, we wish to urge the United States to handle trade disputes in the spirit of advancing bilateral trade, and refrain from taking any actions harmful to bilateral trade in the future," it said.
