European Commission Vice President Sir Leon Brittan suggested on Thursday that China might soon see progress on its plan to join the World Trade Organisation but Beijing played down chances of a breakthrough.
Brittan said he might press the United States to move forward on China's drive to join the WTO if Beijing would give an assurance that it supported the European position.
"I will certainly take up the matter with the Americans with extreme urgency ... urging them that the time has come to adopt the approach that Europe has pioneered," he told a business conference in the Chinese capital.
"I hope even before the end of this visit to be able to announce some specific action" in advancing the process, he said.
Europe has maintained that it would be flexible on requirements for China's full implementation of WTO rules. But Beijing had to make clear its commitment to full compliance and show progress on granting access to its domestic markets.
China's Minister of Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation Wu Yi on Thursday appeared to be unconvinced that the United States, which has been a key hurdle to Beijing's drive to join the global trade organisation, was ready to change its stance.
"Their intentions are kind-hearted," said Wu in a reference to the European effort. "But the question of China's accession to the World Trade Organisation is not entirely decided by the European Union," she told reporters at the same business conference.
Beijing has been pushing to join the WTO under the more lenient terms of developing nation status but Washington has insisted that China's economy is too big for such treatment.
Brittan, who is leading a delegation of 30 European business leaders hoping to tap into the Chinese market, said he would meet senior Chinese officials, including Vice Premier Zhu Rongji and foreign trade minister Wu.
Brittan made it clear that a reaffirmation of Chinese acceptance of the European position would be enough for him to try to take his case to the United States.
"The U.S. was erecting very high hurdles to be surmounted," he said of the American position.
But he said the end of the U.S. presidential election campaign could be an opportunity for making progress in the negotiations.
"Recent stirrings in the media...suggest that the U.S. is perhaps readier now than over the past two years to heed European calls for decisive engagement on this negotiation," Brittan said.
Brittan praised China for making strides in strengthening intellectual property rights though he said more market access was needed.
He also warned that Europe would not be discriminated against in the Chinese market, and he singled out bilateral shipping agreements as an area of concern.
"Europe cannot accept unequal treatment and will not be discriminated against," he said.
On Wednesday, Chinese leaders denounced Beijing's exclusion from the WTO as unjust, saying the world's largest developing nation had made great strides in opening its markets to trade and investment.
Beijing also lashed out on Thursday at European Union investigations into Chinese textile exports, hinting at retaliatory measures if the probes led to anti-dumping measures.
