China said on Sunday the United States was trying to contain it and that Washington needed to shift policies to improve ties.
In an attack aimed just days before the arrival of U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher, China also accused the United States of being "self-righteous" and "alientating" in its foreign policy.
"Only when the United States drops the idea of (containing China), removes ideological bias against China and stops basing its foreign policies purely on its own economic interests can we expect significant progress in bilateral ties," said the Business Weekly.
Contrary to Washington's stated policy of maintaining contact with China, the United States was employing a strategy of containment based on a security defence chain linking South Korea, Japan, the Philippines and Thailand, said the newspaper, published by the official China Daily.
The newspaper was quoting Chen Bingcai, an economist at a think-tank linked to the State Planning Commission.
The U.S. secretary of state is scheduled to arrive in China on Tuesay in the first senior-level contact between the two nations since the re-election of U.S. President Bill Clinton.
It is part of an effort aimed at repairing relations strained by a series of disputes ranging from Taiwan to human rights to trade and arms proliferation.
The most serious damage to ties was inflicted when China held war games and unarmed missile tests off Taiwan early this year, prompting the U.S. to send two aircraft carrier groups near the island in a show of force.
Beijing has accused the U.S. in the past of pursuing a goal of containment, often linking Washington's policies to what it sees as a revival of Japanese militarism.
The newspaper also made the same policy connection, saying that although there had been fewer conflicts with Japan of late, Tokyo still needed to abandon this path.
China and Japan have been at loggerheads most recently over disputed East China Sea islands known in Chinese as the Diaoyus and in Japanese as the Senkakus.
An expanded U.S.-Japan security pact signed this year was in fact a cover for a resurgence of Japanese militarism, according to the newspaper.
Diplomats in Beijing said this was a theme heard most frequently from China's armed forces.
The newspaper quoted Chen as saying the United States, relying on its economic and military might, was becoming increasingly high handed in international affairs -- "and its own foreign policy has become extremely self-righteous and alienating".
Without a policy shift, the United States could be expected to continue blocking China's long-stalled entry into the World Trade Organisation and further turbulence was likely in trade and economic relations.
The newspaper said the U.S. needed to take into account cultural diferences in handling a range of disputes from the World Trade Organisation to human rights.
