China has sent mixed signals to the United States before the visit by Secretary of State Warren Christopher, combining toughness with conciliation on a range of issues that have tangled Sino-American ties.
But diplomats said on Monday the highest level visit by a U.S. official in two years is unlikely to stumble over any of the key hurdles in its path as the two sides focus on repairing past damage.
"Both sides seem to be eager to put the relationship back on track," said a Beijing-based diplomat. "The relationship is just too important."
China and the United States have seen ties strained by a series of disputes, including human rights, arms proliferation, Taiwan and trade.
Christopher's visit is likely to be the first in a series of top contacts in the months ahead aimed at keeping those conflicts from boiling over.
Clinton will confer with President Jiang Zemin in Manila on the sidelines of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) summit this month and plans are under discussion for an exchange of visits between the two leaders over 1997 and possibly 1998.
Vice-President Al Gore may also visit China in the first half of next year.
Both sides' eagerness to get their relationship moving forward again has still left plenty of room to manoeuvre.
"China has sent mixed signals to create an atmosphere of uncertainty," said another Beijing-based diplomat. "That should put some pressure on the U.S. for some concessions."
A key area of disagreement has been human rights where Beijing has publicly thumbed its nose at Washington by turning down the appeal of dissident Wang Dan and upholding his 11-year sentence for subversion.
But Beijing has also released dissident Chen Ziming, one of the so-called "black hands" behind the 1989 student movement for democracy. It made its move just as President Bill Clinton won re-election in what was widely seen as a gesture of goodwill.
Human rights marred Christopher's last visit in 1994. Leading dissident Wei Jingsheng was detained after meeting Assistant Secretary of State John Shattuck, the top U.S. policy maker on human rights.
Shattuck will accompany Christopher on this visit but there are no plans to meet pro-democracy activists this time.
China has tried to keep the United States off balance with other seemingly conflicting policy statements. It lashed out at Washington on Sunday, saying it was trying to contain Beijing by forming a defence chain linking other Asian states, notably Japan.
It also wagged a finger at the United States for blocking China's entry into the World Trade Organisation and called U.S. policy "self-righteous" and "alienating".
And on Monday, Beijing said it supported the candidacy of United Nations Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali for a second term, a move publicly opposed by Washington.
These followed largely upbeat statements after Clinton's re-election, suggesting that Beijing was willing to work with the U.S. administration.
Diplomats said that Taiwan would be raised in Christopher's discussions with Chinese leaders, although it would not be the burning issue it was earlier this year. In March, China conducted war games off the island's coast and Washington sent warships there in a show of force.
The United States was also expected to bring up the return of Hong Kong to Chinese rule in mid-1997, making its case that a smooth transfer of power in the British colony was in the interests of all parties concerned.
