The United States would consider some form of peaceful nuclear cooperation with China even before a previously signed accord is fully implemented, U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher said on Wednesday.
"As we move forward on nuclear non-proliferation, the U.S. is prepared to consider, as consistent with U.S. laws, further steps in the area of peaceful nuclear cooperation even in advance of our full implementation of the 1985 agreement," Christopher told a news conference in Beijing.
Christopher did not specify what types of cooperation might go ahead before implementation of the agreement or give any timetable.
"If they (the Chinese) are making progress towards putting the 1985 agreement into effect, we are prepared to consider other things," Christopher said.
Christopher also said the two sides had agreed to establish a regular dialogue on arms control and non-proliferation issues.
"I made clear our strong concern about (China's) nuclear cooperation with Iran," Christopher said.
China pledged in May not to provide assistance to any unsafeguarded nuclear facilities.
The United States has held up the full implementation of the 1985 agreement on peaceful nuclear cooperation because of concerns over Beijing's nuclear sales, although the two sides have recently begun talks aimed at allowing the accord to proceed.
Before the 1985 agreement can be implemented, the U.S. president has to certify to Congress that China is not transferring nuclear technology to countries that have nuclear facilities without safeguards.
China is eager to buy billions of dollars worth of nuclear power reactors from U.S. firms.
Christopher arrived on Tuesday for a three-day visit that included meetings with Chinese President Jiang Zemin and Premier Li Peng.
Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Cui Tiankai later told reporters the Sino-U.S. agreement on peaceful use of nuclear technology was signed 11 years ago.
"We believe it is high time to put this agreement in practice," Cui told reporters.
He said if the U.S. moved ahead with providing nuclear technology to China, U.S. companies would benefit.
"The China market is very big," Cui said.
Asked to comment on the agreement on proliferation, Cui said: "All I can say is the two sides will meet every year and hold a dialogue... to discuss comprehensive issues about global security and non-proliferation."
