China said on Thursday the highest-level U.S. visit in two years had produced results and the task now was to push Sino-American ties forward.
Beijing made the upbeat assessment as U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher wound up a three-day visit by urging China to seize an historic opportunity to build a new era of cooperation.
"We believe this visit has produced results," Foreign Ministry spokesman Cui Tiankai told reporters.
"Both sides believe that Sino-U.S. relations have improved in the last few months," he said. "Both sides believe it is necessary to maintain and develop this improving trend."
Christopher met Chinese President Jiang Zemin and Premier Li Peng and held lengthy discussions with Foreign Minister Qian Qichen during the visit.
One significant gain for Beijing was Washington's willingness to consider cooperation in nuclear technology despite lingering concerns over possible re-exports.
The United States and China signed an accord in 1985 for cooperation on the peaceful use of nuclear technology. But before the accord can be fully implemented the U.S. president must certify to Congress that Beijing is not providing nuclear assistance to states with unsafeguarded facilities.
Concerns about assistance to countries such as Iran and Pakistan have long blocked China's access to the technology it wants to spur its nuclear power industry.
For its part, China agreed to regular meetings on arms proliferation, though Beijing made clear that as far as it was concerned, the main such issue is U.S. arms sales to Taiwan.
"This is the most important arms proliferation issue," Cui told reporters.
China views Taiwan as a renegade province and it used Christopher's visit to make the point it expects to see an eventual end to American arms sales to the island.
Washington insists these are two separate issues and it will continue to sell defensive weapons to Taiwan.
The foreign ministry spokesman also pointed to results on trade issues, particularly a broad agreement that China should join the World Trade Organisation as soon as possible.
But the two sides have different views over how that can be achieved. Beijing wants admission under the more favourable terms of a developing country while Washington insists the Chinese economy is too big for such treatment.
Cui played down other areas of disagreement -- such as human rights -- saying there were major differences between the two sides but these should not become obstacles to improving ties.
More high-level contacts were agreed on, though an announcement on summits was deferred, apparently until U.S. President Bill Clinton meets the Chinese president in Manila on Sunday.
Those talks could touch on possible dates for an exchange of visits by the two leaders.
