China on Thursday tried to play down friction with the United States over a rising trade gap and called on the U.S. to end curbs on technology exports to put trade back in balance.
"The two sides should avoid taking actions that do not help the expansion of trade," said a spokesman of the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation.
"These are two of the biggest markets in the world," he said. "They should be complementary."
The United States said on Wednesday its trade deficit with China climbed to nearly $29 billion in the first nine months of the year, from $25 billion in the same period last year.
The trade gap, already the second largest for the U.S. after its deficit with Japan, was seen reaching $40 billion by the end of the year, up from $34 billion in 1995.
American economists said the mounting deficit was likely to create new frictions between the two countries.
U.S. Commerce Secretary Mickey Kantor said the growth in the deficit with China had slowed, but he called on Beijing to live up to its international trade obligations.
A group of influential U.S. senators, in a letter to President Bill Clinton, questioned Beijing's trade practices and said China should not be allowed to join the World Trade Organisation on special terms because it would harm American economic interests.
Beijing has been seeking to join the global trade body on favourable terms given to developing nations, but Washington has insisted that China's economy was too big for this treatment.
The Chinese Trade Ministry spokesman said Washington's policy curbs on U.S. exports were part of the bilateral trade problem. "There are policy rulings that are holding back U.S. exports," he said. "Where there are limits on technology exports, this is a lost export opportunity for the United States."
The U.S. appeared to be moving to address this matter.
On Wednesday, U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher said Washington was considering allowing technical cooperation in peaceful uses of nuclear technology despite concerns about safeguards over re-exports.
Christopher, after meeting with Chinese leaders in Beijing, said the U.S. was looking at taking steps that eventually could allow American companies to sell their technology to China.
A Chinese economist suggested some of the criticism over trade was unfairly directed at China as U.S. imports were mainly labour intensive products that were not manufactured in the United States.
"If the U.S. does not buy these products from China it will buy them elsewhere," said Wang Jian, an economist with the State Planning Commission. "These are goods produced by developing countries."
But the economist conceded that bilateral trade problems could spill over into broader trade issues.
"The U.S. already is the main obstacle to China's plan to join the World Trade Organisation," he said, adding that renewed Sino-U.S. trade friction could further complicate the issue.
