Russia will push to expand economic ties with China at a top level meeting in Moscow next month as old political hostilities fade in the background, a senior Russian diplomat said on Friday.
"The big task in bilateral relations is to boost economic cooperation to the level of political cooperation," said Russian Ambassador Igor Rogachev.
Chinese Premier Li Peng and Russian Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin will meet in Moscow to map out practical economic steps in a relationship described by the two sides as a strategic partnership.
The two former rivals for the leadership of the world communist movement have not seen such smooth relations since 1949 -- when the Chinese communists proclaimed the birth of the People's Republic of China, according to the Russian diplomat.
"Relations have never been on such a healthy and rational basis," said Rogachev, one of Russia's top China experts.
The two sides would now push to deliver oil, natural gas and electricity from Siberia to China while Russia wanted a role in China's nuclear power development, he told reporters.
Rogachev said Russia was hoping to see other neighbouring countries participate in the projects, though he gave no indication of how likely that was or what form it might take.
China and Russia have already proposed an oil and natural gas pipeline linking Siberia to China but financing is certain to be a key hurdle for the huge project.
"I don't expect an agreement on these issues at the (December) meeting but perhaps we'll be ready by the spring," he said.
That is when China's President Jiang Zemin travels to Moscow for a summit with Russian President Boris Yeltsin, a meeting arranged during the visit to China this week of Russian Foreign Minister Yevgeny Primakov.
China and Russia are expected to sign another accord soon, this one on troop reductions along their 4,300 km (2,580 mile) border, the official Xinhua news agency has said.
Rogachev said Russia was eager to reduce the high cost of stationing troops along the lengthy border, particularly when the strains of the 1960s Sino-Soviet split were so far behind them.
"We don't think that China creates a threat for our country and they (China's leaders) don't see Russia as an enemy," Rogachev said.
During Yeltsin's April visit to China the two nations -- along with the three former soviet states of Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan -- signed a treaty agreeing to inform each other of military exercises along the border and not to attack each other.
However, China and Russia been unable to reach agreement on one area of cooperation -- further deliveries of Russia's Sukhoi Su-27 interceptors.
China's armed forces have already put into service a first group of the planes but talks for further sales have long been stalled over payment and technology transfer issues.
"Talks are going on," Rogachev told reporters. "There will be more talks in future."
