China gave new hints on Monday that its three-year austerity programme was over, pronouncing its anti-inflation fight a success and saying the new task was ensuring stability as the nation prepared to recover Hong Kong.
China's top leaders, after winding up four days of meetings on the economy, also said a key goal next year was to speed reform of ailing state enterprises.
"After three years of strenuous efforts, our national economy has had sustained, rapid and healthy development. The main task of keeping inflation under control has been achieved," the official Economic Daily said in its report on the meeting.
"Next year is an important one in our history as it marks the recovery of Hong Kong and the year of the 15th Communist Party congress," the official People's Daily said in a commentary that also called for economic progress in the midst of stability.
China slapped tight controls on government spending in 1993 to keep mounting inflation in check.
The credit curbs are likely to bring inflation below 6.5 percent this year, compared with 14.8 percent last year and a Communist-era high of 21.7 percent in 1994.
The fall in inflation has allowed China to cut interest rates twice this year.
Many economists have been expecting a further easing of monetary policies in the coming months as China is expecting a smooth handover of Hong Kong and social stability ahead of the key policy meeting of the Communist Party.
The British colony reverts to Chinese rule on July 1, 1997 and political planners in Beijing have been eager to ensure that there are no social or economic dislocations in the territory or on the China mainland to mar the transfer of power.
The party congress, scheduled for the second half of next year, is widely expected to result in an infusion of cash into the economy to bolster the standing of the current leadership as party personnel matters come up for discussion.
Merchant bank Kleinwort Benson recently forecast credit expansion of 20 to 25 percent next year, compared with 17 percent this year.
"Naturally there will be some easing (of monetary policy) next year," said Cheng Xiusheng, an economist with the Development Research Centre under the State Council, or cabinet.
He added that the monetary easing would be limited, and would not trigger a new round of inflation.
"The focus is relatively quick economic development under the premise of stability," he said.
Other economists agreed there would not be a return to higher inflation.
"If we have an adjustment, it will be a small one," said Zhang Zhuoyuan, director of the economics institute of the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences.
He added that reform of state-owned enterprises was still the key problem facing China's economic planners.
State-owned enterprises have been losing money and massive subsidies have been draining state resources.
Political leaders fear that cutting off these subsidies would lead to layoffs and social unrest though economists have said the strength of the economy gives planners a chance to tackle this problem now.
