China has captured the big prize in its recognition battle with rival Taiwan after South Africa announced plans to switch formal ties to Beijing.
But the lengthy transition of more than one year signals that much bargaining remains on the shape of future relations between the three governments, diplomats in Beijing said on Thursday.
"We...welcome (South African) President Nelson Mandela's positive statement concerning normalisation of relations between China and South Africa," Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Cui Tiankai told a news briefing.
"If South Africa can recognise reality at an earlier date it is in its own interests to do so," he said.
"This is in keeping with the basic interests of the peoples of the two countries," Cui said.
Mandela told reporters in Johannesburg on Wednesday that Pretoria would switch diplomatic recognition from Taipei to Beijing by the end of 1997.
Cui declined to comment on Pretoria's decision to switch only by the end of next year.
"South Africa must recognise there is only one China, recognise that Taiwan is a part of China and sever so-called diplomatic relations with Taiwan," Cui said.
"Taiwan is an inseparable part of China. The People's Republic of China government is the sole, legitimate government of all China," he said.
"This has been our longstanding stand. It is very clear... Our stand has not changed," the spokesman said.
South Africa is the biggest of just 30 states that recognise Taiwan's exiled Republic of China rather than the communist People's Republic on the mainland.
Taiwan and China have been separated since a civil war ended in 1949. China sees Taiwan as a rebel province not entitled to foreign ties while Taiwan insists its 21 million people should have a voice in international affairs.
"The South Africans have been the big fish for China," said a Beijing-based diplomat. "The others are just minnows."
But in most diplomatic divorces, the break is swift, and diplomats said South Africa was still trying to work out its future relationship with both sides.
"They are trying to gain maximum concessions out of the two sides," said a diplomat.
South Africa is probably looking for a package deal that includes investment and trade guarantees under a formal legal framework with Taiwan.
It is also hoping to limit damage.
Mandela, announcing the break wtih Taiwan, pointedly thanked the island for its economic support during his nation's transition from minority, white rule to democracy.
The announcement well ahead of formal recognition would also help South Africa preserve its consulate in the British colony of Hong Kong - which returns to Chinese rule on July 1, 1997.
South Africa had been hoping to maintain official relations with both sides, a goal that proved unrealistic.
Taiwan had also been looking to duplicate a framework with the Pacific states of Fiji, Vanuatu and Papua New Guinea which have formal relations with Beijing but have signed a "mutual recognition pact" with Taipei, diplomats said.
"These smaller states may get away with a format such as this but South Africa apparently was not in the same category," said a diplomat.
