China is preparing a lobbying campaign to join the World Trade Organisation (WTO) at the ministerial meeting in Singapore this month, officials said.
It will send a team led by Long Yongtu, assistant minister of Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation and an experienced trade negotiator, to the meetings that begin next Monday, Chinese officials said.
China, which will be an observer at the meetings, has waged a lengthy battle to join the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and its successor body governing global trade, the WTO.
It has pushed to gain entry on the favourable terms of a developing nation but Western countries, particularly the United States, have insisted its economy was too big for such preferential treatment.
"We will be there as an observer," said a Chinese trade official of the Singapore meeting. "That is all we will be doing."
BEIJING TO PRESS CASE
But foreign diplomats said China would continue to press its case, mainly outside the official meetings in bilateral talks with member countries.
"The real work will be in the corridors around the meeting," said a diplomat who monitors international trade issues.
"China wants support from as many countries as possible to put pressure on the United States," said another diplomat.
China views gaining entry to the WTO as a symbol of its growing prestige but it also is eyeing the benefits of fixed mechanisms for settling trade disputes.
Beijing has had numerous trade spats with its major trading partners -- from annual review by the United States of its Most Favoured Nation status to copyright protection for textiles and shoes.
By joining the global trade body, China could ensure that any penalties imposed on it conformed with WTO dispute settlement procedures. Diplomats said that could be of considerable value to Beijing as mounting exports increase the prospect of trade disputes.
Western diplomats familiar with the trade issue described China's current position on WTO as "woefully inadequate".
MOVING TOWARD COMPROMISE
But diplomats said Beijing was aware that it must put more on the table and there appeared to be some movement toward a compromise.
China's Foreign Minister Qian Qichen said last month at the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) forum in the Philippines that China expected to conclude talks with the United States on WTO in the first half of next year.
Chinese President Jiang Zemin has also offered to aim for an average 15 percent import duty by the year 2000 compared with 23 percent now.
More important to the United States is ensuring access to the big Chinese domestic market and the removal of a whole range of practices that are seen as discriminating against foreign firms.
Washington would like to see an end to unpublished restrictions on purchases of foreign made goods, changes in agricultural import practices and more relaxed requirements on producing components in China.
China says these restrictions are needed to protect infant domestic industries that are unable to compete with established foreign companies.
