Asia gave a cautious welcome on Friday to U.S. President Bill Clinton's appointments for the key posts of secretaries of state and defence, mixing public praise with some private misgivings.
U.N. Ambassador Madeleine Albright, tapped to become the first woman secretary of state, and Senator William Cohen, who would take up the defence post, were seen as able appointees, though both were perceived as short on Asian expertise.
Analysts said Asian nations that had been targets of U.S. pressure on human rights might also have cause for new concerns, particularly with the outspoken Albright in the top foreign policy job.
Clinton named his United Nations envoy and the Republican senator from Maine on Thursday as his choices for the Cabinet posts to succeed Warren Christopher and William Perry. Senate confirmation for both nominees was widely expected.
Japanese Prime Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto said he did not foresee any impact on U.S.-Japan relations.
"I do not expect any changes in U.S.-Japan ties and I hope we can work together to deepen our relations," he told reporters.
But government sources said both appointees were unfamilar with Japan and their counterparts in Tokyo would soon begin the task of getting acquainted with them.
China, which has seen an easing of its strains with the United States of late, said it welcomed Albright's appointment and looked forward to a continuation of improving ties.
"We congratulate Ms Albright on her nomination as secretary of state," a foreign ministry spokesman said.
"We hope that while she is secretary of state, China and the United States ... will grasp the opportunities and make mutual efforts to improve and develop Sino-U.S. ties."
Sino-U.S. relations had been buffeted over the past two years by disputes over Taiwan, arms proliferation, trade and human rights. Relations have improved markedly in recent months, most notably with a meeting between Clinton and Chinese President Jiang Zemin in the Philippines last month.
But Chinese specialists in U.S. policy issues said a lack of experience in Asian affairs would prove a handicap for the two new Cabinet members, though they expected this to be overcome.
They said that human rights issues, still a source of friction, had been put aside for the time being, and were unlikely to upset bilateral ties.
Burma could be one Asian state to have misgivings about the new post for Albright, particularly in the sphere of human rights, analysts said.
There was no official comment from the Burmese government but a Western diplomat in Rangoon said Albright's appointment would be viewed negatively as her past statements on human rights and women's issues have not been welcome.
The United States has also been critical on occasion of Indonesia's human rights record though Jakarta's reaction to Albright's appointment was upbeat. Indonesian Foreign Minister Ali Alatas described her as an able and experienced diplomat.
South Korea saw the new U.S. Cabinet appointees as likely to maintain pressure on rival North Korea as both are wary of the potential threat posed by Pyongyang.
"The U.S. policy of trying to guide North Korea to a soft landing and keeping the freeze on Pyongyang's nuclear programme will continue," a government official said.
"The new team is also likely to promote dialogue between South and North Korea," he added.
North Korea invaded the South in 1950 and the two sides remain technically at war. Hostilities ended in 1953 with an armistice, not a peace treaty.
Albright won an enthusiastic response from some quarters, such as in the Philippines where she was called an inspiration to women worldwide.
"I am glad that the United States showed the way," said Katrina Legarda, one of the country's prominent women lawyers.
"This development is so rare," she said.
