China should take advantage of easing inflation and switch its fund raising efforts to longer term bonds, an official newspaper said on Tuesday.
The Financial News, published by the central bank, said that the reduced interest rates meant that Beijing could lock in long-term funds at cheaper rates.
"Now that we are in a period of lower inflation, this is the time to shift to longer term maturities for government funds," the newspaper said.
China's retail price inflation rate slipped to 6.9 percent for the first seven months of the year, well below a target of 10 percent for the year and down sharply from the 14.8 percent for all of 1995.
That persuaded the central bank to cut bank interest rates once this year, and many analysts expect another rate reduction by the end of the year.
China also felt confident enough to eliminate a hefty subsidy on new bank deposits and government debt of more than three years as of April.
The subsidy, paid on top of the normal interest rate, was aimed at attracting investors during a period of high inflation.
The subsidy hit a peak of 13.24 percent in December of last year, paid in addition to interest of 12.24 for three-year bank deposits.
In 1995, China issued 151 billion yuan ($18.18 billion) in domestic treasury debt, representing 2.6 pct of its gross domestic product, according to the daily.
"The government had to raise interest rates on bonds and to give a subsidy on top of this. As a result, this increased the the cost of raising funds and the burden of repayment," the newspaper said.
In July, Beijing issued its first tranche of 10-year bonds. They paid annual interest of 11.83 percent but with no subsidy, making them a far cheaper way for the central government to raise funds.
"The advantage to the state is that it is simpler to manage," said Xu Hongyuan, an economist at the State Information Centre.
"From the investor's standpoint, the bonds are also quite attractive," he told Reuters.
The newspaper said in addition that China also had too much of its debt concentrated in three to five-year maturities, bunching up repayments and straining government finances unnecessarily.
"If we can rely on a certain amount of 10-year treasury bonds that will ease the problems," the newspaper said.
