China Tuesday announced a ban on poultry and poultry products from Missouri and Oklahoma, citing what it said was the outbreak of a deadly disease.
The ban, which took effect Monday, was aimed at preventing damage from the "very destructive" Newcastle disease, an official of the Ministry of Agriculture told Reuters.
Official news reports said the ban was slapped on poultry products from the two states because of five cases of the disease discovered between July and September.
The disease, known as viscerotropic velogenic Newcastle disease, or VVND, is deadly.
However, Phillip Holloway, representative in Hong Kong and China for the Oklahoma state agriculture department, said he had not heard of any recent cases of VVND in Oklahoma.
"It's a very, very dangerous disease -- the most feared of poultry diseases," he said. "The symptoms are like influenza, and once one bird gets the disease, all the poultry will die."
The poultry industries of Oklahoma and Missouri were far down on the list of top U.S. producers and exporters, Holloway said. "My estimate is that Oklahoma and Missouri account for less than 5 percent of U.S. poultry exports to China."
Arkansas is the country's biggest poultry producer and home of industry giant Tyson Foods Inc.
A source at Tyson's Hong Kong office said VVND was known to exist in China, but this could not be confirmed.
Beijing has also banned all U.S. poultry brought into the country either by mail or hand-carried by travelers, according to the Ministry of Agriculture official.
The last major outbreak of VVND in the United States occurred in California in the 1970s and led to the eradication of the state's entire poultry population, Holloway said.
The United States exports around $500 million of poultry and poultry products a year to China, its biggest market after Russia.
The Chinese quarantine official told Reuters that the action was unrelated to other trade disputes with the United States and there were no plans to delay implementation of the decision.
Beijing and Washington are at odds over textile imports, and that dispute has threatened to spill over into the farm sector. China had threatened to ban some U.S. farm goods -- as well as textiles and alcoholic drinks -- in retaliation for U.S. penalties on textiles purchased from China.
On Sunday, Beijing announced it was delaying for one month implementation of those curbs, which had been scheduled to take effect on Tuesday, because the two sides were planning to hold further talks on the issue.
In October, China announced a ban on imports of poultry from 10 U.S. states because of fears it carried a virus called highly pathogenic avian influenza. China and the United States held talks on the issue and the ban did not go into effect.
