China on Tuesday announced a ban on poultry and poultry products from two U.S. states affected by what it said was the outbreak of a deadly disease.
The ban is already in effect and covers poultry from the states of Missouri and Oklahoma, an official of the Ministry of Agriculture told Reuters by telephone.
It was aimed at preventing damage from the "very destructive" Newcastle disease, the ministry official said.
Official news reports said the ban was slapped on poultry products from the two states because of five cases of the disease discovered between July and September.
A U.S. embassy official in Beijing said he could not immediately confirm that the disease had broken out in the United States this year.
"That is what we are trying to confirm," said the diplomat, who asked not to be identified by name.
Beijing has also banned all U.S. poultry brought into the country either by mail or hand-carried by travellers, according to the Ministry of Agriculture official.
"Travellers are barred from bringing in any poultry goods from the United States," he said. "These products also cannot be brought into China through the mail."
An official of the State Bureau of Animal Plant and Quarantine said the ban went into effect on Monday.
The disease, known as viscerotropic velogenic Newcastle disease, or VVND, is deadly, Phillip Holloway, representative for Hong Kong and China for the Oklahoma state agriculture department, told Reuters on Tuesday.
"It's a very, very dangerous disease -- the most feared of poultry diseases," he said. "The symptoms are like influenza, and once one bird gets the disease, all the poultry will die."
But Holloway also said he had not heard of any recent cases of VVND in Oklahoma.
The last major outbreak of VVND in the United States occurred in California in the 1970s and led to the eradication of the state's entire poultry population, he said.
The Chinese quarantine official told Reuters that the action was unrelated to other trade disputes with the United States and there were no plans to delay implementation of the decision.
Beijing and Washington are at odds over textile imports, and that dispute has threatened to spill over into the farm sector.
China had threatened to ban some U.S. farm goods -- as well as textiles and alcoholic drinks -- in retaliation for U.S. penalties on textiles purchased from China.
On Sunday, Beijing announced it was delaying for one month implementation of those curbs, which had been scheduled to take effect on Tuesday, because the two sides were planning to hold further talks on the issue.
In October, China announced a ban on imports of poultry from 10 U.S. states because of fears it carried a virus called highly pathogenic avian influenza.
China and the United States held talks on the issue and the ban did not go into effect.
China is the second-biggest market in the world, after Russia, for U.S. poultry products.
Some 330,000 tonnes of U.S. poultry products -- worth a total of $445 million -- were exported to China through Hong Kong last year, according to the U.S. Poultry and Egg Export Council.
Every day 700 tonnes of U.S. chicken feet are transported across the border from Hong Kong into China, the council said.
