China on Tuesday announced a ban on poultry and poultry products from two U.S. states hit by an outbreak of a deadly disease.
The ban is already in effect and covers poultry from the states of Missouri and Oklahoma, an official of the Ministry of Agriculture told Reuters by telephone.
It was aimed at preventing damage from a "very destructive disease", the ministry official said.
The official said, however, that China had banned all U.S. poultry brought into the country either by mail or hand-carried by travellers.
"Travellers are barred from bringing in any poultry goods from the United States," he said. "These products also cannot be brought into China through the mail."
An official of the State Bureau of Animal Plant and Quarantine said the ban went into effect on Monday.
Official news reports said the ban was slapped on poultry products from the two states because of five cases of a deadly poultry flu discovered between July and September.
The quarantine official told Reuters that the action was unrelated to other trade disputes with the United States and there was no plan to delay implementation of the decision.
The virus in question, known as viscerotropic velogenic Newcastle disease, or VVND, is deadly, Phillip Holloway, representative in Hong Kong and China for the Oklahoma state agriculture department, told Reuters on Tuesday.
"It's a very, very dangerous disease -- the most feared of poultry diseases," he said. "The symptoms are like influenza, and once one bird gets the disease, all the poultry will die."
But Holloway said he had not heard of any recent cases of VVND in Oklahoma.
The last major outbreak of VVND in the United States occurred in California in the 1970s and led to the eradication of the state's entire poultry population, he said.
Beijing and Washington are also at odds over textile imports, and that dispute has threatened to spill over into the farm sector.
China had threatened to ban some U.S. farm goods -- as well as textiles and alcoholic drinks -- in retaliation for U.S. penalties on textiles purchased from China.
On Sunday, Beijing announced it was delaying for one month implementation of those restrictions, which had been scheduled to take effect on Tuesday, because the two sides were planning to hold further talks on the issue.
In October, China announced a ban on imports of poultry from 10 U.S. states because of fears the meat carried a virus called highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI).
China and the United States held talks averting the ban, worth nearly $500 million a year.
China is the second-biggest market in the world, after Russia, for U.S. poultry products.
U.S. poultry exports to China in 1995 totalled 330,000 tonnes transshipped through Hong Kong and were worth $445 million, according to the U.S. Poultry and Egg Export Council.
Every day 700 tonnes of U.S. chicken feet are transported across the border from Hong Kong into China, according to the council.
