Two years ago, China's second telephone network set out to challenge the powerful Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications (MPT) and bring competition into the country's a fast-growing market.
But the fledgling network has found it hard to tackle a seasoned competitor -- one that is also the market regulator.
"Are they (the MPT) supposed to be the referee or one of the athletes on the playing field?" asks Li Huifen, president of China United Telecommunications Corp, also known as Unicom.
The arrival of Unicom and the end of the MPT monopoly was initially hailed as a boost for China's long-suffering telephone subscribers, who often had to wait up to a year for a telephone line and endure indifferent service afterwards.
But Unicom has captured only a tiny slice of the market as its entrenched competitor has kept a tight grip on the telecommunications sector, using its regulatory clout to slow the upstart network's advance.
"They have delayed interconnections and won't give us telephone numbers for our customers," Li said in an interview. "We need a telecommunications law to give us a legal framework."
Unicom has 16 shareholders, but the key backers of the project were the ministries of electronics industry (MEI), power and railways.
MANUFACTURING MUSCLE
The MEI has manufacturing muscle with a corps of factories producing telecommunications equipment. But it feared the MPT's equipment-making capacity would eventually squeeze it out of the market unless it had its own captive customers.
The other key partners had private telecommunications networks with spare capacity, while the MPT's public network was heavily overcrowded.
The feud between the rival Chinese government camps was often bitter, sometimes ensnaring foreign companies. Firms that did business with the new network were threatened with blacklisting by the MPT, according to Western industry sources.
Those frictions have eased somewhat in recent months, but it still took an order from the State Council, or cabinet, for promised network interconnections to emerge.
China expects to have more than 60 million telephone lines installed by the end of this year -- adding a breathtaking 10 million in 1996 alone. The total is likely to top 100 million by the turn of the century, still only a small segment of the nation's 1.2 billion people.
MPT says it should not be considered a competitor to Unicom because it has a separate operating arm called China Telecom.
"Since 1993, we have separated policy making from business operations by creating China Telecom," said an MPT spokesman. "The MPT is not both regulating and competing," he said, blaming Unicom's slow progress on its own technical problems.
STRUGGLE TO BE IMPARTIAL
But China Telecom officials concede it is hard to say where one entity ends and the other begins. And even if they can draw the line cleanly, the MPT must struggle to remain impartial.
"They always say they are being fair," said Unicom's Li. "But China Telecom is their own child, and parents are always partial to their own children."
Li took up the Unicom reins in August, becoming the third president in the company's brief history. She was tapped from her job as deputy mayor of the big industrial city of Tianjin to put political clout behind the second network.
The company started with mobile telephone services, first in the big cities of Beijing, Shanghai, Tianjin and Guangzhou, and eventually expanded to 16 cities. It has made its greatest inroads in Shanghai where it has about 20,000 mobile phone customers, Li said.
"In 10 years we will have 10 percent of the fixed line market and 30 percent of the mobile phone market," Li said.
One clear success has been in bringing mobile telephone prices down. They now cost 7,000 to 10,000 yuan ($840 - $1,200) compared with 10,000 to 20,000 yuan before Unicom came along.
Li says Unicom is profitable on its operations, but that excludes heavy investments in building network infrastructure. Despite the cost of putting a network in place, Unicom has one advantage. Foreigners are not permitted to operate telecommunications networks in China, and many foreign firms give Unicom capital in return for a share of the income.
That will at least ease the growing pains for the infant network, analysts said.
