China's once strained ties with the United States have improved dramatically in recent months with a series of top level visits healing some of the old wounds.
But as the two nations move closer, the United States is sidestepping one of China's most sensitive figures -- Premier Li Peng -- who is still too closely linked to the 1989 crushing of pro-democracy demonstrations in Beijing's Tiananmen Square, diplomats said on Sunday.
They said that Li is one Chinese leader who does not fit into the agenda for a visit to Washington.
"It may be a bit unfair but he is the one leader everyone remembers for his role in the (1989) crackdown," said a senior foreign diplomat.
Last month U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher made his first visit to China in two years, setting the stage for the series of meetings between other high ranking officials of the two countries.
During Christopher's visit, the two sides reached an understanding that their relationship should not be side-tracked by any one issue. That meant contacts would proceed despite continued disagreements over a range of issues from human rights, to trade and China's political rivalry with Taiwan.
Chinese Minister of Defence Chi Haotian is now in the United States after twice delaying a visit -- both times due to tension over Taiwan. He met President Bill Clinton on Monday last week.
Clinton and Chinese President Jiang Zemin held talks at the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum in the Philippines last month, and an exchange of visits by the two leaders is planned over 1997 and 1998.
U.S. Vice President Al Gore is expected to visit China some time during the first half of next year.
But there is no talk yet of a return visit to the United States by Premier Li, Gore's counterpart in the Chinese government.
U.S. officials in Beijing played down the lack of an invitation, saying the timing of the Gore visit itself had not been set.
Other foreign analysts said an invitation would be made but there was little chance of a visit before a new premier takes office in 1998.
China is expected to sort out its leadership line-up at the Communist Party congress late next year and then formally install new government figures at the parliament meeting in March 1998.
"They (the Americans) seem to be waiting for the selection of the next premier," said another foreign diplomat.
Western leaders, including Americans, have been willing to meet Li in China. But for some of them, hosting him in their own country is another matter, diplomats said.
Li has been tarred with the decision to use military force to crush the pro-democracy protests in Beijing in 1989, though paramount leader Deng Xiaoping was the only man with sufficient clout to order in the army.
President Jiang was also elevated to his role as Communist Party chief because of his tough stance on dissent.
Li has not visited the United States, the United Kingdom or Australia since 1989. He has travelled to Germany, France and Canada since then, though he has been dogged by controversy on each trip.
