China has taken its cue from U.S. Federal Reserve chief Alan Greenspan and tried to talk its raging stock markets lower but some investors said Beijing regulators did not need to shout.
China's official People's Daily ran a front-page commentary on Monday calling on investors to behave rationally in investing in the market, warning that what goes up must come down.
The commentary, carried prominently in major financial newspapers as well, also reminded the investing public that the safest place to put its money was in the bank.
Many Chinese officials and stock market brokers noted similarities to Federal Reserve Chairman Greenspan's now famous remarks this month about "irrational exuberance" of U.S. markets.
Greenspan's remarks, which did not specifically mention stocks, were clear enough to send share markets around the globe into a steep, if brief, fall. Since then many investors have remained cautious.
"There were definite similarities in approach," said a stock market policy official who declined to be identified.
"They (regulators) are looking at the same objectives -- the stock markets were too high and they hoped the markets would move lower," he said.
A spokeswoman for the China Securities Regulatory Commission chuckled over the suggestion that Greenspan might have inspired Beijing's action.
"Our objective was to bring some stability to the market," she said without elaborating.
Whatever the objective, many brokers and investors were not entirely sympathetic with the result.
"The phrasing (of the commentary) was much too tough," said an angry broker in Shenzhen, home of one of the nation's two officially approved stock markets.
"This was over the top," he said.
The commentary called up images of Wall Street's 1929 crash while it lashed out at big investors for manipulating the market and blamed brokers for improperly extending overdrafts to finance stock purchases.
The state media also came under criticism for helping to pump up the market by urging investors to buy shares.
Last week, the bourses in Shanghai and Shenzhen in southern China slapped curbs on share movements, limiting them to a daily 10 percent in either direction.
Shenzhen's A share market for domestic investors fell the 10 percent limit on Monday, sliding 46.34 points to 417.2 while Shanghai's A share market lost 9.92 percent, or 115.37 points, to 1,047.68.
The B share indices, which track shares supposedly reserved for foreign investors, closely mirrored the A share falls.
Both Shenzhen and Shanghai had seen huge run-ups in share prices this year, with most of the gains made in recent months. Shenzhen had surged 360 percent from a trough to the peak this month, while Shanghai had climbed about 150 percent.
Some brokers were sympathetic to the plight of regulators.
"The market was clearly very speculative," said a Beijing-based broker. "I disagree with some people over how far ahead of itself the market actually was but there was bound to be a considerable pyschological impact from any action by the regulators."
Brokers said that part of the reason behind the steep rise was the lack of alternative investments.
Two interest rate cuts this year had played a key role in luring money into the stock market.
