The Stone Group, a Chinese high technology company, plans to inject assets into its Stone Electronic unit to boost trading in the Hong Kong-listed firm, a top group official said.
The asset injections could begin next year as the Hong Kong company recovers from its steep slide in profits in 1995, president Duan Yongji told Reuters.
"We want to expand our float," Duan said in an interview late on Tuesday.
"We don't have enough stock on the market. Many investors say 'you are not big enough'," he said, adding that more shares would be sold once the assets were injected into the listed vehicle.
The plan requires a sharp reduction in the price-to-earnings ratio of the company's stock -- now at about 23 -- to about 10.
Duan said a sharp rise in earnings expected this year and in 1997 would help to set the stage for the plan.
The Beijing-based Stone Group Corp listed shares in 1993 with a HK$300 million ($38 million) flotation for Stone Electronic Technology Ltd.
The group still has a controlling 57 percent stake in the Hong Kong company, which makes integrated word processors and printers and distributes a wide range of products, including computers as well as office and lighting equipment.
Stone Group now has 18 joint ventures and it plans to start placing some of those assets into the listed firm.
"We are preparing to inject some of the profitable companies into that vehicle," Duan said.
Stone Group probably will inject a large part of its 40 percent stake in a $60 million China-based joint venture with Matsushita of Japan to produce light fixtures. The plant has required heavy start-up costs but should be profitable next year, Duan said.
Stone Group also has a stake in a $1.6 billion semiconductor project with Mitsubishi Electric and Mitsui in China, although that will not begin production until late 1997 or early 1998.
Stone, one of the success stories of China's electronics industry, was started with a loan of 20,000 yuan ($2,400) in 1984.
"We used to compete with just the little guys," said Duan.
"That has changed dramatically in recent years," he said, adding that all major multi-nationals were now in the domestic market as China has relaxed its once-tight curbs on imports.
"Technology is also changing rapidly so we have to make use of our capital," the executive said. "We can't let it stand still."
Stone Electronic's profits slumped to HK$17 million in 1995 from HK$63.88 million in 1994. But earnings for the first half of this year were up 44 percent over the year-ago period to HK$10.22 million.
"I can't give a profit figure for all of this year but the full year growth will be better than first-half growth," Duan said, adding that 1997 should continue that trend.
Stone sees specialised electronic products for the banking system and tax collection as areas where it has major advantages over its competitors.
The parent company has also diversified into finance, setting up securities and futures trading operations and investing in a bank. Income from financial operations already has exceeded the company's electronics business. ($1= 8.3 yuan) ($1= 7.8 Hong Kong dollars)
