China said on Thursday it strongly opposed a visit to Jordan by Taiwan's foreign minister and accused its island rival of trying to disrupt Beijing's ties with other friendly states.
It also accused Taipei's leaders of lacking sincerity towards improving relations with Beijing.
"We deeply regret and express our strong dissatisfaction with Jordan and other states for allowing a visit by (Taiwan Foreign Minister) John Chang," said Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Shen Guofang.
"We are resolutely opposed to the development of government links or any other form of official contacts with Taiwan by any states that have diplomatic ties with our country," he told a news briefing.
Taiwan's foreign minister arrived in Jordan on Wednesday in a visit shrouded in secrecy.
Jordan has diplomatic relations with China but has strong commercial ties with Taiwan.
Chang gave an economics lecture at a northern Jordanian university, sources at the university said. Jordanian government officials declined to comment on the visit.
China has viewed Taiwan as a rebel province since the end of the Chinese civil war in 1949 and has not ruled out the use of force to recover the island.
It has tried to isolate Taiwan by insisting the island was not entitled to formal relations with foreign states.
Taiwanese media said Chang, who left Taiwan earlier this week, was travelling to Abu Dhabi and Jordan, en route to Italy.
The trip is one of four overseas damage-control missions planned by top Taiwan officials since South Africa, Taipei's largest ally, declared last month it would switch ties to Beijing by the end of next year.
"Taiwan authorities are trying to disrupt our friendly relations with other states," Shen said, repeating Beijing's frequent accusation that Taiwan was trying to create "two Chinas".
"Taiwan's leaders...lacked sincerity towards improving relations between the two sides," Shen said.
Taiwan's leaders had taken a negative attitude towards improving economic and trade ties with the mainland and this would not help improve relations, he said.
