A top Chinese defence official has stepped down in a reshuffle linked to China's string of satellite failures, political sources said on Friday.
General Ding Henggao has been replaced as Minister of the Commission of Science, Technology and Industry for National Defence (COSTIND), a key body charged with overseeing high technology projects related to defence.
Ding, 65, was succeeded at the helm of the ministerial level COSTIND by 61-year-old Cao Gangchuan, a lieutenant-general and deputy chief of general staff of the People's Liberation Army.
"I can confirm that (Ding) stepped down and the change was made in late November or early December," said an official of the Defence Ministry.
"I do not know the reason," he said.
Sources with close ties to the defence industry told Reuters that Ding had been at the centre of controversy, largely over satellite issues.
"This is partly a matter of age and partly a dispute over satellites," said a source.
China successfully launched a satellite in October but that followed a series of failures, the most recent of them last August when a Long March 3 rocket put a U.S.-built satellite into the wrong orbit.
Last February, a Long March 3B rocket exploded shortly after liftoff, killing at least six people and injuring 57 on the ground.
In January 1995, a Long March 2E blew up, killing a family of six on the ground and destroying the Apstar 2 satellite it was carrying.
"There have been bitter disputes over where the responsibility for the failures lies," said a source.
COSTIND is responsible for launches while China Aerospace Corporation is in charge of rockets and satellites.
The Soviet-trained Ding, who has a background in missiles and precision engineering, coordinated research and production of strategic missiles as well as satellite launches, according to an official biography.
Ding's departure probably coincided with a reshuffle that replaced the nation's air force and naval commanders, both of whom were also 65 years old.
Ding is the son-in-law of the late Marshal Nie Rongzhen, one of the veteran military leaders of China's communist revolution.
Nie Li, Ding's wife and daughter of Marshal Nie, stepped down from a senior post at COSTIND two years ago.
