China warned on Monday against reinforcing military alliances, saying Cold War ideology lived on.
In an apparent dig at the United States, it also hailed what it called a trend towards a multi-polar political and economic world order.
"The practice of reinforcing military alliances runs counter to the current tide of peace and development, and will have to arouse great concern among the people," Vice-Premier Qian Qichen was quoted by the official Xinhua news agency as saying.
"The Cold War has ended but confrontational 'Cold War thinking' still exists," said Qian, who is also foreign minister.
Qian did not name specific targets for Beijing's ire but the remarks closely followed a visit by Premier Li Peng to Russia, a trip that prompted China's official news media to trumpet the rise of a power centre to balance the United States.
Chinese political analysts have noted they shared Russian concerns over the planned expansion of the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation to admit Moscow's former Cold War allies in eastern Europe.
China has also vented its anger at closer U.S. military ties with Japan stemming from an agreement this year that enhanced security ties between the two countries.
Beijing has tried to strengthen its own links with the United States and other Western countries, but it is keen to see some check on Washington's power, diplomats said.
Qian said a key trend of the past year was the movement towards economic and political "multi-polarisation".
Relations between the world's big powers were undergoing major readjustments, marked by mutual reliance and restraint, which have brought about a complicated and changeable situation, he said.
This was underscored by widespread opposition to the Helms-Burton and D'Amato legislation put into effect by the United States with the aim of tightening economic sanctions against Cuba and Iran, he said.
The two laws had been strongly condemned and extensively boycotted, Qian said.
China sees these laws as U.S. interference in the affairs of other states, a sensitive subject for a country that has come under sharp criticism for its human right policies at home.
Qian said that over the last year, Beijing had moved to counter practices that interfered in its internal affairs, safeguarding the state's sovereignty, territorial integrity and national dignity.
Beijing was willing to work with the United States to improve ties, adding that relations had stabilised after a "period of turbulence" earlier this year.
Sino-U.S. relations were badly strained by Beijing's war games and missile tests near Taiwan in March.
Relations between Washington and Beijing were also marred by tensions over trade, human rights and arms proliferation although a series of meetings between senior officials helped to ease strains in recent months.
