China's central bank chief has said that inflation would be a modest seven percent this year and this showed the state's economic policies were working.
But Dai Xianglong, governor of the People's Bank of China, lashed out at companies that had taken advantage of tight money policies used to tackle inflation by lending money at excessively high rates.
"The appropriately tight monetary polices have achieved clear results which have been acknowledged both in China and abroad," Dai was quoted as saying in the Financial News on Monday.
"We can now control inflation to about seven percent for the full year," he said.
China's retail inflation stood at 6.9 percent year-on-year in the first seven months and at 5.9 percent in July alone.
Beijing has said it wanted to keep inflation within 10 percent for 1996, down from 14.8 percent last year and a communist-era high of 21.7 percent in 1994.
But the central bank chief had harsh words for companies that had taken advantage of the tough austerity programme put in place three years ago to deal with the worst days of inflation.
He did not name any of the offenders but he said that some "monopoly groups" and publicly listed companies were lending out money at excessively high rates.
Tsingtao Brewery, which has stock listed in Hong Kong as well as in Shanghai, has run afoul of regulatory authorities in the British colony in the past for lending out funds raised from its public offer.
A senior Chinese economist who asked not to be named said several big ministries were cash-rich and able to earn more than bank deposit rates by lending out their funds.
"The big offenders are some cash-rich ministries," said the economist. "They can earn 16-18 percent on their money."
That would compare with interest of 7.47 percent earned on one-year bank deposits.
Other economists have said that higher rates were available for even more speculative lending.
Dai gave no indication of whether any measures were being planned to address these problems, although he said that funds in the banking system were unevenly distributed.
He said that China had already taken steps to curb illegal money market trade and that it had taken steps to ensure that other unauthorised financial organisations did not act as commercial banks.
"There are many violations of financial regulations," Dai was quoted as saying. "There must be an expansion of supervision over the financial sector."
