China ushered in 1997, a year it has hailed as one of the most significant of the communist era for the impending recovery of Hong Kong, with a paean to senior leader Deng Xiaoping, the man who made it all possible.
China Central Television broadcast on Wednesday the first episode of a documentary lauding the 92-year-old political patriarch, a man whose pragmatic policies turned a backward Stalinist state into an economic powerhouse and helped regain capitalist Hong Kong from Britain.
The primetime programme, to be shown over 12 days, would set the tone for a crucial Communist Party congress due later this year, largely by defining Deng's legacy to the current party leadership, Chinese and Western political analysts said.
"This is an extremely important year for the Communist Party with the recovery of Hong Kong and the holding of the 15th party congress," a Western diplomat said.
"China's leaders are reminding people that Deng was instrumental in regaining Hong Kong, and they are also using him to define their own policies at the congress and in the post-Deng era."
Deng has not been seen in public in nearly three years. At his last appearance he looked frail and unsteady.
The documentary showed a vigorous leader, larger than life and portrayed against a background of golden clouds radiating across the sky.
He was seen inspecting factories while donning a hard hat, shaking hands with children and receiving gifts of poppies in Paris in the 1970s.
The main theme of the one-hour show was clearly reform, underlining China's commitment to its course of market-oriented economic change charted by Deng and continued under his chosen successor President Jiang Zemin.
But its use of adulatory tones -- opposed by Deng who abhorred the personality cult of revolutionary leader Mao Zedong -- suggested that the ageing party veteran had little or no control over the documentary's contents.
Speculation about Deng's health surfaces periodically and an unconfirmed report described him as lapsing briefly into unconsciousness this week.
Some Hong Kong newspaper reports said he had been admitted to a top military hospital but there were no unusual movements this week at the Beijing medical centre where senior officials are usually treated.
Deng had vowed to visit Hong Kong to witness the historic transfer of power at midnight on June 30 this year but a Beijing official believed to be close to the Deng family said recently this was unlikely.
On Wednesday, the People's Daily, the Communist Party newspaper, called on China's 1.2 billion people to uphold Deng's credo of pragmatism known as "socialism with Chinese characteristics".
In an article published earlier this week the newspaper described the television series on the life of the nation's paramount leader as one that "showed in their entirety the glorious achievements and greatness of the theories of comrade Deng Xiaoping."
The documentary had taken four years to complete and included interviews with more than 100 senior officials, according to official media.
Previews from the series showed Deng giving words of encouragement to party officials and reviewing China's military might -- interspersed with glimpses of sleek skyscrapers and modern factories, symbols of the material progress inspired by the party patriarch.
"This is very much linked to the party congress," said a Chinese academic. "It is setting the tone for those taking part in the party congress."
President and Communist Party chief Jiang narrated parts of the episode seen on television and was shown giving his assessment that Deng had made an important contribution to the building of a modern, socialist China.
Jiang is widely seen as the man who has the most to gain from the adulation for the paramount leader.
"This shows he (Jiang) has the mantle of Deng," said another Western diplomat.
"He is building up himself by building up Deng."
