China will avoid bold moves in tackling its ailing state enterprises as it focuses on stability ahead of this year's crucial Communist Party congress, analysts said on Monday.
They said policy makers would err on the side of caution in a year billed by Beijing as one of the most significant of the communist era.
"Reform of state enterprises is the nation's biggest economic problem but it is an extremely difficult one to solve," said economist Cheng Xiusheng of the Development Research Centre of the State Council, or cabinet.
"I would not expect any major breakthroughs this year."
As China sheds the vestiges of a centrally planned economy, it wants state-owned companies, which have grown fat under government nurturing, to be leaner and better able to compete in the marketplace.
About 75 percent of state firms are losing money. Losses surged to about 69 billion yuan ($8.3 billion) in the first 10 months of last year, a rise of 45 percent over the same period of 1995, officials have said.
Halting those losses would mean shedding much of the workforce and in some cases making use of bankruptcy laws to dissolve companies.
China's rulers have vowed to push ahead with reforms of the state sector but analysts are betting that the scale of any changes will be limited.
Analysts note that China has set a target of keeping urban unemployment around three percent this year, little changed from the official figure issued in the recent past.
"The problem is there is no social safety net," said a Western diplomat.
China has no real unemployment insurance system and retirement schemes cover only a fraction of the working public.
As most social welfare benefits stem from the employer, the loss of a job could have a huge impact on the individual.
On a wider scale it could mean social unrest.
"The Chinese realise where the problem lies," said the diplomat. "The trick is being able to make tough political decisions."
That is unlikely this year as China's leaders prepare for the party congress that will set policies over the medium term.
"No one wants to go into that meeting with the threat of social unrest," said another diplomat.
Beijing is also loath to take risks as it awaits the recovery of Hong Kong on July 1 after more than 150 years of British rule. It wants a smooth handover.
Some economists had hoped communist leaders would turn their attention to the deep-rooted problems of the state sector this year after Beijing effectively declared victory in its other major campaign -- the battle against inflation.
China wrestled inflation down to six percent last year from 14.8 percent in 1995 and a communist-era high of more than 21 percent in 1994, according to official data.
Economic leaders were confident enough inflation had been licked to allow state-set prices for postal rates and local telephone calls -- long held at subsidised levels -- to rise sharply last month.
But economists said that this year at least, Beijing would prefer to continue with some of its subsidies rather than pay the social cost of putting ailing companies out of business.
