Communist Party chief Jiang Zemin has put his personal stamp on the legacy of China's paramount leader Deng Xiaoping with a television paean aimed at portraying him as the 92-year-old patriarch's rightful heir, analysts said.
The primetime television series was also carefully crafted to limit the role of those who might challenge Jiang's claim to the Deng mantle or who might disagree with his version of the patriarch's role, they said on Monday.
"This was building up Deng to build up Jiang," said a Western diplomat who has long experience with China.
That view was widely shared by China analysts.
"Jiang wants to use the Deng legacy to build up his own public image," said another diplomat.
China Central Television spent four years on the series that traced Deng's personal long march from his birthplace in southwestern Sichuan province to the pinnacle of power.
In a breathless tone, it heaped praise on the veteran leader for his pragmatic policies that made his countrymen both proud and prosperous.
State television estimated 224 million people -- 28 percent of the 800 million people who have access to television -- watched the programme broadcast over 12 successive evenings.
Jiang, who is officially referred to as the "core" of the third generation of China's leadership, introduced the series and entered the final judgment on Deng's contribution to building a modern Chinese state.
"He is a worthy outstanding Marxist and a stalwart communist," Jiang said of the man whose reforms turned a backward Stalinist state into an economic powerhouse.
Deng has not been seen in public in nearly three years and his last appearance showed him looking frail and faltering.
The final episode of the television series showed Deng announcing his retirement from his last official post in 1989 when he stepped down from the party's powerful central military commission.
Seen strolling with Jiang at his side, Deng called on the party to rally round his anointed successor.
Analysts said much of the drama from an otherwise predictable series stemmed from what was omitted.
The series made no mention of Deng's previous anointed successor Zhao Ziyang, the man most closely linked with guiding China's reforms until he was dismissed in the power struggle that accompanied the crackdown on the pro-democracy movement in Beijing in 1989.
Viewers received only a brief glimpse of Zhao, who has been under house arrest since 1989, as he was shown signing the historic Sino-British accord of 1984 that returns Hong Kong to China this year.
The late Hu Yaobang, Deng's other heir apparent who fell from grace, was given a perfunctory mention while former President Yang Shangkun, who was dropped in 1993 amid fears he was building up his own faction to mount a leadership challenge, made only a brief appearance.
Deng's children were shown alongside the elderly leader, holding him steady as he walked on uncertain feet, speaking into his one good ear or buttoning his tunic. They had no opportunity to give their own assessment of the man who is patriarch of their family as well as the Communist Party.
While the series paid homage to Deng's 1992 tour of southern China's special economic zones, which he used to kick-start stalled reforms, viewers saw a sanitised version.
"A key part of the southern tour was Deng's anti-leftist theme," said a Chinese academic. "This made no mention of that."
Analysts said Jiang was placating the Communist Party's left wing as he prepares for the party congress scheduled for later this year, a pivotal meeting that will set the nation's political and economic course for the next five years.
"By holding tightly to the Deng legacy he is trying to demonstrate that he is the one to interpret Deng," said a China analyst. "And he is the one who will set the tone for the congress."
