A restructuring agreed between Channel Tunnel operator Eurotunnel SA /Plc and bank negotiators on its 69.6 billion francs of debt was a "robust" deal, French co-chairman Patrick Ponsolle said on Monday.
He told a news conference the restructuring was robust as it would eliminate a total 16 billion francs of debt by swapping eight billion of loans into equity and a further eight billion for equity notes.
The plan secured the company's future until 2003, when the London-Folkestone high-speed rail link would be built, he said.
"After 2003 we will see an explosion of revenues from the railways," Ponsolle said.
The restructuring meant the interest bill would be fixed at 5.2 percent or 3.21 billion francs for the seven-year period. That rate was much lower than market rates, the company said.
If there is a cashflow shortage to repay interest, it will be able to draw down on stabilisation notes, which are effectively a credit line, free of interest until January 2006.
The plan also pushed back the debt repayment periods by a significant period, Ponsolle said. The resettable bonds mature in 2050, the participating loan notes in 2040, the remaining junior debt in 2025 and stabilisation notes in 2026.
Eurotunnel has also negotiated the right to refinance all its debt after 2004, free of penalties, to benefit from any improvement in market conditions. Previously, that refinancing incurred heavy financial penalties.
The deal had been worked out using a wide range of scenarios and sought to preserve the company's future and independence, Ponsolle said. "It is the best compromise under the circumstances. The sacrifices for shareholders and banks are equal and equitable."
The two chief aims of the deal were "to preserve a clear majority for the shareholders and to ensure long-term financial stability," he said.
Although the company planned to pay a first dividend in around 10 years, if it performed very well it could make a payment at the date envisaged in the 1994 rights issue -- 2004.
Asked what would happen if shareholders rejected the deal, Ponsolle said, "I think we would go back to the choices at the starting point. The starting point was either we come to a friendly agreement or insolvency."
"I think, contrary to some, an insolvency could only be a catastrophe for the small shareholders."
Prices should rise "to a reasonable level" following the merger announcement last week of P&amp;O and Stena of their cross-Channel operations, Ponsolle said.
The merger news had come as a surprise to Eurotunnel, which had not expected such a move until later, perhaps in 1997, he said.
The earliest Eurotunnel could hold a shareholders' meeting to vote on the deal would be late March or early April, he said.
-- Paris newsroom +33 1 4221 5452 pnt
