Construction group Bouygues has emerged as the latest contender in the French telecommunications arena with its joint bid with Italy's STET to run the telephone network of rail operator SNCF
Bouygues follows the larger Cie Generale des Eaux, which last month announced blue chip partners for its Cegetel telecoms unit, and the state-owned RATP Paris Metro operator which set up a unit to exploit its 300 kilometres of track.
The stock market cheered Bouygues' alliance with STET and marked its shares up 4.62 percent to 510 francs on Friday.
The new entrants are seizing on the opportunity presented by the breakup of France Telecom's domestic monopoly from the start of 1998, under European Union competition rules.
Although both Bouygues and Generale des Eaux currently run mobile telephone businesses, their ambitions run higher. They want a major slice of the profitable long-distance call market and the high-value business networks.
Generale des Eaux chairman Jean-Marie Messier wooed analysts recently with bullish growth forecasts for the telecoms sector and said he expected Cegetel to contribute 15 percent of group sales and 25 percent of cashflow by 2003.
Which leaves Lyonnaise des Eaux of the three French major utilities and services company firmly wedded to pursuing communications rather than telecommunications.
"Our strategy is communications, not telecommunications," said a Lyonnaise executive.
Analyst Annick Santer at broker Ferri said, "Communications is not at all in the same league as telecommunications. It does not have the same scope but it can be profitable."
Communications, if it offers less spectacular potential, also holds less scope for risk, she added.
The group's communications interests, grouped around its Lyonnaise Communications unit and M6 television stake, had 1995 sales of 1.4 billion francs and contributed 69 million in net profit.
The profit came from its 34 percent stake in the Metropole Television M6 unit, which reported a first half net profit of 215 million francs, up 2.3 percent from a year ago.
But Lyonnaise Communications, which runs its cable television operations, made a 1995 loss of 45 million francs.
The cable business, with 400,000 subscribers, is close to breaking even this year and depends on getting a few thousand more customers, a source close to the company said.
Lyonnaise owns 70 percent of Lyonnaise Communications, with France Telecom holding 17 and US West with six percent.
Lyonnaise executives declined to give sales or cashflow forecasts for its communications business but said most of the investment had already been made and it was adding services to the existing infrastructure.
-- Paris newsroom +33 1 4221 5452 pnt/cct
