French aviation executives said on Tuesday they feared renewed turbulence with the United States over airline market access in France, with flagcarrier Air France caught up in a looming "air war".
The U.S. government wants France to sign a bilateral treaty which would grant more landing rights to American airlines, while Paris seeks a gradual market liberalisation.
A spokeswoman for the U.S. embassy in Paris told Reuters the U.S. authorities had not rejected the new winter schedule for state-owned Air France.
"However, Air France has requested increased services over last winter," she said.
"The Department of Transportation has extended the deadline to rule on Air France's request until October 27, thereby giving our government time to discuss the schedule with the French authorities."
That delay on approving Air France's schedule was seen as a strongarm measure to force Paris into agreeing a new aviation treaty.
"It's like placing a dagger at our throat," an aviation executive said. Air France's winter schedule was due to enter service on October 27.
Air France has requested an extra flight to San Francisco, two to Los Angeles and one to Chicago this winter, compared to the 1995 winter schedule. It wants to add extra cargo capacity from March to Miami and Chicago.
A second French executive said if the United States took unilateral measures, Paris would not hesitate to retaliate against U.S. airlines, as it did in March when U.S. Transportation Secretary Federico Pena rejected Air France's summer schedule.
Paris cut landing rights of six U.S. airlines before the junior transport ministers of both countries, meeting in Paris, agreed to open talks aimed at reaching a treaty to replace one which expired in 1992.
Without such a treaty, each route and landing rights have to be negotiated on a case-by-case basis, whereas Washington would like a global, market-driven solution.
Separately, Washington is withholding approval of a planned alliance between American Airlines and British Airways Plc until Britain agrees an "open skies" treaty with the United States.
