French President Jacques Chirac looked set on Wednesday to achieve his ambition of creating a national defence giant to rival huge U.S. conglomerates through the planned merger of Lagardere's Matra with Thomson- CSF.
The government announced on Wednesday it preferred a bid by missile-maker Lagardere Groupe for electronics firm Thomson SA over a rival one by civilian engineering group Alcatel Alsthom. Both offers have been referred to the independent Privatisation Commission.
The preference for Lagardere seems to vindicates the integration sought by Noel Forgeard, chairman of Lagardere's Matra unit, who has fought a highly-public campaign for Thomson, in order to win its Thomson-CSF defence arm.
The deal will "indisputably strengthen the missiles activity in France and particularly Europe," said Jean-Marc Baron, a partner specialising in defence at consultants KPMG Peat Marwick. "The merger wil create a critical mass," he added.
Matra specialises in air-to-air missiles with the Magic and Mica weapons, while Thomson-CSF has ground-to-air missiles including the Crotale NG (New Generation) and Starstreak very- short-range missile built with Shorts Brothers Plc, a unit of Canada's Bombardier.
The addition of Thomson-CSF reinforces a vital joint venture between Matra and British Aerospace Plc to create Matra BAe Dynamics, which Lagardere wants to be the pole for future European industrial concentration.
Besides the missile synergy, Baron pointed to the benefits of marrying Thomson-CSF's radar and communications expertise with Matra's space satellites, which will give Thomson access to a new market.
Lagardere has major space interests with its Matra Marconi Space (MMS) joint venture with GEC Plc of Britain and also wants to use this a platform for building a single European satellite giant, to make the most of scarce funds.
This vertical integration of detection, communications and weapons makes the future Thomson Matra a powerful "systems" player rather than a seller of separate products. Each of these segments has annual turnover of about $1-$2 billion, Baron said.
In the United States, the defence industry has quickly consolidated through $40 billion of mergers and acquisitions to create giants such as Lockheed Martin. Integration is seen as key, with firms such as Hughes, a unit of General Motors, not only building missiles and satellites but also operating the satellites.
European and U.S. defence firms have had to adapt to shrinking military spending since the end of the Cold War and soaring research and development costs. But Europe has lagged in that restructuring due to differing national interests.
With the aid of Matra's links with BAe and GEC and through overtures to Daimler-Benz Aerospace (Dasa), Forgeard wants to forge a European grouping which would have world class status in terms of turnover and product range.
Chirac launched the privatisation of Thomson SA in February as part of a restructuring of France's fragmented defence industry, widely seen by analysts as a vital step toward a badly needed consolidation of European capacity.
