A planned sale of French television maker Thomson Multimedia to South Korea's Daewoo Electronics for a symbolic one franc has sparked a political backlash against the government's privatisation plans.
The government wants to sell electronics group Thomson SA to the Lagardere conglomerate, which would sell the loss-making Thomson Multimedia to Daewoo while keeping Thomson-CSF, the defence electronics subsidiary.
The leader of the French Socialist Party, Lionel Jospin, told France 3 state-owned television on Sunday he was "shocked" by the Thomson privatisation.
"This was a public sector firm and concerned the national interest. It has been privatised for ideological reasons", he said.
"I was shocked by the method, which was despicable and perhaps even illegal as the 1986 (privatisation) law specifically called for the parliamentary privatisation committee to give a supporting opinion," he said.
Jacques Delors, former president of the European Commission, told a conference in Paris on Sunday, "I would have preferred to maintain a European pole in consumer electronics."
On Monday, French business newspaper La Tribune Desfosses added to the controversy by reporting that a French businessman, whom it did not identify, was preparing a bid for Thomson Multimedia to keep the company French.
The report said it was only after the government declared its preference last Wednesday for Lagardere's bid over a rival offer from Alcatel Alsthom that authorities realised "the value of the gift it (the state) was making to Daewoo."
A Thomson-CSF spokesman declined to comment on the report of a "white knight" bidder.
A Lagardere spokesman said bids had closed in September and if investors were interested in Multimedia, they would have to negotiate with Daewoo after it had bought the firm.
Jospin said French President Jacques Chirac and Prime Minister Alain Juppe were allowing the sale of Thomson Multimedia to Daewoo, which would reap the benefits of French state financing for the group's digital technology.
"Thanks to state finances, it will be able to take up a strong position in the digital (television) market and be profitable from 1999," Jospin said.
Thomson Multimedia is set to make big profits in 1999, when revenues from technology licences will contribute at least one billion francs ($192.3 million) a year. The licences were acquired when Thomson bought RCA of the United States from General Electric in 1987 but only revert to Thomson after 1998.
"We are not hostile to a foreign company taking control of Thomson Multimedia as it follows an industrial and economic logic," a spokesman for the Thomson-CSF association of employee shareholders said.
But, he added, it was a pity the state had not played its part as a shareholder to recapitalise the group earlier.
A source close to Thomson said the group's financial situation was untenable as its share capital was insufficient to sustain its debt and that it was in dire need of fresh funds.
But the government is tightening its belt as it cuts public spending to meet tough requirements to join the single European currency by 1999. The Thomson privatisation was also launched as part of the government's consolidation of the defence industry.
The Thomson Multimedia unit, the world's fourth-largest TV maker, reported a loss of three billion francs in the first half of 1996. It has invested heavily in digitial television technology and is a leader in television decoders, as well as a being a member of the Digital Video Disc consortium.
The chairman of the South Korean company, Bae Soon-Hoon, has said he is ready to invest $1.5 billion in France and create 5,000 new jobs if he wins Multimedia.
($1=5.199 French Franc)
