Just as the submarine changed the face of naval warfare in World War Two, Europe's shipbuilders are hoping a new breed of "stealth" warships will do the same in the 21st century.
At a trade fair at the business airport of Le Bourget, north of Paris, three shipbuilders were presenting their own version of combat ships with the ability to hide and deceive the enemy.
British shipbuilder Vosper Thornycroft was due on Tuesday to unveil its design for the Sea Wraith corvette at the Euronaval exhibition, which gathers the world's navies.
BAeSema, a joint venture between British Aerospace Plc and France's Sema Group, launched its Cougar coastal corvette project on Monday.
And French state-owned DCN shipyard presented its La Fayette frigate which it boasted was the first operational warship fully to use stealth features in its design.
DCN builds the hulls, while it has linked up with French defence company Thomson CSF to provide the ship's communications, detection and weapons control systems.
Stealth warships use similar principles to the radar-beating technology developed by the U.S. aircraft industry and used in the 1991 Gulf War against Iraq. The diamond-shaped F117 and batwing B2 bombers were designed to absorb or deflect radar.
But traditionalists who admire the sleek greyhound lines of warships would be dismayed to see the flat, angular shapes forced by the stealth technology which makes modern ships mere "platforms" for weapons and detection systems.
The La Fayette uses a slab-sided superstructure and non-metallic composite materials to confuse radar and missiles. The second of eight La Fayette-class ships ordered by Taiwan entered service last week, while Saudi Arabia has also ordered the French ship.
But the British are in hot pursuit with their own designs for a new generation of stealth vessels, which they say they are ready to build now. They have set their sights firmly on export markets for the first customers.
"We believe this is the warship of the future and all warships will need to use these techniques," Brian Spilman, Vosper's manager of future projects shipbuilding, told Reuters.
The Sea Wraith design puts the distinctive clutter of mast, radar dishes and aerials inside flat-sided towers and has shaped topsides, rather like diamond facings, to make it hard for radars to lock on. It also uses non-reflective composites.
Sea Wraith can alter its "radar signature" by lowering or raising the mast, making it difficult to recognise the craft. Two asymetrically-located masts are meant to confuse radar-guided missiles.
To counter new infra-red, or heat-seeking, missiles, the ship sprays a fine mist of water to conceal itself and its "hot spots" such as the exhaust.
BAeSema is showcasing the Cougar patrol vessel, which uses low-acoustic waterjet propulsion instead of traditional noisy engines which are easily picked up by sonar.
Its low, angular lines are typical of stealth designs for throwing off radar beams.
BAe last week announced it was merging its naval systems activities into BAeSema, to boost its prime contractor role.
Prime contractors bid for contracts in which their integration of radar, communications and defence systems provide the added value.
Both BAeSema and Vosper have declined to give prices for their ships, saying these depend on the systems requested.
Thomson-CSF, part of the French state-owned Thomson SA electronics group which is being privatised to the Lagardere conglomerate, is the prime contractor for the La Fayette under Sawari 1 and 2 contracts signed with Saudi Arabia.
