The French government, belatedly attempting to consolidate a fragmented aerospace industry, on Wednesday gave the green light for aero-engine maker Snecma to buy up rocket engine manufacturer SEP.
State-owned Snecma already owns 51 percent of Societe Europeene de Propulsion (SEP) and wants to buy out minority shareholders to make it a wholly-owned subsidiary. The enlarged group would have annual sales of around 15 billion francs ($2.9 billion).
"The government has been advised of Snecma's wish to raise its holding in the capital of SEP from 51 percent to 100 percent and has given its approval so Snecma's board can make a public offer for SEP shares, followed by, if the 95 percent threshold is reached, a mandatory buy-in," the Finance Ministry said in a statement.
The deal has a strong industrial logic and would ensure Snecma's future in space programmes and its position as France's centre for engine manufacture, it said.
SEP makes engines and boosters for Ariane rockets, used by the European Arianespace consortium.
Snecma makes civilian and military aero engines including those for passenger jets of the Airbus Industrie consortium and Dassault Aviation combat planes.
The buy-in, for which no financial details were available, reverses a policy drawn up by Snecma's previous chairman, Bernard Dufour, who wanted to dispose of SEP and Messier Bugatti, Snecma's aircraft brakes unit, to raise cash.
"Previously envisaged, the sale of SEP is no longer on the agenda", said a Snecma staff note made available to Reuters.
Although the SEP sale would have brought in fresh cash, it also risked weakening the Snecma group by losing know-how essential for future transports such as a second generation supersonic plane and hypersonic aircraft, the note said.
It would also have meant the loss for SEP of Snecma's technical support, which has helped it in the past.
Snecma's new chairman, Jean Paul Bechat, has said asset sales should not be used to make up operating losses and that the company's deficits would only be tackled by meeting a targeted 1.5 billion francs in cost cuts in a restructuring plan.
In addition, the government has adopted an industrial policy for the defence sector which relies on consolidating each sector on a business basis. Snecma was thus the natural centre for SEP, to build a propulsion group in aeronautics and space, it said.
The move would also consolidate Snecma's brakes activities by bringing together SEP's Carbone-Industrie subsidiary with Snecma's Messier Bugatti to create a bigger entity.
Brakes make up around eight percent of Snecma's sales, with potential to grow into areas such as cars and trains.
The buyout will help SEP through a difficult period in the next few years as its order book falls when the Arianespace space consortium transfers launches to the new Ariane 5 rocket from the existing Ariane 4.
SEP makes the rocket motors for the Ariane 5, which has one huge Vulcain engine instead of the up to 10 Viking and HM 7 motors in Ariane 4. Competition from the United States, Russia, Ukraine, China and Japan is also expected to put severe price pressure on rocket launchers.
SEP also makes ballistic missiles and its proposed M5 replacement for the M45 was only adopted in the six-year defence budget on condition that there would be big cost reductions and reorganisations among the industrial partners.
The takeover will create a group with synergies in aeronautical and space engines, making it virtually unique in Europe, a Snecma spokesman said.
Snecma made a 1995 net loss of 1.24 billion francs and expects to make a loss in 1996 and next year before returning to profit in 1998. Turnover for 1996 is expected to total 9.2 billion francs, up from 8.6 billion in 1995 but still lower than 1994's 10.39 billion.
SEP had 1995 turnover of 5.4 billion francs, up 10 percent from 1994, and made a net attributable profit of 133 million. ($1=5.157 French Franc)
