French holding company CGIP said on Tuesday it was buying 20 percent of car parts manufacturer Valeo, solving a problem which has occupied the government, France's car makers and Italian businessman Carlo de Benedetti.
Cerus, a French investment firm controlled by de Benedetti, sold the 20 percent stake to Compagnie Generale d'Industrie et de Participations (CGIP), for a sum which could total 6.7 billion francs, if Valeo hits 1997 profit targets.
The Valeo stake has been on the market for a year, as Cerus sought to raise cash to reduce debts, and sparked U.S. interest which set off alarms among European car makers. French industry minister, Franck Borotra, said he wanted a "French solution" for the Valeo holding.
But the Valeo purchase was made because "it is good for our group, our shareholders and for Valeo," CGIP chairman Ernest-Antoine Seilliere told a news conference, explaining why his company chose to become the lead shareholder in Valeo.
The Valeo purchase was driven by CGIP's desire to rebalance its portfolio away from the packaging business, in which CGIP had 49 percent of assets following the acquisition of U.S. Crown Cork &amp; Seal shares last year in exchange for its interest in CarnaudMetalbox.
CGIP halved its stake in Crown Cork to 9.9 percent last month and with the 3.2 billion franc proceeds, helped pay for the holding in Valeo, which has significant growth potential, Seilliere said. These were "parallel operations" he said.
The question of keeping Valeo in French hands did not figure in its calculations. "It's not our problem," he said.
CGIP wants Valeo to adopt a more generous dividend policy, pursue acquisitions more aggresively and use debt financing to leverage its financial results.
"We will ask for a payout of a third of the net," Seilliere said. Valeo has historically paid out 15 to 18 percent of net profit, while the average on the Paris stock exchange is 35 to 40 percent.
The CGIP move seemed to have borne fruit as Valeo said as part of the acquisition announcement it will make an exceptional 10 franc dividend later this month, for which Cerus would still be the beneficiary.
But Valeo's chairman Noel Goutard emphasised "There is no change in direction," he told a separate news conference. The priority will be a "strong and healthy balance sheet," and the company will pay particular attention to pursuing "controlled and profitable growth," he said.
He added that Valeo had relied on its own resources in the past as Cerus did not want to see its 28 percent stake diluted in any capital raising in the markets.
With the new ownership structure, Valeo would be free to tap the markets for funds when it saw acquisition opportunities.
French car industry analysts said the deal was good news for all involved. Valeo had a solid partner in CGIP to develop on its own, even if this would not rule out a merger with another car parts firm in several years as the industry changed.
In the deal, Valeo, Europe's second largest car parts maker and a leading supplier of French and German carmakers, said it would make a 1996 dividend downpayment of 10 francs. Another payout of 10 francs per share would be made to Cerus if Valeo's 1997 net attributable profit hits 1.45 billion francs.
Shares in CGIP closed 3.93 percent higher at 1,190 francs while Valeo ended 2.64 percent. Cerus was down 7.29 percent at 127.10 francs.
