The French government sold a nine percent stake in oil major Elf-Aquitaine on Wednesday, raising around 10 billion francs ($2 billion) and allowing the energy group to buy back a big chunk of its own shares.
The disposal follows a sharp rise in the Paris bourse in recent weeks and, specifically of oil stocks which have benefited from high world oil prices.
"Finance minister Jean Arthuis has decided to sell 24.9 million shares in Elf-Aquitaine held by the ERAP company, which will reduce the stake held by this public sector firm in Elf-Aquitaine to 0.75 percent," the ministry said in a statement.
The sale involved the placement of 12.5 million Elf shares, or 4.6 percent of the capital, at 417.50 francs per share to French and international institutions.
Elf said in a separate statement it had bought a 4.5 percent stake through its indirectly-owned financial Fingestval company as a long-term investment, accounting for the remainder of the shares sold by the state.
Elf shares slipped 2.5 francs to 423 by 1300 GMT.
The 10 billion francs will go into a government special account held for share sale proceeds, which is reserved for injecting into other state-owned companies, the ministry said.
Government spokesman Alain Lamassoure said the money would be used to recapitalise state-owned companies which needed it, particularly those being privatised.  It will not be used to help reduce the government's budget deficit.
France plans to recapitalise Thomson SA to the tune of 11 billion francs before selling the state-owned electronics group to Lagardere Groupe and Daewoo Electronics Corp.
The Elf share sale leaves a rump 0.75 percent of Elf stock in government hands, which covers free shares due to Elf employees and non-voting petroleum certificates held by the state.
Elf was among the early privatisations in the previous conservative government of Edouard Balladur in February 1994 (Corrects timing of Elf privatisation), when it was floated at 385 francs per share to private investors.
The group has wide-ranging interests in oil exploration, production and refining, as well as health and beauty products through its Sanofi unit.
It is a major constitutuent in the Paris CAC-40 share index.
The group's stock purchase would boost earnings per share, chairman Philippe Jaffre said: "This removes the uncertainty surrounding the French state's interest in the company which has weighed on the share price."
"The acquisition will automatically improve earnings per share," he said in a company statement.
The sale to institutions was handled by Paribas and SBC Warburg, after a tender with various banks. ABN Amro Rothschild acted as adviser to the government.
Fingestval is a wholly-owned subsidiary of Socap, which itself is wholly-owned by Sofaxbanque. Sofaxbanque is 100-percent owned by Elf. Socap manages assets and financial interests and has substantial cash holdings, Fingestval said. ($1=5.088 French Franc)
