State-owned Air France is under pressure from the French government to drop any thought of buying Boeing long-haul jets from the U.S. and stick with the French-based Airbus equivalent, industry sources said on Friday.
They said that Air France chairman Christian Blanc flew into a political storm after saying on Thursday that the French flag carrier might use a mix of Boeing and Airbus planes in its planned new long-haul fleet, expected to cost some $1 billion.
One industry source said the pressure on Blanc had come from Transport Minister Bernard Pons.
"It's clear there is extremely strong political pressure," head of the SNPL pilots union Geoffrey Bouvet said on Friday.
Blanc on Thursday told the business newspaper Les Echos there was no conflict in flying both the Airbus 340 and Boeing 777 aircraft.
"They are complementary...Today like yesterday, we need both Airbus and Boeing." He added that he did not expect government opposition if the company bought from both European Airbus Industrie consortium and arch-rival Boeing.
"The minister, having talked to Airbus, has been told that there will be an equivalent Airbus product. It is perfectly natural that he ask the national company to invest in Airbus," a transport ministry spokeswoman said.
Any decision will go to Prime Minister Alain Juppe for ratification, the transport ministry spokeswoman said.
France's state-owned Aerospatiale is a senior partner in Airbus. The others are British Aerospace Plc, Daimler-Benz Aerospace, a unit of Daimler-Benz AG and Construcciones Aeronauticas SA (CASA) of Spain.
At the heart of the debate, apart from technical merits of the fleet, is Blanc's desire to run the airline as a "normal" company along commercial lines, free of political intervention.
Blanc's mandate is to turn round the airline, prepare it for privatisation and deregulation of European air travel from 1997. He has forecast the group was on track to break even this year.
Because of the political sensitivity, a committee of Air France board members was formed to evaluate the products and will submit its conclusion on December 20.
The union's Bouvet said Air France should be left to choose the right planes for particular routes rather than have a fleet imposed by the government. A mixed fleet could make economic sense, if a world class airline such as Singapore Airlines could fly both Airbus and Boeing, he said.
Air France is expected to order between five and 10 planes.
The official list price for the A340-300 is around $120 million. The plane seats 295 passengers in a typical three-class layout and can fly up to 7,300 nautical miles or 13,500 km.
The Boeing 777 flies in two basic versions. The 777-200 seats between 305 to 328 in three classes and has a catalogue price of $128-146 million, and has a range of 3,780 nautical miles, or 7,000 km.
The 777-300, officially priced at $151 million-170 million, seats between 368 and 394, flies 5,380 miles or 9,970 km.
A Boeing spokesman said the company has made a number of offers to Air France using different product mixes.
Airbus itself declined to comment.
The Air France operating company in June reported a first-half operating profit of 413 million francs compared with a loss of 902 million in the first half of 1995.
