Channel Tunnel operator Eurotunnel SA/Plc sought to reassure the public Wednesday about the safety of the rail link between France and Britain following last week's fire that halted most services.
But its public relations effort was marred by a minor fire that broke out near the site of last week's blaze.
"There is no doubt the tunnel is at least as safe as other Channel transport systems," French Co-Chairman Patrick Ponsolle of the Anglo-French company told a news conference.
A fire in a truck on a freight train seriously damaged a section of the tunnel on Monday last week, injuring 34 people and raising doubts over the safety of the cross-Channel service.
The Eurostar high-speed passenger train and Le Shuttle car and passenger services have been halted, although a limited freight service has resumed.
Wednesday's fire was apparently sparked by welding work during repairs, but it was quickly extinguished, British police said.
"Safety is our first consideration, ahead of commercial considerations," British Co-Chairman Robert Malpas said. "The emergency evacuation procedure which forms the backbone of the safety system worked after two other measures failed."
The cause of the fire remains a mystery, although sabotage is seen as one possibility by the French magistrate investigating the fire.
"The judge has not ruled out the theory of foul play," said a Eurotunnel spokeswoman.
But legal sources said the idea that the fire was started deliberately was regarded as a remote possibility and not the most likely cause.
Ponsolle said Eurotunnel's maximum potential loss from the fire was five to seven million pounds ($8.40 million to $11.75 million).
"The ultimate maximum loss for the company after receiving insurance indemnities could be of the order of five or six or seven million pounds," he said.
Eurotunnel's monthly revenue before the fire was between 350 million and 400 million francs ($67.75 million and $77.43 million). Loss of revenues would depend on the re-establishment of a partial service, he said.
If passenger and freight services resumed to 50-60 percent of previous capacity, this would mean a maximum monthly loss of 200 million francs ($38.7 million), Ponsolle said.
Eurotunnel's maximum insurance coverage is 1.5 billion francs ($290.4 million) for equipment and 4.5 billion ($871.1 million) for earnings losses, Ponsolle said.
Eurotunnel hopes to resume partial passenger service early next week, if the safety commission that oversees the tunnel approves a new set of temporary evacuation measures, Ponsolle said.
Because a 1.243 mile section of one of the tunnel bores cannot be used for evacuation, the company is laying on special fire-fighting and ambulance crews on 24-hour alert, with two cars for extricating passengers.
The train that was destroyed in the fire was worth nearly 100 million francs ($19.4 million) and repairs to the tunnel and related equipment would cost between 200 million and 500 million ($38.7 million to $96.8 million). But Eurotunnel is awaiting the results of insurance investigations into the costs of the fire.
Ponsolle said the blaze should not affect a complex plan to restructure the company's 70 billion francs ($13.6 billion) of junior bank debt, which took a year to negotiate. "There is no reason for us to put into question the restructuring," he told reporters.
"We do not see at this stage there needs to be any delay in the rescheduling of the debt," Malpas told Reuters Financial Television when asked whether the banks had asked for new clauses to be added to its restructuring because of the fire.
"The creditor banks have been very understanding; they wish us well ... they see it as an incident which we will get over and which will be contained in insurance arrangements and the financial arrangements we have set up," Malpas said.
Ponsolle said the company did not face any problems with cash flow. Eurotunnel had 100 million pounds ($167.7 million) in cash holdings and "it is not under financial pressure to reopen services."
