Some 120 Eurotunnel SA /Plc employees are working round the clock to clear wreckage from the Channel Tunnel, devastated by a fire two weeks ago which has halted passenger services on the undersea link between Britain and France .
Reporters visiting the tunnel on Tuesday viewed a nightmarish scene of flame-scarred concrete where intense heat had blown apart the surface cladding to expose steel reinforcing cables embedded in slabs.
A blaze on a truck-carrying wagon on December 18 forced Eurotunnel to close the tunnel to Eurostar high-speed passenger trains and tourist vehicle Shuttle services just before the Christmas season. Partial freight traffic has been resumed.
Eurotunnel hopes to run two thirds of normal passenger and freight traffic in the estimated three to six months necessary for repairs to be completed, Eurotunnel spokesman Francois Borel said.
"We are going to make a new tunnel," he said.
But before repairs can begin, the wreckage must be cleared.
With scorched rubble underfoot and ghostly streams of melted grey fibre glass filaments overhead, maintenance workers in four shifts of six hours are shovelling out ashes and debris, all that is left of 28 trucks caught in the fire.
The Eurotunnel official coordinating the clearance, Dominique Dorso, said three wagons remained where the fire started, in section five of the tunnel. One was being removed Tuesday evening and the other two should be taken out next week.
The fire was so intense in one 30-metre stretch that no visible traces of the trucks themselves remained in the Shuttle wagons, which were themselves reduced to blackened and twisted steel lattice frames.
Chunks exploded off the first 40-cm thick concrete layer which makes up the the Tunnel wall but the fire did not penetrate to the underlying 20-30 cm of injected concrete which lines the link. Behind that second layer is chalk.
Two weeks on, the smell of burnt plastic and metal still permeates the air and protective masks are obligatory.
Once the debris is cleared , the Anglo-French consortium which built the Tunnel, Transmanche Link (TML), can start repairs to the five or six affected kilometres of the link, putting in new cladding, cabling and conductor rails.
Eurotunnel hopes to use intersections linking the two tunnel bores to bypass the damaged section and allow trains to run between Britain and France during repairs, he said.
Tight security surrounds the entry points to the tunnel bores. There are three separate checkpoints before workers can even enter the narrow central service tunnel, which was used for the evacuation on the night of the fire, and is routinely used by maintenance crews.
Specially-built Mercedes vehicles, high and narrow, are used to transport personnel along the service tunnel. It is not a trip for claustrophobics. Once the overhead lights are out, the grey strip of tunnel extends into the darkness ahead, with only the headlights for illumination. Overhead are tonnes of rock and the Channel waters.
