A two-stage privatisation France's Thomson SA electronics group would allow an early sale of its defence arm and make better economic sense than packaging defence with the loss-making consumer goods unit, stock market analysts said on Monday.
Conservative Prime Minister Alain Juppe said in an interview in the London Financial Times on Monday that the military electronics subsidiary Thomson-CSF could be separated from Thomson Multimedia to allow for a speedy privatisation.
The government was forced last week to drop its preferred choice of selling the whole Thomson group to the Lagardere Groupe conglomerate for a symbolic one franc after the independent Privatisation Commission rejected that option.
A break-up of Thomson runs directly against President Jacques Chirac's initial policy announced on February 22 on restructuring the French defence industry and selling Thomson as one unit.
But analysts said the two-part sale made good sense.
"We should have started with that...get on immediately with restructuring the defence industry," said an analyst at a French brokerage. "We can leave Thomson Multimedia (TMM) until 1998."
A second analyst said, "It's the privatisation of the Multimedia unit which poses the problem. The industrial logic of the merger between Thomson-CSF and Lagardere has not been criticised by anyone."
It was Lagardere's plan to sell TMM to South Korea's Daewoo Electronics, while keeping Thomson-CSF, which led the Privatisation Commission to rule out its bid. The Commission objected to planned technology transfers to Daewoo and the lack of binding commitments by Daewoo to retain jobs in France.
Privatising Thomson-CSF separately would meet the state's main aim of creating a defence electronics national champion, and shelve the problems of Thomson Multimedia. CSF is profitable, virtually clean of debt and 42 percent of the capital is quoted on the Paris bourse.
A source close to Thomson-CSF said the firm has not lost any contracts due to the privatisation uncertainty but it has had to run a corporate advertising campaing in countries where it feels its image has suffered.
Lagardere's Matra missile company still looks the favoured candidate for taking over Thomson's defence unit ahead of a rival offer from engineering group Alcatel Alsthom.
"We get the impression that the government wants Lagardere to get Thomson-CSF," said one analyst at a brokerage.
An analyst at a French bank said, "Insofar as the government has made its preference known and is sticking by it, Lagardere seems to be well placed."
Lagardere has the means to buy Thomson-CSF, without recourse to significant borrowing, one analyst said.
Taking a range of Thomson-CSF share price of between 156 and 200 francs per share, the company has a market capitalisation of between 18 and 24 billion francs ($3.4-4.6 billion), he said.
At the end of 1995 Lagardere had 10 billion francs in tradeable securities, 1.3 billion in free cash and is due to receive three billion in the first half of 1997 when share warrants are due to be exercised. Financial debt was around 8.4 billion.
Lagardere would bring some eight billion francs of Matra's assets in merging with Thomson-CSF, which would reduce the cash it would have to pay. It would however be expected to pay large amounts for goodwill.
Speculation that a vertical integration of missiles, electronics and airframe makers could now be tackled by merging Thomson, Matra, Dassault Aviation and Aerospatiale did not stand up to scrutiny, analysts said.
Combat plane maker Dassault is expected to be absorbed by the larger, civilian-aircraft manufacturer Aerospatiale as part of the defence industry consolidation. But as Aerospatiale is state-owned and the government still wants to privatise Thomson, that course seemed to be excluded, an industry executive said.
Economy ministry officials were not immediately available for comment. ($1=5.244 French Franc)
