Partners in European aircraft consortium Airbus must speed up plans to convert the partnership into a single company after news of a merger between its two U.S. competitors, an aerospace executive said on Sunday.
Boeing Co and McDonnell Douglas announced a $13.3 billion merger plan which would create the world's largest aerospace firm, with 1997 sales of about $48 billion and employing 200,000 people, dwarfing rival Airbus.
The merger meant Airbus shareholders had "to get their act together quickly", said the executive, who asked not to be identified.
Airbus is a consortium made up of France's Ste Nationale Industrielle Aerospatiale, British Aerospace Plc (BAe), Daimler-Benz Aerospace, a unit of Germany's Daimler-Benz AG, and Construcciones Aeronauticas SA (CASA) of Spain.
An Airbus spokesman said the U.S. merger would not alter the competitive threat to Airbus: "(McDonnell) Douglas hasn't been a competitor in the civilian aircraft business for a number of years," the spokesman said. "So it hasn't altered the equation in the commercial field at all for Airbus."
Boeing is effectively swallowing up McDonnell Douglas, he said. "It was expected Douglas would have to look in the civil field for its fortunes elsewhere, or merge, or opt out of the business altogether," he said. Boeing was the obvious merger candidate.
MD decided in October to drop plans to build the MD-XX wide body passenger jet, which would have doomed it to niche player status with its two current products, the MD-11 and MD-80/90.
Airbus, which has historically held around a 30 percent market share, with Boeing some 60 percent and McDonnell 10 percent, wants at least half the market by the end of the decade.
Airbus expects to notch up firm orders for more than 300 aircraft in 1996, worth around $20 billion, compared to 106 sales last year, worth $7 billion. Boeing said it has received orders for 621 planes at the end of November.
The Airbus partners, who are also Airbus subcontractors, are in talks on how to change the grouping into a joint stock company from the present "groupement d'interet economique" (economic interest group) partnership. The aim is to create a more competitive and responsive organisation.
"The need for the Europeans to integrate becomes more urgent," said the executive who spoke on condityion of anonymity. The merger move showed "the arguments (between partners) are trivial".
BAe's group managing director John Weston has said the future Airbus should be a large, integrated company with design offices and manufacturing and sales functions, and have a solid balance sheet to finance aircraft sales, to better rival Boeing.
But Aerospatiale's chairman Yves Michot has said he sees the new Airbus as essentially a large prime contractor, directing its suppliers' work but retaining its design offices.
Some executives see the design office as the heart of the business, with the ability to create new aircraft. Aerospatiale's design offices are in the southwestern French city of Toulouse, next to Airbus headquarters.
Eventually, BAe wants Airbus to be the civilian arm of a huge pan-European aerospace grouping, with a military wing to build future generations of combat planes, built from the national companies.
But for the time being, the partners also need to resolve differences over the valuation and transfer of assets.
The Airbus negotiations slowed over the summer, when the French government moved the then chairman, Louis Gallois, to the helm of troubled state railway operator SNCF and promoted his number two, Yves Michot.
An agreement was due to be signed by the end of 1996 setting out the main lines of the new Airbus but the industry executive said the talks are due to last up to March 31.
U.S. broker Lehman Brothers has estimated Airbus could be worth between $15-18 billion after its conversion, based on historical and prospective financial data.
The internal debate over the shape and scope of the future Airbus has run on for years, with managing director Jean Pierson a fervent enthusiast for an integrated company. The new Airbus company is supposed to be formed by the end of 1999.
