The European Airbus consortium must resolve deep differences over the future shape of the aircraft-maker to meet the challenge posed by the merger of its U.S. rivals, industry executives said on Monday.
Boeing and McDonnell Douglas shook the aerospace world on Sunday by announcing they were joining to create a company with annual sales of $48 billion.
The strengthening of Boeing, which already outpaces Airbus in sales of civilian aircraft, puts further pressure on the four-nation Airbus Industrie consortium to agree a status change that might sharpen its commercial muscle.
But the four member companies from France, Germany, Britain and Spain are stuck over differing ambitions for changing their present partnership into an integrated company that could rival the new U.S. titan.
Historically Boeing has held around 60 percent of the world civilian aircraft market, Airbus 30 percent and McDonnell Douglas 10 percent.
Airbus, which had set a target of 50 percent by the end of decade, is a partnership made up of French state-owned Ste Nationale Industrielle Aerospatiale, British Aerospace Plc, Daimler-Benz Aerospace, a unit of Daimler-Benz AG and Construcciones Aeronauticas SA (CASA) of Spain.
The partners said on July 8 they aimed to reach an agreement by the end of 1996 on the timetable for setting up a new Airbus company, which could be formed by 1999. But an industry source in London said a pact looked likely to slip into the new year.
"The discussions go on. The partners are still working on negotiations for the Airbus Industrie restructuring," said an Airbus spokesman, speaking from its headquarters in Toulouse, southwestern France.
"I think this will clearly introduce a massive sense of urgency," aerospace analyst Sash Tusa, at broker UBS told Reuters Financial Television (RFTV).
A senior executive said the partners have three different positions on the future Airbus. Aerospatiale wants a "minimal" Airbus, Dasa seeks a "maximum", while BAe wants a transfer of "core assets" from the partners to the new company, he said.
Aerospatiale's chairman Yves Michot said in September he wanted Airbus to act as a prime contractor with enlarged powers to direct subcontractors. Aerospatiale does not think Airbus can take on more than its current marketing operations.
"You cannot go from one thing to the next overnight. Marketing is a business in its own right. Managing factories, manufacturing, people is something else," a French industry executive said.
That pits the French firm against Dasa which wants to deepen Airbus' integration to include the design and engineering of sub-assemblies as well as making the major systems such as wings and fuselages. The "maximum Airbus" would also handle procurement, final assembly and product support.
BAe would like to transfer design and manufacturing facilities and provide Airbus with a strong balance sheet to finance aircraft sales.
But Aerospatiale would stand to lose its industrial and intellectual crown jewels if it transferred its design office and manufacturing plant in Toulouse to Airbus.
Aerospatiale gains some 70 percent of annual sales from the civilian sector, more than BAe and Dasa which have military and motor vehicle sales respectively to boost their revenue streams.
Although Aerospatiale would receive Airbus dividends, it would lose key operations --  galling for a company which set up Airbus jointly with the Germans. It is joint senior partner with Dasa with 38 percent ownership.
Stripping out Airbus would leave Aerospatiale with missiles and satellites, both of which are being eyed by the acquisitive Lagardere Groupe, and helicopters -- a business under severe pressure.
Apart from the status change, Airbus also needs to develop a fuller product range.
"We have to enlarge the product line at the upper and lower end," a Dasa spokesman told RFTV. Airbus is studying a large plane seating between 500-600, dubbed the A3XX, and is planning a 100-seater with China and Singapore.
BAe chairman Richard Evans told the Wall Street Journal on Monday that while the A3XX large aircraft was important, it needed to be a sound business decision.
"I recognise that to be successful and compete with Boeing, we in Airbus need as wide a product mix as possible but not at any price, not at the cost of busting the business," he said.
BAe owns 20 percent of Airbus, while Casa owns four percent.
