French state-owned aerospace group Aerospatiale, in the throes of merger talks, faces key questions on its strategic operations as Europe's aircraft industry gears up for competition with a new U.S. giant.
Aerospatiale is due to merge with combat plane maker Dassault Aviation as part of France's consolidation of its fragmented defence industry.
It is also fighting what executives see as a rearguard action to preserve its hold on building passenger jets for Airbus Industrie, in which it is a senior partner.
"France and Europe have no choice but to restructure," Jean-Marc Baron, aerospace specialist at consultancy KPMG Peat Marwick, said. "The Boeing-McDonnell Douglas merger is excellent because it confronts the Europeans with reality."
Sunday's surprise merger announcement by U.S. giant Boeing and McDonnell Douglas put the spotlight on speeding up European consolidation and a shakeup of the Airbus structure, in which Aerospatiale is expected to play a key role.
Airbus partners British Aerospace Plc (BAe) and Daimler-Benz Aerospace AG (Dasa) are pushing for a version of a future Airbus which could effectively take commercial aircraft production out of Aerospatiale's hands.
The Airbus shareholders, which also include Construcciones Aeronauticas SA of Spain (Casa), are negotiating the future shape of the Airbus group as part of a move to convert it to a joint stock company from a cumbersome partnership structure.
If, as the British and Germans want, the partners transfer key design and manufacturing assets to Airbus, Aerospatiale would be left with an uncertain future in missiles, satellites, helicopters and combat aircraft after taking over Dassault, a senior industry executive said.
"Aerospatiale wants to accelerate the merger with Dassault to give it more weight vis-a-vis Dasa in Airbus," Baron said.
Aerospatiale derives 70 percent of annual sales from the civilian sector, of which half comes from Airbus products, an Aerospatiale spokeswoman said.
Airbus contributed a 1995 operating profit of 1.06 billion francs ($203 million) to Aerospatiale and that figure is sure to rise for this year with Airbus deliveries at 111 at the end of November. Airbus delivered 102 planes in 1995.
Although Aerospatiale, which had 1995 turnover of 49.23 billion francs, would absorb Dassault in the merger, chairman Serge Dassault has said he wants to keep its identity distinct.
Dassault, smaller than Aerospatiale with 1995 sales of 11.6 billion francs, has consistently made profits and cultivates its own strong corporate culture as maker of the Mirage combat plane and Falcon small business jet.
The merged company would have annual turnover of around 60 billion francs and is expected to have a common purchasing centre. Purchasing makes up around 60 percent of turnover so if it made annual savings of around five percent, it could benefit to the tune of one to two billion francs a year.
The Aerospatiale spokeswoman said merger terms had not yet been agreed.
Aerospatiale wants Airbus eventually to have a military wing, similar to U.S. giants such as Lockheed Martin and Boeing and McDonnell Douglas, a source close to the company said.
The U.S. giants have defence businesses to balance out the business cycles and receive state research contracts for military projects which are viewed as indirect industry aid.
After merging with Dassault and breaking even, Aerospatiale can be privatised. This is expected to be a sale of capital to industrial partners rather than a stock market flotation, because of the strategic nature of Aerospatiale's business.
But so far, no timetable or partners have emerged.
On missiles and satellites, Aerospatiale executives are frustrated that they have been unable to close a deal to merge these activities with Dasa, despite years of negotiations.
The two activities, grouped under a space and defence heading, contributed 412 million francs operating profit in 1995, after a loss of 32 million in 1994.
Meanwhile, it feels the French conglomerate Lagardere Groupe breathing down its neck. Lagardere recently completed a merger of its Matra missiles unit with BAe to create the Matra BAe Dynamics joint venture, with annual sales of $1.5 billion.
Lagardere argues that by virtue of its British merger it should be the focus for the next consolidation between France and Germany in missiles, while its Matra Marconi Space satellites joint venture with Britain's GEC Plc should be the centre of a European space business.
Aerospatiale also has a Eurocopter joint venture with Dasa, which makes military and civilian helicopters. Eurocopter made an operating loss of 817 million francs last year, after a 45 million loss in the previous year.
Eurocopter faces a difficult medium-term outlook with an orders gap after the next two years until first deliveries in 2002 of the Tiger combat helicopter to the French army.
Aerospatiale made its first surplus since 1991 with a first-half 1996 net profit of 273 million francs and expects to break even in 1997 if the dollar stays at five francs.
It made a 1995 net attributable loss of 981 million, due to a 1.5 billion restructuring charge to cover 3,000 job losses. ($1=5.224 French Franc)
