The French government said on Friday it would reveal early in the New Year how it plans to sell the Thomson-CSF state defence electronics firm and that the sale would be covered by a 1986 privatisation law.
The decision, announced by the finance ministry, makes the sale process slower than if it had been carried out under another 1991 privatisation decree.
The independent Privatisation Commission earlier this month forced the state to rethink its plan to sell the Thomson SA electronics group in a private deal to the Lagardere Groupe conglomerate, when it objected to a key element in the disposal.
Following that setback, the state decided to privatise Thomson SA in two parts, with a sale of Thomson-CSF first, followed by Thomson Multimedia, the loss-making consumer electronics unit, to speed up the process.
But the complex sale details mean any decision will only be made in the beginning of 1997, government officials said.
The Council of State, France's highest administrative court, ruled that the Thomson-CSF sale is covered under the 1986 act, after the government asked it to rule on the legal framework.
The court said that as Thomson-CSF constitutes an essential part of the assets of Thomson SA, the sale should be seen as a means of privatising the parent company, the finance ministry said in a statement.
"The privatisation of Thomson-CSF is covered, just as that of Thomson SA, by chapter II of the law of 6 August 1986 on privatisations," it said.
A number of possibilities have emerged for Thomson-CSF since the Privatisation Commission derailed the sale process.
Thomson-CSF's chairman Marcel Roulet and its executive committee have lobbied the Prime Minister Alain Juppe for a stock market flotation instead of selling it to an industrial company such as Lagardere.
A flotation would preserve Thomson-CSF's independence and would be faster than a "trade sale", a source close to the firm said. The company has all the financial details to hand and 42 percent of its capital is already traded on the stock market.
Floating Thomson-CSF would allow a faster restructuring of the defence industry, which was the aim of the privatisation move. It could still form alliances with other groups, such as the planned merger between aircraft companies Dassault Aviation and Aerospatiale.
Thomson-CSF wants a "clean" flotation, without the traditional cross-shareholding pact which protects companies from hostile takeovers. A flotation would also ensure clarity in the sale terms, a senior source close to Thomson said.
But Lagardere chairman Noel Forgeard argues a flotation could lead to a break up of Thomson-CSF as members of any shareholders pact would want to buy up parts of the business.
