Shareholder democracy will grab the spotlight when investors in the troubled Channel Tunnel operator Eurotunnel SA/Plc vote on a complex debt deal aimed at keeping the company afloat.
The restructuring agreement with its bank lenders requires a two-thirds majority at an extraordinary meeting of shareholders expected to be held by March.
Potentially, two French shareholder groups could muster a blocking minority but the associations hold distinct positions and styles. Of Eurotunnel's estimated 750,000 small investors, around 600,000 are French.
Albert Jauffret heads the newer and smaller Association de Defence des Actionnaires d'Eurotunnel (Adacte), considered by some as the more "extremist" -- but possessing clear and strongly-held views on the restructuring and what he wants.
"Whether one agrees with his views or not he represents a group of shareholders and shareholder democracy requires each shareholder has a voice," said lawyer Sophie L'Helias, who acted as proxy agent for more than 20,000 Eurotunnel shareholders.
Jauffret, a retired headmaster, believes the restructuring gives too much to the banks. "We are very unhappy the debt is being treated at face value," he said.
In London's secondary debt market, Eurotunnel's 70 billion francs ($13.40 billion) of junior-ranked loans have been marked down to about 40 percent of face value, on a view they are distressed assets.
CALL FOR SOME DEBT CANCELLATION
The 225 lending banks should cancel at least a third of the debt, taking their lead from the market's valuation, instead of keeping most of the debt intact, Jauffret argues.
The restructuring takes out eight billion francs of loans to be swapped for shares at 10.40 francs per share.
The loans outstanding should be converted into Eurotunnel shares at 24 francs per share, the average level of the last three rights issues by Eurotunnel, Jauffret believes.
Adacte is highly critical of Eurotunnel's managers, whom Jauffret believes are cowed by its bankers. At the annual general meeting in June, he moved a resolution, which was easily defeated, to sack co-chairman Patrick Ponsolle along with six other executives, considered too close to the banks.
Adacte, which held proxies for about four percent of the votes at the AGM, was founded in September 1995 as a breakaway from the Eurotunnel shareholders association.
Christian Cambier, who runs the Prigest portfolio management company, heads the Eurotunnel shareholders association which was set up in 1992 and has around 3,000 members, most of whom are professional workers rather than the retired folk who make up Adacte.
DIFFERENT APPROACHES
The difference in constituencies partly explains the divergent approaches. Adacte members are angered by the loss of life savings, while Cambier's have limited losses to spare investment income, said one observer.
The contrasting styles was shown clearly after Eurotunnel announced the restructuring agreement with its bankers.
Adacte denounced it as a "declaration of war", because it did not cancel any debt. In contrast, the Eurotunnel shareholders association said it would seek a meeting with management to get more details.
"We support the management," Cambier says, adding that he does not want to change the board. He spends perhaps five percent of his time on Eurotunnel and the rest managing client funds.
Cambier does not fundamentally object to the restructuring but says the operating licence needs to be extended to 99 years from 65, to allow the company extra time to make money.
His clients hold around 1.5 million Eurotunnel shares and lend them in stock-lending operations, which he says poses no conflict of interest. They gain a running yield each month, even though the shares have fallen sharply in value.
However, both Cambier and Jauffret share common ground when they accuse some of Eurotunnel's banks and brokers of conflicts of interest.
They accuse some of the underwriters for the 1994 rights issue of short selling the shares in the months before the May capital increase.
Cambier garnered a near blocking minority of around 32 percent of the votes at the AGM, after a ground-breaking proxy solicitation, and wants to improve on that for the crucial EGM.
He says he will base his voting on the share price. If Eurotunnel trades below five francs, he will take that as the market's no-confidence in the restructuring, but if it is between 10 and 15 francs, he will approve the deal. ($1=5.225 French Franc)
