A longstanding row over market share between rival plane makers Boeing of the U.S. and Europe's Airbus consortium resurfaced on Tuesday, when Airbus claimed to have overtaken the U.S. giant.
Airbus senior vice president for strategy John Leahy told reporters at the Farnborough air show that if 117 cancellations of previous orders at Boeing were taken into account, the U.S firm had added 216 net new orders this year rather than the gross orders of 333 planes announced.
"You have to be very careful when people are running around at air shows talking about gross order books because gross orders aren't what you can bill," he said. "Essentially a third of the Boeing order book has been cancelled this year."
Airbus, with 13 cancellations, has so far had 221 net orders this year, putting it ahead of the Seattle-based firm, he said.
Based on planes seating between 125-350 passengers in which Airbus fields a competitor product to Boeing -- Airbus does not have a 100- or 400-seater -- the European grouping claims a 52 percent share, crediting Boeing with 43 percent and McDonnell Douglas with five percent.
Leahy said since 1976, Boeing's share had shown a slow but noticeable decline while Airbus showed a strong increase. McDonnell Douglas had seen a steep loss.
But Boeing vice-president for marketing Bruce Dennis told Reuters, even with cancellations, the company was exceeding targets for this year of around 63-64 percent market share.
"Orders are exceeding our targets and are doing very well," he said. "We just don't agree with their numbers."
Although Airbus has increased its share over the years, this had not been at Boeing's expense but came out of McDonnell Douglas's sales. "It's not coming out of Boeing's hide."
Production figures gave a clearer view of the company's advance, he said. Boeing had recently increased production of its 777 giant twinjet to seven per month from five and would be turning out the 737 narrow-body at a rate of 17.5 planes per month late next year. He gave no figure for present output.
Airbus' Leahy reaffirmed the group's aim to develop the 3XX, a plane seating over 500, for $8 billion, or perhaps less, thanks to industry restructuring efforts.
The four-nation partnership aims to deliver the first 3XX in 2003, he said. He also defended the company's market forecast for the plane, which showed there was demand for the aircraft.
Airbus executive Volker Von Tein said of the 3XX, which is seen as key to attacking Boeing's lucrative monoploy at the top end of the market, "We are not in a race with Boeing on this programme. If Boeing were to launch a stretched derivative of their veteran, 34-year-old 747, it will come as no surprise to us." That would allow Airbus to "fine tune" the 3XX, he said.
He added that Boeing had said that there was not enough room in the market for two makers of large planes. "In that case I would suggest that they opt out of the competition because once the A3XX is on the market maybe they will be proven right -- there will be no room for old derivatives."
Boeing's Dennis said he could not see how Airbus could build the 3XX for the estimated $8 billion, "unless they see something that we can't."
Boeing Commercial Airplane Group president Ron Woodward said on Monday its studies showed it would cost over $5 billion to build large planes seating 460 and 560 derived from the existing 747 jumbo jet, which would be cheaper than creating a new plane like the 3XX.
The Airbus consortium comprises French Aerospatiale, British Aerospace Plc, Germany's Daimler-Benz Aerospace AG and CASA of Spain.
