The four partners of the Airbus consortium Monday signed an agreement aimed at making the European planemaker a unified company better able to compete with U.S. rival Boeing Co.
Airbus Industrie said in a statement its four European partners had signed a memorandum of understanding to restructure Airbus into a limited liability company by 1999.
"The establishment of Airbus Industrie as a single corporate entity (SCE) is an important initial step in the consolidation of the aerospace industry within Europe," Airbus said.
Toulouse, France-based Airbus is currently a partnership between French state-owned Ste Nationale Industrielle Aerospatiale, British Aerospace Plc, Daimler-Benz Aerospace (DASA) and Construcciones Aeronauticas SA (Casa) of Spain.
The new Airbus will have a single management structure which would add engineering, testing, production, procurement and customer service to Airbus's current marketing, sales and product support activities, the statement said.
DASA Chairman Manfred Bischoff told reporters in Munich that differences remained among the partners in the consortium despite the signing of the deal on Monday.
He said there were still different views over the amount of productive assets that should be brought in to the limited liability company which is to replace the existing partnership.
An industry executive said what follows now would be "horse-trading" as the partners discuss what assets are deemed necessary now that the functions for the new Airbus have been decided. "Is this plant an essential part of the function of the future Airbus," will be the question to be asked, he said.
The Airbus statement said "Transfer of assets associated with these functions... will depend on how far the assets are essential for the described functions and their detailed valuation, to be completed by the end of 1997."
The British and Germans had argued for a high degree of integration in the new Airbus, while Aerospatiale wanted a more cautious approach, based on a largely static view of Airbus.
Airbus is mainly a sales and marketing organisation with the four partners making the planes. But the task of reorganizing Airbus took on an urgent note after Boeing and McDonnell Douglas said in December they would merge and form a civil and military giant with $50 billion in annual sales.
Airbus said the restructured company would help improvement in overall operational efficiency, the introduction of new international strategic partnerships and the longer term opportunity for "external participation" in Airbus.
Airbus spokesman Robert Alizart said that these options included a future stock market listing of Airbus.
In London, a British Aerospace spokesman said a share flotation for Airbus was a "long-term possibility."
Airbus said it was studying a launch of the A3XX, which would break the stranglehold on the lucrative high-capacity end of the market now held by Boeing's 747 jumbo jet.
Aerospatiale Chairman Yves Michot told journalists that he had met the chairman of U.S. giant Lockheed Martin, Norman Augustine, for cooperation talks and did not exclude a role in the A3XX project for the U.S. company.
"You cannot get enough of the right kind of partners in this sort of project..." Michot said, citing Lockheed Martin as a potential partner.
But Dasa's Bischoff told the Stern magazine that no decision was expected this year on the A3XX project as talks with airlines had shown detailed consultations were still needed, in view of the huge financial effort needed.
The goal of the new Airbus company must be to achieve a return on equity of at least 12 percent for its shareholders, Bischoff said. That meant that Aerospatiale must match cost cuts of 30 percent already made by DASA and BAe, he said.
Bischoff told reporters in Munich that Lockheed and Russian plane companies could become Airbus partners, as well as Saab of Sweden and Italy's Alenia.
