The four partners of the Airbus consortium on Monday signed an agreement aimed at making the European plane maker a unified company better able to compete with Boeing Co.
In a statement, Airbus Industrie said its four European partners had signed a memorandum of understanding to restructure Airbus into a limited liability company by 1999.
"The establishment of Airbus Industrie as a single corporate entity (SCE) is an important initial step in the consolidation of the aerospace industry within Europe," Airbus said.
Toulouse-based Airbus is currently a partnership between French state-owned Ste Nationale Industrielle Aerospatiale, British Aerospace Plc, Daimler-Benz Aerospace(DASA), and Construcciones Aeronauticas SA(CASA) of Spain.
The French and Germans both have 37.9 percent, the British 20 percent and Spanish company 4.2 percent.
The new entity will have a single management structure which should add control of engineering, testing, production, procurement and customer service to Airbus's current responsibilities for marketing, sales and product support, it said in a statement.
"Transfer of assets associated with these functions... will depend on how far the assets are essential for the described functions and their detailed valuation, to be completed by the end of 1997," it said.
"The ultimate objective is the restructring of the entire European (aerospace) industry, of which Airbus in one element and not the integrating entity," Aerospatiale chairman Yves Michot told the Le Monde newspaper.
"Airbus will be made a single company before the end of 1999 with a shareholding strictly the same as now," he added
Currently Airbus is mainly a sales and marketing organisation with the four partners manufacturing the planes.
Airbus first announced a preliminary agreement in early January. The four partners decided last July to turn Airbus into a corporation to streamline decision-making and production.
These restructuring plans took on a more urgent tone after Boeing and McDonnell Douglas said in December they would merge and form a civil and military giant with nearly $50 billion in annual sales.
Airbus said in its statement that the restructured company would facilitate continuing improvement in overall operational efficiency, the introduction of new international strategic partnerships and the longer term opportunity for "external participation" in Airbus.
Airbus spokesman Robert Alizart said that these options included a future stock market listing of Airbus.
Airbus said that the restructured company "presented a great opportunity for business growth both for its existing shareholders and its future partners."
It said Airbus was studying expansion of its product range with an aircraft in the 100 seat category, with Alenia  ALEI.RO of Itlay in co-operartion with AVIC of China and Singapore Aerospace.
It is also mulling derivatives of the four-engined A340, the A340-500 with a range of 8,300 nautical miles and the A340-600 with seating capacity of close to 400 seats.
In the high-capacity long haul market it is planning to launch the A3XX, which would break the stranglehold on the lucrative top-end of the market now held by Boeing's 747 jumbo jet.
Airbus is also pondering work on the Future Large Aircraft (FLA), a military transport aircraft to match the future needs of Europe, next to its civil work.
British Aerospace said it expected its wing development and production operations, employing more than 4,000 people, to be transferred to Airbus.
