French electrical equipment company Schneider aims to almost double its return on equity capital to 15 percent in the next three years, executive vice president Michel Staib told Reuters.
"Our objective is to have a net return on capital, before amortisation of goodwill, of 15 percent...in three years," he said in an interview. "It's a reasonable plan."
That compared to just over eight percent in 1995, he said. The improvement will come from pruning down Schneider to core electrical activities and an internal re-engineering programme.
Schneider shares have risen strongly in the past few weeks as analysts considered the stock undervalued and welcomed the pending sale of the Spie Batignolles unit, which has dragged on the group's results.
The stock has risen around 10 percent since mid-December when news of its Spie sale hit the market. The shares closed on Wednesday at 255.70 francs. About a third of the capital is in non-domestic hands.
All the group companies are profitable and with the sale of construction company Spie Batignolles, Schneider is at a "diamond point," Staib said.
Staib did not rule out further disposals depending on market and technology changes but Schneider is now well-focused.
Schneider will seek growth in emerging markets, in South America and Asia, including India. It wants Asia to contribute at least 20 percent of group turnover before the end of the decade compared to 11 percent in 1995.
Schneider has expanded its operations in China, increasing the number of employees to 2,500 from 200 five years ago.
The company also wants to increase its share in Germany from a tiny three to four percent of a market which Staib says is the world's third largest. Germany accounted for 2.5 percent of turnover in 1995, or three billion francs.
It will seek alliances with other industrial companies rather than acquire firms, as the Germany market is tightly held. Expansion in emerging markets will also be done through local alliances and joint ventures.
Schneider last year bought out Daimler-Benz AG's 50 percent share in AEG Schneider Automation unit.
Schneider posted 1995 sales of 59.42 billion francs and net attributable profit of 817 million. It reported 1996 first half net profit of 503 million francs, at the low end of market expectations.
Schneider is selling Spie to Amec Plc and to Spie employees for one billion francs, subject to regulatory approvals. Amec will gain between 40-48.6 percent of Spie for an injection of 40 million stg.
-- Pierre Tran, Paris newsroom +33 1 4221 5452
