Eurotunnel Plc, the debt-laden Channel Tunnel operator, pledged on Monday to recover from the public relations disaster which followed last November's tunnel fire and said it expected to restore lost market share in 1997.
Speaking from Eurotunnel's Folkestone base in England, Patrick Ponsolle, chairman, outlined the group's review of 1996 with an update on sales and the debt refinancing in the aftermath of the fire which caused a partial shutdown of services in the key Christmas period.
Ponsolle assured investors that the financial fallout from last November's fire would not hit its debt rescue plan clinched in October or derail long-term growth.
"The board...believes that the November fire should not have any significant effect on the long-term financial performance of the company, nor will there be any need to review the financial restructuring plan," said Eurotunnel in a statement.
The shareholder meeting to approve the debt plan has been delayed to June, when all tunnel services resume.
Eurotunnel said its banking syndicate had taken the opportunity of the delay to the meeting to ask the remaining syndicate of bankers to extend the debt standstill arrangement to December.
Richard Hannah, analyst at UBS, said "The fact that the refinancing will not have to be restructured is the key message for investors."
Eurotunnel also provided evidence of its sales surviving last year's fire, with passenger numbers sharply ahead and an "encouraging" outlook for 1997.
Ponsolle told the Folkestone press briefing that revenues in the fourth quarter of 1997 were expected to be "substantially higher" than the same 1996 period, making him "cautiously optimistic" for 1998.
The embattled Anglo-French group which recently restructured near to nine billion pounds in debt, said its efforts to claw back lost sales coupled with cutbacks in cross-Channel capacity by the ferry companies would fuel the rise in revenues.
In the first major trading review since the fire, the group reported that unaudited estimated turnover for 1996 was 450 million pounds ($752.5 million), up from 300 million in 1995.
The group said the sales growth was achieved "despite a substantial loss of revenue in the last seven weeks (of 1996)."
Thirteen million passengers travelled through the tunnel last year by the Le Shuttle car service or the Eurostar passenger trains, up from eight million the previous year.
Eurotunnel said once full services resumed in June it should be able to increase its market share in the second half.
"This market share should be comparable to, if not higher than, autumn 1996, and revenues at the end of this year should be higher than at the end of 1996," it said.
"As expected, Eurotunnel has provided a morale booster," added UBS' Hannah. Sales growth was in line with expectations.
Eurotunnel sought to stress that no damage had been done to consumer confidence by publishing the results of a commissioned Gallup survey which found 77 percent of French questioned and 68 percent of British believed the tunnel was safe.
Looking at a breakdown of the latest Eurotunnel traffic data, Eurostar increased passenger numbers by 67 percent to 4.86 million for the full year and by 69 percent for the 11 months up to the November fire which led to a temporary closure.
Le Shuttle car tourist traffic rose 70 percent to 2.07 million cars in 1996, with coach traffic up 148 percent to 57,692 coaches. Le Shuttle freight traffic was up 33 percent to 519,003 trucks for the year.
Eurotunnel shares edged up two pence to 78 in London and rose 20 centimes to 7.10 francs in Paris.
