The European Airbus consortium said on Tuesday it was confidently pressing ahead with studies on a 555-seat passenger plane despite a decision by archrival Boeing to scale back work on a larger jumbo jet.
Boeing on Monday said market conditions did not justify the risk and expense of building a new version of its 747 jumbo jet, the 747-X, and it was diverting half the 1,000 staff on that project to smaller planes.
"We are confident the A3XX will meet market needs," an Airbus spokesman said. "The signs from major airlines working with us on shaping the A3XX are definitely encouraging."
Airbus, ever quick to seize on any perceived gaps in Boeing's armour, says airlines want an all-new plane rather than Boeing's 747-X, which the Airbus spokesman said was the "end of the line for a product developed in the late 1960s".
"Airlines want to fly into the 21st century facing forward, not backwards," the spokesman added.
Airbus must attack Boeing's monopoly on the large-capacity segment and is studying designs for an A3XX product family which it hopes to launch in 1998 for service in 2003.
It wants to grab at least half of the aircraft market by the end of the decade, up from its estimated historic share of 35 percent. But it lacks large planes to compete with Boeing's 777 giant twinjet and the best-selling 747 jumbo.
The four-nation consortium differs with Boeing over the potential market and development costs for a new large plane.
Airbus forecasts a market of 1,383 planes seating more than 400 passengers over the next 20 years, while Boeing believes demand would only stretch to 470 planes seating 500 or more, which would not allow it to get a return on its money.
A basic A3XX would cost around $200 million, giving potential sales worth more than $275 billion on the Airbus forecast.
"A split market would have been a big challenge for two manufacturers but now Boeing is opting out, that enhances our prospects," the Airbus spokesman said.
Airbus accepts the view that the market will fragment further as people want to fly more frequently, non-stop, long distance between city pairs.
The "fragmentation" effect was one of the factors cited by Boeing for cutting demand for larger planes and reducing the importance of big airport hubs.
But Airbus believes it will meet that market change with its A340 long-haul plane and that the A3XX will co-exist.
Saturation of air routes and airport landing slots calls for higher capacity planes, it argues. Countering critics who point to the already lengthy waits at airports, it says its A3XX designs would allow a quicker passenger turnaround than the jumbo.
Airbus is talking to 14 leading airlines on what the plane should offer and is confident that it can match or better the airlines' operating demands. These include fitting within an 80 metre "box" at the airport terminal.
It is officially sticking to its estimated $8 billion development cost for the A3XX, despite scepticism among some experts that it cannot be done for less than $15 billion.
Even though, privately, Airbus executives concede that the cost could be nearer $10 billion, they say they will try to contain costs to $8 billion.
Airbus is a consortium made up of French state-owned Ste Nationale Industrielle Aerospatiale, British Aerospace Plc, Daimler-Benz Aerospace (a unit of Daimler-Benz AG) and Construcciones Aeronauticas SA (CASA) of Spain.
