France's national audit office on Monday criticised a lack of clarity and insufficient competition in the water supply market, dominated by two giant companies Cie Generale des Eaux and Lyonnaise des Eaux.
"There is a high degree of concentration. That is not to say competition is absent, but it is organised competition," said Francois Logerot, author of the Cour des Comptes (court of auditors) report.
"It may be that concentration in this sector is accentuated by agreements between these companies...sometimes by creating joint subsidiaries at the request of local councils."
Logerot cited as an example the Saint-Etienne city council, where the water company Societe Stephanoise des Eaux is jointly owned by Lyonnaise des Eaux Dumez and Generale des Eaux (CGE).
The report, presented at a news conference, said the private sector held 75 percent of the supply of drinking water in France in 1991, up from 60 percent in 1980 and 31 percent in 1954.
The price of water rose by a national average 47.7 percent from 1990 to 1994, it said.
Significant price rises occurred where contracts were awarded to the private sector, Logerot said.
"Sometimes there was a catch-up effect but there were also excesses and abnormal situations."
Lyonnaise officials were not available for comment. But CGE noted in a statement that the report said the main reason for rising water prices was higher quality and increasing investment needs.
It said the official audit pointed to a near doubling of the cost of water treatment between 1990 and 1995, while the price to the consumer rose by 30 percent.
Logerot said local authorities often awarded contracts to the water companies in exchange for payments which the companies then recovered in the price charged to customers.
The study followed a 1995 law which banned "right of entry" payments that water companies paid to win an operating licence.
The report cited the Alpine city of Grenoble, where a contract with Lyonnaise des Eaux resulted in the conviction for bribery of the mayor, former Gaullist minister Alain Carignon.
Grenoble used the proceeds of the water contract to finance its general expenditure, while accounting principles call for water expenses to be kept separate from the general budget.
The CGE statement said much of the criticism in the report related to the past, when payment for contracts was legal. It added that the company was pleased such payments were banned and the duration of those contracts was limited.
CGE said the water market was highly competitive and 1996 had shown that when contracts expired, there was competition to win new licences. The sector was also subject to strict controls by a number of public bodies, including competition and quality experts.
The audit office called for tighter water management and said higher water quality standards contained in a 1992 law would require annual investment of around 14 billion francs.
