French subscriber television company Canal Plus said on Friday that it was merging with Nethold, a Dutch satellite television company, to create one of the world's largest pay-TV groups.
Nethold is jointly held by Richemont SA, which is quoted on the Zurich and Johannesburg stock exchanges and MIH Holdings Ltd, a listed holding company.
"This merger is a major strategic move, resulting in the creation of one of the largest television groups in the world...particularly in the field of pay-TV with over 8.5 million subscribers," Canal Plus said in a statement.
The new group will have significant positions in France, Italy, Spain, Scandinavia, the Benelux countries and Germany, as well as a presence in several growing markets in central Europe.
The Paris stockmarket authorities had suspended trading in Canal Plus shares on Friday morning, sparking speculation of a link up between the French firm and Nethold.
Its stock closed at 1,169 francs on Thursday.
Utilities group Cie Generale des Eaux, a key shareholder in Canal Plus, said in a separate statement that it was delighted with the merger plan, which marked big step in Canal Plus's international development.
The pact would give the French company access to the fast growing Italian market, Generale des Eaux said.
It would also give the new group greater weight in negotiating purchases of copyrights and open opportunities for the launch of European theme channels.
Generale des Eaux said it was comfortable with its investment in Canal Plus. It said that, in agreement with other Canal Plus shareholders, it would seek to maintain the same scale of investment in the new company.
Under the terms of the deal, Canal Plus will buy 100 percent of Nethold from Richemont and MIH, paying with 6.1 million new Canal Plus shares and $45 million in cash.
Following the issue of new Canal Plus shares, Richemont and MIH will respectively own 15 and five percent of Canal Plus. Cie Financiere Richemont has interests in luxury goods and tobacco and owns such famous brandnames as Cartier, Mont Blanc, Rothmans and Dunhill.
Canal Plus said the deal had the backing of its main shareholders, media group Havas, Generale des Eaux, bank Ste Generale and state bank Caisse des Depots et Consignations. It is subject to regulatory and shareholder approval.
