Troubled Channel Tunnel operator Eurotunnel SA/Plc is due to release first-half results on Monday but analysts said any attempt to forecast the figures was futile, given the uncertainties over its debt restructuring.
"Everything depends on resolving the financial situation. If they announce a good figure...that might help, but it's really a face-off between the company and the bankers," Olivier Machou, analyst at brokerage Leven said.
Eurotunnel needs to agree a refinancing of its $12.3 billion bank debt by the end of September, having asked in July for two court-appointed mediators to stay on to negotiate a deal with its some 220-strong bank syndicate.
Machou said it was hard to forecast results due to "dumping" in the price war between Eurotunnel and ferry companies as they battle for a share of cross-Channel traffic between Britain and France.
"It's not a stock that you can take a view based on half-year figures, especially as the first half comes before the summer season," one analyst said.
However, one analyst at a large French brokerage said he had a rough forecast of a 2.5 billion franc ($492 million) net loss and an operating loss of around 100 million.
The Channel Tunnel operator posted first-half sales of 1.79 billion francs, up from 806 million a year ago. It made a net loss for the full year last year of 7.196 billion francs on turnover of 2.266 billion.
The headline figures will likely be flattered by the fact that Eurotunnel did not have all its services running a year ago, said Jeff Summers, head of research at debt specialist Klesch and Co in London.
Stripping out the minimum usage fee that the railway operators pay, he expected a 25-30 percent improvement in the underlying results from a year ago.
In sterling terms, Summers has pencilled in a 22 million pound ($34.45 million) pretax, pre-interest loss versus 121 million a year ago. With benign currency movements, it may break even.
Operating cashflow should at least double to 56 million sterling before interest and capital expenditure, compared with 29 million.
"Everything is going in its favour," Summers said. He cited the British government's recent decision to allow cooperation between ferry companies to pool their capacity and the European Commission's decision not to extend the duty-free sales regime beyond 1999.
Pooling by rivals such as P&amp;O and Stena would lead to "a reduction in direct competition" for Eurotunnel, while the loss of duty-free sales, representing 250 million sterling of soft subsidies for the ferries, would push ferry firms to raise ticket prices.
Eurotunnel could then raise its prices and boost turnover.
The cross-Channel market has also grown much faster even than Eurotunnel forecast, with traffic up 20 percent last year and estimated growth of 13-15 percent this year, Summers said.
Richard Branson, head of the London &amp; Continental Railways (LCR) group which runs the Eurostar high-speed train concession, has forecast it will hit six million passengers in the financial year 1996/97 and 10 million in 18 months.
If that happens, Eurotunnel could receive revenues above the minimum usage fee as higher service levels trigger extra payments. ($1=5.077 French Franc) ($1=.6385 Pound)
