European aircraft consortium Airbus said on Friday it had no evidence that archrival Boeing was putting pressure on U.S. suppliers to prevent them from working on Airbus' planned A3XX large plane.
Daimler-Benz Aerospace (Dasa) chairman, Manfred Bischoff, said on Thursday he was concerned Boeing and merger partner McDonnell Douglas were signalling to a big U.S. subcontractor, understood to be Northrop Grumman, not to work on the Airbus project, newspapers reported.
"We have no evidence of any kind of pressure," an Airbus spokesman said.
But an industry source close to Airbus said Boeing had put pressure on Northrop to stay out of the A3XX project, which threatens Boeing's lucrative monopoly of the high-capacity segment with its 747 jumbo. "It is a fact," he said.
Dasa is a partner in Airbus Industrie, alongside France's Aerospatiale, British Aerospace Plc, and Casa of Spain.
Boeing was not immediately available for comment.
Airbus had been in exploratory talks with Northrop over supplying engine housing sections for the A3XX but those negotiations had ended, the industry source said.
Airbus has been looking for risk-sharing partners to supply up to 40 percent of the targeted $8 billion in the A3XX development costs. The plane would seat 550 passengers in the basic version, which it wants to enter service in 2003.
Airbus managing director Jean Pierson told journalists on Thursday at the Toulouse headquarters that he would lay out Airbus' competition concerns on the Boeing merger when he gives evidence to the U.S. Federal Trade Commission and the European Commission, as expected.
In the long term, the Boeing merger "will pose a problem for Europe's civil aviation industry," he said, adding there would effects in military markets, particularly helicopters.
The industry source said the merged Boeing/McDonnell company would have bigger clout on suppliers, have a wider technology base though its portfolio of patents and gain larger access to indirect state funds for research and development through military programmes.
But Pierson said the merger was inevitable. "The Boeing-McDonnell merger will go ahead," he said.
Airbus is determined to fight back and is holding to its aim of securing a half share of the world passenger plane market by the early part of the next decade. A niche player strategy was doomed to failure, as McDonnell Douglas and Fokker found out, he said.
The consortium needs to field products at the top and bottom end of the range, with respectively the A3XX and a 100-seater plane to be built with China and Singapore, as well as extend the A340 family of long-range jets to compete against Boeing.
