China is not expected to be in the international market for sugar before mid-1997 as stocks are high and domestic prices are recovering in the lead up to the harvest, traders and Western industry sources said on Wednesday.
But a lack of cash among state-run sugar processors could affect farmers' willingness to keep growing sugar cane and pressure the industry in the long-term, they said.
China had up to two million tonnes of processed sugar in reserve after massive imports in 1995 that have yet to be fully absorbed, a Hong Kong trader said.
"No one knows the actual figure because it's a state secret," he said of China's sugar reserves.
"I would think there is something between one and two million tonnes, because they imported 3.3 million tonnes in 1995 and it takes a long time to use up," he said.
China's sugar demand had not increased by very much over the eight million tonnes of recent years, traders said.
"China's economy in 1996 has not been that good, so consumption has not really gone up," another Asian trader said.
"Sugar is not an essential item in China and people can go without it when money is tight," he said.
The bulk of the Chinese market is industrial, traders said.
Central authorities are expected to maintain tight control over the sugar industry, encouraged by the success of an ongoing crackdown on smuggling, traders said.
Millions of tonnes of sugar were smuggled into China in 1994 and 1995 on false or altered import licences, flooding the market and pushing ex-factory prices below break-even point.
The crackdown, which was long and severe, brought some control back to the sugar industry, traders said, and prices are finally starting to move up.
No licences had been issued this year, traders said.
A tonne of processed sugar in major production areas in the southwest of the country is now fetching 4,100 to 4,200 yuan (US$494-$506), up from 3,800 yuan (US$458) a tonne a few months ago, traders and industry executives said.
The head of a Western company with joint venture interests in Guangxi province said this was "putting a smile on our faces for the first time in months".
Government-set cane purchasing prices in Guangxi, China's major sugar grower, have not been raised from last season's 250 to 280 yuan ($30-33) a tonne, he said.
But many state-run sugar processors lacked cash to pay farmers for the cane they grew last season, and had either been late in paying or had handed over IOUs instead, he said.
China News Service, a semi-official agency in Hong Kong, reported in August the Agricultural Bank of China's Guangxi branch had been ordered to lend 400 million yuan ($48 million) to the province's sugar industry to buy 100,000 tonnes of sugar.
Many farmers had already planted cane for the current season when the cash shortages began to bite, but they might be discouraged from planting again if the same happens this year, the Western industry source said.
China's sugar harvest begins in mid-November and according to the official Xinhua News Agency could climb two million tonnes over 1995's 5.65 million tonnes.
Customs figures released in late September show China's sugar exports in the first eight months of 1996 were up 310.1 percent on the same year-ago period to 462,459 tonnes.
Imports fell 54.9 percent in that time to 830,000 tonnes, the figures show.
China permits raw sugar imports for the purpose of tolling, or processing and re-exporting.
(US$1 = 8.3 yuan)
-- Hong Kong newsroom (852) 2843-6470
