China's decision to ban imports of some U.S. chicken meat due to concerns about a fowl plague could hit a multi-million dollar export business, although U.S. officials said on Friday their chickens do not have the disease.
"We don't have highly pathogenic avian influenza (A.I.) in the U.S.," a U.S. quarantine official told Reuters.
"There is no record of it being found in domestic poultry," he said. It had been eradicated after an outbreak in the 1980s.
"It affects the birds but not the meat, the meat does not transmit anything to people."
Washington's agriculture attache in Beijing notified his head office on Thursday that China had blocked imports of chicken meat from 10 U.S. states because of concerns about highly pathogenic avian influenza.
U.S. sources in Beijing said China's Administration of Animal and Plant Quarantine (CAPQ) had confirmed the ban by telephone on Friday and was preparing notification which was expected some time next week.
"We initially heard about a ban on the import of poultry chicks, but no one at CAPQ has been able to confirm or deny that," a senior diplomatic source said.
"Now, if poultry chicks aren't banned for reasons of A.I., why is poultry meat banned? It makes no sense," he said.
U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) representatives would probably meet Ministry of Agriculture officials on Tuesday in a bid to resolve the issue, an embassy source said.
Asked to confirm reports of the block on chicken imports, a quarantine official in Beijing told Reuters by telephone: "It is true." He declined to give details.
Officials of the China National Cereals, Oils and Foodstuffs Import and Export Corporation (Ceroils) said they had heard of the ban but also declined to give further information.
Customs officials said they were unaware of the ban.
U.S. officials in Beijing on Friday said any ban China might place on U.S. chicken meat imports because of avian influenza was not based on sound scientific evidence.
"It comes down to good science versus bad science," a senior official said on condition of anonymity.
Poultry meat was not a likely vehicle for transmission of the virus, he said, and U.S. poultry meat exports posed no threat to the international poultry industry.
The ban could have a major impact on U.S. poultry exports to China. In 1995, 330,000 tonnes worth US$445 million was trans-shipped through Hong Kong alone, according to the U.S. Poultry and Egg Export Council.
China is the second largest market for U.S. poultry products after Russia, the council's Hong Kong director, Sarah Li, said.
"It is the only market to take paws," she said, referring to chicken feet. "People say U.S. chickens need wheelchairs because all their feet are going to China."
Thirty containers a day of chicken feet moved from Hong Kong into China, she said. Any hold-ups would cost importers dearly because of the high cost of storage in Hong Kong.
The Chinese chicken ban is the latest headache for U.S. agriculture officials in China who have been dealing with fears of importing potentially tainted products for over 20 years.
Wheat is a continuing issue, with China refusing to import grain from the U.S. Pacific northwest because it cannot be guaranteed to be free of a fungus called TCK smut.
Washington claims the fungus is harmless, that the ban is not based on good science, that it cuts annual U.S. wheat sales to China by 500,000 tonnes and is a non-tariff trade barrier.
China, on the other hand, says TCK smut could cut domestic wheat yields if it got into the domestic growing areas.
-- Hong Kong News Room (852) 2843-6470
