China's decision to ban imports of some U.S. chicken meat due to concerns about a fowl plague could hit a multi-million dollar export business, although U.S. officials said Friday American chickens do not have the disease.
"We don't have highly pathogenic avian influenza (A.I.) in the U.S.," a U.S. quarantine official told Reuters. "There is no record of it being found in domestic poultry," he said, adding that the disease had been eradicated after an outbreak in the 1980s.
"It affects the birds but not the meat. The meat does not transmit anything to people," the official said.
Washington's agriculture attache in Beijing notified his head office on Thursday that China had blocked imports of chicken meat from 10 U.S. states because of concerns about highly pathogenic avian influenza.
U.S. sources in Beijing said China's Administration of Animal and Plant Quarantine, or CAPQ, had confirmed the ban by telephone on Friday and was preparing notification, which was expected some time next week.
"We initially heard about a ban on the import of poultry chicks, but no one at CAPQ has been able to confirm or deny that," a senior diplomatic source said.
"Now, if poultry chicks aren't banned for reasons of A.I., why is poultry meat banned? It makes no sense," he said.
Asked to confirm reports of the block on chicken imports, a quarantine official in Beijing told Reuters by telephone: "It is true." He declined to give details.
However, Customs officials said they were unaware of the ban.
U.S. officials in Beijing said any ban China might place on U.S. chicken meat imports because of avian influenza was not based on sound scientific evidence. "It comes down to good science versus bad science," one senior official said.
The ban could have a major impact on U.S. poultry exports to China. In 1995, 330,000 metric tons worth $445 million was trans-shipped through Hong Kong alone, according to the U.S. Poultry and Egg Export Council. China is the second-largest market for U.S. poultry products after Russia, the council's Hong Kong director, Sarah Li, said.
"It is the only market to take paws," she said, referring to chicken feet. "People say U.S. chickens need wheelchairs because all their feet are going to China."
The Chinese chicken ban is the latest headache for U.S. agriculture officials in China. Wheat is a continuing issue, with China refusing to import grain from the Pacific northwest because it cannot be guaranteed to be free of a fungus called TCK smut.
Washington claims the fungus is harmless, that the ban is not based on good science, that it cuts annual U.S. wheat sales to China by 500,000 tons and is a non-tariff trade barrier. China, on the other hand, says TCK smut could cut domestic wheat yields if it got into the domestic growing areas.
