China's decision to ban imports of some U.S. chicken meat due to concerns about a fowl plague could hit a multi-million dollar export business, although U.S. officials said on Friday their chickens do not have the disease.
"We don't have highly pathogenic avian influenza in the U.S.," a U.S. quarantine official told Reuters.
"There is no record of it being found in domestic poultry," he said. It had been eradicated after an outbreak in the 1980s.
"It affects the birds but not the meat, the meat does not transmit anything to people," he said.
Washington's agriculture attache in Beijing confirmed by fax to his head office on Thursday that China had blocked imports of chicken meat from 10 U.S. states because of concerns about highly pathogenic avian influenza.
U.S. sources in Beijing said nothing had been received in writing about the ban from China's Administration of Animal and Plant Quarantine (CAPQ).
"It came out of the blue," a senior diplomatic source said.
Embassy officials hoped to meet Ministry of Agriculture officials on Friday or Monday, an embassy source said.
Asked to confirm reports of the block on chicken imports, a quarantine official in Beijing told Reuters by telephone: "It is true." He declined to give details.
Officials of the China National Cereals, Oils and Foodstuffs Import and Export Corporation (Ceroils) said they had heard of the ban but also declined to give further information.
Customs officials said they were unaware of the ban.
The ban could have a major effect on U.S. poultry exports to China, which in 1995 totalled 330,000 tonnes trans-shipped through Hong Kong alone, and worth US$445 million, according to the U.S. Poultry and Egg Export Council.
China is the second largest market for U.S. poultry products after Russia, the council's Hong Kong director Sarah Li said.
"It is the only market to take paws," she said, referring to chicken feet. "People say U.S. chickens need wheelchairs because all their feet are going to China."
Thirty containers a day of chicken feet moved from Hong Kong into China, she said. Any hold-ups would cost importers dearly because of the high cost of storage in Hong Kong.
U.S. Agriculture Department (USDA) official John Reddington told a meeting of U.S. poultry producers on Thursday the industry should diversify its export markets as it was vulnerable to changes in sanitary rules such as one that halted shipments to Russia earlier this year.
The drop in prices following the changes in Russia could have put some U.S. producers out of business had it continued, he said.
The Chinese chicken ban is the latest headache for U.S. agriculture officials in China who have been dealing with fears of importing potentially tainted products for over 20 years.
Wheat is an on-going issue, with China refusing to import the grain from the U.S. Pacific northwest because it cannot be guaranteed to be free of a fungus called TCK smut.
Washington claims the fungus is harmless, that the ban is not based on good science, that it cuts annual U.S. wheat sales to China by 500,000 tonnes and is a non-tariff trade barrier.
China, on the other hand, says TCK smut could cut domestic wheat yields if it got into the domestic growing areas.
U.S. officials on Friday said any ban that China might place on U.S. chicken meat imports because of avian influenza was not based on sound scientific evidence.
"It comes down to good science versus bad science," a senior official said on condition of anonymity.
Poultry meat was not a likely vehicle for transmission of the virus, he said, and U.S. poultry meat exports posed no threat to the international poultry industry.
-- Hong Kong News Room (852) 2843-6470
