Asian traders raised their eyebrows on Monday at reports that China had bought hundreds of thousands of tonnes of soybean oil, saying authorities had issued import licences for only a fraction of that.
"Total quota issued (for soybean oil imports) were a little over 100,000 tonnes," a trader in Shanghai said.
"People with quota are not in a hurry to import," he said, because c&amp;f (cost and freight) prices to China were still too high for local buyers.
A Chinese trader in Hong Kong concurred, saying high domestic stocks and a near-record domestic rapeseed crop of eight million tonnes meant there was as yet no demand in China for imported vegetable oil.
Rumours swept the Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT) on Friday that China may have bought 173,000 to 200,000 tonnes of South American soybean oil in the previous few days.
Argentine soybean oil was trading on Thursday at US$500 a tonne FOB (free on board) for October delivery while U.S. soybean oil was $510 a tonne, sources in the U.S. said.
Asian traders said these levels were still a good $40 away from prices Chinese buyers would be willing to pay.
But an official of Beijing's food trading arm China National Cereals, Oils and Foodstuffs Import Export Corp (COFCO) told Reuters China had not yet issued new soybean oil quota or import licences for 1996.
Quotas for 1995 had expired at the end of June, she said. Palm oil import quotas had been issued in July, she said, but declined to give more details.
China could come into the market for vegetable oil late in 1996 or early in 1997 to make sure there was enough in stock for Chinese New Year in February, traders said.
A Chinese source said 140,000 tonnes of soyoil import licences were issued by central authorities in August.
He said 50,000 tonnes of soyoil had already been imported on that quota, and 40,000 tonnes of quota had been allocated to Tibet so licences could be sold there for cash.
Authorities in Tibet, contacted by telephone, said they were unaware of this.
One trading house source in the region reported a busy day on the telephone on Monday, fielding Chinese inquiries for soybean oil. He thought perhaps this was an indication quota had been issued.
Relevant officials with the Ministry of Agriculture could not be immediately reached for comment.
An executive with an international marketing organisation who met Shanghai grain bureau officials last week said they had no indication of when import quotas for vegetable oil would be issued.
"They said they were going to apply for licences, but they had no idea when they were likely to be issued," she said by telephone.
Prices quoted last Thursday by the National Grains and Oils Information Centre in Shanghai put grade one soybean oil in northeastern Jilin province at 7,000 yuan ($843) a tonne, and grade two in Tianjin at 7,200 yuan ($867) a tonne.
Freight information from Brazil details 18,000 tonnes of vegetable oil due to be loaded for China in early October. No other details were available.
Soyoil imported into China without an import licence carries a 120 percent import tax. Importers with licences must pay 13 percent import duty and a 13 percent value-added tax on top of that.
-- Hong Kong newsroom (852) 2843 6470
