Fears China has been cancelling soybean and soybean meal orders in the wake of tumbling world prices came as no surprise to Asian grain traders on Tuesday.
"Prices have dropped US$10 (a tonne) since Friday -- there is the incentive," a Hong Kong trader said.
"If you can buy cheaper material, then you probably will, no matter who or where you are," he said. "But there is no unsold cargo in the market. Most has been committed. We're sold out.
"So the CBOT (Chicago Board of Trade) drops $10, can you buy cheaper? No. There is no physical available," he added.
CBOT soymeal prices closed lower on Monday on fears China might have been cancelling soybean and soymeal purchases following the recent price slides, traders there said.
Soymeal closed unchanged to $4 a tonne lower, with October down $1.60 to $235.10 a tonne.
Asian grain traders could not confirm the rumours.
Traders last week reported total soybean and soybean meal purchases by China of up to 800,000 tonnes. The sales would show up in U.S. Department of Agriculture figures this week.
The Chinese swoop on the market followed an extended public holiday while China celebrated National Day on October 1.
During those three weekdays of rest -- September 30 to October 3 -- CBOT soy product prices fell on worries among traders the crop would be bigger than expected.
China scooped up between 600,000 and 800,000 tonnes of beans and meal. Traders reported c&amp;f (cost and freight) prices at between $300 and $310 a tonne.
On Tuesday, however, traders said Chinese buyers, notorious for their price consciousness, would be keen to get even better prices and to increase their profit margins.
"Now that Chinese buyers are responsible for their own profit and loss, this is becoming more frequent," another Hong Kong trader said.
The shortage of physical availability would see Chinese buyers who wanted to increase their margins by cancelling previous orders missing out altogether, he said.
"They are still waiting for the dust to settle down, and maybe the price will stabilise in one or two days," he said.
"The price today is affordable for the Chinese but they are wanting prompt delivery and there is none around for them."
China is in the midst of the peak soymeal consumption season and has been expected to import significant quantities before the end of 1996.
The possibility that a new import tax regime will be introduced from January 1, 1997, would serve to dampen orders in December, traders said, and orders for delivery before year-end should be high.
Ideally, imports should arrive before new crop soybean products start coming on to the market in January, a Chinese trader said.
Before then, China should have imported 300,000 to 400,000 tonnes of soybean meal to make sure the larders are full for Chinese New Year, which in 1997 falls in February.
"Feed industry demand will go down seasonally after February, so we will see increased domestic supply and decreased demand from February to April," he said.
"Then from April/May demand will go up again so they will need more imports."
This year's soybean crop is expected to be two or three percent down on the 13 million tonnes harvested in 1995.
-- Hong Kong newsroom (852) 2843-6470
