China has banned imports of poultry from 10 U.S. states, threatening an export market worth about $500 million a year, because of fears it carries a fowl plague, a U.S. embassy official in Beijing said on Wednesday.
"China has placed a ban on imports of all poultry and poultry products from 10 states," the official said.
Chinese authorities had indicated fears the poultry products carried a virus called highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI), he said.
The states affected are Arkansas, Florida, Maryland, Utah Minnesota, New Jersey, New York, North Carolina, Texas and Wisconsin.
The U.S. embassy official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said there seemed to be some confusion on the part of Chinese quarantine officials over the difference between HPAI and avian influenza (AI).
"HPAI has not been found in the U.S. since 1984 and we believe there has been some confusion about the type of AI virus found in the United States and noted by China," he said.
A U.S. quarantine official based in China told Reuters last week the virus could not be transmitted to people who ate the meat of infected birds.
China is the second biggest market in the world, after Russia, for U.S. poultry products and is its only market for chicken feet.
U.S. poultry exports to China in 1995 totalled 330,000 tonnes transshipped through Hong Kong alone, worth US$445 million, according to the U.S. Poultry and Egg Export Council.
Every day 30 23-tonne containers of U.S. chicken feet crossed the border from Hong Kong into China, the council's spokeswoman Sarah Li said.
The AI virus could be found worldwide, particularly in wild fowl, the embassy official said, and had not been isolated from commercial poultry flocks in the United States.
Another U.S. official told Reuters the AI virus may have been detected in ostriches imported from the United States as breeding stock on Chinese ostrich farms.
"Ostrich raising in China has become very popular and a lot of the breeding stock is brought in from the U.S.," the marketing official said on condition of anonymity.
"We heard that some of the ostrich breeding stock had been found to have AI," the official said.
News of the ban surfaced last week and was confirmed by Chinese quarantine officials to the U.S. embassy on Friday.
Officials of China's Administration of Animal and Plant Quarantine (CAPQ) and the U.S. Embassy in Beijing met on Tuesday in an effort to resolve the issue, the embassy official said.
"It was a frank, candid and open meeting -- they listened to us and agreed that we should talk more about it, which we will as soon as possible," the official said.
"Basically, we said we think there's been a misunderstanding, but they said what if it (the AI virus) mutates? We said it didn't and they rejected that," he said.
The rejection threatened U.S. poultry markets in China and had also been extended to poultry and poultry meat imports from the Netherlands for the same reason, he said.
Officials of the U.S. Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service would travel from the United States to meet their Chinese counterparts. No date had been fixed.
-- Hong Kong newsroom (852) 2843-6470
