Smiles are coming back to the faces of Asian sugar traders and industry executives, who are smacking their lips at the prospect of a stabilised Chinese market and decent profits for sugar mills there.
Prices for sugar in China were starting to move to levels not only covering factory costs but providing some profits, trade and industry sources said on Wednesday.
White sugar prices in Beijing and Shanghai were around 4,400 yuan (US$530) a tonne, reflecting prices of three or four months ago, trading sources said.
Ex-factory prices in the growing regions, however, were now a good 300-400 yuan higher, the sources said.
"The lowest price in 1996 was 3,650 renminbi a tonne in the producing areas," a Chinese trader in Hong Kong said.
Transport to the major cities added 150 to 200 yuan, plus handling costs, he said. So current prices were indicative of when the sugar was purchased and stored.
Prices in the producing areas, notably Guangxi and Guangdong provinces in the south, had moved to between 4,500 and 4,700 yuan a tonne.
"The Chinese sugar market is still a very attractive market," an industry executive who runs a number of joint venture sugar factories in southern China said.
"It is not yet fully mature and there will be an inbalance between supply and demand for a long time," he said on condition of anonymity.
He put annual Chinese demand at eight to nine million tonnes.
"The government has stopped imports for the last three months, so I see the market getting back to normal," he said.
Imports in 1995 were 3.3 million tonnes. This year's harvest, which begins next month, is expected to be more than 7.5 million tonnes, over last year's 5.65 million.
Signs the market in China was beginning to stabilise were evident in the recent rise in wholesale prices for processed white sugar, he and other trade and industry sources said.
The tightness reflected in the rising prices would last until the beginning of the crushing season in November.
"The price could go to 5,000 (yuan per tonne)," a trader in Shanghai said.
Stocks of 1.5 to two million tonnes represented two months' consumption at the current peak consumption time, he said.
Even so, traders and industry sources did not see China having to import sugar before the middle of 1997.
Some rumours that China had recently purchased five to 10 cargoes -- or a maximum of 120,00 tonnes -- of Thai sugar were seen as an attempt to push up faltering Thai raw sugar premiums.
"I find it hard to believe because there are no sugar import licences," a Hong Kong trader said.
"The Thai premium was falling below $60 (per tonne) two weeks ago and I suspect people are spreading this rumour to push the premium back up," he said.
The premium on Thai sugar to China had recovered to around $70 for March-May contracts, he said.
Another trader in Hong Kong reported a secret deal in which a monastery in rural Tibet was granted sugar import licences, which it then sold to raise money for restoration work.
He said 50,000 tonnes of import quota was involved, and had been used to purchase raw Cuban sugar at US$3,000 a tonne.
"The central government gave the quota to the lamasery, then the monks sold the quota to raise money," he said.
The only other detail he would provide was that the Cuban sugar was not part of the annual 500,000-tonne barter deal between Beijing and Havana, and that it would arrive in China before the end of 1996.
-- Hong Kong newsroom (852) 2843-6470
