Up to 100,000 tonnes of copper held in Shanghai bonded warehouses, confounding the world market as to its source and ultimate fate, probably belongs to China's strategic state reserve, industry sources said on Friday.
Around 40,000 tonnes of the copper have already been moved to warehouses near the northern port of Yingkou, where some of the strategic stockpile was stored, they said.  
Just who owns the copper is a question that has kept traders and industry analysts guessing since the metal was channelled into Shanghai by the China National Nonferrous Metals Import and Export Corp (CNIEC) in June and July.
It was unclear whether or not the 40,000 tonnes had cleared customs -- which would provide some concrete indication that the strategic reserve, administered directly by the central government's State Planning Commission, owned the copper.
Traders have said the reserve could negotiate concessions on duties -- three percent import tax and 17 percent value-added tax -- that made the copper prohibitively expensive otherwise.  
But one source, the head of a Hong Kong trading house, said it made no difference if the copper was customs cleared or not.
"If they spend all this money moving the copper to Yingkou, it will be sitting there for years," he said.
"Once it arrives in Yingkou, it is subject to monitoring by the State Planning Commission, which has to give permission for any more movement; it is out of the hands of traders," he said.
Mystery has surrounded the Shanghai stockpile in recent months, with traders unsure not only of who owns it, but of its exact size and what its owner planned to do with it.  
Trading sources generally agreed it would be cost-effective to take the copper back into a depleted central reserve as it had already served its purpose in taking advantage of long-term backwardation on the London Metal Exchange (LME).
A backwardation occurs when the spot price of a metal is higher than the forward price.
CNIEC lent around 85,000 tonnes of copper onto the LME between April and June 1995 on behalf of the state reserve, running the state stockpile down to 115,000 tonnes from 200,000 tonnes previously.  
Traders in Asia said CNIEC could well have lent it to the market at around US$2,700 a tonne, and then paid somewhere between $2,200 and $2,400 a tonne when it started taking the metal back earlier this year.
This would have cleared CNIEC a healthy profit, which could then have been used to finance storage and other costs.
Word that CNIEC had offered the copper to European trading houses in a series of secret meetings unnerved an already jittery market.  
Industry analysts Bloomsbury Minerals Economics (BME) said on Wednesday the motivation of the owners of the 85,000 tonnes, "whoever they are, is the most important short-term fundamental" in an already tight world market.
BME repeated in its latest review rumours of involvement by Sumitomo Corp, with CNIEC said to be helping the Japanese trader unload its copper positions after it revealed in June losses of $1.8 billion in a decade of unauthorised deals.
Sumitomo and CNIEC have made no comments on the talk and Chinese traders said they know nothing of such an arrangement.  
Traders in Shanghai said on Thursday they were unaware of movements out of the Shanghai bonded warehouses. They reported more arrivals that were probably spot purchases.
They also expressed concern that the tonnage in bonded warehouses would move onto the domestic market.
But these concerns were irrelevant, a Singapore trader said, despite a forecast that domestic Chinese copper demand could hit one million tonnes this year.  
As with many commodities, "there is a desire (by the Chinese government) to keep a stockpile of the metal," he said. "You don't keep it to help industry, you keep it in case of emergency."
-- Hong Kong newsroom (852) 2843-6470
