Casualties are starting to mount as Chinese buyers of soybeans and soybean meal default or cancel contracts in the wake of falling international prices, Asian trading sources said on Thursday.
"We have stopped doing Chinese business for now," said a trader in Hong Kong with a major international house.
"We're waiting for the market to stabilise and are staying away from the possibility of defaults," he said.
Traders in Hong Kong, Singapore and China reported hearing of Chinese soymeal buyers delaying finance arrangements for orders in an attempt to force sellers to lower their prices.
Another Hong Kong source reported that Chinese buyers had defaulted on three to four cargoes, each of 50,000 tonnes, since last week when international prices began to fall.
"They are defaulting because PRC buyers delayed opening LCs (letters of credit) in the hope of squeezing another two or three dollars from their sellers," he said.
Traders have said these tactics are next to useless as physical soymeal for prompt delivery is tight, and would command a premium that would wipe out any extra profit.
Since entering the international trading arena earlier this decade, Chinese traders have earned themselves a reputation for dubious practices when it comes to paying for their orders.
In some cases, traders have reported, a Chinese buyer will default on or cancel an order for a commodity if the price falls after the order is placed and before it is delivered.
The Chinese company will then attempt to replace the commodity at the cheaper rate.
As a result, when prices of a commodity that is a hot item in China begin to fall, some international traders simply exit the market.
Others insist on deposits, and others grade Chinese traders according to their record of paying up and charge higher premiums accordingly.
Soybean meal has been the hot Chinese commodity of 1996, traders said, with arrivals from South America around 1.2 million tonnes since February.
Traders said maximum Chinese orders of U.S. meal in the past two weeks were 300,000 tonnes.
One trader claiming to have done 400,000 tonnes of beans and meal business in the past two weeks said he had letters of credit from his buyers for 350,000 tonnes.
His sales would show up in U.S. Department of Agriculture figures this week, he said.
The price of soybean meal on the Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT) has been on a rollercoaster ride since late September, and initially dipped while China was on holiday from September 30 to October 3 celebrating National Day.
On October 4, Chinese buyers scooped up more than 600,000 tonnes of beans and meal, mostly of U.S. origin, some South American, paying $300 to $310 a tonne, traders said.
But last Friday, prices started to fall again, by Tuesday coming off another $10 or so a tonne -- and word of Chinese cancellations and defaults began to circle.
Reports from Chicago on Wednesday described the market as perplexed over rumours China had bought or cancelled export orders for U.S. and Latin American soybeans and soymeal.
CBOT October soymeal closed at $236.30 a tonne, after Tuesday's $235.30.
