China has agreed not to enforce a ban on imports of U.S. poultry until after top-level quarantine talks scheduled to take place in Beijing next week, U.S. business and diplomatic sources said on Tuesday.
"We understand they (the Chinese authorities) have not issued any letter to the field banning imports, and that they will not until discussions are held," a senior diplomat in Beijing said.
China last week confirmed a ban on imports of poultry and poultry products from 10 U.S. states because of fears of a fowl plague known as highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI).
China is the second biggest market in the world, after Russia, for U.S. poultry products and is its only market for chicken feet.
U.S. poultry exports to China in 1995 totalled US$445 million, according to the U.S. Poultry and Egg Export Council. The states affected are Arkansas, Florida, Maryland, Minnesota, New Jersey, New York, North Carolina, Texas, Utah and Wisconsin.
A two-man delegation from Washington's Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS) would arrive in Beijing on Monday for talks with China's Administration of Animal and Plant Quarantine (CAPQ) on Wednesday, the diplomatic source said.
"We have been told they will hold off on any action until then," he said of the ban.
News of the ban surfaced on October 10, when the U.S. agriculture attache in Beijing confirmed to his head office that China feared U.S. poultry products bore the HPAI virus.
U.S. officials say U.S. poultry is free of HPAI virus and that Chinese quarantine personnel are confused about the difference between HPAI and avian influenza, or AI.
"We don't know what they identified," an APHIS official told Reuters.
"All we can say is that HPAI is not found in the U.S. The last time it was found (in 1984) it was eradicated and since then we have had no reports of HPAI at all."
AI is prevalent the world over, especially in wild fowl, and had not been isolated in commercial U.S. poultry flocks, he and other U.S. sources said.
"AI is not a concern for vets -- it's like the common cold and is not quarantinable," the APHIS source said.
U.S. and meat industry sources said the HPAI virus had been detected in ostrich breeding stock in the United States destined for ostrich farms in China.
During a trip to Texas by CAPQ personnel to look at U.S. ostriches, 22 birds had tested positive for HPAI, a U.S. source said.
A positive test did not necessarily mean the bird was ill with HPAI, he said, likening it to a tuberculosis skin test which, if positive, did not indicate definitively the presence of TB.
-- Hong Kong Newsroom (852) 2843-6352
