International copper prices are likely to stick to the high road for some time yet, pricing the metal out of the key China market, Far East metal traders said on Monday.
"The LME (London Metal Exchange) will move higher and will test US$2,100 (a tonne)," a base metal trader in Hong Kong said.
"We want it to go down. $1,800 to $1,900 is workable."
Copper prices on the LME rallied through the psychological barrier of US$2,000 a tonne on Friday, hitting $2,027 in late afternoon trading.
This rally pushed the international price above the domestic Chinese price, rendering imports senseless, traders said.
On the Shanghai Metal Exchange, the most active February 1997 contract opened at 19,550 yuan ($2,355) a tonne, consolidating around that level within the first half-hour.
China levies a three percent import duty and a 17 percent value-added tax (VAT) on copper imports, killing margins at current prices, traders said.
Soggy Chinese business would be further dampened, traders said. One source at a Chinese listed company said he had 200 tonnes of the red metal to sell at a premium of $100 over the LME spot price.
The premium on copper, CIF (cost, insurance and freight) to Hong Kong and Chinese ports, was $150 last week, traders said.
"We will not have any import business (with China) with such high LME prices," another trader in Hong Kong said. "We are getting calls from Chinese offering copper back to the market."
"Premiums are not the issue, the total price is the concern -- and even with no premium it is difficult," he said.
Among the bears, the head of a trading house in Hong Kong bullishly noted signs the central government was attempting to stimulate the property market could see copper and aluminium users stocking up.
Cancellation of interest rate subsidies, interest rate reductions and the removal of private car purchase quotas were aimed at stimulating the sluggish economy, he said.
"I think the whole picture will change," he said.
"We have been waiting for a very long time and we have known they (Chinese authorities) are moving in this direction. It will restart cash flow and that will re-stimulate the economy very, very quickly," he said.
He and other traders said Chinese consumers' stocks, usually kept at one month's supply or around 100,000 tonnes, have been run down.
"Consumers have nothing and if they have to accumulate investory in their warehouses because of the change of sentiment, the damage to the market will disappear," he said.
Other sources said the Shanghai Metal Exchange had around 15,000 tonnes of copper in stock.
Drawdowns from LME warehouse stocks over the past couple of months indicated demand in Europe was picking up, traders said.
"If it continues, we will not have enough material, especially as there is no scrap around at the moment and LME stocks are down (to 145,825 tonnes)," said the trading house boss.
"The situation could become critical by the end of the year," he said.
