U.S. officials are confident a China visit by senior agricultural experts will break an impasse that threatens a multi-million dollar Chinese market for U.S. poultry products, a U.S. agriculture official said on Tuesday.
"Things are looking good," the official in Beijing told Reuters on condition of anonymity.
"I would say we have all the evidence we think we need to convince them (the Chinese) there is no problem," he said.
Two senior U.S. agriculture officials would arrive in Beijing from Washington on Tuesday evening for meetings with Chinese quarantine and agriculture officials, he said.
The talks starting on Wednesday afternoon would focus on a ban China slapped on imports of poultry and poultry products from 10 U.S. states because of fears they carry a fowl plague known as highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI).
China's ban came to light on October 10 but has not yet been implemented as, U.S. sources said, Chinese officials decided to wait and hear first what the U.S. experts had to say.
The talks would initially centre on the technical and scientific aspects of the dispute, the Beijing source said.  
"We're trying to keep it that way so the trade issue does not come into it until the technical side has been presented," he said.
It would become a trade issue if the Chinese side did not accept U.S. scientific evidence "and if we feel they'll enforce a ban that has no technical or scientific basis," he said.
The U.S. side viewed as a favourable sign China's recent approval of two bovine semen centres and nine embryo transfer centres to import U.S. veterinarian technology, he said.
Bilateral meetings were also set for November on plant health, covering fruit imports, and on the long-simmering issue of wheat imports and a wheat fungus called TCK smut.
"And the secretary of state (Warren Christopher) is coming in November, so all of this is helping us negotiate better," the source said.
U.S. diplomats, agriculture officials and meat industry executives say HPAI does not exist in commercial U.S. flocks, having been eradicated in the mid-1980s.
They say China's Administration of Animal and Plant Quarantine (CAPQ) is confused about the difference between HPAI and avian influenza, or AI, which one source equated with the common cold.  
The HPAI virus was apparently detected in ostrich breeding stock in Texas destined for ostrich farms in China, and which were being inspected by CAPQ personnel.
Detection of the virus did not mean the bird was diseased, said a U.S. diplomat, likening it to a tuberculosis skin test.
The dispute threatens the United States' second biggest market after Russia for poultry and poultry products, and its only market for chicken feet, considered a delicacy in China.
U.S. poultry exports to China in 1995 totalled 330,000 tonnes trans-shipped through Hong Kong alone, worth US$445 million, according to the U.S. Poultry and Egg Export Council.
The council's representative in Hong Kong, Sarah Li, told Reuters that every day about 700 tonnes of U.S. chicken feet cross the border from Hong Kong into China.
-- Hong Kong News Room (852) 2843-6470
