Chinese and U.S. scientists are making good progress in meetings on China's decision to ban poultry imports from the United States, a U.S. source said on Thursday.
The Chinese government banned all imports of poultry and poultry products from 10 U.S. states earlier this month for fear it carried a virus called highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI).
Although the ban has yet to be implemented -- China wanted to hear what the U.S. experts had to say first -- it threatens an export market worth around US$500 million a year.
"The first set of meetings on Wednesday were frank, candid and held in a positive atmosphere," the source, who refused to be identified, said by telephone from Beijing.
The meetings are between Washington's Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS) and China's Administration of Animal and Plant Quarantine (CAPQ).
Two APHIS experts arrived in Beijing on Tuesday night and would stay in Beijing for as long as it took to solve the problem, the U.S. source said.
"There is no timetable," the source close to the talks said. "We are willing to take as much time as is needed in order to make sure the Chinese have as much information as they can to make an informed decision based on good science."
Meetings had already been scheduled for Thursday and would, if necessary, continue on Friday, he added.
APHIS experts, U.S. diplomats and meat industry executives say HPAI does not exist in commerical flocks in the United States, having been eradicated in the mid-1980s.
U.S. sources have said Chinese quarantine officials seem to have confused HPAI with the less-virulent avian influenza, or AI, which one APHIS source likened to the common cold.
Sources have said CAPQ officials would be joined by experts from other government departments for what sounded like a series of lectures and presentations by the APHIS team.
The U.S. source in Beijing said the Chinese had so far been receptive and were taking a "very positive approach".
U.S. sources said the plan was to concentrate initially on the technical side of the dispute before raising trade issues.
If the dispute goes beyond the differences the two countries have in interpreting science, Beijing could find itself accused of using bad science as a non-tariff trade barrier.
This is the case with wheat. China refuses to import wheat from specific areas of the United States because it cannot be guaranteed free of a fungus called TCK smut.
Washington says the fungus is harmless and that Beijing's policy of zero tolerance is a barrier to an extra 500,000 tonnes of U.S. wheat sales a year to China.
-- Hong Kong Newsroom (852) 2843 6470
