Talks aimed at averting a Chinese ban on imports of United States poultry have been hailed as a success by U.S. officials, who said on Friday they expected the issue to vanish without any disruption to a major market.
A Chinese ban on imports of poultry and poultry products from 10 U.S. states, worth nearly US$500 million a year, was now unlikely to be implemented, official U.S. sources said.
"I'm optimistic that the issue has been resolved," a U.S. diplomat in Beijing said by telephone.
"Hopefully, this thing will now be dropped. I'm not expecting any correspondence or a list -- sometimes no news is good news," he said, speaking on condition of anonymity.
A two-man team from Washington's Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS) spent two days in meetings with China's Administration of Animal and Plant Quarantine (CAPQ) and scientists from other government departments and universities.
The aim of the talks was to convince CAPQ that U.S. poultry does not carry a virus called highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI), contrary to Chinese fears that led to the ban.
"We are hopeful this issue has been resolved," said Ray Miyamoto, the APHIS area director in Beijing. "We feel their (CAPQ's) primary concerns were adequately addressed."
Miyamoto added that CAPQ planned to write a report that may or may not be made available to APHIS.
The meetings ended on Thursday. CAPQ was not immediately available for comment.
U.S. sources described the talks as "frank, open and candid" and said they augured well for other discussions slated for November on plant quarantine issues.
Wheat, however, remains shrouded in politics. Washington claims a Chinese ban on accepting wheat from specific U.S. areas because it cannot be guaranteed free of a fungus called TCK smut is, in effect, a non-tariff trade barrier.
A top-level Chinese delegation is due to leave for the United States this weekend for a two-week TCK fact-finding trip.
The poultry ban came to light on October 10 after U.S. chicken meat imports were blocked. CAPQ confirmed it to U.S. Embassy officials in Beijing the next day in a telephone call.
Nothing was ever received in writing from CAPQ, a source at the embassy said on Friday, and the ban was not implemented as CAPQ wanted first to hear what the U.S. experts had to say.
What the experts said, according to sources close to the meetings, was that HPAI, while widespread in wildfowl, was eradicated from commercial U.S. flocks in the mid-1980s.
The U.S. side seemed convinced that CAPQ had confused HPAI with the less-virulent avian influenza, or AI, which an APHIS source likened to the common cold.
Another U.S. source said the Chinese fears had been fuelled during a visit to Texas by CAPQ personnel to check on ostrich breeding stock destined for farms in southern China.
A number of birds there tested positive for HPAI, the source said, though this did not necessarily mean they were afflicted with the virus.
China is the second-biggest market in the world, after Russia, for U.S. poultry products and its only market for chicken feet.
U.S. poultry exports to China in 1995 totalled 330,000 tonnes trans-shipped through Hong Kong alone, worth US$445 million, according to the U.S. Poultry and Egg Export Council.
The council's representative in Hong Kong, Sarah Li, told Reuters about 700 tonnes of U.S. chicken feet are transported across the border from Hong Kong into China every day.
-- Hong Kong News Room (852) 2843 6470
