China has given the green light to corn exports but has set a minimum selling price so high above world levels that the grain is going nowhere and farmers are missing out on much-needed cash, traders said on Tuesday.
The selling price for a tonne of Chinese corn has been set at US$170 at a time when the world price is hovering around $140-150 a tonne, sources in Hong Kong and China said.
"The market is dropping so there is no reason for anyone to buy Chinese corn," an agent working in Hong Kong on behalf of Beijing's food trading arm China National Cereals, Oils and Foodstuffs Import/Export Corp (COFCO), told Reuters.
Another veteran trader in the region said COFCO executives had told him the government had agreed in principle to the export of two million tonnes of corn.
"But there is nothing in writing," he said. "We have given them bids at world price levels and they won't touch it."
Neither COFCO nor the State Planning Commission, which issues the licences, were available for comment.
Asian traders said U.S. corn was now arriving at some Asian ports at $145 a tonne inclusive of cargo and freight (c&amp;f).
"It's nonsense to issue such licences -- why not issue them 10 months ago when Chinese corn was cheap and buyers would have lined up," a Shanghai trader said.
"The new (Chinese) crop is coming and the farmers are complaining that they don't have money to buy fertiliser. But still they effectively won't allow exports."
Traders in Asia saw corn prices falling further. Expectations of a huge U.S. harvest totalling more than nine billion bushels or 228.6 million tonnes has pushed prices down by 18 percent since September.
Talk on Monday among traders on the Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT) that China was looking for U.S. corn seemed misplaced, given that China is heading for a record crop of 115-120 million tonnes and has around 30 million tonnes of corn in storage.
CBOT corn closed one to 3-1/2 cents per bushel lower in Monday trading, with December down 1-1/4 to $2.61-3/4.
The lowest offers foreign traders and agents said they had received from Chinese corn sellers, predominantly COFCO and some Chinese trading companies with export permits, was $165 a tonne.
But traders such that price was believed to be just exploratory and was not necessarily an indication that Chinese exporters would undercut the new official price to make sales.
"But so far there is no business concluded and unless the international market price is improving, there will not be," another trader in Hong Kong said.
The FOB (free on board) price at Dalian was $165, they said.
The export permits had been issued with the tacit approval of Vice Premier Zhu Rongji, trading and industry sources said.
Zhu had also set the price, sources close to the process said, though one of them added: "He's no fool, he knows he won't sell a pound at that price ($170 a tonne) today".
Corn exports were discussed earlier this year and spurred farmers and traders to ship up to two million tonnes to Dalian to await the green light.
Fear of fuelling inflation and of leaving reserves low in case of an emergency stopped Zhu short of allowing exports, Western grain industry executives who have met with Zhu said.
This saw China miss out on the chance of earning enormous amounts of money -- $175-180 a tonne -- and buying back if necessary in the current cheaper market.
"It's great for the feed industry," the Chinese source said of the prevailing situation, echoing other sources who say Chinese feed mills are buying corn hand-to-mouth as prices drop.
"And for American farmers -- they must love the Chinese government," he said.
