International trading companies are rebelling against a contractual stipulation by Chinese traders demanding the right to reinspect and reject some cargoes arriving in China, traders said on Wednesday.
"No way, there is absolutely no reason for any trading company to accept these terms," a Singapore grain trader said.
Chinese companies named by trading sources were unavailable to comment on reports the new contracts gave them the right to re-inspect soybean and soybean meal cargoes on their own terms.
Those terms allowed the Chinese buyer to inspect the cargo once it arrived at a Chinese port, even though it had already passed inspection before leaving for China, another trader said.
Ostensibly, the terms were to protect the buyer in case a quarantinable bug or disease was found in the cargo -- such as TCK smut, which affects wheat and is barred from China.
But traders were concerned the new terms could exposure them to further risk if some buyers used them as an excuse to renege on deals as prices dropped.
Traders polled by Reuters said their companies were refusing to accept the new contracts.
"They are taking positions themselves," a veteran trader said of the Chinese trading houses involved. "And you are always increasing your risk in dealing with speculative buyers."
China has bought between 1.5 million and two million tonnes of soybeans and soybean meal in the past three months, traders said. Much of it is being loaded or is on the way and due to arrive in China before year-end.
Prices have fallen dramatically, especially since China's October 1 National Day holiday, after which most orders came. Since then, Asian traders have been on tenterhooks awaiting letters of credit from the Chinese buyers guaranteeing payment.
Earlier, soybean cargoes were purchased above US$300 a tonne. Chicago Board of Trade November soybean futures closed on Tuesday at $6.70 a bushel, or $263 a tonne.
Some Chinese traders have earned themselves a reputation in recent years for reneging on deals if the price of the commodity they are buying drops between the order and the delivery.
Few Asian traders have reported washed-out deals since the price decline began.
But some said the re-inspection terms, which began appearing on contracts in the past two or three weeks, could be attempts by the Chinese buyers to squeeze discounts out of the sellers.
International trading companies have previously been stung when Beijing's food trading arm, China National Cereals, Oils and Foodstuffs Import/Export Corp (COFCO) altered contractual terms.
In May, COFCO informed the trading companies that they would have to bear responsiblity for the rejected cargo and all costs if TCK smut was found on wheat shipments arriving in China,
Traders in Asia said they refused to do business with China on those terms and the matter was dropped.
"After the TCK debacle, we're not willing to take any risks. It's not the way international trade is done," one source said.
-- Hong Kong News Room (852) 2843 6470
