Chinese grain sellers are cutting the price they are willing to accept to export corn but are still a good US$12 a tonne over prevailing world prices, Far East trading sources said on Wednesday.
Chinese corn was being offered at $150 a tonne FOB (free on board), traders in Hong Kong and China said, while U.S. corn is selling into Asian ports at $138 c&amp;f (cost and freight) a tonne.
"There is no point because no one is going to pay that price," said a trader in Hong Kong.
He said Chinese sellers could be coming under pressure to move old crop as the new crop -- expected to be a bumper of between 115 million and 120 million tonnes -- comes on stream.
Traders who bought corn earlier in 1996 in the hope of making huge profits had been paying storage costs for more than six months and could now be trying to cut their losses, he said.
An industry source in Beijing said the offers were being made by state-owned traders in Jilin and Heilongjiang, China's major corn-growing provinces in the far northeast.
"At 1,250 (yuan per tonne, or $150) there won't be any takers unless China starts selling forward -- March, April, May -- which would see them possibly being more competitive," he said.
Wednesday's March futures price on the Dalian Commodity Exchange was 1,550 yuan ($186) per tonne.
Prices on the Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT) fell in Tuesday trading after the release of official U.S. figures predicting an enormous U.S. corn crop.
The U.S. Department of Agriculture said the 1996 crop would total 9.265 million bushels, far above previous estimates. The announcement pushed December corn down 1/4 cents to $2.68 and March down 1-1/4 cents to $2.70-1/2.
Asian traders said they expected U.S. corn to fall further in the immediate term, leaving Chinese corn in its dust.
Traders reported last week that China had already given the green light to corn exports -- lifting a ban in effect since December 1994 -- but authorities had set a minimum price of $170 a tonne when the world price was $140-150.
Trading sources said they were receiving offers from provincial branches of Beijing's central food buying arm China National Cereals, Oils and Foodstuffs Import/Export Corp (COFCO) and some Chinese trading companies with export permits.
The general feeling among traders polled by Reuters was that the price had been set with the intention of stifling exports.
Permission had to come from vice premier and economic tsar Zhu Rongji, who would be loathe to take any steps that could be inflationary, said industry sources who have met with Zhu over the issue.
With U.S. corn prices seen falling -- one Hong Kong trader predicted $130 a tonne c&amp;f Asian ports -- industry sources doubted any Chinese corn would leave home within the next six months.
-- Hong Kong Newsroom (852) 2843-6470
