Around 300,000 tonnes of copper is in the process of being added to the stocks of China's central reserve authorities with about a third of that quantity now clearing through customs, Asian traders said on Monday.
Metals trading and industry sources polled in recent days by Reuters generally agreed that Shanghai bonded warehouses have held up to 100,000 tonnes of copper.
"The copper in the Shanghai (bonded) warehouses has been settled and is moving into China," a Chinese metals trader said.  
The copper's ownership and purpose have been contentious since it was channelled into China in the wake of Japanese Sumitomo Corp's revelation in June of massive copper-trading losses now said by the company to total US$2.6 billion.
Many market and industry sources have said the copper was bought by Beijing's metals trading arm China National Non-ferrous Metals Import/Export Corp (CNIEC) possibily in conjunction with Sumitomo.
Neither CNIEC nor Sumitomo have made any official comment.  
A Chinese source, who trades for a state-owned company, said central authorities bought the copper now moving through customs to cover the 85,000 tonnes of the red metal lent to the market in March 1995 and which had to be taken back.
But a European trader in Beijing said the 85,000 tonnes was additional to the tonnages now undergoing customs formalities.
He also noted the earlier movement of between 40,000 to 50,000 tonnes of copper which was shipped from Shanghai to bonded warehouses in north China for the state reserve.  
Another 50,000-60,000 tonnes had been taken from London Metal Exchange (LME) warehouses and would be delivered to Chinese ports in January or early February, he said.
The European source's total figure of 285,000-295,000 tonnes tallies with reports from other sources, Western and Chinese, who have said China, either through major state-owned trading companies or smaller firms with hot money, is due to take delivery of substantial amounts of copper.
As the London Metal Exchange (LME) copper price plummeted in June on Sumitomo's news, China was said to be taking advantage of prices below $2,000 a tonne to stock up.  
Arbitrage opportunities are narrowing, however, and trade sources said they were relieved the Shanghai hoard was destined for central government reserves.
"This will keep it off the market," a Shanghai trader said.
The European source in Beijing said: "These tonnages are worth US$1 billion and only the central reserve authorities have the capacity to put out this sort of money.
"It could even be part of the Three Gorges Dam budget -- that project could easily use 100,000 tonnes of copper and the reserve's stocks are very low," he said.  
A large gap between LME and Shanghai Metal Exchange prices gave Chinese arbitragers a stab at healthy profits and a chance to take their money out of domestic equities.
This fuelled fears that massive amounts of copper could be channeled onto the domestic Chinese market.
A South American source who regularly visits Chinese copper smelters said many of his contacts had recently expressed fears that 300,000 tonnes of copper would soon arrive in China and kill the market for domestic product.  
Beijing's plan to dam the Yangtse River is one of the world's biggest infrastructure projects, costing around $30 billion and due for completion in 2009.
Five different departments of Shanghai Customs contacted by Reuters said they did not know of the copper movements.
A number of government departments, as well as Beijing's metals production arm China National Non-ferrous Metals Corp (CNNC) and CNIEC also said they were not aware of or had no comment on the market talk.
China is traditionally guarded about its reserves, treating all relevant figures as a state secret.  
Copper futures on the Shanghai Metal Exchange breached the key resistance level of 20,000 yuan ($2,409) per tonne in early Monday trading, after sharp gains on the LME on Friday.
LME copper rode a roller-coaster on Friday, finally settling at $2,148 a tonne, a gain of $117 over Thursday as the market shook off rumours of huge stocks held in Rotterdam and focused on the lowest LME copper stocks in 6-1/4 years.
The latest Hong Kong indications of premium or discount in US$/tonne over LME cash prices on a CIF basis:
				    Nov 18		    Oct 11
    COPPER			 100			100
    ALUMINIUM Western	   65-75		    65
		  CIS		 N/A			N/A
    LEAD			    N/A		     135
    ZINC (Chinese)		N/A			70-90
	   (Western)		N/A		     120
($1=8.3 yuan)
-- Hong Kong Newsroom (852) 2843 6358
