Some Chinese traders are moving to take advantage of a sharp rally in world copper prices by selling the red metal back to the market, Far East metal industry sources said on Wednesday.
A rise in copper stocks held in London Metal Exchange (LME) warehouses in Singapore was attributed in part by some trading sources to Chinese selling.
"With such high LME prices, I believe some (copper) will be brought out of China," a Singapore trader said.  
He said stocks in Singapore rose 5,000 to 6,000 tonnes late last week -- after hovering at extremely low levels for the past couple of months -- as Chinese buyers sold material recently taken from LME warehouses elsewhere.
Asian traders have said China is adding substantial tonnages -- up to 300,000 tonnes -- to its central stockpile, with a third of that amount now passing through customs in Shanghai.
These reports have helped fuel a rally in three-month LME copper, which has climbed almost 20 percent in recent weeks on tight physical supply.  
Three-month LME metal hit a five-month high of $2,232 a tonne on Tuesday, up from $1,900 at the end of October.
Whether or not the copper now in China has completed customs formalities is not an issue, sources said.
"This is the government, they do what they like," said one.
There was a feeling, however, that Chinese government departments, mired in bureaucratic red tape, would be unable to move fast enough to take advantage of rapid market movements.
This would be the province of minor trading companies using hot money to buy small lots for speculative purposes.  
At least one Asian trader reported small parcel offerings from Chinese companies wanting to pick up between $200-$300 a tonne in profit.
Prices are at their highest since June 14 when Japan's Sumitomo Corp announced that one of its copper traders had wracked up losses in unauthorised deals now said by the company to be US$2.6 billion.
Reports from Europe last week of a hidden hoard of 600,000 tonnes of copper in Rotterdam were shot down by Asian traders.  
Tight global supply is now driving prices, with LME copper stocks below 100,000 tonnes for the first time since 1990 and representing less than a month's demand.
Traders in the Far East, polled in recent days, told Reuters this fundamental shift in the world supply/demand picture should keep prices buoyed at least in the short term.
"It's a volatile market and it is impossible to know what is going to happen," a South American source said.
"Is it going to stay over $1/lb next year? Absolutely, I have no doubt about that. It won't be for a couple of days, I'm talking for maybe a quarter and I think it will then stay there.  
"Why? Consumption. Don't forget consumption. It is much more important than people think. The fundamentals really call for a higher price," he said.
Shanghai and surrounding areas alone use upwards of 45,000 tonnes of copper a month, a European source in Hong Kong said.
But physical copper on the Shanghai Metal Exchange has also been tight as traders there liquidate their positions on the rising LME prices.
"Prices have gone up so fast it is a little bit hard to digest," a trader in Shanghai said.
"It could be beneficial to export," she said.  
"On the other hand, anyone who wanted to buy could be afraid the price will start to go the other way. It's close to year-end, book-squaring time, so everyone will want to sit back and wait."
($1=8.3 yuan)
-- Hong Kong newsroom (852) 2843-6470
