Protectionist policies practised by a major Chinese soybean producing province are keeping prices for the grain throughout the country artifically high, Far East traders said on Thursday.
Heilongjiang, in China's far northeast, will not allow soybeans to leave the province in any but value-added form, a policy which traders said had been enforced for three years.
"This means the bean price is being kept artificially low in Heilongjiang and artificially high in other provinces," a trader in Hong Kong said.
Despite the recent arrival on the market of a soybean crop of between 10 and 12 million tonnes, domestic prices had not fallen, trade and industry sources said.
Heilongjiang grows one-third of China's annual soybean crop.
Officials there confirmed to Reuters in September that the "policy of appropriate control", which traders characterise as a ban on sale of beans outside the province, would stay in place.
The policy aimed to meet demand from local crushing mills, which crush the beans to produce oil and meal, an official said by telephone from the provincial capital of Harbin.
But China's crushing industry is not concentrated in Heilongjiang, and traders said crushers in other regions were having to pay inflated prices for their raw material.
The National Grains and Oils Information Centre in Shanghai reported on Wednesday that grade three beans in Heilongjiang were fetching 2,840 yuan (US$342) a tonne.
By contrast, beans elsewhere were priced at up to 3,320 yuan a tonne.
Traders with western companies in the region agreed with these figures, saying beans smuggled out of Heilongjiang were commanding a hefty premium.
"Outside the province (Heilongjiang), there is a premium of 100 or 200 renminbi (yuan) a tonne for smuggling the beans," another trader said.
"There are road blocks in Heilongjiang to checks loads on trucks, people even use post office trucks to carry beans -- and they've been caught," he said.
"It is costing other provinces more money for beans."
Another industry executive said the price of domestically produced soybean meal, used to make animal feed, had also remained high despite the recent soybean harvest.
"Prices for meal are not coming down, they are still 2,900 to 3,100 renminbi per tonne," he said, levels that have prevailed for some months.
High soybean meal prices would in turn lead to high meat prices, the executive said, adding his organisation believed pork prices in China's coastal areas had risen 20 percent in the past two to three months as a result.
This year's soybean crop had been expected to drop two to three percent on the 1995 figure of 13 million tonnes, said traders who toured growing regions.
Heilongjiang's output was 4.3 million tonnes in 1995.
Traders and industry experts who visited the province in September put output there this year at 3.5 to four million tonnes.
One industry expert based in Shanghai said China's soybean supply shortfall would be 2.5 million tonnes in the coming year.
China's total soybean imports for 1996 should be around one million tonnes, traders said.
($1-8.3 yuan)
-- Hong Kong News Room (852) 2843-6470
