Copper is dribbling out of China in small lots as some Chinese traders try to take advantage of higher world prices to cash in, Far East metals traders said on Monday.
In an otherwise catatonic market, copper movements out of China were the only ripples on a glassy pond.
"The market is very dull, but we are getting some calls from people asking us to help them ship to LME (London Metal Exchange) warehouses in Singapore," said the manager of a state-owned Chinese metals trading firm in Hong Kong.
"They bought the metal a long time ago and pretty cheap, and they want to take advantage of the higher LME market now."
The Chinese selling was in small lots only, nothing more than 1,000 tonnes at a time, as small-time traders sought to liquidate, square the books for year-end and fill their pockets with some much-needed cash, traders said.
The copper market has been abuzz with little more than Chinese copper movements in recent months as the red metal has plied the waters between Shanghai and Singapore and back again.
Movements in stock levels in LME warehouses in Singapore have been attributed to Chinese buying and selling, though movement out has been to Chinese central reserves and in small lots, metals industry sources said.
Copper prices on the LME closed easier on Friday after a half-hearted rally based on some short-covering.
Traders and analysts said early in London's Monday that copper prices were likely to fall towards support at US$2,120 a tonne, after Friday's close of $2,162/64.
In the zinc market, prices could climb to as high as $1,200 a tonne in the first half of 1997, a Hong Kong trader said.
A fall last week in LME zinc stocks had caused some concern, she said, as metal buyers have long been used to picking up material when they need it and at long stable prices.
Figures released on Friday show a drawdown in stocks of 3,050 tonnes -- not an unhealthy level -- to 523,925 tonnes. Some liquidation was seen in Friday trading, with the price ending $17 a tonne easier at $1,048.
News that Spain's Austriana de Zinc liquidated its entire zinc futures position on the LME, announced in mid-November, had been absorbed by the market, she said, adding that the move was important for its value as information rather than its impact.
Nevertheless, she said, "the information scared the market".
"Manufacturers are saying they will be looking at levels of $1,200 in the first quarter, possibly the first half (of 1997)," she said.
China's zinc alloy business was the best bet, she said, adding that she had locked in long-term contracts and was looking forward to a happy and prosperous 1997 as the dye-casting industry in southern China thrived.
Aluminium remained dead, traders said, as Chinese consumers turned to domestic stocks rather than imports to meet their meagre needs.
A narrow differential between LME and Shanghai Metal Exchange prices made imports unworkable and could keep China off the world market until after Chinese New Year in February.
"I'm looking for higher domestic aluminium prices," a trader with a European firm said.
LME aluminium closed at $1,526 a tonne on Friday. The Shanghai December price ended last week at 13,480 yuan ($1,667).
"Imported aluminium must pay nine percent duty and 17 percent VAT (value-added tax) -- though of course people don't pay that. And even without paying it and you just have the price and the premium, they still cannot afford to import," the trader said.
"We are getting no inquiries from extruders," said another source recently returned from China's Hainan Island.
"They are getting domestic material. As they use up domestic stocks, this could lead to a demand next year -- we are praying every day for that," said another trader. "Otherwise, it's going to be a long and quiet holiday."
The latest Hong Kong indications of premium or discount in US$/tonne over LME cash prices on a CIF basis:
				Dec 9			   Dec 2
    COPPER		   100			     100
    ALUMINIUM Western    80-85			   65-75
		  CIS	  N/A			     N/A
    LEAD		     N/A			     130
    ZINC (Chinese)	 N/A			     N/A
	   (Western)	 120-130			 120-130
(US$1 = 8.3 yuan)
-- Hong Kong Newsroom (852) 2843 6470
