China is unlikely to need to buy rice on the international market to make up for flood damage to domestic crops, Far East traders said on Tuesday.
No China inquiries for rice were reported by traders in China, Hong Kong, Singapore and Thailand.
"As far as large demand from the (central grain) reserve, COFCO (China National Cereals, Oils and Foodstuffs Import Export Corp) or the grain bureaux goes, I rule it out," said a Chinese trader in Shanghai.
China's Futures Herald newspaper, quoting State Grain Reserve Administration statistics, said on Saturday that although flood damage had reduced the early rice harvest and was likely to slow planting of late rice, total output for 1996 was expected to be unaffected.
This is because China has increased the area under rice cultivation this year, the newspaper said, adding that the reduction in the early harvest should not have a significant effect on the total grain harvest due to higher production of other crops, it said.
Rice imports could not go ahead without central government approval, and the process of issuing quotas and licences could take weeks or even months, trading sources said.
The International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies said at the weekend that flooding in Hunan, one of China's major rice-growing provinces, had prevented farmers from planting rice for the autumn harvest and could force them to depend on food aid until next summer.
"Many farmers lost the season's first crop of rice in the floods and were unable to plant for the second harvest, leaving them dependent on food aid until their next crop, in one year's time," said Thorir Gudmundsson.
"For the second crop, they need to plant in July, and it is now mid-August," he said.
The notion that China might need to import rice to meet demand provided some underlying support to rice futures prices on the Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT) on Monday.
The CBOT September price closed up 5-1/2 U.S. cents per cwt at $10.16.
Chicago rice futures have been underpinned by a recent U.S. report that China bought 20,000 tonnes of Vietnamese white rice for prompt July shipments and that additional purchases were expected.
But very little movement in domestic Chinese rice prices has been seen over the past three months, traders said.
"To be convinced that China will buy some rice, I have to get confirmation from the market -- but so far the market has not done anything, prices are steady," one Asian trader said.
Traders in China quoted domestic prices at 2,200-2,300 yuan ($265-$277) a tonne for low quality long grain rice; 2,600-2,700 yuan ($313-$325) for high quality long grain rice; up to 2,800 yuan ($337) for low quality short grain rice; and 3,000 yuan ($361) for high quality short grain rice.
More than 500 people were killed by the July floods in Hunan alone, with the national death toll from floods and typhoons surpassing 2,700, according to the government.
Applications for rice imports would have to traverse China's multi-layered bureaucracy, trading sources said, though the procedure could be speeded up in times of emergency.
The State Planning Commission (SPC) would issue a national quota, which would then be allocated to provincial SPC offices, which would then distribute the quota to trading companies, trading sources said.
Rice, along with wheat, corn and soybeans, is considered a strategic grain and is thus tightly regulated.
Hunan grows more than 22 percent of China's total early rice crop. Losses to the rice crop in the central province have been estimated at 2.4 million tonnes, accounting for most of the 2.6 million tonnes of Hunan's total grain losses.
About 90 percent of China's early rice crop of 50 million tonnes is grown in Hunan, Guangxi, Guangdong, Jiangxi and Zhejiang provinces. China has three rice crops a year.
A Chinese analyst predicted earlier this month that the flooding could cut early rice output by between 10 and 20 percent. This would reduce the total 1996 rice crop by up to four percent for a total output figure of about 180 million tonnes.
China's rice production in 1995 was 179 million tonnes according to figures from the China National Cereals, Oils and Foodstuffs Import and Export Corp.
