Shanghai-born tycoon Tung Chee-hwa claimed victory for himself and for the Chinese nation on Wednesday when he won the race for Hong Kong's future leader.
"For the past 100 years, Hong Kong has been a colony. Now we are in charge of ourselves. I believe most Hong Kong people have confidence in the future," said Tung.
"Some people still have worries, but I want to remind them that people walk the road together, success lies with the people and comes from their efforts," he said.
"I believe everyone should be clear that we want a better Hong Kong, a better future," Tung said.
Tung was elected by the Selection Committee, a panel of 400 members handpicked by Beijing, to be Hong Kong's Chief Executive once the colony reverts to Chinese rule on July 1, 1997.
In a short, prepared victory speech, Tung, 59, stressed pragmatism and stability and downplayed democracy.
While noting Hong Kong's rule of law, spirit of freedom and strong civil service, Tung said it was important to secure a smooth transition for the colony from British to Chinese rule.
"I believe we can do better than before, based on the one country-two systems policy and under the protection of the Basic Law," Tung said.
He was referring to Beijing's policy for letting Hong Kong's capitalist system continue after it comes under the communist government's jurisidiction, and to its post-1997 constitution.
That Tung would be the man to take on Hong Kong's leadership yoke after the departure of the last British governor, Chris Patten, had been widely seen as a foregone conclusion.
The shipping magnate heads a family empire that was bailed out of financial difficulties by China a decade ago.
In the first round of voting by the 400-member Selection Committee, Tung took 206 votes. On Wednesday, he won 320 votes.
His speech was delivered at Hong Kong's Convention Centre immediately after his victory was declared by Chinese Foreign Minister Qian Qichen, who said Tung had become Hong Kong's most democratically elected leader to date.
The voting process, long criticised as undemocratic and unrepresentative of Hong Kong's six million people, was a step forward on the colony's road to democracy, Tung said.
"People may have differing opinions about the pace of democratic change in Hong Kong, but today, under the Basic Law, I believe we are making the first step towards democracy and this is most suitable for Hong Kong's situation," Tung said.
"This is a good start," he said. "Today we elect our own chief executive and in the future, we will follow the Basic Law and the actual situation of our society, step by step, to push democracy forward," he said.
He called on Hong Kong's political parties not to politicise issues but to work together for the sake of their country and for all Chinese people.
Demonstrations were part of Hong Kong culture, he said, but people should instead sit down and discuss their grievances.
Tung emphasised public welfare reform and called for a long-term re-examination of education, welfare for the elderly and industry policy.
He was leaving for Shenzhen, a Chinese special economic zone on Hong Kong's border, later on Wednesday, where he was expected to receive China's official blessing as Hong Kong's next leader.
