U.S. experts are striving to assure China their chicken is safe, but it is impossible to tell if poultry exported to China comes from areas hit by dangerous diseases, government and industry sources said on Monday.
Poultry is processed on such a massive scale in the United States there was no way of knowing where the birds originated, a U.S. agriculture expert told Reuters.
"So it would be impossible to identify in a shipment of meat from Arkansas which chickens came from Oklahoma or Missouri," the expert, speaking on condition of anonymity, said.
A senior U.S. diplomatic source said, however, poultry shipments could be certified as not having come from regions where quarantinable diseases were an issue.
U.S. poultry exports to China, worth around US$500 million a year, were hit by a disease scare last week when the Chinese press reported a ban on poultry from Oklahoma and Missouri.
Chinese quarantine officials confirmed the ban, linking it to a deadly poultry flu called viscerotropic velogenic Newcastle disease or VVND, discovered in the two states during the summer.  
A Chinese quarantine official in Beijing said he was aware of U.S. claims the disease had been confined to pet birds, but said the ban would stand.
The Chinese official contradicted U.S. sources by saying there were no plans to hold bilateral talks on the issue.
A U.S. source told Reuters he met with Chinese quarantine officials on Monday morning.
"They know it is not of real consequence," he said, adding that talks were slated to take place on this and other agricultural issues in California in late January.
The diplomatic source said banning poultry from those two states would be like banning pineapples from Beijing.
"Pineapples don't come from Beijing and chicken does not come to China from Oklahoma and Missouri," the source said.
Missouri and Oklahoma together produce less than five percent of the total U.S. poultry output, said Phillip Holloway, representative in Hong Kong and China for the Oklahoma state agriculture department.
The disease was found in parrots imported from Mexico for sale in Oklahoma pet shops, Holloway said.  
Federal U.S. veterinarians eradicated the birds and all trace of the disease, he said, adding that it had no contact with commercial flocks.
VVND kills all birds that come into contact with it, and necessitates the eradication of entire commercial flocks.
It is carried principally by psittaciformes -- parrots, parakeets, budgerigars and macaws, Holloway said.
Parrots introduced the disease into California in the 1970s, leading to the destruction of the state's entire poultry flock.
Gus Schumacher, of the U.S. Department of Agriculture's Foreign Agriculture Service, said U.S. experts were working to reassure Chinese quarantine officials the disease had no effect on U.S. poultry.
"It is not at all linked to American poultry so we're reassuring the Chinese quarantine officials and working through this in an explanatory, technical way, so the trade will continue on an active basis," he said.
Schumacher, in Hong Kong last Friday, said chickens were not now being shipped to China from these two states, but trade from other areas of the U.S. had not been affected.  
However, cheap land and labour in the two rural states was attracting contract production from major producers that pay for labour and feed, and then purchase all chicks produced, the agriculture expert said.
"Most of the birds produced in these two states are shipped elsewhere for processing, like Arkansas or Mississippi...so it is generic chicken and there is no way to tell," he said.
