Demand is the engine that will drive China's metals markets in 1997, said analysts and traders who expect a modest flow of money to keep consumption of base metals such as aluminium and copper ticking over.
"Consumption, don't forget consumption. It is much more important than people think," a South American industry executive told Reuters.
"The fundamentals really call for a higher price," he said of copper.  
While some trading and production firms are convinced an increase in total worldwide copper production capacity could lead to a supply glut after the first quarter of 1997, and a subsequent price spike, the Chilean source disagreed.
Buoyant global demand should ensure copper prices stay above the "magic US$1 a lb figure" for a good part of the year, he said, adding that Chinese consumption would make up an important proportion of the total.  
A senior metal trader in Shanghai said the city's metal futures exchange was becoming more reflective of real underlying fundamentals in the country's base metal market and reducing the opportunity to arbitrage between cash and futures prices.
"If they (traders) don't think (copper) imports are necessary, the (futures) price will stay low, but if consumption needs pick up, the exchange price will go up," she said.
Arbitraging had been a feature of the Shanghai exchange in 1996, the Shanghai trading source said.  
"It looks like there will be efforts to control arbitraging (in 1997) -- though if the demand is there and stock is low, then the price will go up anyway," she said.
The Shanghai Metal Exchange had enough copper stocks to see end-users through to Chinese New Year in February, she said.
Daryl Ho, senior economist in Hong Kong with Jardine Fleming Asia Research, said the effects of Beijing's easing of credit restrictions would be seen more clearly in 1997 as money began filtering through to such sectors as construction.  
Traders have complained since mid-1996 that a near-halt to construction throughout China, based on a lack of available cash to keep projects going, has stifled metals use and purchasing.
This slowdown would be reflected in China's overall 1996 economic growth figure, expected to come in at eight to nine percent after 10.2 percent in 1995, an aluminium trader said.
"Eight to 10 percent growth for 1996 is a beautiful rate for Europe, but China is looking at having had 13 percent in recent years, so it is a setback," he said.
"We think it is a healthy setback, setting the scene for more stable growth and it is quite encouraging."  
Aluminium in China had bucked the year's international trend of de-stocking -- one that will see the rest of the world's end-users, having run down their stockpiles, re-stocking in 1997 -- much to the delight of producers.
China's official figures would probably show aluminium imports for 1996 at around 400,000 tonnes, the trader, speaking on condition of anonymity, said.
"But I think a lot of that has to do with cargoes delayed from 1995 and that actual net imports will be around 300,000 tonnes," not much changed from 1995, he said.  
And for 1997? "We see no change in the pattern in 1997, China will be pretty much business as usual," he said.
Jardine Fleming's Ho said the easier availability of money might not translate immediately into higher base metal imports as extra domestic production had to be absorbed first.
The main sticking point for the industry in 1997 and beyond will be how the government deals with the myriad state enterprises that continue to bleed cash.
The state-owned enterprises were effectively shouldering the government's social welfare burden, Ho said.  
The metals industry provides some startling examples of this excess, with smelters and factories employing in some cases hundreds of thousands of people, subsidising for them everything from housing and schooling to health care and food.
At the same time, Ho said, management had no incentive to work for profit "so money keeps flowing out of the government's pockets".
"It is not an impossible problem to solve if the government can encourage the development of the private sector -- and that's a slow process," Ho said.  
China's communist leaders are anxious to avoid the problems of unemployment and bankruptcy that followed the collapse of the Soviet Union and now plague Russia's attempts at reform.
A German source saw these problems of over-employment and under-performance as the metal industry's Nemesis.
"Look at the zinc smelters -- a total disaster. They are all bankrupt. This is just a big black hole, overstaffed, totally overstaffed -- which is also a result of the system," he said on condition of anonymity.  
"It's all the system -- look at Russia, look at East Germany, they all had the same problem," he said, echoing many other traders and industry executives polled by Reuters.
He cited the example of China Steel in Taiwan, which produces 5.65 million tonnes a year of crude steel with 13,000 employees.
Compare these figures to one of China's biggest steel producers, Baotou Iron and Steel in Inner Mongolia, which employs 160,000 people for annual crude steel output of just four million tonnes.  
"This is such a classic example, it tells you everything. This is China's problem. And it will only get worse," he said.
Problems of corruption and inefficiency aside, it is a rare international metals company that feels it can afford not to be in China.
"China is becoming a more important market," the Chilean source said.
"For instance, in 1992/93 only 200,000 tonnes of (copper) concentrate was being imported. Now it is double and I don't see this trend stopping any time," he said.
-- Hong Kong newsroom (852) 2843-6470
