China's zinc industry is fast succumbing to the rigours of reform, as mines and smelters find that surviving without government grace is difficult and the ways of the world are tough, Far East traders said on Monday.
Withdrawal of government subsidies, combined with tight credit, expensive infrastructure and utilties, and over-manned mines and smelters mean the industry is struggling to compete.
Chinese zinc exports have slowed as Chinese sellers are unwilling to lower their prices to world levels, traders said.
"The Chinese are asking high premiums -- LME (London Metal Exchange) plus US$70 to Hong Kong and Taiwan," one said.
Three month LME zinc was quoted at $1,036/$1,038 a tonne in early trade on Monday up slightly from Friday's $1,033 close.
Many Asian customers bought zinc heavily in late 1995 and still have stock to consume before they look to China, a Hong Kong trader said.
Nor is China importing much zinc, as a 10 percent import duty and a value-added tax of 17 percent made it too expensive for cash-starved smelters, traders said.
July customs figures show China's exports of unwrought zinc and zinc alloys dropped to 117,293 tonnes in the first seven months of 1996, down 7.1 percent on the same year-ago period.
The January-May export figure of 86,494 tonnes was down 25.5 percent on the corresponding period in 1995.
An executive with an Australian firm said the problems faced by the Chinese industry would take a long time to resolve.
Expansions planned some years ago had not been costed on world terms, he said, but on the local supply of raw materials that were sold at a set price.
So when mine depletion and rising demand became evident and forced China to look outside for raw materials, "they found it was very expensive, much more expensive than they expected."
As China's economy has grown at about 10 percent a year, zinc consumption is maintaining a growth rate of about eight percent, the Commodities Research Unit (CRU) said in a report.
Zinc output has risen faster than consumption and enabled China to become a net exporter of about 200,000 tonnes of slab in 1995 -- after being an importer 10 years earlier of 200,000 tonnes, CRU figures show.
U.K.-based CRU put China's 1994 mine output at 949,000 tonnes of zinc.
China's influence on the world market is expected to continue, despite reduced exports, an analyst at Billiton Metals in London said in July.
China's refined zinc exports in 1995 totalled 164,000 tonnes, compared with 222,000 tonnes in 1994, the analyst, Karen Norton said. London brokers T Hoare &amp; Co put China's average yearly exports in the previous five years at 70,000 tonnes.
The Chinese government is gradually withdrawing subsidies to mines and smelters in line with requirements for membership of the World Trade Organisation (WTO), trading sources said.
"The zinc price is down, but the Chinese are getting a double whammy with subsidies disappearing," the Australian source said.
"They can't lay people off, but they have to make money -- so what can they do?" he said.
"The real issue is that the smelters have to become competitive, and this means redundancies... So even though they are free to run the smelters as free enterprises, it would be a brave man to be the first to stick his hand up and say he is going to lay off a couple of thousand workers."
Capacity in China will remain under-utilised, while expansion elsewhere will further pressure the industry.
"The Chinese will have to compete, and their competitors will be leaner and meaner," the Australian source said.
