While China's leaders peppered 1996 with assurances they can attain their Holy Grail of feeding a fifth of the global population on a tiny patch of its arable land, outside China the calls for a reality check grow louder.
Grain and oilseed production is increasing, but the economics of China's agricultural sector remain patchy and official figures can sometimes leave much to the imagination.
As a result, Western analysts and grain industry leaders are sceptical about China's ability to achieve its stated goal of grain self-sufficiency.
Many industry sources say China's communist leadership must overcome its need to keep state grain reserves secret and give the world notice of its growing food needs.
"They should get it together on real need, announce it and let other growing nations know and plan and grow for supply to China," said a consultant to the Chinese and U.S. grain industries.
"If it becomes apparent that China is importing, you'll see Argentina, Brazil gearing up to meet demand, the U.S. will expand, India might try... so there'll be competition for the China market -- which should in turn act to stabilise prices," he said on condition of anonymity.
Official projections that 1996 grain output will be yet another record, hitting 485 million tonnes after 1995's bumper 465 million tonnes, are "high even for ministry officials," says China Agribusiness, an analytical newsletter published in Hong Kong by China Concept Investment (BVI) Ltd.
"Increased domestic supply has reduced import needs, and could cause (domestic) prices to fall and 1997 production to suffer," the newsletter's third quarter 1996 issue says.
Grain supply has grown in China by 55 million tonnes in the past two years. The government predicts it will grow to 550 million tonnes a year by 2010, to feed a population which will expand from the current 1.2 billion to more than 1.4 billion.
China's net grain imports in the first nine months of 1996 were 7.4 million tonnes, with industry experts expecting total imports for the year to total eight to nine million tonnes.
This is well down on 1995's imports of around 17 million tonnes, mostly on the back of the bumper harvests, a ban on some grain exports, and a conscious official effort over the past couple of years to boost strategic grain reserves.
This has brought a much-needed confidence boost, coming after alarming predictions by American environmentalist Lester Brown that China's rising population and diminishing land and water resources will lead to enormous grain import needs.
"There's a bit more confidence on the part of China now," a grain industry executive based in Beijing with a U.S. organisation said in a recent interview.
"More than two years after Lester Brown came up with his scare-mongering, a lot of people (in China) are looking at these last two years as evidence that 'We can feed China, that's who'," he told Reuters by telephone from Beijing.
"The more realistic people here are saying imports will be a significant part of China's needs, that perhaps five to 10 percent of needs will be covered by imports annually," he said. Like other observers of China's agriculture sector, he sees 1997's grain imports falling significantly.
The Chinese government said in a recent agriculture policy white paper that grain imports could be limited to five percent of need over the coming 35 years.
Indeed, China has already frozen wheat import permits for next year because of an expected bumper crop.
Corn is in such oversupply in the northeastern growing regions that questions are being asked about how the crop, currently under harvest, be stored -- though exports, banned since December 1994, could help.
The one problem China seems unable to deal with is that of price stability.
Chinese farmers, long permitted to grow what they choose, will plant what they think will bring them the most money. With little or no planning, this leads to famine-and-feast cycles.
the coming year, 1997, will be no exception. With corn exports banned and a bumper crop on the way, corn is heading for oversupply that will push prices down.
This will in turn discourage farmers from planting corn next year, instead looking for a crop that will bring them a profit -- probably soybeans, the current short-supply crop.
"The danger -- and one that Chinese people just cannot get through their heads -- is if there is a domestic switch from corn to soy, the soy price will drop on higher supply, farmers will then stop growing soy, corn will go up in price on tighter supply and the whole boom-bust cycle begins again," a senior marketer of U.S. grains to China said.
He says China is heading for a 2.5 million-tonne soybeans shortfall in 1997 because just a couple of years ago soybeans were in oversupply, prices dropped and farmers headed for corn.
What would help?
China Agribusiness suggests the current high-supply period could be a good time to reform the grain price system, bringing the government's procurement price -- that paid for a set quota of each farmer's grain -- and the higher market price into line.
The grain marketer and others advocate a continuation of the current import policies, based on need, and an end to the secrecy that keeps the world guessing.
"Looking at it from the point of view of announcing state reserves, it would definitely help China," he said, though he pointed to the fears among China's communist leadership of panic buying and hoarding if reserves were low.
Without more openness, expert sources say, the world has no way of knowing if China will need as much as Lester Brown says -- 369 million tonnes of grain imports a year by 2030.
Or if, as the Chinese Agriculture Ministry's white paper says, import needs will be kept below 40 million tonnes by then as technology brings greater production efficiency, the population peaks and dependence on grain as a staple diminishes.
-- Hong Kong newsroom (852) 2843-6470
