Launching a fresh assault on the U.S. minivan market, Toyota Motor Co. introduced its 1998 Sienna at the North American International Auto Show Wednesday, describing the vehicle as the "Camry of minivans."
But capacity constraints will prohibit the Sienna from loosening Chrysler's Corp.'s iron grip on the 1.1 million unit market.
Designed in Japan, the Sienna features more conservative styling than the Chrysler products, which dominate the U.S. market for the popular vehicles about a 46 percent stake.
Toyota's low-key approach carried over to the introduction of its new vehicle.
Shunning the rappeling executives and mock thunderstorms of other automakers at the show, Toyota simply pulled back a black curtain, without fanfare, to reveal the vehicle.
The front-wheel-drive Sienna will be built off a slightly longer version of the Camry sedan platform. It will come with essentially the same 3.0 litre V6 engine and four-speed automatic transmission as the Camry.
Like minivans from Chrysler and General Motors Corp., the Sienna will offer an optional fourth door on the driver's side.
Pricing has not been determined. But Dave Illingworth, general manager of the Toyota Division in the United States, said it will be below the more than $30,000 pricetag the Previa started at and will be aimed at the middle of the minivan market.
The rear-wheel drive Previa, which was introduced in 1990, will be dropped when the Sienna goes on sale in the fall, Illingworth said.
Toyota expects to sell 50,000 to 60,000 Siennas -- all it will be able to produce at its plant in Georgetown, Ky. The facility has annual volume capacity of about 500,000 units, but is also responsible for making the Camry and Avalon.
Illingworth said Toyota has no plans for additional capacity expansion in North America and does not expect to start producing the Siennas in Japan for export to the U.S. market.
By replacing the poor-selling Previa, Toyota is hoping to give existing Toyota buyers a durable, moderately priced alternative.
"This is an attempt to keep our buyers in the franchise," he said. "I don't see us challenging Chrysler."
Neither does Dennis Pawley, executive vice president of manufacturing for Chrysler, who attended the Sienna unveiling. Although the minivan segment of the market has not grown for about six months, Pawley said the battle for market share is not likely to hurt Chrysler, which has the most loyal minivan owners.
"This is going to hurt GM and Ford (Motor Co)  much more than it's going to hurt our sales," he said.
But Richard Wagoner, president of GM's North American Operations, said the automaker plans to gain share when its new line of minivans begin arriving in heavier volumes throughout this year. However, he added, "We never underestimate Toyota."
Susan Jacobs, who runs the industry consulting firm Jacobs &amp; Associates, said the tight production volumes indicates Toyota will sell all it can make of the new vans. She predicted the Sienna's conservative looks will not hurt its sales.
"You don't need to be the style leader to succeed in minivans," she said.
