Amid a landscaped backdrop of bird calls, trees and a waterfall, Ford Motor Co. this week showed off a concept coupe with extra side doors, adjustable pedals and telescoping dashboard gauges.
Not far from Ford's display at the North American International Auto Show, Pontiac premiered the "Rageous." Another two-door concept car, or one-of-a-kind show car, the Rageous has enough room to carry a four-by-eight foot sheet of plywood when the tailgate is down. It even has a driver's side door compartment big enough to safely hold your pistol.
Extra doors. Larger trunks. Cupholders that warm up and cool down. It's a practical world out there, and automakers have gotten the message.
A walk around the show, which opens to the public on Saturday, turns up cars, sport/utility vehicles, pickup trucks and minivans with a raft of new features designed to make your vehicle as handy as can be.
The new Chevrolet Corvette has undergone structural changes that make it easier to climb into the low-slung sports car. Designers have added more than 12 cubic feet of cargo room -- enough to fit two sets of golf clubs into the trunk.
Volkswagen is testing the waters with a new two-door concept car called the Coupe CJ. Designed specifically for the American market, the car can seat four people comfortably. The trunk has nearly 15 cubic feet.
Chrysler Corp. is showing the Dakar, a concept version of its popular Jeep Wrangler that has four doors. It is just one of several new types of sport/utilities that automakers are displaying as they seek to carve up the fast-growing market into even smaller niches.
One of the more extreme sport/utility concepts is the Open View from Wilhelm Karmann GmbH, an auto industry supplier from Osnabrueck, Germany. Built off a Ford Explorer platform, the Open View has a retractable roof system that essentially turns the vehicle into a convertible sport/utility.
Perhaps the best example of burgeoning practicality is Ford's Mercury MC4 concept. Designed as a coupe, the car has two half doors that open to the rear. Access to the trunk is provided by two "gull-wing" lids that provide more loading versatility.
On the inside, drivers can adjust the sculpted seats, pedals and instrument gauges to fit their individual needs. The centre console has a pop-up screen, and there is an integrated child seat in the back.
"The MC4 is designed with the needs of today's diverse and active lifestyles in mind and shows that sports coupes can be practical when it comes to carrying passengers and their belongings in comfort," said Jack Telnack, vice president of corporate design at Ford.
Although the MC4 is not likely to ever see a dealer's showroom, Ford Automotive Operations President Jacques Nasser said some of the mechanical features are already being incorporated into future Ford vehicles.
Whether it's more head room or extra power outlets for cellular phones, the new features signal the struggle among automakers to get whatever kind of competitive edge they can, said David Cole, director of the University of Michigan's Centre for the Study of Automotive Transportation.
Gone are the days when there were vast quality differences between Japanese and domestic cars, he said. Now, automakers must find new ways to differentiate themseves from the increasing number of models in the market.
"What they're trying to do is get any kind of competitive advantage they can find," he said.
