A commuter plane heading for Detroit in a heavy snowstorm crashed in a remote wooded area south of the city on Thursday, killing all 30 on board, officials said.
The Embraer-120, operated as flight 3272 by Comair, a regional carrier based in Cincinnati, crashed at 3:50 p.m. EST (2050 GMT) near the town of Ida about 25 miles (40 km) from Detroit near the Raisin River.
Comair operates as a feeder for Delta Airlines.
A nearby resident, Thomas Marino, said he heard the plane flying low overhead while shoveling snow off his driveway.
"I heard a jet flying very low. Then a loud boom, a vibration. I didn't see the fireball," he told Reuters. "It sounded low, but planes fly low all the time over here, especially when it's overcast."
Much of the region had been hit by a storm which dumped a half foot (15 cm) or more of snow. There was no confirmation, however, that weather played a role in the crash.
Marino said he drove one-half mile (0.8 km) to the crash site, but could only see smoke and rescue workers swarming around.
He said the plane crashed into what looked like a farm field, just south of the Raisin River.
Television film footage showed only a blackened gash in a snowy field.
The National Transportation Safety Board in Washington said the plane carried 25 passengers, two pilots and three flight attendants and that none survived.
The flight originated in Cincinnati.
One man who lived near the crash site told a Detroit radio station there was an "unbelievable" explosion and fireball when the plane crashed.
Any plane carrying 70 or less is considered a commuter flight though some routinely operate under the same safety and flight rules that govern larger aircraft.
In October 1994, icing caused a French-built American Eagle ATR-72 to crash in northern Indiana, killing all 68 on board. The plane's manufacturer later made revisions to de-icing equipment.
CNN reported that the Brazilian-made Embraer-120 has been involved in 13 other crashes since 1986 where lives were lost, including an accident in Georgia that killed former Senator John Tower.
