Chrysler Corp. Tuesday reported brisk sales of minivans and pickup trucks for August, pushing total U.S. sales for the automaker up 9 percent on a daily selling basis to 186,306.
The August total broke a company record for the month of 176,184 set in 1989.
Sales of light trucks, including popular Ram pickups and four-door minivans were 127,870, a 16.7 percent jump that marked the 11th consecutive month of rising light truck sales.
Domestically produced car sales came in weaker than some analysts had expected, falling 2 percent to 58,255 units.
Chrysler's strong light truck sales were helped by incentives on some Jeep sport utility models. Grand Cherokee sales rose 42 percent; Cherokee was up 52 percent; and Wrangler sales shot up 59 percent.
Total pickup sales were held back somewhat by low supplies of the Dakota, which is undergoing a model changeover. Dealers have a 35-day supply of the compact pickups -- about half of what the industry considers to be ideal.
Chrysler executives said they did not expect significant volumes of the new Dakotas to be available until October.
Steven Torok, executive director of sales and marketing operations, said Chrysler was not concerned about the slide in car sales. Total car sales were down 4 percent from August 1995, and off 24 percent from July.
August is often a seasonally weaker month than July, Torok said. Also, declines in the Dodge Stratus and Neon were partly attributable to model-year changeovers.
"Frankly, we saw our cars starting to firm up as the month went on, and we think we'll have a pretty good month in September," said Torok, adding September car sales will likely surpass those of August.
Torok said the No. 3 automaker was pleased with the breadth of its sales performance.
"What we see is a very even, consistent demand pattern," he said. "Consumer sentiment seems to be not euphoric but consistent."
Although car sales were slightly weaker, PaineWebber analyst Michael Ward said Chrysler's total numbers were still respectable because it was up against a strong year-ago performance.
Chrysler was the only one of the major automakers to report monthly sales on Tuesday. General Motors Corp. is scheduled to report sales Wednesday. Ward predicted it will post sales that are 4 percent to 5 percent below last year, with light trucks again offsetting weak car numbers.
Also on Tuesday, Subaru of America, a unit of Fuji Heavy Industries, reported U.S. sales up 18 percent to 10,361. Volvo Cars of North America, a unit of AB Volvo had August sales of 7,349, down almost 1 percent.
