Investigators fought frigid, wind-blown snow on Friday trying to recover the remains of 28 adults and one infant killed when a commuter plane crashed into a field and left a blackened crater.
Investigators found the plane's "black box" cockpit voice recorder and flight data recorder late on Friday, the NBC and ABC television networks reported, quoting sources close to the investigation.
The devices usually provide investigators with detailed information on the final seconds before a crash.
Hampering the search for both human and aircraft remains were temperatures falling to near zero Fahrenheit (minus 18 Celsius) and ground blizzards that created near white-out conditions.
Workers were able to stay in the wooded field for no more than 15 to 20 minutes at a time, said John Hammerschmidt, senior member of the National Transportation Safety Board.
"There is a crater out there" hiding some of the wreckage, he said, including propellers, engines and engine assemblies from the 30-seat, Brazilan-built Embraer 120 operated by Delta Comair.
In addition, eight-foot (2.5 metre) high brush covered with snow from the storm during which the plane crashed on Thursday made recovery efforts difficult, Hammerschmidt said.
"There are remains just all around the entire scene," he said. Local police had removed some of the remains to a morgue and families of some of the victims were taken to a nearby motel, where teams of counsellors were on hand.
Hammerschmidt said the 28 adults and one "babe in arms" aboard the twin-engine propjet lifted off from Cincinnati at 2:53 p.m. EST, and the plane crashed and 3:52 p.m. during its approach to Detroit's Metropolitan Airport.
He said the pilot, Dann Carlsen, 43, of Williamstown, Kentucky, was very experienced and was a flight instructor. He also said the plane was equipped with de-icing systems for the wings, the leading edge of the propellers and for the engines.
Hammerschmidt refused to speculate on whether ice was a factor in the crash. USA Today said a pilot in the vicinity reported icing conditions at about the same altitude the doomed plane was flying minutes before it crashed.
The Cincinnati Post quoted an unidentified Comair pilot on Friday as saying the Embraer 120 can suffer wing icing problems despite a system designed to break up ice through a pneumatic rubber strip on the wing that is inflated and deflated in bad weather.
Michael Bragg, a professor of aeronautical and astronautical engineering at the University of Illinois in Champaign, told Reuters that some eyewitness accounts of the crash point to a "classic horizontal tail stall."
Such stalls have long been considered a problem with smaller propjet planes, he said. Ice on the the horizontal part of the tale can disrupt the airflow that keeps a plane flying level. When flaps are deployed in such a situation, Bragg said, the plane stalls and dives.
Monroe County Sheriff Tillman Crutchfield told a news conference the recovery of the bodies would last into the weekend.
Those killed included Maureen DeMarco, 37, a teacher from Englewood, Colorado, who was en route to Detroit to attend a memorial service for her brother, Brian Scully, who died on Dec. 22 in the crash of an Airborne Express cargo plane in Virginia.
Also killed was Keita Takenami, 47, a quality control manager at Toyota Motor Corp.'s car assembly plant in Georgetown, Kentucky, and Dexter Adams, 41, a Procter &amp; Gamble Co. purchasing executive.
Wreckage from the crash was strewn over a tight area of about 200 yards (190 metres) by 100 yards (94 metres), Crutchfield said.
In a news briefing in Erlanger, Kentucky, Comair senior vice president Charles Curran said the airline would defer to the NTSB for all future information on the crash.
Cincinnati-based Comair is a regional carrier that flies commuter routes for Delta. Hammerschmidt said the company has 91 planes in its fleet.
The three Cincinnati-based crew members were Carlsen, First Officer Kenneth Reece and Flight Attendant Darinda Ogden, Comair said.
Flight 3272 had been cleared for approach to Detroit Metropolitan Airport when air traffic controllers lost radar contact, Comair's Curran said on Thursday. No distress signals were sent, he said.
