U.S. investigators began the grim task on Friday of digging through a snow-covered field to recover the bodies of 29 people killed on Thursday when a commuter plane crashed during a snowstorm near Detroit.
Officials said National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) investigators would focus on retrieving bodies before looking at the wreckage of the Delta Comair plane.
"We're going to be doing the body recovery first, and the NTSB investigation secondly," Monroe County Sheriff Tilman Crutchfield told a news conference in Monroe, a town about six miles (10 km) from the crash site.
He added that NTSB officials briefly examined the site on Thursday night but had not located the plane's cockpit voice and data recorders.
The Comair plane, an Embraer Brasilia 120 en route to Detroit from Cincinnati, crashed in a snowy field just west of Monroe in Raisinville Township, Mich., about 25 miles (40 km) southwest of Detroit.
Those killed included a teacher from Englewood, Colorado, who was en route to Detroit to attend a memorial service for her brother who died on December 22 in another air crash,
A temporary morgue has been set up at the Custer Airport near Monroe and NTSB officials were expected to be at the crash site by mid-morning.
Wreckage from the crash was strewn over a tight area of about 200 yards (190 metres) by 100 yards (94 metres), Tilman said. Although emergency workers covered the crash site with tarpaulins overnight, he added that snow showers would hamper recovery efforts.
"The weather certainly complicates the situation with the blowing snow," Tilman said. "It certainly hampers the situation and is going to make the recovery more difficult."
Cincinnati-based Comair, an independent carrier that flies commuter routes for Delta, said the 30-seat plane was carrying 26 passengers and three crew members.
The airline sent 30 members of its emergency response team to Michigan on Thursday, according to David Siebenburgen, President of Comair.
"They are there to assist the families, the NTSB and the FAA (Federal Aviation Administration) in any way they can during this ordeal," Siebenburgen said.
Flight 3272 had been cleared for approach to Detroit Metropolitan Airport when air traffic controllers lost radar contact, Comair's Curran said on Thursday. No distress signals were sent, he said.
Comair said the plane has been with the company since February 1992 and had its most recent maintenance checkup on Nov. 20, 1996. The airline denied an earlier report the plane had been grounded two days earlier for rudder problems.
