National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) investigators were preparing to examine the wreckage on Friday of a Delta Comair plane that crashed in a snowstorm on Thursday, killing all 29 people on board.
The commuter plane, an Embraer Brasilia 120 en route to Detroit from Cincinnati, crashed in Raisinville Township about 25 miles (40 km) southwest of Detroit.
NTSB officials arrived in Michigan on Thursday and immediately set up a command post in Ann Arbor, which is near the site of the crash. The wreckage was brought together under a tarpaulin to protect it from snow and was being guarded until the probe began.
Investigators met early on Friday to plan strategy for the probe and were expected to begin combing the mangled wreckage later in the day.
Cincinnati-based Comair, an independent carrier that flies commuter routes for Delta, said the 30-seat plane was carrying 26 passengers and three crew members.
The three Cincinnati-based crew members were Captain Dann Carlsen, First Officer Kenneth Reece and Flight Attendant Darinda Ogden, Comair said in a statement early on Friday.
The airline sent 30 members of its emergency response team to Michigan on Thursday, according to David Siebenburgen, President of Comair.
"They are there to assist the families, the NTSB and the FAA (Federal Aviation Administration) in any way they can during this ordeal," Siebenburgen said.
A news conference was scheduled by the airline for 8:30 a.m. EST (1330 GMT)  at Cincinnati airport in Erlanger, Ky.
Flight 3272 had been cleared for approach to Detroit Metropolitan Airport when air traffic controllers lost radar contact, Comair Senior Vice President of Marketing Charles Curran told a news briefing on Thursday. No distress signals were sent, he said.
Comair said the plane has been with the company since February 1992 and had its most recent maintenance checkup on Nov. 20, 1996. The airline denied an earlier report the plane had been grounded two days earlier for rudder problems.
Witnesses told local television crews the plane's engines made a sputtering sound before it crashed into the ground at a sharp angle. The plane exploded into a fireball that sent a black mushroom cloud into the air that left "just pieces" of the twin-prop airliner.
The area and much of the region had been hit by a storm which dumped six inches (15 cm) or more of snow. While air traffic was snarled in Chicago and other cities there was no confirmation that weather played a role in the crash.
In October 1994 icing caused a French-built American Eagle ATR-72 to crash in northern Indiana, killing all 68 on board. The plane's manufacturer later made revisions to de-icing equipment.
CNN reported that the Brazilian-made Embraer-120 has been involved in 13 other crashes since 1986 where lives were lost, including an accident in Georgia that killed former Senator John Tower.
