Investigators of Thursday's Delta Comair crash were trying to determine on Saturday the nature of what they called "an unexplained event" shortly before the plane plummeted to the ground killing 29 people.
"Approximately one minute after leveling off at 4,000 ft (1,200 m) an unexplained event took place, normal operations ceased and the airplane crashed shortly thereafter," John Hammerschmidt, the National Transportation Safety Board chief spokesman told a news conference.
"At this juncture, it is an event we are trying to understand," he added.
NTSB investigators said they had determined something happened from listening to the "black box" cockpit voice recorder, but they refused to tell reporters what the pilots said.
Investigators were still reviewing the cockpit voice recorder and flight data recorder boxes at their laboratory in Washington D.C., said Hammerschmidt, who added that nothing had been ruled out in trying to determine the cause.
"The cockpit voice recorder indicated an uneventful routine orderly businesslike flight," he added.
Flight 3272 was enroute to Detroit from Cincinnati when it went down about 25 miles (40 kms) south of the airport in rural Monroe County in southeast Michigan on Thursday, killing 28 adults and one infant.
Hammerschmidt said eye-witnesses reported seeing the plane's wings rock (corrects from "lock") before it plunged out of the sky.
He said there was apparently a large amount of wing rocking (corrects from "locking") after which the plane briefly stabilised.
"They all indicated that the airplane stabilised, then the nose of the aircraft abruptly pitched down and descended vertically to the ground," he said.
Hammerschmidt said the NTSB had learned that 20 minutes after the crash the pilot of a DC3 aircraft reported icing 25 miles southwest of Detroit airport.
He said the previous crew of the doomed plane had on at least two occasions earlier in the day successfully used the entire de-icing system of the plane.
He said there were no strong winds at the time of the accident, cloud cover was at 1500 feet (457.2 metres) and visibility was one to three miles (1.6 to 4.8 km).
(Corrects cloud cover figures from 15,000 feet (4,570 metres).)
Capt. Dann Carlsen had a total of 5,329 flight hours and his co-pilot Ken Reece 2,582 hours, Hammerschmidt said, adding both "were reported to be very good pilots."
Both engines of the plane showed they were rotating and working on impact and all eight power blades showed damage consistent with fact they were rotating on impact.
Some observers had suggested the crash could have been caused by broken propeller blades. Propeller problems have been blamed for two previous fatal crashes involving the Brasilia model.
the Monroe county medical examiner said there were still remains to be removed and that the identification process was expected to begin on Saturday.
