The head of General Motors Corp.'s  Chevrolet Division said Monday he wants customers to be able to buy a new car or truck in 90 minutes -- down from the six to eight hours it often takes today.
Chevrolet also plans to expand a pilot program called Custom XPress Delivery, whereby buyers of popularly configured Blazers can receive the sport/utility vehicle one day after they sign the papers.
"Customers shouldn't have to wait six to eight weeks to take delivery on a new vehicle with the color and options they want," said John Middlebrook, general manager of Chevrolet, GM's largest single division.
The changes are part of a series of what Chevrolet calls "Brand Critical Standards" the division plans to roll out on a national level this year.
"Today, building a quality product is just the price of entry," Middlebrook said in a speech at the Automotive News World Congress here. "Dealership experiences set us apart and help make the difference between winning and losing a loyal customer."
Middlebrook predicted that changes to the distribution system, dealership culture and retail process will be the industry's dominant focus into the 21st century.
Driving the changes are customer demands for better service and better treatment from the existing new car sales process, one he said has not changed in more than 80 years.
He cited the rapid rise of new companies such as Car Max and AutoNation. Often called "Big Box" retailers, the new stores offer a wide selection of certified used cars, as well as new cars, at no-haggle prices.
"The bottom line is that customers' expectations are changing and will continue to drive change into the retail sales process for automobiles," he said.
Another area Chevrolet wants dealers to change is the selling process itself. Many sales representatives now spend 20 percent of their time helping a customer settle on a new vehicle, and 80 percent negotiating over the price. Chevrolet wants those numbers reversed.
"Our stores have to convey an image that is consistent with the Chevrolet brand. Customers should feel genuine trust when they walk into a Chevrolet dealership," he said.
Chevrolet is continuing its plan to reduce the number of dealerships. Eventually, the division wants 4,000 in the United States instead of the current 4,400, said Middlebrook.
Talking to reporters later, Middlebrook said dealers should have "good availabitity" of Chevrolet's new Venture minivan when advertising begins in February or March. However, he warned that overall inventories will be tight.
"We're going to be short because I think demand will exceed supply," he said, adding that Chevrolet plans to make and sell 70,000 to 75,000 of the new minivans in 1997.
Despite flat total U.S. minivan sales during the last several months, Middlebrook predicted the segment will grow 25 percent over the next five years as buyers from more demographic groups need the practicality they offer.
"As you look at the minivans and their acceptibility, it's across the total age spectrum. We're seeing more and more retirees in a minivan when they retire," he said. "Minivans are going across the entire market spectrum -- much like station wagons used to."
Middlebrook said segment leader Chrysler Corp. remains the GM's top competitor in the minivan market. In addition to GM, Toyota Motor Corp. will enter the market with a new front-wheel drive product called the Sienna in the fall.
Last week, Toyota executives said they expect to sell all of the 50,000 to 60,000 Sienna's they can produce in the first model year it is on the market.
