Federal investigators said on Sunday an examination of engine wreckage from the Delta Comair crash showed the crew tried to shut off the right engine and activate a fire extinguisher system.
Although the pilots took three steps to cut the engine, investigators said they had found no indication there was a fire on the plane when it slammed into a snowy field in rural south-east Michigan late on Thursday afternoon.
"There is no indication of an in-flight fire," National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) official John Hammerschmidt told reporters at a briefing.
Hammerschmidt said the cockpit voice recorder showed the pilot began a 30-degree banking turn to the left and after three seconds of a stable turn the angle increased.
"Over the next eight-second period of time, the angle of bank increased to approximately 40 degrees. At that point the aircraft departed controlled flight. All data ended approximately 17 seconds after it departed controlled flight," he added.
Hammerschmidt, and the lead NTSB investigator on the scene Richard Rodriguez, did not offer an explanation for the plane's left turn and apparent right engine problems.
Hammerschmidt said that on Monday investigators would begin decontaminating the wreckage and moving it to a building at the local fairgounds where it would be subject to further examination. NTSB officials said they expected to wrap up most on-site work by the end of the week.
Also on Monday investigators in Washington D.C. will resume their study of the "black box" cockpit voice recorder and flight data recorder that were recovered from the wreckage of the Brasilia aircraft, built by Embraer of Brazil.
A local church held a packed memorial service on Sunday attended by relatives of the victims, some of whom visited the scene where a simple memorial had been made from bales of hay.
A blue and white sign perched on a hay bale said, "In memory of the passengers and crew of Comair Flight 3272, from the community of Monroe County and southeast Michigan."
Investigators braved below-zero windchills for the third day in a row on Sunday, retreiving body parts and continuing their probe into the crash, which occurred as the plane was on approach to Detroit Metropolitan Airport from Cincinnati.
Monroe County Medical Examiner David Lieberman said work crews were making good progress in identifying the remains of the 26 passengers and three crew members killed when the plane nosedived to the ground from about 4,000 feet (1,200 metres).
