When General Motors Corp.'s former Chairman Roger Smith forked over $5.1 billion for Hughes Aircraft Co., he envisioned an industrial Goliath that would develop space-age technologies for every-day cars.
Nearly 12 years the later, the verdict is mixed on Smith's grand plan, analysts said Thursday.
Raytheon Corp.'s agreement to purchase the Hughes defence operations is valued at $9.5 billion -- more than covering the original cost of the entire company bought from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute in June 1985.
If 100 percent of the Hughes-linked GM Class H stock were valued at Thursday's closing stock price of just under $63 a share, Hughes would be worth $25.2 billion. Under the structure before the proposed sale, about 25 percent of the Class H shares were traded publicly, with the rest held by GM.
Financially, GM's purchase of Hughes has paid off handsomely for the world's largest automaker.
But from the perspective of integrating Hughes and GM products, the experiment has not panned out, some analysts say.
One attempt was a heads-up instrument display like those used on fighter jet cockpits that was incorporated into Oldsmobiles and Pontiacs -- but never went anywhere.
"The idea of synergistically combining aerospace technology into the automobile business, and applying GM's advanced mass production technology to the high-cost aerospace business, was an idea straight out of cloud cuckoo-land and it never happened," said David Healy, an analyst at Burnham Securities Inc.
"Roger Smith was a terrible manager but a great investor," Healy added.
Analysts also pointed out that when GM's industry dominance slipped in the mid-1980s, the money it tapped for Hughes was unavilable to sink into sorely needed new car and truck programmes.
Indeed, Hughes Chairman C. Michael Armstrong acknowledged Wednesday that GM does not need to own Hughes to get the benefits of its radar and other aerospace technology.
But other analysts argued that GM has reaped untold strategic benefits from Hughes that are not readily visible to outside observers. One of the first benefits GM received was a vast improvement in its systems engineering capabilities, said David Cole, director of the University of Michigan's Centre for the Study of Automotive Transportation.
GM's EV1 electric car, the industry's first electric vehicle designed from the ground up, would not have been possible without Hughes' Delco Electronics Corp. unit, which developed the inductive charging system, as well as the lead-acid batteries.
Another Hughes product appearing on GM vehicles is the OnStar navigation and security system. GM plans to offer the $895 optional system on vehicles outside its Cadillac division by the 1998 model year.
Cole said there were numerous other applications for Hughes' technology, including future electric vehicle platforms and other vehicles that incorporate hybrid technologies.
"Financially, it was excellent," said Cole. "The problem is that a lot of people outside don't see the level of integration."
