The domestic auto industry's chief lobbyist predicted Tuesday that the Republican-led Congress will accept President Clinton's challenge to tone down partisan feuding and develop a better working relationship.
Andrew Card, president and chief executive officer of the American Automobile Manufacturers Association, said the group generally supports the agenda Clinton outlined after his inaguration Monday of a leaner government and a balanced federal budget.
"The second Clinton administration presents both opportunities and concerns to the auto industry," Card said during a lunchtime address to the Automotive Press Association.
In general, Card said federal regulators need to do a better job of understanding the domestic issues facing the Big Three automakers and work harder at opening up global markets, where the biggest growth potential lies.
"There is a natural tension between government and industry, and I think that natural tension is good," he said. "But the government has to recognise a role that is increasingly in favour of the industry rather than against it."
The AAMA represents General Motors Corp., Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp. from large offices in Washington D.C., Detroit and nine regional sites around the country. The Detroit automakers employ about 700,000 people directly and account for about 4.5 percent of the nation's gross domestic product. Including suppliers and dealers, work generated by the Big Three is responsible for 2.3 million jobs, Card said.
He said he wants the federal government to step up pressure on the Japan to boost the value of the yen. A cheaper yen allows Japanese automakers to produce vehicles in Japan at a lower cost than what the domestic automakers can produce them for in the United States.
"I am very, very troubled that the yen is at about a 46-month low," Card said.
AAMA believes the market should be allowed to set the true value of the yen, and not the government of Japan, which has been pushing the yen down against the dollar and other currencies, he said. The yen is now worth about 118 to the dollar, up dramatically from 79, where it was 18 months ago.
On other matters, Card warned that "irresponsible standards" proposed for the National Ambient Air Quality Standards could seriously affect U.S. economic growth. The Clean Air Act requires the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency to review the standards periodically.
The comment period for the standards ends Feb. 18. The new rules are due in June, but Card said he hopes the government delays that date.
