Ford Motor Co's long-shot bid to sit down first with the United Auto Workers union paid off, but analysts wondered Wednesday what the automaker had to give up in exchange for being the Big Three's lead-off negotiator.
"Everyone wants to be first, and that's obviously a plus for Ford in that regard," said J.P. Morgan analyst David Bradley. "The question is, what price did they have to pay to be first?"  
Since January, analysts and other auto industry observers believed Chrysler Corp would be the UAW's choice to start contract talks, although last month some thought General Motors Corp had a good shot.
Union officials acknowledged Tuesday that Ford was selected, but they declined to comment beyond that. Ford executives also declined to comment other than to say the automaker is "encouraged" by the tone of the talks.
Analysts speculated Ford may have expressed some willingness to help union organizing efforts among its supply base.  
That would address job security issues that are crucial to the UAW as the union faces a shrinking membership base.
In return, the union may have agreed to consider a contract that spans more than the traditional three years.
"I think (Ford) would love to have a five or six year agreement," said Michael Ward, an analyst at PaineWebber Inc. "It strengthens Ford's position with the UAW."
A big unknown is how willing Ford is to limit the number of components it buys from outside suppliers, a process known as outsourcing.  
But James Harbour, president of Troy, Mich.-based industry consultant Harbour and Associates Inc, said Ford does not have the breadth of engineering talent to bring large numbers of parts in-house.
"I think probably the biggest thing they could give them is to say we'll work with suppliers and ask them to join the union," said Harbour.  "Membership is the issue this year."
Not being the lead-off company has in the past been bad news for the two automakers not selected because of the pattern style of bargaining that imposed terms on them.
But analysts said that is not necessarily the case this time.  
Unlike prior years, negotiations are continuing with GM and Chrysler.  And there are signs the traditional pattern process is no longer as firm as it used to be.
Bradley noted that by holding out, GM has also not lost any negotiating power. "For now, GM is powder-dry.  They haven't given up any leverage, which they would have had to do to be first," he said.
In picking Ford, which employs about 104,000 UAW members, the union starts with a company that is recognized as having the best labor relations among the Detroit's Big Three.
Analysts said the relative labor peace has given Ford better work rules and allows it more flexibility to use overtime to increase production.  It also has spared the company costly strikes that have hit GM and Chrysler.
The downside, according to Wall Street analysts, is that Ford has not been as aggressive in farming out work to less expensive outside suppliers -- something GM is focusing on.
