Workers striking two Johnson Control Inc. seat assembly plants Tuesday scored a major victory when Ford Motor Co. said it would refuse to accept non-union made seats until the dispute is resolved.
"We had a huge, huge victory here today," Bob King, director of United Auto Worker Region 1A, told a boisterous crowd of strikers and supporters outside of the plant in Plymouth, Mich., a suburb west of Detroit.
More than 300 workers at the plant walked off the job at 6 a.m. Tuesday after talks on a new contract broke down late Monday. The strike drew hundreds of other chanting supporters.
About 200 employees of a Johnson Controls seat plant in Oberlin, Ohio, also struck the company when their talks collapsed. Workers at both plants agreed last fall to be represented by the UAW in a new labour contract.
The Plymouth plant provides final assembly for seats that go into Ford's hot-selling Expedition full-size sport utility vehicle, which is made at the nearby Michigan Truck plant in Wayne, Mich. The Ohio plant makes seats for Ford's Econoline full-size vans.
Johnson Controls officials did not return telephone calls. In a statement, the company said it will make "every effort" to continue seat production at both plants, including hiring temporary and permanent replacement workers, if necessary.
Representatives from Ford said they had to consider their own union workforces when they were affected by supplier disputes. Ford is generally regarded as having the best labour relations of Detroit's Big Three.
"We're not accepting seats made by the non-union employees of Johnson Controls," said Ford spokesman Bill Carroll.
As of midday Tuesday, no new talks were scheduled.
UAW spokesman Karl Mantyla said the union was seeking wage parity with other seat suppliers, such as Lear Corp. which pays hourly wages of $14 to $16. Mantyla would not say what Johnson offered, but said the company "did not get close to that."
The UAW is also pressing for resolution of unfair labour practice claims. After workers agreed to be represented by the UAW, Mantyla said Johnson dropped its entry pay rate to $9 an hour from $9.50, cut out a 401(k) retirement plan, and barred union supporters from displaying UAW buttons at company meetings.
In its statement, the company said the UAW rejected what Johnson termed a reasonable and fair offer.
