When thousands of auto dealers rolled into Las Vegas for their annual convention last year, there was much clamour over the looming onslaught of no-haggle superstores.
As dealers prepare for this year's gathering, which starts Saturday in Atlanta, the juggernaught is upon them.
Republic Industries Inc., the company controlled by billionaire investor Wayne Huizenga of Blockbuster Video fame, is on a buying spree that may have already made it the largest auto dealer group in the nation.
Within two months, Republic, which includes the AutoNation USA superstore chain, has gone from owning no new-car franchises to six dealer groups.
In the meantime, officials at CarMax, the auto superstore chain owned by Circuit City Stores Inc., said earlier this month they would consider buying existing dealerships and adding more new-car outlets as part of their expansion plans.
"I think it's got a lot of dealers rattled," said John Sinclair, owner of Sinclair Ford of Festus in Festus, Mo.
The sweeping changes prompted industry trade magazine Automotive News to ask in its most recent edition: "Apocalpyse Now?"
Before its latest purchase, Montgomery Securities estimated Republic's 1997 franchised dealership revenues at $2.5 billion. That puts it ahead of the previous largest group, Hendrick Automotive Group, which has estimated 1997 revenues of $2.4 billion.
The explosive growth of Republic, CarMax and others comes as Detroit's Big Three automakers have backed off their traditional resistance to publicly owned dealerships.
Ford Motor Co. Chairman Alex Trotman told dealers in Las Vegas a year ago that the No. 2 automaker had no plans to follow Chrysler Corp. and award a new car franchise to an auto superstore.
But the automaker reversed its position in December when it formed an alliance with Republic that resulted in the sale of Ohio-based Mullinax Management, one of the country's biggest Ford dealers, to Republic.
Ford Chief Financial Officer John Devine said earlier this week the automaker still believes the private enterprise system is the best for the industry.
But he added, "We also have to recognise that changes are here and more changes are going to come."
How profitable and successful the superstores ultimately become remains to be seen. But in the short term, they are helping turn the tradition-bound retail car industry upside down. Armed with capital, the auto superstores have taken sophisticated mass-market retail concepts honed in such places as consumer electronics stores and applied them to the new and used vehicle market.
The results are huge lots of high-quality, pre-certified used cars. Buyers who dread walking into an old-fashioned car dealerships enter the new superstores to find user-friendly computer kiosks and childrens' play areas. Salaried sales representatives offer low-pressure help, vehicles at no-haggle prices and 30-day bumper-to-bumper warranties.
"I think there's going to be a revolution in the car business," Fred Ricart, owner of Ricart Ford in Columbus, Ohio, said earlier this month during a panel discussion at the Automotive News World Congress.
Ricart, whose own dealership is structured in an auto mall format, believes traditional dealers can overcome their negative sterotypes and compete. But he says they have to find new ways of improving and measuring customer loyalty and satisfaction.
"The advantage the superstores have is they've got a clean slate going in," he said.
The National Automobile Dealers Association's 80th Annual Convention and Equipment Exposition will be held at the Georgia World Congress in Atlanta, from Feb. 1-4.
