If Miss Manners, the nation's arbiter of proper taste and decorum, can find good things to say about car dealers, then the industry must be doing something right.
That was the message John Peterson, outgoing president of the National Automobile Dealers Association, delivered on Saturday in a speech that railed against the media and others who say traditional car dealerships are on the way out.
"It's time we stood up for what our industry is doing right out there," said Peterson. "So, to our friends in the media, I say take a tip from one of your own, Miss Manners, and park that old stereotype of fast-talking salesmen in plaid coats and white bucks."
According to Peterson, Miss Manners, whose real name is Judith Martin, wrote a column in 1996 after she shopped for a new car in which she said she was "astonished" at the "dignified courtesy" she found at a dozen dealerships she visted.
Peterson spoke at the opening day of the NADA's 80th annual convention and equipment exposition.
In his remarks, Peterson acknowledged the traditional dealer franchise system is facing numerous challenges from the explosive growth of used car superstores such as CarMax and AutoNation USA.
But he said traditional franchised dealers will remain the dominant system for selling new cars and trucks. In a year when the superstores grew rapidly, Peterson said franchised dealers boosted sales by three percent, increased profits by 25 percent, and finished the year with 23,000 dealerships in operation.
Of the approximately 15 million new light vehicles expected to be sold in 1997, 14.5 million will be sold by the current franchise system.
Peterson also took issue with critics who say car dealers do not respond to customers, saying a recent survey by the Newspaper Association of America indicated that more than 90 percent of new-vehicle buyers are satisified or very satisfied.
"No business is more poked at, picked at, anaylzed, written about and castigated for failing to live up to performance standards that no other business in the country is expected to meet," said Peterson.
In the NADA's keynote speech, Toyota Motor Corp's top executive in the U.S. told the audience that franchised new-car dealers will continue to be the cornerstone of the U.S. automotive retailing industry.
Yale Gieszel, executive vice president of Toyota Motor Sales USA Inc, said consumers -- and not auto superstores -- are driving the changes rocking the business.
"Large retail chains or automobile department stores are not the answer to the challenges we face. The current franchise system will not only survive, it will flourish," he said.
At a news conference afterward, Gieszel said he does not believe the large superstore chains can reap enough economies of scale that they can outperform local franchises. Gieszel also said Toyota is not convinced the large superstores can offer the close customer attention that individual dealers can.
