One year after Chrysler Corp. stunned traditional car dealers by granting a new car franchise to the CarMax auto superstore chain, a senior Chrysler executive said Sunday the move has been a success.
"We think Car Max represents us well," said Tom Pappert, vice president of sales and service for Chrysler.
Pappert, who spoke to reporters at the National Automobile Dealers Association annual convention here, said competing dealers near the Norcross, Ga., Chrysler/Dodge CarMax dealership have begun to emulate many of CarMax's practices such as money-back guarantees and more generous warranties.
"It takes all of the guess work out of the used car process, and that's exactly what needs to happen," he said, noting the dealership has added new business and not stolen it from other Chrysler dealers.
Chrysler, the first of Detroit's Big Three to ally itself with one of the new superstores, has no plans to expand any more with CarMax, Pappert said. CarMax is a unit of Circuit City Stores Inc..
Like other automakers, Chrysler has a limit on the number of separate dealership storefronts a single owner can have, although exceptions are granted. The company limits owners to 10 separate dealerships in the country, six in a given regional sales zone, and two in a metropolitan area.
But Chrysler has adopted some of the superstore techniques at three new facilities being built in Texas, Maryland and Massachusetts. The stores will give as much exposure to used cars as new cars typically get. They will be set up in a mall-type layout and feature a personal greeter, child playrooms and a cafe.
The superstore concept, as well as dealerships owned by publicly traded companies, have been a source of concern voiced by dealers attending the convention, according to officials at both Chrysler and Ford Motor Co..
However, Pappert said the capital that publicly traded companies have access to can help dealers who find their profits squeezed by increasingly thin margins.
Profits are likely to come under even more pressure as more buyers use the Internet to research and purchase vehicles, said Pappert. He cited a Boston Consulting group study that forecast 25 percent of new vehicle sales will be over the Internet by 2000, adding he believes it will be higher than that.
"It's going north -- not south," Pappert said.
Separately, Ford Division General Manager Ross Roberts said the automaker has had discussions superstore groups, but has not reached any other letters of understanding like the agreement it signed recently with Republic Industries Inc., which owns the AutoNation USA chain.
Under the agreement announced in December, AutoNation can submit proposals to acquire existing Ford or Lincoln-Mercury dealerships. The pact also covers areas that Ford does not have dealerships and wants to start one.
Roberts said Ford has talked with large groups that do not meet the automaker's financial, territorial and cooperative standards.
