Fearsome of injuries caused by deploying airbags, consumers polled by a market research firm gave safety a lower ranking when choosing a new vehicle for the first time in four years, according to a study released on Sunday.
The biggest drop came with regard to airbags, which have been linked to the deaths of dozens of children and small adults by federal safety regulators.
The number of people who gave driver and passenger side air bags a very important or important rating fell to 57 percent from 82 percent the previous year, according to the report conducted by the Dohring Co. Inc., a Glendale, Calif.-based market research firm.
Respondents who said those air bags are "not at all important" in their purchase decision jumped to 24 percent from 6 percent.
"No doubt the safety reports of physical injury have contributed to this," Rik Kinney, senior vice president of Dohring Co. "This is the first time since we started doing this study in 1993 that the importance of all safety-related equipment declined."
Kinney said 96 percent of those surveyed had seen or heard media reports of potential injuries from airbags. Harm to children ranked as the single biggest fear, with 45 percent of those listing that as a concern.
The study was conducted in January 1997 from a random sample of 1,253 consumers in all 50 states. The poll's margin of error is 2.8 percent.
In other findings, the Dohring study found the number of people who have purchased or will shop at a new car dealership have access to on-line information serivces was up 10 percent to 38 percent.
But the study found that 81 percent of those talked to would still want to test drive a vehicle, even if they researched it over a computer on-line service. Only 4 percent plan to use an on-line service to buy their vehicle.
The study also found that 28 percent of the respondents would rather buy their next used car from a new car dealership that has a manufacturer's certified program, vs. 15 percent who said they would go to a used car superstore.
Kinney said the study was paid for by Dohring. But he acknowledged the company receives 99 percent of its revenues from by selling research to automakers, dealer advertising associations and individual auto dealerships.
