The Explorer from Ford Motor Co., one of the brightest stars in the sport utility segment, looks headed to its first ever sales incentives.
Explorer, the best-selling four-door vehicle in the country for nearly two years, is facing its stiffest competition since it was introduced six years ago.
Ironically, some of that will come from the new Expedition full-sized sport utility that Ford is now introducing. The Explorer is also battling subsidised leases on competitive models that have made Chrysler Corp. Cherokees available for as little as $199 a month.
"We expect by the end of the year, they will most likely have begun some type of national programme on the Explorer," said Wesley Brown, director of global product analysis at CSM Forecasting, a consultant in Farmington Hills, Mich.
In a research report published earlier this week, Salomon Brothers analyst Jack Kirnan predicted Ford will launch lease incentives and other marketing support on the Explorer in the next 60 days.
"We strongly suspect that the all-new Expedition full-size sport utility will begin to cannibalize some sales from the Explorer, which alone should force Ford to implement incentives on the vehicle," said Kirnan.
Ford executives have said the Expedition, based on a modified platform of the new F-150 pickup truck, will steal 10 percent to 15 percent of the smaller Explorer's sales. Analysts believe Ford's internal projections have underestimated the Expedition's effects.
Explorer sales are already being hurt by the new Mercury Mountaineer, which is taking production capacity away from its sister Ford Division vehicle.
Including sales from August announced Thursday, Explorer sales have dropped five months in a row. For the month, sales were 27,615, down 10.7 percent. So far this year, sales of the sport utility were 264,996, 3.5 percent ahead of 1995.
Ford did not act as it were worried about hurting sales when it priced the 1997 Explorer. After quietly raising prices $200 at the end of the 1996 model year, Ford boosted the price for most Explorers another $315, one of the steepest in the model line. Going along with the price hikes, however, are some improved equipment features for the 1997 model year.
Jim Bright, a Ford Division spokesman, declined to discuss the possibilty of Explorer incentives. He noted the Explorer has faced tough competition before.
"We've never had a penny of incentive money on Explorer," he said. "People keep coming after us. To date, we have not had to take that action."
