As megadealer H. Wayne Huizenga continued to gobble up more new car franchises Monday, the National Automobile Dealers Association's top economist said traditional dealers are poised to grab more of the used vehicle market and exploit their superior parts service.
"All in all, we have a pretty favourable outlook in terms of our industry," Tom Webb, chief economist of NADA, told a news conference at the group's annual convention.
Webb's comments came hours after Huizenga's Republic Industries Inc. announced the purchase of Wallace Automotive Group, a six-dealer group that operates Ford, Nissan, Dodge, Mitsubishi and two Lincoln-Mercury dealerships in southeast Florida.
The deal, valued at $55 million, pushes Republic's total 1997 new dealer revenue estimates for 1997 to about $2.8 billion, a Republic spokesman said, erasing any doubt that Republic is now the largest new vehicle dealer group in the country in terms of revenues.
In a swipe at the superstore trend, Webb disputed the idea that selling large volumes of new or used vehicles will cut more costs or generate higher profits. One analysis conducted by NADA showed economies of scale benefits stop after 100 vehicles a month.
"People who think that just increasing volume is the answer are totally wrong," he said.
The new car market remains a mature one, Webb said, with average 1996 dealer profits per vehicle at about $40. The used vehicle segment is growing twice as quickly, he said, because franchisers are picking up more business from small, less-sophisticated used car operators, as well as people who no longer prefer trying to sell a car or truck themselves.
Traditional dealers now control about 31 percent of used retail unit sales and have a 50 percent share of the market in terms of revenue dollars, said Webb. Retail sales of used vehicles number between 40 million and 45 million a year, he said.
"I think the franchised dealer share will grow," he said.
Webb also believes franchised dealers can make gains with their parts and service operations, which he said consistently receive high quality rankings.
Webb said traditional dealers have an inherent advantage over superstores structured like CarMax, a unit of Circuit Cities Stores Inc. , because they have more than one profit centre. The CarMax chain now only makes money from one area -- used cars, according to Webb. But franchised dealers make money off used cars, parts and financing.
Franchised dealers have also benefited from growth in lending to higher-risk buyers. Even if those loans later become delinquent, it is not the dealer's problem, as he or she has already made money from the sale, Webb said.
He said he is not concerned about consumer debt levels hurting vehicle sales. Although some industry experts believe the overall selling cycle is becoming more stable, he said the industry still remains vulnerable to a downturn in the economy.
"A new vehicle is a very postponeable purchase," said Webb. "So if the economy weakens, yes, we will suffer."
For 1997, NADA predicts there will be a net loss of 100 to 150 dealerships, continuing a gradual consolidation that has been under way since the 1940s. According to NADA, there were 22,000 new vehicle dealers in 1996, more than 50,000 franchises and about 15,000 dealer principals.
