Federal-Mogul Corp., dropping its four-year effort to build a global auto parts retail empire, unveiled a massive restructuring Thursday that returns it to its core manufacturing and distribution business.
The Southfield, Mich.-based company said it took a total of $264 million in pre-tax charges to cover the restructuring and special one-time items from the fourth quarter.
Federal-Mogul, which has about $2 billion in annual sales, also said it will slash about 2,900 jobs, equal to 18.5 percent of its worldwide work force of 15,700.
The charges resulted in a net loss of $220.2 million for the fourth quarter, compared with a loss of $49.1 million for the 1995 period.
For all of 1996, the company lost $211.1 million, but would have posted a profit of $34.7 million before special items. In 1995 the company lost $9.7 million.
"We have realigned our growth strategy behind our core competencies of engineering, manufacturing and distribution," Chairman Dick Snell said in a statement. "Our retail operations are good viable businesses that can be operated better by someone else."
The company makes a wide variety of products, ranging from engine bearings, oil seals and pistons to lighting and electrical components, for the auto, farm and construction vehicle industry.
Federal Mogul stock closed up 87.5 cents at $24.375 on the New York Stock Exchange.
Snell, the former CEO of Tenneco Inc.'s automotive business, joined Federal-Mogul in early November. He earned high praise from analysts Thursday for his swift action and straightforward explantion of where the company is headed.
"This is the kind of stock where if the numbers work out, the stock is going to work out, because people want to like him," said Salomon Brothers analyst Darren Kimball.
Nicholas Colas, an analyst at CS First Boston, said the restructuring makes sense because the firm tried to expand in an area where it had no in-house retail expertise.
"Basically, the grand vision of having an international third world distribution and retail business is gone," he said. "This is much more playing to the company's historical strengths."
Included in the restructuring is the planned sale of 132 international retail operations in Australia, Chile, Ecuador, Panama, Puerto Rico, South Africa, and Venezuela, and the planned sale or restructuring of about 30 wholesale operations in 10 countries.
The firm also plans to relocate product lines in its European manufacturing operations and cut the work force; consolidate lighting products in Juarez, Mexico; and close a manufacturing facility in Indiana. The company also plans to close two distribution warehouses in Kentucky, consolidate customer support functions in the United States and streamline administration and operational staff functions worldwide.
The moves are a complete reversal of the efforts by former Chairman and Chief Executive Officer Dennis Gormley, who was forced to resign in September after pressure from the board.
Snell said in an interview that future restructuring in North America and Europe are likely, which could result in more job losses over the next few years, although not on the scale of Thursday's announcement.
At the same time, the firm will be on the lookout for acquisitions that could add to its core businesses, he said. For instance, since Federal-Mogul makes engine bearings, it makes sense for it also to offer pistons, Snell said.
