Federal-Mogul Corp unveiled a massive restructuring Thursday that dumps its four-year effort to build a global auto parts retail empire and returns the firm to its core manufacturing and distribution business.
The Southfield, Mich.-based auto supply firm said it will take a total of $264 million in pre-tax charges to cover the restructuring and special one-time items from the fourth quarter. Investors approved of the action, pushing the stock up $1.50 to $25 a share.  
Nicholas Colas, an analyst at CS First Boston, said the move is a prudent one for the company, which had no in-house retail expertise when it began to expand in that area.
"Basically, the grand vision of having an international third world distribution and retail business is gone," he said. "This is much more playing to the company's historical strengths."
The moves mark a reversal of the efforts by former chairman and chief executive officer Dennis Gormley, who was forced to resign in September after pressure from the board.  
Gormley spent about $500 million on acquisitions since 1992, although a company spokeswoman said less than one-third of that was related to the international retail expansion.
"Our retail operations are good viable businesses that can be operated better by someone else," said Federal-Mogul Chairman and Chief Executive Officer Dick Snell, who announced the restructuring 95 days after he assumed the company's top post.  
Snell was formerly the CEO of Tenneco Inc's automotive unit. He said in a statement there will be further restructuring that will generate positive cash flow, adding the company expects a "positive economic value added" by 1998.
Colas said future restructuring charges will range from $5 million to $7 million in the next couple of years. He said Snell told analysts Federal-Mogul has a goal of nine to 10 percent return on capital by the end of 1997, and 12 percent by the end of 1998.
"The guiding light at this company has shifted from trying to create earnings growth to creating shareholder value," said Colas.
Federal-Mogul, which had $2.03 billion in 1996 sales, also said it will slash about 2,900 jobs, equal to 18.5 percent of its worldwide workforce of 15,700. The charges resulted in a net loss of $220.2 million for the fourth quarter, compared to a loss of $49.1 million for the 1995 period.
The company makes a broad range of products, ranging from engine bearings, oil seals and pistons to lighting and electrical components, for the auto, farm and construction vehicle industry.
