Federal-Mogul Corp., dropping its four-year effort to build a global auto parts retail empire, unveiled a massive restructuring Thursday that returns it to its core manufacturing and distribution business.
The Southfield, Mich.-based company said it took a total of $264 million in pre-tax charges to cover the restructuring and special one-time items from the fourth quarter.
Federal-Mogul, which has about $2 billion in annual sales, also said it will slash about 2,900 jobs, equal to 18.5 percent of its worldwide workforce of 15,700.
The charges resulted in a net loss of $220.2 million for the fourth quarter, compared with a loss of $49.1 million for the 1995 period.
For all of 1996, the company lost $211.1 million, but would have posted a profit of $34.7 million before special items. In 1995 the company lost $9.7 million.
"We have realigned our growth strategy behind our core competencies of engineering, manufacturing and distribution," Chairman Dick Snell said in a statement. "Our retail operations are good viable businesses that can be operated better by someone else."
The company makes a wide variety of products, ranging from engine bearings, oil seals and pistons to lighting and electrical components, for the auto, farm and construction vehicle industry.
In afternoon trading, Federal Mogul stock was up $1.125 at $24.625 share on the New York Stock Exchange.
Nicholas Colas, an analyst at CS First Boston said the move was a prudent one for the company, which had no in-house retail expertise when it began to expand in that area.
"Basically, the grand vision of having an international third world distribution and retail business is gone," he said. "This is much more playing to the company's historical strengths."
Included in the restructuring is the planned sale of 132 international retail operations in Australia, Chile, Ecuador, Panama, Puerto Rico, South Africa, and Venezuela, and the planned sale or restructuring of about 30 wholesale operations in 10 countries.
The firm also plans to relocate product lines in its European manufacturing operations and cut the workforce; consolidate lighting products in Juarez, Mexico, and close a manufacturing facility in Indiana.
The company also plans to close two distribution warehouses in Kentucky, consolidate customer support functions in the United States and streamline administration and operational staff functions worldwide.
Included in that is the moving of European aftermarket management functions in Geneva, Switzerland, to manufacturing headquarters in Wiesbaden, Germany.
The moves are a complete reversal of the efforts by former Chairman and Chief Executive Officer Dennis Gormley, who was forced to resign in September after pressure from the board.
Gormley had spent about $500 million on acquisitions since 1992, although a company spokeswoman said less than one-third of that was related to the international retail expansion.
Federal-Mogul director Steve Miller took over on an interim basis until Snell was hired Nov. 8.
Snell said in a statement that there will be further restructuring. He said moves will generate positive cash flow, adding the company expects a "positive economic value-added" by 1998.
Colas said future restructuring charges will range between $5 million and $7 million in the next couple of years.
"The guiding light at this company has shifted from trying to create earnings growth to creating shareholder value," Colas said.
