It is probably a good thing the National Automobile Dealers Association annual convention will not be returning any time soon to Atlanta, where the CarMax superstore has made a big splash.
Acting on a request from CarMax management, a local policeman forced three reporters out of the CarMax lot in the Atlanta suburb of Norcross, telling them people associated with the convention were banned from the store.
A momentary lapse of Southern hospitality? Hardly. The incident ranks as only one more illustration of the friction, fear and outright hostility caused by the new breed of used car superstores and mega dealers.
Although the superstores now account for only a fraction of the 40.8 million used cars sold in 1996, H. Wayne Huizenga's Republic Industries Inc. is on a relentless campaign to buy new vehicle dealerships.
Republic, which owns the AutoNation USA chain, added two more dealer groups this week, lifting estimated 1997 revenues to more than $2.8 billion, the single largest in the country.
Together, the CarMax and Republic models are taking the industry by storm, and in the process are tearing apart a system traditional franchised dealers have known for 80 years.
CarMax in particular drew a steady stream of criticism from many dealers -- and some manufacturers -- at the convention, which wrapped up earlier this week.
Yale Gieszl, the top Toyota Motor Corp. executive in the United States, blasted CarMax during a press conference, saying Toyota would not grant a new car franchise to the company.
"I don't think size is equivalent to customer service," said Gieszl, executive vice president of Toyota Motor Sales USA Inc.
Officials at CarMax returned the favour by turning down all requests for tours of the Norcross store. The outlet is unique because it is the only CarMax to have a new car franchise, from Chrysler Corp., which was granted last year.
Morgan Stewart, a spokesman for Circuit City Stores Inc., which owns 80 percent of CarMax, said there were simply too many requests to accommodate the visitors.
"We had hundreds if not thousands of people showing up, looking for tours, and we had to keep our primary commitment, which was to serve customers," he said.
As for the reporters, Stewart said they should have first contacted Circuit City's public relations department at the company's Richmond, Va., headquarters.
Although the superstores have received much attention for emphasising a more friendly sales approach, many dealers remain unconvinced they can successfuly run the business side.
Vinje Dahl, who owns Dahl Ford in Davenport, Iowa, said it is not easy to operate used car businesses profitably on a local level, where an intimate knowledge of the market is key. Profit margins are razor-thin, and a dealership is considered doing well if its return on sales is 1.5 percent to 2 percent.
"We're in a buying business, we aren't really in a selling business," he said, adding, "I don't think these guys are buying very smart."
For now, CarMax sales are booming. For January sales from stores open at least a year were up 33 percent, while total sales rose 90 percent to $43.1 million, thanks to the addition of two new superstores.
CarMax, however, is not expected to report significant profits before 1999, said Nicholas Colas, an analyst with Credit Suisse First Boston.
Despite their grousing, many of the dealers privately expressed envy and amazement at the prices Republic is paying. Profitable dealerships typically sell for three to five times earnings, dealers said, but Republic is paying for dealer groups in stock that value the deals at 17 to 20 times earnings.
Colas said the fact the deals are for stock and not cash does carry some risk for those selling because their wealth is dependent on future growth and stock market valuation. But the pay-off could be big if they execute well.
Still, car dealers, a notoriously independent bunch, may be in for a rude shock if they sell out to companies whose stock is scrutinised by Wall Street.
"I don't think most dealers are cognizant of how quickly the world is changing around them, and how brutal public ownership is," said Colas.
