Federal-Mogul Corp hopes to pay off $185 million in debt in 1997, bringing its total debt to capital ratio to under 60 percent by the end of the year, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer Dick Snell said Thursday.
Snell told Reuters in an interview other goals for 1997 include hitting a return on invested capital of 12 percent, although the year's average will probably be below that.
Over the last three years, Federal-Mogul has been earning from 4.5 percent to six percent on its capital -- below its cost of capital of 12 percent.  
During 1998, Snell would like the company to be earning a 10 percent return on sales. "Those are goals," he said. "I think we have a reasonable chance of making it, but I'm not promising."
The Southfield, Mich.-based auto parts supplier announced a broad restructuring Thursday that will take it out of the international retail business. The restructuring and other one-time items resulted in a $264 million pre-tax charge.
Federal-Mogul reduced its debt by $104 million in 1996. Debt-to-capital is 69 percent, although Snell said that will fall as the company sells off its retail operations.  
Snell said the company has been in contact with possible buyers of the retail operations. A single buyer for the whole package is unlikely, he said, noting the business could be sold in three to 10 different pieces. The firm paid a total of about $125 million for the retail operations.
"We're not going to give away the shareholders' assets," he said. "We're going to demand a good value for them."
Snell said further consolidations of its North American distribution system and European operations are likely on top of those already announced. Those will likely result in more headcount reductions over in the next few years.  
Federal-Mogul plans to add a new position of vice president of marketing to improve customer relations, Snell said. Finalsts have been selected for the job, which will also be responsible for shoring up the firm's after-market brands.
"We have some very, very good well known aftermarket brands that haven't had much of any in the way of market support the past several years, which I think is sort of the hidden opportunity this company has," he said.
As it digests the restructuring, Federal-Mogul will also be on the lookout for acquisitions that add to its core manufacturing businesses, said Snell. For instance, since the firm makes engine bearings, it makes sense for it to also offer pistons, he said.
Snell did not rule out the possibilty of an acquisition worth "several hundred million" in 1997 if the right opportunity arises.
Salomon Brothers analyst Darren Kimball said Snell, who has been on the job 95 days, impressed investors and analysts with the moves announced Thursday.
"This is the kind of stock where if the numbers work out, the stock is going to work out because people want to like him," he said.
