Talks aimed at settling a dispute between the United Auto Workers and Johnson Controls Inc. continued Thursday afternoon, as Ford Motor Co. prepared to idle light truck production lines at three plants.
Johnson Controls spokesman Jeff Steiner said in a recorded message that talks were continuing as of mid-afternoon to resolve the strike, which entered its 10th day Thursday.
About 500 UAW workers walked off the job Jan. 28 at two Johnson Controls seat plants in Plymouth, Mich., and Oberlin, Ohio, after talks on a new contract collapsed.
The plants conduct final seat assembly for the Ford Expedition full-size sport utility, and Econoline and Club Wagons full-size vans.
With no sign that a settlement is near, Ford is sticking with plans to idle all of its Michigan Truck Assembly plant, and part of two other facilities in Ohio, said Ford spokesman Bert Serre.
On Wednesday, Ford said it would suspend production at the plants if the two sides did not resolve their issues, a move that would idle about 6,800 hourly workers.
Ford has refused to accept seats made by non-union labour, but has continued to make and store Expeditions and Econolines, using temporary seats to finish production.
When production of the current shifts concludes, Ford will have made 7,700 Expeditions and 7,100 full-size vans without regular seats, Serre said. He declined to comment on the how much the shutdown would cost the automaker.
Analysts have said Ford earns $10,000 in pre-tax profits on the Expedition, one of its most popular and profitable vehicles. Normally, Ford makes 42 Expeditions an hour, or 840 vehicles a day during two 10-hour shifts at Michigan Truck.
Because Ford makes its F-Series pickup trucks on the same line as the Expedition, the company said stopping Expedition production will also force it to halt F-Series assembly.
Ohio plants affected are the van assembly line in Lorain, and a frame production line at Ford's Ohio Assembly in Avon Lake.
Taking cues from Ford, Johnson Controls did not stand in the way of UAW organising efforts at the plants last fall. The UAW has been stepping up efforts to organise auto suppliers to boost its falling membership base.
The union says it wants seat workers at the two plants to receive pay levels competitive with other seat manufacturers. But Johnson Controls maintains its offer is competitive with what the UAW has accepted elsewhere.
