Ford Motor Co. halted light truck assembly lines at three plants Friday as planned because of a strike at a seat supplier, but signed up another company to help it clear out the backlog of 7,700 Expeditions built without proper seats.
Following an appeal from Ford Chairman Alex Trotman, Lear Corp. Chairman Kenneth Way agreed to have his company make seats for Ford's Expedition full-size sport utility vehicle once the walkout is settled, according to sources in the supply industry.
Under the arrangement, Lear, which already is a large Ford supplier, would make second and third row seats for the Expedition, said Donna Parolini, president of International Business Development Corp., a consulting firm in Troy, Mich.
Front seats for the vehicles are being made by Ford's Chesterfield, Mich., trim plant, Ford officials have said. Ford spokesman Bert Serre said the plant has been making a limited number of seats, less than 20 an hour.
Ford suspended all production at its Michigan Assembly in Wayne, which makes the Expedition and F-Series pickup trucks, after the United Auto Workers and Johnson Controls Inc. failed to settle a strike, which entered its 11th day Friday.
Ohio plants affected were the Econoline and Club Wagon full-size van assembly line in Lorain and a frame production line at Ohio Assembly in Avon Lake. About 6,800 workers were idled as a result of the action.
Industry analysts said the strike has Ford in a huge bind. The Expedition is one of its most profitable and popular vehicles, earning Ford an estimated pre-tax profit of $10,000 each. Under normal production, it makes 840 vehicles at day Michigan Truck, the only plant where the Expedition is made.
But to avoid angering its own UAW workers, Ford refused to accept seats made by non-union replacement workers. It had been making the vehicles with temporary seats. But after making about 14,800 Expeditions and Econolines without proper seats, Ford decided to shut production down completely.
"To interrupt Expedition production for any extended period of time would hurt Ford financially in North America," said Michael Robinet, managing director of CSM Forecasting in Farmington Hills, Mich.
Because Ford and Lear do not want to provoke the UAW, Lear, which has unionized plants, would not start producing seats until the strike is over, said Parolini. Another issue prohibiting Lear from making seats immediately is the fact that it buys seat frames from the same Johnson Controls facility that assembles seats for Ford.
Shutting down Expedition production means an extension of the three- to six-month wait that many consumers already face. Introduced last fall, the Expedition has been a huge hit with buyers looking for a sleek, larger sport utility.
"The reception of this vehicle has been the highest of anything I've seen since the original Mustang," said Lou Stanford, owner of Varsity Ford in Ann Arbor, Mich., one of the largest Ford dealers in the country.
About 500 UAW members struck Johnson Controls seat plants January 28 in Plymouth, Mich., and Oberlin, Ohio, when talks broke down on a new contract.
Jeff Steiner, a spokesman for Johnson Controls' automotive unit, said no talks occurred Friday after they broke off late Thursday. No new negotiations were scheduled for the weekend.
Steiner declined to characterize the discussions, which have restarted and collapsed several times since the strike began over terms for a new contract.
