Convinced there is no quick end in sight to a crippling seat supplier strike, Ford Motor Co. said Monday it was moving ahead with a plan to resume production of its Expedition full-size sport utilty vehicle with seats from another company.
Ford hopes to finalize its restart efforts by the middle or end of this week, said spokesman Bert Serre. Lear Corp., the substitute seat supplier, plans to start making the seats later this week.
The automaker halted production of the Expedition and Econoline and Club Wagon full-size vans early Friday afternoon, idling 6,800 workers in Michigan and Ohio.
Ford had hoped a 14-day strike by about 500 United Auto Workers union members at two Johnson Controls Inc. seat plants would be settled. In deference to its own union workforce, Ford refused to accept seats made by non-union replacements.
Ford, however, made 7,700 Expeditions and 7,100 Econolines without seats, before it ran out of storage room and grew concerned over Johnson Controls' ability to meet the backlog and regular production demand. Over the weekend, Ford made its own labor negtiators available to help resolve the dispute.
"From our position, we're disappointed that Johnson Controls and the UAW haven't been able to reach a settlement. We've done everything we could," said Serre. "Now, we've made the decision to act."
The seat agreement with Lear is a temporary one, company officials said. Lear spokeswoman Leslie Touma would not disclose what Detroit area plant will make the seats. Touma also declined to comment on what reaction Lear's unionized workers might have to the company's decision.
"Ford is a valued Lear customer, and we're trying to help them out during this time," she said.
Ford will first focus on putting seats in new Expeditions built once production resumes, said Serre. It will then turn its attention to the backlog of Expeditions built without seats. The Expedition is one of Ford's most profitable vehicles, generating an estimated $10,000 in pre-tax profits, according to analysts.
Johnson Controls and the UAW have not held discussions since Thursday, and none are scheduled, Steiner said. The two sides are at odds over terms for a new contract.
