In what may be a break in a 15-day strike against a maker of automotive seats, negotiators for Johnson Controls Inc. and the United Auto Workers spoke for several hours late Monday and early Tuesday.
The renewed discussions came hours after Ford Motor Co. said it would re-start its Expedition production line with seats from Lear Corp., Johnson Control's chief competitor in the auto seat business.
"We're hopeful there will be some additional discussions," said JCI spokesman Jeff Steiner.
No talks were held later Tuesday, but Steiner characterised the negotiations as being adjourned, compared with previous sessions where talks broke off completely. The two sides had not spoken since late Thursday, Feb. 6.
Unable to agree on terms for a new contract, about 500 UAW members at JCI seat plants in Plymouth, Mich., and Oberlin, Ohio, walked off the job Jan. 28. In addition to the Expedition full-size sport/utility, the plants make seats for Ford's Econoline and Club Wagon full-size vans.
Ford refused to accept seats made by non-union replacement workers, but continued making vehicles in hopes the strike would be settled soon. After it made 14,800 Expeditions and Econolines without seats, Ford last Friday suspended production on three assembly lines in Michigan and Ohio, idling 6,800 workers.
The automaker reversed direction again Monday, saying it was devising plans to resume Expedition production with seats from Lear. The popular sport/utility, introduced last fall, is one of Ford's most profitable vehicles, earning what analysts estimate at $10,000 each in pre-tax profits.
The Expeditions are made only at Ford's Michigan Assembly plant in Wayne, Mich. Once production resumes, some 4,000 of the 6,800 workers idled would go back to work. The shutdown has been a costly one for Ford. In addition to losing 840 Expeditions a day, the plant has also been forced to halt production of the hot-selling F-150 pickup trucks.
Steiner confirmed that JCI has moved fabrication equipment and frame-making tools out of the Plymouth plant and into its metal seat frame plant in Cadiz, Ky. The plant, which is represented by the United Steelworkers union, is one of six JCI facilities that has union representation. Milwaukee, Wis.-based JCI has a total of 34 plants in the United States.
JCI chose the Cadiz plant because it has extra floor space to accommodate the machinery, Steiner said. Under the plan announced Monday, JCI will make frames for both Lear and Ford. Lear will produce second and third row seats for Expeditions, and Ford will make front-row seats at its Chesterfield, Mich., trim plant.
