Daily circulation at Detroit's two strike-bound newspapers fell by a third in the first quarter of 1996 from a year ago, according to the first audited figures released since the strike began.
Combined daily circulation of the Free Press and Detroit News was down 33 percent at 576,698 for the January-through-March period, Detroit Newspapers Inc., the joint operating agency that runs two papers, said Friday.
The number, as verified by the Audit Bureau of Circulations, was below the 624,980 that the papers say they distributed, because ABC could not confirm payment or collection for all the papers.
The circulation drop from the same three months in 1995 roughly coincides with the 25 percent to 30 percent decline newspaper officials have acknowledged since the strike began in July 1995.
About 2,500 pressroom, mailroom, delivery and newsroom employees from six unions walked off the job in a dispute over proposed work rule changes and job cuts. Knight-Ridder Inc. owns the Free Press. The News is owned by Gannett Co. Inc..
Circulation for the combined Sunday edition as counted by the Audit Bureau declined to 769,594, a 29 percent drop from 1,085,677 in the year-ago period. Detroit Newspapers said they distributed 844,335 combined Sunday papers.
The Audit Bureau, which contacted thousands of subscribers, had trouble guaranteeing that all of the subscriptions had been paid. They also found some readers were reluctant to admit they read the struck papers, the newspapers said.
Detroit Newspapers officials said they have concentrated more on delivering papers during the strike than on collecting for them.
"As time has gone by, we have been increasingly successful at re-establishing all of our distribution procedures, including billing and collection," said Rob Althaus, senior vice president of circulation, in a statement.
The newspapers said their combined daily net paid circulation in the April-through-August period has increased by 25,000, or 4.5 percent, using the Audit Bureau criteria for calculating paid subscribers. Sunday circulation for the same period grew by 18,000, or 2.4 percent.
Roger Kerson, a spokesman for the striking unions, said the audited figures reinforce the unions' position that it was too costly to produce papers under strike conditions.
"They show a critical and devastating loss of readership," said Kerson. "I hope the admission of these horrible circulation numbers will lead to some (bargaining) progress."
No negotiations were held this week, although some meetings are scheduled for next week, the papers said.
