MGM Grand Inc.  Wednesday announced a partnership with several prominent local civic and business leaders to build a casino in Detroit, joining a parade of high-profile suitors vying for three downtown gambling licenses.
MGM Chairman Terrence Lanni said following a news conference here that total investment in the proposed casino complex would be more than $400 million.
"It could be more -- I would expect it to be more," Lanni said.
Officials from MGM and the nine local partners, mostly African-American, refused to disclose details about the size and theme of their casino plans. They said it would be inappropriate to do so before an application is submitted and city leaders decide where the casino can be built.
Michigan voters last November approved legislation that would grant three licenses for operating casinos in Detroit, making it the largest American city to have legalised gambling.
Two local gambling groups that financed the pro-gambling lobbying efforts last fall are presumed to be in line for two of the licenses. Those companies are Greektown Casino LLC and Atwater Entertainment Inc.
In addition to MGM Grand, casino operators that have expressed interest in Detroit include Harrahs Entertainment Inc., Mirage Resorts Inc. and Circus-Circus Enterprises Inc.
Las Vegas-based MGM is known for its glitzy, entertainment-themed casinos, and Lanni made clear he envisions something similar for Detroit -- possibly involving a Motown theme.
"We're in the gaming entertainment business. We're competing for the entertainment dollar. Unless you have something that is very special, that is something people want to visit and re-visit, you're going to lose out to other entertainment venues," Lanni said.
In addition to its reputation, Lanni boasted that MGM has the financial might to build a casino and possibly a hotel in Detroit. The company has received a commitment to boost its line of credit to $1 billion from $600 million.
Lanni also stressed that MGM is a good corporate citizen that would help revitalise the lagging downtown Detroit area if its application was approved. But in an ironic twist, standing behind Lanni at the briefing was Alex Yemenidjian, MGM's president and chief operating officer.
Yemenidjian, who said nothing at the press conference, was a key part of the hostile takeover attempt of Chrysler Corp. by MGM controlling shareholder Kirk Kerkorian in April 1995. Kerkorian and his Tracinda Corp. eventually abandoned his effort and signed a truce with Chrysler.
Chrysler Vice Chairman Thomas Denomme was recently appointed chairman of the Michigan Gaming Control Board, the agency charged with licensing and regulating the new casinos.
It was unclear how Denomme would handle his position when it comes to ruling on the MGM application.
The local investment group is led by William Pickard, chairman of Regal Plastics Co. Other investors include Roy S. Roberts, general manager of General Motors Corp.'s Pontiac-GMC division; Anthony Grainer, president and CEO of Malan Realty Investors Inc.; and Dr. Arthur Johnson, retired Wayne State University vice president and vice chairman of New Detroit, Inc.
