After 19 months of sometimes violent confrontations, six striking newspaper unions on Friday made an unconditional offer to return to work at Detroit's two major daily papers.
Al Derey, head of the Metropolitan Council of Newspaper Unions, said the action was not an act of surrender but a tactic to expose the papers to potentially huge financial losses if they do not agree to a fair contract.
"Our position is this strike has not ended. This is simply a new strategy to try to win a fair and decent contract from two corporate giants that don't have any souls," a visibly emotional Derey told a news conference.
About 2,500 distribution, pressroom, newsroom and mailroom workers walked off their jobs at the Detroit Free Press and Detroit News in July 1995 after contract talks collapsed.
The papers are editorially indepdendent and have separate owners but have been published under a joint operating agreement since 1989.
Knight-Ridder Inc. owns the Free Press. The News is owned by Gannett Co. Inc..
A representative from Detroit Newspapers Inc, the joint operating agency, could not be reached for comment.
The papers have published every day since the strike began, although early on they only published a single joint edition. More than 400 of the original strikers have cross picket lines. The papers have hired about 1,400 replacements.
Since the start of the strike, which has often erupted in violent confrontations between supporters and private security guards, circulation at the papers has fallen 30 percent. Advertising revenues are down between 15 percent and 20 percent.
Derey told reporters the advertising boycott has cost the papers a combined $250 million, and 700,000 readers have dropped subscriptions. But because the newspapers "still don't get it," he said the unions need to adopt a new strategy.
If the papers reject the return-to-work offer, they could be liable for back pay from the time the offer was made if they were found to have commited unfair labor practices, said Derey. That amounts to $250,000 a day, or $1 million a year, he said.
The action Friday is a controversial one for many union members, who are staunchly opposed to returning to work. But Derey appealed for their support.
"This wasn't the only strategy and it isn't the easiest, but it is the best way we've got to take on these corporate powers and get us moving again down the road to a fair contract," he said.
One local labor analyst said the union's move was an acknowledgement the strike as a means of leverage has reached the point of diminishing returns. But it does force management to make some difficult decisions.
"What the unions are doing now is upping the legal ante," said Steve Babson, labor program specialist at Wayne State University's Labor Studies Center.
If the papers do not agree to take back all of the striking workers, they could be liable for the back pay penalities if they commited unfair labor practices, a legal process that could take years to resolve, he said.
The Detroit regional director of the NLRB has accused the companies of unfair labor practices, finding they did not bargain in good faith. The company appealed that decision to an administrative law judge, who has not yet issued a ruling.
