Bargaining between union and American Axle Manufacturing Inc. negotiators was expected to continue up to the midnight Friday deadline to avoid a strike that would quickly paralyse General Motors Corp.'s U.S. light truck production.
About 7,200 United Auto Workers union members were ready to walk off the job at five plants in Detroit, Three Rivers, Mich., and Buffalo, N.Y., if no agreement was reached on a new three-year contract.
American Axle, which was spun off from GM into a private company in 1994, supplies virtually all of the rear axles for GM's pickup trucks and sport utility vehicles, axles for the Camero and Firebird rear-drive cars, as well as various parts for other passenger car lines.
The company also makes axles for Chrysler Corp. and axle shafts for Ford Motor Co.
Tight inventories at American Axle and Dana Corp., the other primary axle maker in the United States, means GM's light truck plants would run out of parts by early next week, analysts said.
"They can't have more than two days supply because there is no excess capacity in the industry," said James Harbour, president of Harbour &amp; Associates Inc., a Troy, Mich.-based consulting firm.
Burnham Securities Inc. analyst David Healy estimated GM could lose $20 million a day in after-tax profits if it was forced to suspend light truck production. Labour strife cost the world's largest automaker $1.2 billion in 1996.
The American Axle situation is the latest labour dispute to flare up in the automotive supplier industry since the beginning of the year. Analysts say they signal a new era as the UAW steps up efforts to organise more component workforces and bring pay levels in line with those of the Big Three.
"It's the next phase of the evolution of change," said Donna Parolini, president of International Business Development Corp., a Troy, Mich. supplier consulting firm.
UAW membership among independent, or non-Big Three, suppliers has dropped dramatically over the last 20 years so that now less than 20 percent of the independent parts workers belong to the UAW, she said.
The American Axle talks are notable because they mark the first time a GM spin-off has had to negotiate a new contract. When the firm was spun off under former Chrysler manufacturing chief Richard Dauch, it agreed to uphold terms of the previous UAW contract, which expired last September.
Union officials have said the company is balking at following the Big Three pattern deal hammered out last fall. That contract guarantees employment for 95 percent of current workers, and allows automakers to pay new hires at 70 percent of the starting base hourly wage of about $19.
Amrican Axle, however, wants to start new hires at 60 percent of the base wage -- and extend the time it takes to reach the full rate to six years. The Big Three pact has a "grow-in" rate of three years.
Last month, two Johnson Controls Inc. seat plants were hit with strikes by newly organised UAW workers. As of the Friday an agreement had not been reached in the 18-day-old strike.
The walkouts prompted Ford to take the unprecedented action of refusing to accept seats made by non-union replacements. Ford later signed up Johnson Controls' main competitor, Lear Corp., to supply it with seats for the Expedition full-size sport utility vehicle, one of those affected by the strike.
Parolini released figures Friday that showed the global supplier industry consolidating at a faster rate than previously thought. By the end of this year, there will be about 8,000 suppliers -- down from 30,000 in 1988.
In the past 22 months, there have been more than 320 acqusitions or mergers valued at a total of $32 billion. The mergers will likely result in layoffs as the companies seek to gain efficiencies. For instance, Parolini said companies such as Lear and Johnson Controls have issued internal mandates to reduce headcount by 20 percent next year.
