Marathon labor contract talks dragged Saturday at a key auto supplier, with some progress being reported in a bid to avoid a strike that would quickly halt light truck production at General Motors Corp.
Bargainers for American Axle &amp; Manufacturing Inc and the United Auto Workers (UAW) had been talking for 35 hours straight as of 5 p.m. Saturday, seeking to hammer out terms for a new three-year contract that would cover 7,200 hourly workers.
A midnight Friday strike deadline set by the UAW expired without any picket action. Union members remained on the job Saturday, as the company proceeded with its normal weekend operations of limited production and maintenance work.
"There is progress," said a person familiar with the talks who asked not to be named. "The attitudes are good."
A strike at American Axle's five plants in Detroit, Three Rivers, Mich., and Buffalo, N.Y., would shut down light truck production at GM's 11 North American truck plants within days, and create more supplier hardships for Ford Motor Co.
American Axle, which was spun off from GM in 1994, supplies rear axles for GM's pickup trucks and sport utility vehicles, axles for the Camero and Firebird rear-drive cars, as well as various parts for other passenger car lines.
The company makes axle shafts that are used by Ford in its F-150 pickup trucks, Expedition and Explorer sport/utilities and some rear-drive passenger cars, although inventories of those supplies are not as critical as the GM parts. It also makes axles for a small number of Chrysler Corp. light truck products.
Tight inventories among axle suppliers means GM's light truck plants would run out of parts by early next week, analysts said. The world's largest automaker could lose after-tax profits of $20 million a day if it were forced to suspend light truck production, analysts said.
American Axle and the UAW are at odds over wages and other economic issues as the union seeks to impose on the company the same pattern contract the Big Three automakers agreed to for about 400,000 UAW members last fall.
Automakers guaranteed jobs for 95 percent of their current workforce in a contract that provides $2,000 lump sum payments in the first year and wage hikes of three percent in the second and third years. The pact allows automakers to pay new hires at 70 percent of the starting base hourly wage of about $19.
American Axle, however, wants to start new hires at a lower rate and extend the time it takes to reach the full rate to six years, union officials said. The Big Three pact has a "grow- in" rate of three years.
But if the company were forced to match the Big Three pattern it would be at a severe cost disadvantage against its competitors, a company spokesman has said.
The American Axle talks have drawn attention because they mark the first time a GM spin-off has had to negotiate a new contract.
Meantime, a UAW strike against Johnson Controls Inc, a key seat supplier for Ford, entered its 19th day Saturday with no settlement.
