United Auto Workers union bargainers continued to negotiate with  American Axle Manufacturing Inc past a midnight Friday strike deadline as workers held off on putting up picket lines.
About 7,200 UAW members were poised to walk off their jobs at five plants in Detroit, Three Rivers, Mich., and Buffalo, N.Y., if no agreement was reached on a new three-year contract. A person answering the phone at UAW Local 262 in Detroit said at midnight members had not received any official word the deadline had been extended.
A strike at American Axle could cripple the company's largest customer, General Motors Corp, within days.
The two sides are at odds over wages and other economic issues as the union seeks to impose on American Axle the same pattern contract the Big Three automakers agreed to for about 400,000 UAW members last fall. Automakers guaranteed jobs for 95 percent of their current workforce in a contract that provides $2,000 lump sum payments in the first year and wage hikes of three percent in the second and third years.
American Axle, which was spun off from GM into a private company in 1994, supplies virtually all of the rear axles for GM's pickup trucks and sport utility vehicles, axles for the Camero and Firebird rear-drive cars, as well as various parts for other passenger car lines.
The company also makes axles for Chrysler Corp. and axle shafts for Ford Motor Co..
Tight inventories at American Axle and Dana Corp., the other primary axle maker in the United States, means GM's light truck plants would run out of parts by early next week, analysts said.
Burnham Securities Inc. analyst David Healy estimated GM could lose $20 million a day in after-tax profits if it was forced to suspend light truck production. Labor strife cost the world's largest automaker $1.2 billion in 1996.
The American Axle talks have drawn attention because they mark the first time a GM spinoff has had to negotiate a new contract. When the firm was spun off under former Chrysler manufacturing chief Richard Dauch, it agreed to uphold terms of the previous UAW contract, which expired last September.
Union officials have said the company is balking at following the Big Three pattern deal hammered out last fall. The contract allows automakers to pay new hires at 70 percent of the starting base hourly wage of about $19.
American Axle, however, wants to start new hires at 60 percent of the base wage -- and extend the time it takes to reach the full rate to six years. The Big Three pact has a "grow-in" rate of three years.
