Contract talks resumed Sunday between American Axle &amp; Manufacturing Inc. and the United Auto Workers union after bargainers took a rest break following about 36 hours of non-stop negotiations.
The two sides are attempting to hammer out a new contract for 7,200 UAW members at five plants in Detroit, Three Rivers, Mich., and Buffalo, N.Y. A strike would force General Motors Corp., to suspend production at its 11 North American light truck assembly plants within days, and cause more supplier headaches for Ford Motor Co..
Company and union officials began talking about 6 a.m. Friday and recessed talks around the dinnertime Saturday night. UAW leaders let a strike deadline expire midnight Friday without any picketing action. No new deadline was set.
"The mood is still good. Progress is being made," said a person close to the talks who did not want his name used.
A union spokesman could not be reached for comment. UAW members have continued to report for work and the company's normal weekend operations of limited production and maintenance have gone on uninterrupted.
American Axle, which was spun off from GM in 1994, supplies rear axles for GM's pickup trucks and sport utility vehicles, axles for the Camero and Firebird rear-drive cars, as well as various parts for other passenger car lines.
The company makes axle shafts that Ford uses in its F-150 pickup trucks, Expedition and Explorer sport/utilities and some rear-drive passenger cars. It also makes axles for a small number of Chrysler Corp. light truck products.
Tight inventories among axle suppliers means GM's light truck plants would run out of parts about two days after a strike begins, analysts said. A shutdown of light truck operations could cost GM $20 million a day in lost profits, analysts said.
The American Axle talks have drawn attention because they mark the first time a GM spin-off has had to negotiate a new contract. The UAW is trying to force the company to adopt the same pattern contract the Big Three automakers agreed to for about 400,000 UAW members last fall.
Automakers guaranteed jobs for 95 percent of their current workforce in a contract that provides $2,000 lump sum payments in the first year and wage hikes of three percent in the second and third years. The pact allows automakers to pay new hires at 70 percent of the starting base hourly wage of about $19.
The company claims the Big Three pattern would put it at a severe cost disadvantage with its competitors.
A UAW strike against Johnson Controls Inc., a key seat supplier for Ford, reached its 20th day Sunday with no settlement.
