American Axle &amp; Manufacturing Inc. reached a tentative contract with the United Auto Workers minutes before a strike deadline Monday morning, sparing General Motors Corp. a potentially punishing work stoppage.
Details of the agreement were withheld pending ratification by about 7,200 UAW members at five plants in Detroit, Three Rivers, Mich., Buffalo, N.Y., and Tonawanda, N.Y., later this week.
UAW President Stephen Yokich and Vice President Richard Shoemaker released a statement describing the pact as "an excellent new agreement." Company officials did not return telephone calls.
The tentative contract was reached 15 minutes before the 7 a.m. strike deadline. Union and company bargainers negotiated through a midnight Friday deadline and nearly non-stop over the weekend, while UAW members stayed on the job and refrained from putting up picket lines.
But by late Sunday evening no agreement had been reached, and UAW officials set the Monday strike deadline to put more pressure on the company.
American Axle supplies rear axles for GM's pickup trucks and sport utility vehicles, axles for the Camero and Firebird rear- drive cars, as well as parts for other passenger cars.
A strike would have forced the world's largest automaker to suspend production at its 11 North American light truck plants within two days, according to analysts, because of tight axle inventories throughout the auto industry. That could have cost GM $20 million a day in profits, analysts said.
A work stoppage would also have added to Ford Motor Co.'s supplier headaches. American Axle makes axle shafts for Ford's F-150 pickup trucks, Expedition and Explorer sport utility vehicles, as well as some rear-drive cars. The company also makes a small number of parts for Chrysler Corp.
GM spokesman Gerald Holmes said Monday the automaker did not alter its contract with American Axle to pave the way for a settlement.
"We had no part in it at all," he said.
American Axle was spun off from GM in 1994 to a group of investors led by former Chrysler manufacturing chief Richard Dauch. As part of the deal, the components maker agreed to honour the terms of the 1993-96 UAW-GM contract.
In the talks that wrapped up Monday -- the first time a GM spin-off had to negotiate a new contract -- UAW officials had been pressing for American Axle to follow the pattern the Big Three agreed to during their contract talks last fall.
Company officials were reluctant to do that, however, claiming that would put them at a competitive disadvantage with their competitors.
