Internet search firm Yahoo! Inc. Wednesday reported a smaller-than expected third quarter loss, reflecting sharply higher revenues from Internet advertising.
The Santa Clara, Calif.-based company reported a loss of $1.2 million, or 4 cents a share, for the quarter ended in September compared with a loss of $371,000, or 2 cents a share, in the 1995 quarter. Sales jumped to $5.2 million from $288,000 in the year ago quarter and $3.3 million in the second quarter.
Analysts had expected the company to lose 7 cents a share in the quarter, according to First Call, which tracks earnings estimates.
Yahoo! is an online directory that appears on computer screens as computer users tap the Internet, the global computer network. The service helps users find specific sites, articles and points of interest in the World Wide Web section of the Internet. Yahoo! makes its money from advertisers, which display banners on its Internet site.
The company, founded by two Stanford University students two years ago, went public in March.
Most of the quarter's loss came from the cost of advertising Yahoo! in traditional media, said Gary Valenzuela, chief financial officer. The company spent $4 million on sales and marketing, more than 14 times the $275,000 it spent a year ago. Research and development expenses also jumped in the quarter to $1.36 million.
"Our focus righrt now is absolutely on building market share, on expanding out reach globally and on adding" services to the site, Valenzuela said.
Valenzuela declined to say how much the company planned to spend on marketing and research and development in coming quarters.
Yahoo! said the number of advertiser grew to 340 in the third quarter from 230 in the second quarter quarter.
Yahoo! also reported more than 1 billion "hits," or viewings by computer users, in the quarter ended Sept. 30, giving the company an average of more than 14 million page views a day in September, up from an average of 9 million a day in June. The site is one of the most popular destinations on the Web.
Yahoo! had a loss of $1.4 million, or 5 cents a share, in the second quarter on sales of $3.3 million.
