Most U.S. software publishers are expected to report only modest increases in their third-quarter earnings, reflecting a seasonal slowdown and a lack of new products this quarter.
"For the behemoths of the industry, like Microsoft (Corp) and Oracle (Corp ), business is still good," said Marshall Senk, an analyst at Robertson Stephens &amp; Co in San Francisco. "Summer is the slow buying season for most of the industry," but setting aside the seasonal slowing, "business is still pretty okay."  
Analysts expect Microsoft, the world's biggest personal computer software publisher, to report substantially higher earnings for its first quarter of fiscal 1997 on the back of strong sales of its networking software and business programs. Microsoft is scheduled to report results on Oct. 21.
Better-than-expected sales of personal computers in the past few months also will contribute to Microsoft's revenue, analysts said. Microsoft, based in Redmond, Wash., makes about a quarter of its revenue from the sale of its Windows family of operating systems.  Operating systems are the type of software that controls the basic functions of every PC.  
Microsoft benefits from strong PC sales because PC makers have to pay Microsoft a royalty for every copy of Windows they pack in the boxes of new machines.
Wall Street expects Microsoft to earn $0.90 a share, according to a survey of 24 analysts by First Call.  In the same quarter a year ago, Microsoft earned $0.78.
Novell Inc, the biggest publisher of computer networking software, is not expected to perform as well.  
The company is struggling to sell its NetWare flagship -- which controls the flow of computer information through departmental computer departments -- in the face of competition with Microsoft's Windows.  Novell, based in Provo, Utah, also still faces management issues following the resignation of Bob Frankenberg, the former chief executive officer, said David Takata, an analyst at Gruntal &amp; Co in Los Angeles.
"They clearly still have a lot of work to do" to get the company's management in order, Takata said.  
Novell is expected to earn $0.18 a share in its fiscal fourth quarter, compared with $0.16 a year ago, according to a First Call survey of 17 analysts.
Meanwhile, vendors of software for large, corporate computer networks and database management tools are expected to continue to post substantial gains in the third quarter on continuing strong demand.
"For a relatively mature market, this niche is still growing at a good clip," said Jim Pickrel, an analyst at Hambrecht &amp; Quist in San Francisco.  
Pickrel said he expects Oracle and Informix Corp to report the most impressive results on strong sales of their database software -- computer programs which help big companies keep track of huge libraries of corporate information.  Both are taking business from Sybase Inc,  another database software publisher, which is still struggling to recover from marketing and technical shortcomings last year.
Sybase,is expected to report it broke even in the quarter, not counting charges for a restructuring, Pickrel said.  In the year-earlier quarter, Sybase earned $0.01 a share.  
Oracle, the biggest database software publisher, is expected to earn $0.27 a share for the fiscal second quarter ending November, according to a recent survey of 27 analysts by First Call.  A year ago in the same quarter, it earned $0.21.
Hambrecht &amp; Quist's Pickrel said Informix could pass Sybase this quarter in revenue to become the second biggest database vendor.  Informix is expected to earn $0.18 a share, according to a First Call survey of 25 analysts.  In the same quarter a year ago, Informix earned $0.16.
