Apple Computer Inc. stunned investors Wednesday by reporting an unexpected $25 million profit for the last three months of its fiscal year.
The Cupertino, Calif.-based computer maker, which had been expected to lose around 30 cents a share in the quarter, posted a profit of 20 cents a share, the first time Apple was in the black this year.
Included in the operating results for the fourth quarter of Apple's fiscal 1996 was a gain of $17 million, or 14 cents a share.
Wall Street welcomed the news, bidding the company's stock price up $2.25 to $28 a share in after-hours trading.
Analysts cited improved manufacturing efficiencies, lower component costs and reduced operating expenses for the better-than-expected performance.
"It is a shock," said Daniel Kunstler, computer industry analyst at JP Morgan. "It seems they've brought the break-even point for their business down pretty dramatically. This is very encouraging."
In the year-ago quarter, Apple earned $60 million, or 48 cents a share. Revenues for the three months ended in September fell to $2.32 billion from $3.0 billion a year ago.
For the full year, Apple posted a loss of $816 million, or $6.59 a share, reflecting a series of hefty one-time charges for inventory writedowns and restructurings.
In fiscal 1995, Apple earned $424 million, or $3.45 a share.
During the year, Apple was hurt by a sharp decline in its market share, management turmoil and an inability to have the right products on the shelf at the right time.
However, in the last two quarters Apple has started to show signs of a turnaround under former National Semiconductor Corp. chief Gilbert Amelio.
In a statement, Amelio said Apple's financial situation is stablized, as evidenced by the improvement in gross margins during the quarter and cash flow.
"By increasing revenues sequentially and fortifying Apple's financial position in each of the last two quarters, we have achieved two very critical goals of Apple's transformation," Amelio said. "We remain confident about reaching sustainable profitability by the end of Q2 '97.
"As we move forward, our challenges will be to extend our competitive leadership in key markets and to reclaim the mantle of industry pioneer and innovator," he said.
Apple's gross margins -- the difference between what it sells its products for and the cost of goods -- rose to 22 percent in the fourth quarter from 18.5 percent in the third quarter.
More importantly, however, Apple ended the quarter with more than $1.7 billion in cash and short-term investments on hand, up from $952 million a year ago.
"We continue to make progress in strengthening Apple's financial condition, as our $410 million in positive cash flow from operations during the quarter suggests," said Apple Chief Financial Officer Fred  Anderson. "We've reduced inventories by nearly $400 million since June and completed the quarter with over $1.7 billion in cash and short-term investments."
"Gross margins increased due to several factors, including declining component costs, improved manufacturing efficiencies, and sales of previously reserved inventory," he added. "We achieved further sequential reductions in operating expenses, primarily in general and administrative functions."
While shipments were down 26 percent in the fourth quarter to 932,000 units from the year-ago quarter, Apple said shipments were up 11 percent, a sign that customers were once again buying its products.
