Apple Computer Inc. ( stunned investors Wednesday by reporting an unexpected $25 million profit for the last three months of its fiscal year.
The Cupertino, Calif.-based computer maker, which had been expected to report a loss of 30 cents a share, posted a profit of 20 cents a share, its first quarterly profit this year.
In the same quarter a year ago, Apple had net income of $60 million, or 12 cents. Included in the most recent quarter's operating results was a gain of $17 million.
Fourth-quarter revenue for fiscal 1996 declined 23 percent to $2.32 billion from $3 billion.
Apple released the news after the market closed and Its shares jumped as much as $4.25 to $30 a share in after-hours trading.
The profit came because of Apple's aggressive cost cutting, a bigger-than-expected exodus of employees and lower prices for key components, such as memory chips, analysts said.
"It is a shock," said Daniel Kunstler, an analyst at JP Morgan in San Francisco who was expecting a loss. "It seems they've brought the break-even point for their business down pretty dramatically. This is very encouraging."
Most important to investors, Apple could remain profitable in coming quarters, which would bolster confidence among consumers that it will be around for years and keep loyal customers from switching to IBM-compatible personal computers, analysts said.
Fred Anderson, Apple's chief financial officer, stopped short of predicting a profit in the first fiscal quarter.
He said, however, that he expects the company's costs to increase only slightly in the December quarter on higher advertising expenses and that first-quarter revenue should be about the same as in the fourth fiscal quarter.
"We continue to make progress in strengthening Apple's financial condition, as our $410 million in positive cash flow from operations during the quarter suggests," Anderson said.
"We've reduced inventories by nearly $400 million since June and completed the quarter with over $1.7 billion in cash and short-term investments," he said in a statement.
In the past three quarter, Apple reported huge losses because of declining Macintosh sales, management turmoil and growing popularity of personal computers running Microsoft's Windows software, which compete with Macintosh.
The company began slashing its costs when former National Semiconductor Corp. chief Gilbert Amelio took charge of Apple in February.
With most of the cost-cutting plan completed, Apple now will concentrate on the much tougher task of increasing revenue, Anderson said.
While shipments were down 26 percent in the fourth quarter to 932,000 units from the year-ago quarter, Apple said shipments were up 11 percent from the third quarter, a sign that customers were once again buying Apple's products.
Apple has a slew of new products in the works.
On Monday, the company is expected to unveil a new low-end PowerBook, a much-needed portable computer to replace Apple's older glitch-prone models.
In the first calendar quarter, the company also is expected to introduce new low-end consumer desktop models, a niche from which Apple had retreated in an effort to cut costs.
For the full year, Apple reported a loss of $816 million, or $6.59 a share, reflecting a series of hefty one-time charges for inventory writedowns and restructurings. In fiscal 1995, Apple earned $424 million, or $3.45 a share.
Revenue for the year fell 11 percent to $9.83 billion from $11.1 billion a year ago.
