Apple Computer Inc.'s unexpected fourth quarter profit initially impressed Wall Street, but some analysts said Thursday that the computer maker was not out of the woods yet.
Apple on Wednesday reported a profit of $25 million for its fiscal fourth quarter, defying Wall Street's expectations for a loss. But analysts said that a steeper-than-expected 23 percent drop in revenue in the quarter could hurt the computer maker's prospects in the new fiscal year.
The analysts said sluggish revenues could force Apple to skimp on research and development spending just as rivals Microsoft Corp. and Intel Corp. are preparing innovative software for personal computers that could permanently squelch Apple's technology and ease-of-use bragging rights.
"Apple's never hit a wall like this before," said Kurt King, an analyst at Montgomery Securities in San Francisco. "They've never seen their sales drop this much before. It's possible they can recover, but unlikely."
Analysts attributed Apple's profit, equal to 20 cents a share, to aggressive cost cutting, lower prices for memory chips, as well as a one-time gain of $17 million. In the 1995 quarter, the Cupertino, Calif.-based company earned $60 million, or 48 cents a share.
Revenues fell to $2.32 billion from $3 billion.
While Apple's machines remain popular in education and publishing, the company has lost many customers to Compaq, Dell, Hewlett-Packard and other competitors.
The man hired in February to revive the company, Gilbert Amelio, the former head of National Semiconductor Corp., has cut costs aggressively but has not found a way to boost sales.
In the crucial December quarter, revenues will be about even with the $2.32 billion reported for the September quarter, Apple executives said.
The prospect of flat sales during the Christmas season, typically the year's busiest, could finally convince loyal developers of educational and consumer software to defect, further loosening Apple's hold on those markets, analysts said.
"I can't remember the last time Apple's revenue declined in the December quarter from the September quarter," said Jim Poyner at Oppenheimer in New York. "Christmas is supposed to be Apple's high-water mark. This isn't a good sign."
The cautious comments were reflected in Apple's stock, which retreated after an early-morning surge to close at $26.375, up 62.5 cents, on Nasdaq. Earlier, the stock was as high as $27.75.
Apple, which lost about $800 million in the three prior quarters, has been slow to introduce new products.
It is not expected to release a new line of low-cost Macintosh machines aimed at consumers until next year, and it has been slow to replace a glitch-prone line of PowerBook portable computers. A new PowerBook line is expected to be unveiled on Monday, analysts said.
In a conference call with reporters and analysts, Apple Chief Financial Officer Fred Anderson said PowerBook sales were expected to fall $150 million in the current quarter, adding to pressure on revenues.
Anderson also said the company's research and development budget would probably be flat next year.
But the $600 million or so that Apple spent in fiscal 1996 will not keep up with Microsoft and Intel, which are each pouring billions of dollars into improving the multimedia and Internet capabilities of personal computers, analysts said.
"Where are Apple's innovations going to come from?" said Richard Zwetchkenbaum at market researcher International Data Corp. "They've got to come up with something new, something from the ground up."
In the first half of calendar 1996, Apple's share of the domestic computer market fell to 6.7 percent from 9.9 percent in the 1995 period, Zwetchkenbaum said. The rest of the PC market is expected to grow 20 percent this year.
"Apple was the only vendor of the top ten PC makers to fall in shipments this year," Zwetchkenbaum said.
