Apple Computer Inc. will unveil Monday a new family of portable PowerBook computers to fill a critical gap in its product line.
The new PowerBook 1400 family, scheduled to be sold in mid-November with prices starting at $2,500, will feature a built-in CD-ROM drive and a bigger screen. The models are designed to appeal to small office users and students, Apple said.
Until now, the lack of a CD-ROM drive in its portables has held back Apple in competing with offerings from International Business Machines Corp., Compaq Computer Corp. and Dell Computer Corp., analysts said.
The new family "isn't going to put them in the leadership role, but it's going to get them back in the game," said Bruce Steven, an analyst at market researcher International Data Corp.
Apple said it also plans to introduce another new series of PowerBooks in the first half of the 1997 with more advanced multimedia and communication capabilities. The company did not release any more specifications.
Apple has been scrambling to retool the PowerBook line. The predecessor to the new model, the PowerBook 5300, was recalled last spring because of several defects including a faulty AC power connector and a display casing that could easily crack.
The PowerBook 1400 will replace that family. The new machines will be based on a mid-range PowerPC microprocessor.
The faster microprocessor, the CD-ROM drive and bigger screen make the 1400 comparable in price and performance to top-selling models from other vendors, but the 1400 will have a tough time competing with low-priced offerings from second-tier PC manufacturers, Steven said.
Based on the memory, screen options and disk-drive size, the 1400 models will sell for an estimated $2,500 to $4,000 retail in the United States, an Apple spokeswoman said.
The entry-level model will not have the internal CD-ROM drive, she said.
Although the machines will go on sale in mid-November, there will be a limited supply on some models until after the New Year, she said.
