The stock of Vantive Corp. plunged as much as 24 percent Friday after the software company said it expects slowing revenue growth in the next two quarters because of a shortage of sales staff.
The warning came one day after the company reported better than expected third-quarter earnings.
Vantive, based in Santa Clara, Calif., lost $9.25 to close at $31.50 on Nasdaq trading of 4.5 million shares.
Vantive writes software that helps big companies, such as Hewlett-Packard Co. and Motorola Inc., find and keep track of customers and their requests.
In the past few quarters, Vantive's revenue has more than doubled each time on increasing demand for its customer-service products.
In the third quarter ended Sept. 30, the company's income jumped five-fold to $3.17 million, or 12 cents a share, from $632,000, or 3 cents, a year ago.
Wall Street had expected Vantive to earn 7 cents a share, according to First Call, which tracks analyst forecasts.
Third-quarter revenue more than doubled to $11.1 million from $4.29 million on strong software sales and service contracts, the company said.
In a conference call with analysts, however, Vantive executives said revenue in the its next two quarters will be about flat to slightly higher compared with the third. The company doesn't have enough qualified sales and marketing staff to sell its products, the company said.
"We believe most sequential growth for 1996 has already occurred," Kathleen Murphy, Vantive's chief financial officer, told the analysts.
The forecast caught Wall Street by surprise, since the firm had been expected to report continued revenue leaps.
Still, most said the forecast isn't a sign of extended tough times for Vantive.
"Even if sequential growth in the fourth and first quarter is flat, that (revenue) would be double what it was last year," in the same quarter, said Ed Bierdeman, an analyst for Dakin Securities.
Murphy said the company will concentrate on expanding and training its sales and support staff in the coming quarters. It takes about six months to train new sales people, so the new staff will not be effective until the second quarter of 1997.
