Apple Computer Inc. plans to release a new line of computers as early as 1998 that will run an operating system written from scratch, Chief Executive Gilbert Amelio said on Wednesday.
The new operating system -- the fundamental software that controls the basic functions of the computer -- will leapfrog Microsoft Corp.'s competing family of Windows software, Amelio told investors at the American Electronics Association conference in Monterey.
"When you are the minority player in the marketplace, as we are, you need something other than market share to distinguish yourself," Amelio said.
Amelio declined to specify what the new software would look like or how it would outperform Windows. But he promised it would "completely change the way" people get their work done on computers through applications, such as word processing and spreadsheets.
Earlier this year, Apple said it would abandon the overhaul of its Macintosh operating system, an effort code-named Copland. Apple programmers will use some of the components of Copland but will practically start from scratch, Amelio said.
Amelio also told investors, as he has done recently, that increasing the struggling computer maker's revenue and market share would not be a priority until he could improve the company's operations and product lines.
The effort may take until 1998.
"I have to have a solid foundation before I can build a castle," Amelio said. Without a solid foundation, Apple would improve its financial performance for one or two quarters but slide again, he said.
Apple, whose headquarters are in Cupertino, California, reported an unexpected profit of $25 million for the last three months of fiscal 1996, down from a profit of $60 million a year ago. Many on Wall Street had expected the company to post a loss for the quarter.
Investors have given Amelio credit for moving quickly to improve product quality, cut costs and fix production snafus. Apple is likely to report good progress in the next two quarters as well, said Michael Murphy, president of the California Technology Stock Letter and an investment fund. it faces "worrisome" quarters after March, Murphy added.
"Amelio's getting closer to fixing the company's problems," he said, "but we're not going to go back in yet."
