Apple Computer Inc. said Thursday it will cut U.S. prices of its Power Macintosh personal computers by as much as 30 percent to make the machines more competitive with those from rival PC makers.
The price cuts are part of Apple's effort to make its machines as attractive as so-called Wintel PCs -- machines based on Intel Corp. microprocessors running Microsoft Corp Windows software.
Apple, based in Cupertino, Calif., said it will reduce the price of its high-end Power Macintosh 9500/200 to about $4,200 from $4,900.
The price of the entry-level Power Macintosh 7200/120 business machine will be cut to about $1,600 from $2,300, the company said. The price reductions, which will be effective Nov. 2, range from 9 percent to 30 percent.
Apple can afford the price cuts because it has reduced its costs significantly since a restructuring effort began nine months ago, said Byran Longmire, a Power Macintosh product manager at Apple.
"It shows that we can take aggressive pricing actions across many of our product lines and still maintain a healthy business," Longmire said.
Apple's computers have traditionally been priced higher than PCs with similar features made by companies such as International Business Machines Corp. and Compaq Computer Corp.
With the release of Microsoft's Windows 95 program a year ago, Apple lost much of its bragging rights for ease-of-use and saw many of its customers flee to the IBM-compatible world. In the past year, the company reported more than $800 million in losses amid falling sales.
To make its machines more attractive, Apple has had to cut its prices to keep customers from defecting.
"Now when a business customer does a feature-for-feature comparison between a Power Macintosh and a Wintel machine, that customer will find the Power Macintosh competitively priced," Gary Little, Apple's senior vice president of the Power Macintosh division, said in a statement.
The price cuts should help Apple increase the momentum it has gained in recent weeks, analysts said. Earlier this month, Apple reported an unexpected profit in its fiscal fourth quarter ended Sept. 30.
The price cuts will not "take Apple out of the hole, but we're seeing a more aggressive Apple, which is good news," said Scott Miller, an analyst at market researcher Dataquest Inc. The price cuts and the news about better financial health could convince more customers sitting on the fence to buy an Apple, Miller said.
