Cisco Systems Inc. said Tuesday its fiscal first quarter profit from operations rose 77 percent, reflecting strong sales of its computer networking equipment.
The company, which makes devices that control the flow of information between computers in a network, said earnings before gains and charges rose to $320.8 million, or 47 cents a share, for the three months ended Oct. 26, from $181.4 million or 28 cents in the same quarter a year ago.
Net income for the quarter, after taking into account a $174.6 million charge for the acquisition of Telebit Corp. and a $55.1 million gain from the sale of a minority investment, totaled $180.9 million, or 26 cents a share, slightly lower than the year-ago figure.
Revenues jumped 80 percent to $1.43 billion from $798.3 million.
Wall Street had expected Cisco, the world's biggest computer networking company and a bellwhether technology stock, to report a profit from operations of 46 cents, according to First Call, which tracks estimates.
Analysts said the company had a solid quarter, alleviating concerns in recent weeks about slowing sales of networking equipment.
"They surprised us on the revenue," said Eric Blachno, analyst at Bear Stearns in New York. "It was a little higher than we thought."
Cisco also managed to keep its gross margins -- a measure of how much profit a company makes from each dollar of sales -- at 65 percent, better than analysts had expected.
Cisco, based in San Jose, Calif., attributed the higher profits to strong sales across all its product lines.
"More of our customers are beginning to look at a single vendor" for all of their networking needs, said John Chambers, Cisco's chief executive.
The company reported its results after the market closed. For the day, the stock had gained $1.125 to close at $61.75. After the earnings release, the shares slipped 25 cents to $61.50 in after-hour trading.
Analysts said some investors may have been disappointed that Cisco's earnings per share were not higher. Frequently, Cisco reports per-share results that are at least 3 or 4 cents above forecasts.
