Intuit Inc. shares jumped 24 percent Wednesday amid market speculation that American Express Co. is about to buy the struggling financial management software company.
Shares of Intuit, which publishes the best-selling Quicken personal finance computer program, surged $7 to close at $36.50 on Nasdaq. American Express rose 12.5 cents to $48.50 on the New York Stock Exchange.
Officials of both companies declined to comment about "market rumors," and an Intuit spokeswoman called the speculation "wild."
Analysts said American Express, the charge card and financial services company, would be interested in buying Intuit to enable it to jump into the booming online banking industry.
Intuit, analysts said, might be receptive to an offer because of increasing doubts about its future.
Even if American Express is not interested in acquiring Intuit, other companies may be, analysts said.
More than 9 million people, most of them affluent, use Intuit's Quicken to manage their finances and do their banking chores through their personal computers.
But Intuit's growth has stalled amid fierce competition with Microsoft Corp., a one-time suitor of Intuit, and a handful of banks which are offering online banking to their customers through the Internet.
"Intuit is staring down the barrel of a gun, and that gun is the Internet, which is making financial management easier," said Karen Epper, an online banking analyst at market researcher Forrester Research Inc in Cambridge, Mass.
Until two years ago, Intuit relied heavily on sales of its financial and tax software for its growth. Those sales have slowed as Intuit has cut prices.
Intuit also faces renewed competition from Microsoft, which tried to buy it in 1994. Microsoft dropped the acquisition in May 1995 because of opposition from government antitrust officials.
Since then, Microsoft, the world's biggest PC software company has spent hundreds of millions to take on Intuit.
To fuel its growth, Intuit set up a business two years ago to process online banking transactions between banks and depositors. Some investors saw the transaction business as a promising source of growth.
In September, however, Intuit sold its transaction processing unit, Intuit Services Corp., to rival CheckFree Corp.
Epper said Intuit's biggest challenge is figuring out how to grow. She said the company needs the backing of a bank or bigger computer company to fuel expansion into any new business.
