This year's Comdex, the world's most influential computer trade show, will be the showcase for some unusual computers, including machines the size of paperback books.
A host of companies will introduce second-generation handheld computers, about the size of paperbacks, which can do much of the work their desktop counterparts handle.
The trade show, expected to draw 250,000 people to Las Vegas next week, also will feature the digital video disc, or DVD, an advanced compact disc for playing movies and storing computer information.
In addition International Business Machines Corp., Microsoft Corp. and other industry giants are expected to take their year-old battle over rival approaches to simplifying personal computers to the trade show floor.
Moreso than in recent years, this year's show will highlight how the PC, the centre of a $400 billion global industry, is moving into new venues such as the living room entertainment cabinet, shirt pockets and the backs of airline seats, industry executives said.
"As more and more of the population gains experience with PCs, the types of products consumers select will diversify, and the major players have to accommodate them," said Tom Grueskin, marketing manager at computer maker Gateway 2000 Inc.
Microsoft will kick off Comdex on Sunday night with the introduction of Windows CE, a computer programme that will run on handheld computers. Several companies, including Compaq Computer Corp., NEC Corp. and LG Electronics Inc. will unveil devices using the software.
The handheld PCs represent the industry's second big push in four years to sell tiny computers for managing appointments and contacts and keeping in touch with the office.
Analysts said the new more powerful machines will let users do things earlier models were not good at, such as writing lengthy e-mail and tapping the Internet. Microsoft has made strides in making it easier for the handhelds to share information with desktops, analysts said.
Microsoft also will unveil Microsoft Office 97, a major revision of its top-selling package of business programmes. The product will be one of the biggest revenue generators for the world's biggest PC software company, analysts said.
Consumer electronics companies will crash Comdex this year to formally introduce DVD. The technology is based on compact discs similar to music CDs, but with many times the storage capacity.
Next year, Toshiba Corp., Sony Corp., Matsushita Electric Industrial Co. and several other companies will sell DVDs that can play movies and music.
At Comdex, the computer arms of the consumer electronics companies will unveil DVD storage devices that plug into PCs. The so-called DVD-ROM players are expected to spur development of video games that use sophisticated 3-D animation.
By the middle of next year, high-end consumer PCs will be equipped with DVD-ROM players, said Paul Dempsey, senior vice president at Pioneer Electronic Corp.'s New Media division. Several game software companies will have DVD-based products ready to show at Comdex.
By early 1998, some DVD-equipped laptops may even be able to play full-length, full-screen movies, analysts said.
Comdex may also become an arena this year for competing versions of so-called network computers -- bare bones PCs that get most of their computing power from corporate or public computer networks.
IBM will introduce several network computers, geared toward corporate customers who need simple terminals for data entry and customer service tasks.
Meanwhile, Microsoft Chairman Bill Gates and Intel Corp. Chief Executive Andy Grove may give some details in keynote speeches about their companies' plans to redesign the guts of the PC to make them easier to maintain and upgrade.
Both Gates and Groves had pooh-poohed the concept of the network computer, but decided to take a second look when it became clear consumers were intrigued by the possibility of no-brainer PCs.
