Bay Networks Inc., keeping up with rivals in the computer networking business, said Wednesday it paid $99 million in cash and stock to buy closely held NetICs Inc.
The acquisition gives Bay Networks a line of devices called Fast Ethernet switches that are becoming increasingly popular with computer technicians for speeding up the flow of information through corporate computer networks.
Bay Networks' rivals Cisco Systems Inc. and 3Com Corp. have bought similar Fast Ethernet technology in recent months.
Bay Networks, based in Santa Clara, Calif., agreed to pay about $55 million in stock and $44 million in cash for NetICs, a company that has yet to report any revenue. Bay will charge "a substantial portion" of the purchase price against earnings for its quarter ending in December, the company said.
Bay Networks' stock was off 12.5 cents at $21.50 in late trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
The acquisition keeps Bay Networks up to date with rapidly emerging technology, said Dick Eyestone, its senior vice president. "We live in dog years in this industry. Six months is like forever," he said.
Eyestone, who will oversee NetICs' operation as a Bay Networks unit, said his company plans to use NetICs' designs in its own line of networking products. Bay will release the first product from the acquisition in the first quarter.
NetICs, formed in 1995 by a dozen engineers, will remain in Acton, Mass. Until now, NetICs has been developing its technology and has not had any revenue, said Gary Vacon, NetICs founder and president.
Some analysts said they were surprised by the amount of money Bay was willing to pay to get its hands on the technology.
"I know companies with revenues in this sector that would be happy to get $30 million," said Steve Koffler, an analyst at NatWest Securities in New York. "They obviously felt they need this technology."
Bay Networks executives said they are paying the standard price for high-tech startups.
"This is right in line with the industry standard and our expectations," said Bill Ruehle, Bay Networks chief financial officer. He declined to say how much revenue he expects NetICs products to generate.
