A warning about weak Christmas sales from personal computer retailer CompUSA Inc. Thursday raised concerns that the entire computer industry may have a weak fourth quarter, sending PC stocks lower.
CompUSA, tradionally one of the healthier PC retailers, said it expected a disappointingly small rise in sales in the fourth quarter because of weak PC sales. The Dallas-based company was the third major PC retailer in two weeks to report a weak outlook.
"This is certainly not a good sign," said Scott Miller, an analyst at market researcher Dataquest Inc. in San Jose, Calif.
Stock in Compaq Computer Corp., the world's biggest PC maker, fell $2 to $72.375. Dell Computer Corp. slipped $1.875 to $51.25. And Intel Corp., the biggest maker of PC microprocessors, declined 56.25 cents to $130.375.
Analysts said PC companies that make machines geared toward home users, including Packard Bell NEC Inc. and Acer Inc., did have a disappointing year.
Unlike last year, when Microsoft Corp. released the Windows 95 operating system, there were no compelling new technologies in 1996 to drive consumers to stores.
But investors may be overreacting, analysts said. The three biggest personal computer makers -- Compaq, International Business Machines Corp. and Dell -- get only a sliver of their revenues from sales to consumers.
In fact, each of the big three is expected to have solid fourth-quarter financial results because of strong corporate sales.
"Our checks with distributors indicate that IBM is going to have over 30 percent growth (in its PC business) this quarter," said Gary Helmig, an analyst at brokerage SoundView Financial. "IBM's sales are not really focused in the consumer marketplace."
SoundView Thursday raised its rating on IBM to long-term buy from hold.
Neither Dell nor Compaq are expected to suffer from weak consumer sales in the fourth quarter, either, analysts said.
"Corporate sales are still strong, as far as I can see," Dataquest's Miller said. In the past couple of months, many big companies began buying huge numbers of PCs to take advantage of new business software from Microsoft, released late this year.
"The companies that are really suffering now are the ones that are very exposed to retail," said Don Young, an analyst at Prudential Securities in New York.
Those companies may continue to have weak sales increases into 1997, while consumers wait for new multimedia PCs to be released, analysts said.
Packard Bell and Acer officials could not immediately be reached for comment.
