Apple Computer Inc. Chairman Gilbert Amelio will outline a long-awaited plan Tuesday to revamp the Macintosh personal computer with the help of recently acquired Next Software Inc.
At the Macworld trade show here next week, Apple and dozens of other vendors also will unveil new products that could help boost the Macintosh market in 1997, analysts said.
This year's show will be more cheery than last year's, when Apple's future as an independent company was in doubt, customers and vendors said. In 1996, Apple's new management under Amelio stopped huge financial losses and acted quickly to come up with a plan to update the Mac.
"We're very pleased with the decisions Apple has made with the future of the Mac," said Bob Roblin, senior vice president of marketing at Adobe Systems Inc., one of the biggest suppliers of Mac software.
"It's going to be a much more upbeat show, but one where a lot of questions have to be answered."
The questions swirl around Apple's agreement last month to pay $400 million for Next, the company run by Apple co-founder Steven Jobs.
Apple, based in Cupertino, Calif., plans to take Next's well-regarded operating system -- a type of program that controls the basic functions of a computer -- and meld it with the Mac operating system. The Mac's fundamental software needs an overhaul to keep up with Microsoft Corp.'s Windows family of software.
While Apple management has outlined the Next strategy, Macintosh programmers and executives of Mac-related companies said they still needed lots of technical details before they could start working on new products.
"As a user, I want to know what this means for the interface, for the functionality, for my existing software," said Phil Schuller, vice president of product management at Macromedia Inc., a developer of graphics software.
Other highlights of Macworld are expected to be the release of new versions of several key Macintosh products.
Adobe officials said they will announce plans to start shipping later this month the latest version of PageMaker, which helps graphic artists design and compose magazines and newspapers and is one of the best-selling Mac programs.
Microsoft will unveil its long-awaited Internet Explorer browser for the Mac at the show, a company spokesman said.
Apple itself will announce plans to re-enter the online service business. It plans a World Wide Web site, dubbed Apple Club, where subscribers can download Mac software. An annual subscription will cost $19.95, an Apple spokeswoman said.
In 1996, Apple pulled the plug on eWorld, its first foray into the online business.
