Apple Computer Inc. stock tumbled Monday after the company said it expected a loss of up to $150 million in the latest quarter, prompting even some of the company's most loyal customers to question its survival.
Apple shares fell $3.875 to $17.875, the lowest level since mid-July, as more than 16.8 million shares traded, making it the most active issue on Nasdaq.
Industry analysts, who had expected Apple to post a small loss in the normally strong Christmas quarter, said the loss made it harder for customers to justify buying a Macintosh, given serious questions about the company's finances.
"You can't dismiss this as a one-time issue," Montgomery Securities analyst Kurt King said. "It really does say something about Apple's long-term position in the consumer market."
The troubled computer maker, struggling for the past year to shore up its finances and rebuild its image, said late on Friday that weak demand for its Performa personal computers would lead to an operating loss of $100 million to $150 million in its first fiscal quarter ended in December.
The company also said it may need further restructuring aimed at cutting another $1 billion in costs, which could mean another round of cutbacks at Apple.
More damaging, the company's woes make it harder for customers -- particularly corporate technology managers -- to justify choosing a Mac over personal computers running Windows software from Microsoft Corp., buyers at the Macworld trade show said Monday.
"It's definitely a fight," said Donald Laird, a computer consultant who advises companies about technology purchases. "Very seldom do I go into a shop where they're as objective (about Apple's technology) as I'd like them to be."
Complicating matters is a new generation computer chip by industry giant Intel Corp., which the company expects to unveil on Wednesday. Analysts said the new multimedia chip should dramatically boost Intel sales and spur sales for PCs  powered by Microsoft software.
Experts said the perception that Apple was in serious financial trouble could keep potential customers away, leading to a spiral of bigger and bigger losses.
"It's frustrating" trying to convince customers they may be better off with a Mac, said Jeff Lauterette, a technical support engineer at EPI Systems, a big Macintosh dealer in Rockville, Md.
At a presentation Monday, Apple Chief Technical Officer Ellen Hancock assured big customers that Apple will concentrate on winning back big accounts now that the company has a clear technology strategy.
"We honestly do believe our lack of a (technology) strategy until a couple of weeks ago caused us the problem" of weak sales in the December quarter, she said. "We are ready to go back on the attack to tell (corporate customers) that we have excellent technology."
Last month Apple announced plans to buy Next Software Inc. for $400 million in a bid to update Apple's operating system.
News of the loss prompted several Wall Street analysts to stop recommending Apple's stock as an investment.
Bear Stearns Cos. Inc. cut its rating on Apple from hold to unattractive. Prudential Securities lowered its rating to hold from buy, according to a source at the brokerage house.
Apple Chairman Gilbert Amelio is expected to outline his company's strategy on Tuesday to thousands of Macintosh customers and programmers at the Macworld show. The highlight of his speech was expected to be Apple's plan to revamp its fundamental Macintosh software with technology acquired as part of the Next acquisition.
Some Apple customers said any technology improvement might be too late.
"I've been an Apple supporter since early on and the Mac has made a difference in my life," said Don Barrs, principal at Wilton Manors Elementary school in Florida. But he said he was under growing pressure to buy Windows-based computers.
"I have to be realistic about what's best for our school district and our children," Barrs said.
