Apple Computer Inc. Chairman Gilbert Amelio said Tuesday the computer maker's three-year turnaround plan was still on track despite its statement last week that it will report a first-quarter operating loss of as much as $150 million.
Amelio, speaking to thousands of Macintosh computer enthusiasts at the MacWorld trade show here also called on several star computer industry executives to express their support for the Macintosh.
In his much-anticipated keynote speech, Amelio assured Mac customers the company will have a smooth transition as Apple shores up its finances and overhauls the fundamental software of the Macintosh.
"We will encounter a few bumps on the way, but I don't want that to shake your confidence," Amelio told Macintosh customers and software developers. "We are sticking to our strategy."
Apple has been struggling for the past year to stop huge financial losses, develop new software to make the Mac more modern and increase revenues. Under Apple's three year plan, it aims to stop financial losses in 1996, develop new products in 1997 and increase revenues in 1998.
Since Amelio became chairman of the Cupertino, Calif.-based company a year ago, he has slashed costs. In December, Apple also agreed to buy NeXT Software Inc. for $400 million to get its help in revamping the fundamental software of the Mac.
In order to move developers smoothly from Apple's current operating system to the new system, Apple said it plans to continue to deliver regularly scheduled upgrades to the current system while accelerating development of a new and advanced operating system.
The new operating system, code-named "Rhapsody," will be based on the merging of technologies from Apple and NeXT.
"Our goal is to be one of the world's strongest brands for consumer, education and the enterprise," Apple co-founder and Next Software President Steven Jobs said, adding Apple hoped to rely on Next's multimedia and computing intensive software to accomplish that goal.
Apple said Friday it expected to report a loss from operations of $100 million to $150 million because of weak sales of its Performa line of Macintosh computers. Revenue for the company's first quarter ended Dec. 27 is expected to drop 10 percent from the $2.3 billion reported in the September quarter.
Amelio blamed the shortfall on weak consumer sales for personal computers rather than a breakdown of Apple's strategy.
"We had one thing that really fell out of bed in a big way and that is, Santa Claus forgot to come," he said, referring to the surprisingly low sales of its Performa desktop PC line aimed at consumers.
The first quarter "was about retail sales, not about the fundamentals in the recovery of Apple," Amelio told a packed ballroom.
Industry experts say part of the blame for declining revenue falls on the perception that there is not as much software for the Macintosh as there is for PCs running Windows software from Microsoft Corp..
To boost the Mac's image, Amelio turned to executives from Microsoft, Sun Microsystems Inc., and Netscape Communications Corp. to announce software plans for future versions of the Mac.
"We see great opportunities for the Mac in the future," said Paul Maritz, Microsoft vice president in charge of application development.
At Macworld, Microsoft introduced its Internet Explorer browser for the Mac.
The Redmond, Wash.-based software giant, which has often battled Apple for control of the PC industry, also said it created a new product unit responsible for design and development of a Macintosh version of its widely used Microsoft Office software suite.
While Microsoft remains Apple's great nemesis in the operating systems software business, Microsoft also has long served as the leading independent developer of software applications that run on Apple Macintosh computers.
"When Apple's biggest third-party developer decides to commit new resources to its Macintosh applications business, that's a pretty clear sign that there's still money to be made in the Macintosh market," said Jeffrey Tarter, an industry analyst and publisher of Soft*Letter.
The creation of the new Macintosh product unit, part of the Microsoft desktop applications division, marks the first time in the history of the division that an entire product unit has focused exclusively on the Macintosh, Microsoft said.
James Barksdale, chief executives of Internet software vendor Netscape, also said his company will release versions of its communication software within the next few weeks that will run on Apple's next-generation operating system.
Apple's stock closed down 37.5 cents at $17.50 on Nasdaq.
