Apple Computer Inc. Wednesday reported a $120 million loss in its fiscal first quarter and warned investors it did not expect to report a profit until September.
The troubled computer maker, based in Cupertino, Calif., also said it expected revenue for the current fiscal year, which ends next September, to drop about 13 percent to $8 billion to $8.5 billion because of weak consumer sales.
Apple's loss, which equaled 96 cents a share, compared with a loss of $69 million, or 56 cents a share, in the year-ago quarter. Sales for the quarter ended Dec. 27 fell to $2.13 billion from $3.15 billion.
Apple attributed the latest quarterly loss to slow sales of consumer-oriented Performa desktop computers during the crucial Christmas quarter, which analysts said was partly due to concerns about Apple's future.
"Apple's been under a black cloud, and part of it has been Apple's doing," said Lou Mazzucchelli, analyst at brokerage Gerard Klauer Mattison in New York. "It's hard for a consumer to get the gumption to buy a Performa when everyone's asking, 'Is Apple dead yet?'"
Apple officials said the company will unveil in coming weeks its second restructuring program in two years, aimed at cutting operating costs by $400 million.
The plan could include more job cuts, Chief Financial Officer Fred Anderson said. Apple wants to reduce its break-even point to $8 billion in annual revenues to enable it to return to profitability by the end of September.
Previously, Apple had promised to return to sustainable profits by March. But industry analysts had started to question that goal after Apple disclosed less than two weeks ago that sales of its Performa line were running behind plan.
Apple, which posted a record loss last year of $816 million, has been struggling to return to profitability in the face of increased competition from computers using Microsoft Corp.'s Windows operating system and Intel Corp.'s computer chips.
Last February, Apple replaced Chief Executive Michael Spindler with National Semiconductor Corp. boss Gilbert Amelio and then, in December, announced a reunion with former co-founder Steven Jobs when it agreed to acquire Job's Next Software Inc. for $400 million.
Meanwhile, debt rating agency Standard &amp; Poor's lowered Apple's corporate credit and debt rating another notch Wednesday, putting the company's debt further into junk bond status.
The rating agency said the downgrade reflected the challenges facing Apple, including reducing costs and restoring revenue growth, executing a cohesive operating system upgrade upon completion of the Next acquisition, and Apple's diminished liquidity and financial resources.
"Despite its position among the top five worldwide personal computer manufacturers ... Apple has been struggling with extremely competitive industry conditions, slipping market share, and operating losses," the rating agency said.
Despite the slowdown in Performa sales, Anderson said Apple's financial position remained strong.
"While we were very disappointed by the Performa sales results and the associated loss, our financial position remains sound," he said. "We exited the quarter with $1.8 billion in cash."
Anderson said there were some bright spots in its results. European shipments rose 50 percent in the first quarter from the fourth quarter. Sales to educational organizations also were above the company's goals, Anderson said.
Still, Performa sales, which account for about a third of Apple's revenues, will be weak for the rest of the year. "We had a major problem in this one product area," he said.
Analysts said the loss, which Apple forecast two weeks ago, represented a setback for Amelio. He had set a goal of stanching Apple's losses in 1996 and getting revenue growing again by 1998.
News of the latest loss can drive even more consumers to avoid buying Apple products, analysts said.
"The question is, can Apple wait until 1998 to get its growth engine going again?" said Walter Winnitzki, analyst at broker PaineWebber Inc. in New York.
Apple reported its results after the market closed. Apple closed at $17.25 a share, down 62.5 cents, on Nasdaq.
