The lean times for the video game software industry appear to be over.
Three of the largest game developers on Thursday reported results for the crucial December quarter that were better than Wall Street expected.
Electronic Arts Inc., Activision Inc. and Spectrum Holobyte Inc. said strong sales of games for personal computers and next-generation video game consoles, such as the Sony PlayStation, contributed to the strong results.
For the past year, the video game software industry had been in a funk while consumers waited for the release of advanced game machines from Sony Corp., Sega Enterprises and Nintendo Corp. The industry also lacked blockbusters to draw customers to the video game isle at stores.
The release of the PlayStation last year and the Nintendo 64 this year has revitalized the industry, analysts said.
"People are underestimating how truly red hot sales of the video game systems are," said David Farina, an analyst at brokerage William Blair &amp; Co. in Chicago. "If history is any guide, we're in for a strong two-year cycle for my investors, cross my finger."
After the market closed, Electronic Arts, the biggest U.S. game publisher, said net income for its fiscal third quarter, ended Dec. 31, rose 25 percent to $36.7 million, or 66 cents a share, from $29.3 million, or 54 cents, in the same quarter a year ago.
Electronic Arts' revenue in the quarter jumped 13 percent to $271.1 million from $240.1 million on strong sales of games for the PlayStation and PCs, the company said.
Activision, another big game vendor, said net income in its Christmas quarter more than doubled to $4.12 million, or 28 cents, from $1.95 million, or 13 cents, a year ago.
Spectrum Holobyte, based in Alameda, Calif., said net income in the December quarter was $5.7 million, or 20 cents a share, more than double the 9 cents Wall Street expected. In the same quarter last year, Spectrum Holobyte had a loss of $9.95 million, or 41 cents a share.
The strong earnings likely will continue into the March quarter, analysts said, as consumers buy a new generation of PCs based on Intel Corp.'s MMX technology, which soups up the graphics capabilities of the machines.
