The Czech Republic appeared headed for its first budget deficit despite earlier reports by the fiscally-hawkish government that it had achieved a surplus for the fourth successive year.
"(We expect) the definitive results for 1996 will range around a deficit of 1.7 billion crowns," Deputy Finance Minister Miroslav Havel said on Wednesday in testimony to parliament's budget committtee.
The Czechs have had three surplus budgets since Czechoslovakia split in 1993.
Final data were due in the ministry on Wednesday but as local media paid close attention to whether monetarist Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus would maintain his fiscal winning streak, Havel said the trend was not positive.
He said that by Wednesday revenues totalled 482.8 billion crowns, while expenditures were 484.5 billion.
More bills may be delivered after the deadline, inflating expenditures further, Havel said.
The government made last-ditch efforts in December when the budget looked headed for a more than five billion crown deficit, by freezing some outlays until 1997, and requiring early repayment on credit granted to a deposit insurance fund.
The budget has been hampered by lower-than-expected tax revenue and delayed repayment on credits to Russia.
The 1996 budget was originally approved as a balanced budget totalling 497.6 billion crowns, but an autumn round of spending cuts knocked the forecast expenditure down to 491 billion crowns.
Parliamentary budget committee chairman Jozef Wagner, a member of the largest opposition party, the Social Democrats, said the 1996 deficit was not troublesome, but he was concerned with the effects government payment adjustments may have on the 1997 budget.
Part of the December stop-gap measures included postponing payment of 800 million crowns in state subsidies for housing loans which was due to the partially-privatised banks Ceska Sporitelna a.s. and IPB a.s.
Klaus, who calls balanced budgets the "alpha and omega" of his government, hailed initial reports of a 1996 budget surplus, made by the finance ministry soon after the new year, as a sign of the country's continued fiscal responsibility.
Parliament approved a fifth straight balanced budget plan in December, with both expenditures and revenues forecast at 549.1 billion crowns in 1997.
But the 1997 budget was based on economic growth of 5.4 percent, and many independent analysts have forecast growth for this year at under five percent, after growth between 4.0 and 4.5 percent for the whole of 1996.
Many have voiced concern that slower than expected economic growth might force the government to consider major changes in the 1997 budget to keep a much larger deficit at bay.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
