Czech engineering group Skoda a.s., a local agent for U.S.-based McDonnell Douglas Corp. (MD) is proposing a barter deal be used to encourage the Czech government to buy MD's F/A-18 "Hornet" fighter aircraft.
Skoda's spokesman Karel Samec said on Wednesday his firm would provide trucks made at Skoda's troubled Tatra a.s. and other goods in return for planes which the cash-strapped Czech military is considering in an upgrade its fleet.
"McDonnell Douglas chose us as intermediator, but it depends on the Czech government and the Defence Ministry which has to decide if they want to buy any planes at all," he said.
"It's a barter deal. They would supply the fighters, and we would supply Czech goods to the States, namely Tatras and other things... And I know from the American side that this project has the support of the U.S. government," Samec added.
The Czechs along with former Warsaw Pact allies Poland and Hungary, all seen as frontrunners to join NATO, want to upgrade their fleets to be compatible with the military alliance.
McDonnell Douglas is competing against U.S. Lockheed Martin , makers of the F-16, Sweden's SAAB, which makes the "Gripen", France's "Mirage", and other groups to update a fleet of ageing Soviet-made Mig-21 planes.
However, the Czech government has delayed a decision on buying the planes as proposed cuts in defence spending have clouded the debate over the upgrading the army's aging fighters.
A spokesman at the Defence Ministry was not immediately avbailable for comment.
The Czech military has said it would need about 24 fighters to replace its old MiG-21s, while Hungary said it needs around 30 and Poland 100.
Samec said the deal would be for new or used F/A-18 "Hornets", and would help the heavily-indebted Tatra, whose production has fallen to a fraction of communist-era levels.
"It would be a penetration (for Tatra) into the world's most important market... and it is advantageous because the Tatras have Detroit Diesel motors, so it could be used perhaps in the U.S. army," said Samec.
None of the fighter producers has publicly stated a price at which they would sell their planes to the Czech government.
Analysts say the planes typically cost over $20 million a piece new without supplementary equipment and technology. A cheaper option would be to buy second-hand planes at a fraction of the cost.
