The Czech government on Wednesday directed three of its ministers to oversee an investigation into the failure of the bank Kreditni Banka a.s., Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus said.
The move comes after the press and opposition questioned official banking oversight in the case of the Plzen-based bank which was shut by the central bank last month after reportedly losing about 12 billion crowns.
Klaus told a news conference after a cabinet meeting that Czech National Bank (CNB) Governor Josef Tosovsky would join Finance Minister Ivan Kocarnik, Justice Minister Jan Kalvoda, and Interior Minister Jan Ruml in overseeing the probe.
"Bearing in mind the extraordinary importance of this matter, the govenrnment authorised the group of three ministers to specially inquire into this issue, using all existing standard mechanisms," Klaus said.
He said authorities have been investigating the Kreditni case since the central bank rescinded its licence in August.
Findings from the investigation might lead to changes in Czech legislation, Klaus said.
Local media reports have placed the blame for the failure of Kreditni Banka, majority owned by the largest Czech insurer Ceska Pojistovna a.s. , on a series of murky loans made to interests connected to shareholders.
The leader of the opposition Social Democrats, Milos Zeman, last weekend blamed Finance Minister Ivan Kocarnik and his ministry for lax supervision of the banks.
After Klaus's announcement, the central bank issued a statement on Wednesday, saying it welcomed the group of ministers looking at whether there was any criminal actions involved in Kreditni's failure.
It said combining the investigatory organs with, tax, legal, banking oversight, and capital market authorities, would help in "uncovering illegal activity" and determining its punishment.
"The CNB believes that through this work it will be possible to solve other cases as well in which the banking supervision has submitted a number of criminal reports on the basis of its knowledge gained in other banks," the central bank's statement said.
Eleven banks have fallen under CNB authority since the liberalisation of the sector began in earnest in 1992.
Klaus attributed the failures of the banks -- all of them small or medium sized -- to growing pains in the still-transforming post-Communist Czech economy.
"I am 100 percent persuaded that the dominant cause of these phenomenona... is the difficulity, fragility, complexity of banking in the transformation phase," Klaus said.
Klaus, in numerous previous speeches has declared that the "transformation phase" was over and the economy was "in the fitness centre building muscle".
But Klaus has been under pressure by opposition deputies who have demanded answers on the banking failures.
"The government condemns the way of politicising of this important situation by the opposition, which could intendidly or not, lead to the destabilisation of the the whole banking system," Klaus said.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
