The agriculture ministry said on Tuesday it plans to privatise Budejovicky Budvar n.p., makers of Czech Budweiser beer, via a management buyout, after lengthy talks with Anheuser Busch Cos broke down last year.
The head of the ministry's privatisation department, Jiri Stehlik, told Reuters that the plan would be to sell a 10 percent stake in Budvar to management with an option for them eventually to buy a further 41 percent.
The plan comes after protracted talks broke down last September with Busch over use of the Budweiser trademark and the U.S. company's interest in a minority stake in Budvar, based in the southern Czech city of Budejovice (Budweis).
The new plan fits the government's desire to privatise the makers of one of the country's most famous exports but keep the company primarily in Czech hands.
"This is the proposal of the (ministry), but the government decides on it, so it can change," Stehlik said.
He said the plan did not include a foreign partner in the first stage of the privatisation process, but added that it did not exclude later entry of a foreign investor. Stehlik declined to give further details of the plan.
Budvar, 100 percent state owned, is the maker of the Czech Budweiser, its flagship label. The beer is sold in many markets as Budvar.
The Czech government had delayed privatisation of the company while trying to settle a trademark dispute with Anheuser Busch, maker of the U.S. Budweiser, which has been battling with the small Czech cousin for most of the century.
The negotiations over the use of the "Budweiser" and "Bud" trademarks were aimed at resolving the row which prohibits the rivals from selling their labels in the other's key markets.
But talks broke down last September when Anheuser-Busch said it would market its brew in much of Europe under the "Bud" name.
Anheuser-Busch sells its beer under the Budweiser name in 11 European countries and under the "Bud" name in nine others.
Budvar is one of the five largest Czech breweries, and Budweiser is one of the country's best-known exports.
"Budweiser" beer has been brewed for centuries in the city known also by the German name Budweis, but the trademark was not registered by the Czechs until late last century,
The trademark conflict with Anheuser-Busch, founded by German immigrants to the United States, began in 1911 when the American brewery first insisted that it had registered the brand name before the Czechs.
The Czech government considers Budvar as a part of its "family silver" of strategic holdings.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
