The Czech Agriculture Ministry announced plans Tuesday to privatise Budejovicky Budvar n.p., brewers of Czech Budweiser beer, through a management buyout after lengthy talks with Anheuser Busch Cos., which makes its U.S. namesake, broke down last year.
The head of the ministry's privatisation department, Jiri Stehlik, said in an interview that the plan was to sell a 10 percent stake in Budvar to management with an option for them eventually to buy an additional 41 percent.
The plan comes after talks broke down last September with Busch over use of the Budweiser trademark and the St. Louis-based company's interest in taking a minority stake in Budvar.
Budvar is based in the southern Czech city of Ceske Budejovice, the German name of which is Budweis.
The new plan fits the government's desire to privatise the makers of one of the country's most famous exports but keep the company primarily in Czech hands.
"This is the proposal of the (ministry), but the government decides on it, so it can change," Stehlik said.
The sale plan did not include a foreign partner in the first stage, but he added that it did not exclude the entry of one later. Stehlik declined to give further details of the plan.
The government has delayed Budvar's privatisation while trying to settle a trademark dispute with Anheuser Busch, maker of U.S. Budweiser, which has dragged on most of this century.
The negotiations over the use of the "Budweiser" and "Bud" trademarks were aimed at resolving the wrangle, which prohibits the rivals from selling their brands in each other's key markets.
Talks broke down last September when Anheuser-Busch said it would market its brew in much of Europe under the "Bud" name.
Anheuser-Busch sells its beer under the Budweiser name in 11 European countries and under the "Bud" name in nine others.
Budvar is one of the five largest Czech breweries, and Budweiser is one of the country's best-known exports.
Budweiser beer has been brewed for centuries. but the Czechs did not register the trademark until late last century,
The conflict with Anheuser-Busch, founded by German immigrants to the United States, began in 1911 when the American brewery first insisted that it had registered the brand name before the Czechs.
