Czech ultra-right Republicans staged a small but noisy demonstration as German Chancellor Helmut Kohl arrived to sign a post-war reconciliation accord between the Czech Republic and Germany on Tuesday.
About a hundred supporters of the Republican Party yelled "go home" and "Czech lands for the Czechs" as Kohl arrived at Prague's Liechtenstein Palace to sign a joint declaration with Czech Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus.
Other protesters carried banners with slogans such as "No more Munich" -- a reference to the 1938 Munich Agreement which ceded the Sudetenland, then part of Czechoslovakia, to Germany.
Kohl waved to the demonstrators as he entered the palace.
In the accord, Bonn expresses its sorrow for the 1938-45 Nazi occupation of the Czech lands and Prague its regret for Czech brutality in the post-war expulsion of some 2.5 million Sudeten Germans.
It also includes German support for Czech membership of the European Union and the North Atlantic Treaty Orgainsation.
"This document has only one aim -- that is to finish Hitler's drive to the east and finalise the liquidation of our nation," Republican Party chairman Miroslav Sladek told the deomstrators.
"It is a revision of the results of the World War II," he said.
The Republicans, who won 18 of the 200 seats in parliamentary elections last June, and the Communists, who won 22, oppose the accord.
The communists say the declaration is a threat to Czech sovereignty.
The Czech Republic is a leading contender to be one of the first new members of the EU and NATO. However, many Czechs are wary about joining a new alliance after the years of Nazi occupation and Soviet domination.
One of the protestors, 64-year old Karel Valis, who said his parents were thrown out of Sudetenland when Hitler's Germany took it over, said Germans would use the declaration as a basis for taking over the Czech Republic.
"Since the 12th century Germans want to rule this area," he yelled. "Next, Sudetens will want their property back."
The declaration does not provide direct compensation for Sudenten Germans' confiscated property.
