Wider trading in shares of the fast-growing Czech chemical and trade conglomerate Chemapol Group a.s. began this month with a whimper, and analysts see the stock hampered by opaque financial disclosure.
They said the still illiquid stock -- which first listed on the Prague Stock Exchange (PSE) last Thursday at 2,290 crowns ($82.76), dipped to 2,170 this week before Friday's fixing at 2,245 -- faced uncertainty because of recent acquisitions.
"The problem is information, we don't know where acquisitions were financed from, we haven't seen the balance sheet from last year," said Jan Zak of Atlantik Financial Markets.
Chemapol spent an estimated 12 billion crowns in an acquisition spree last year. It now controls about 70 companies with combined equity of about 20 billion crowns.
Analysts agreed it was potentially an interesting stock, but much more transparency was needed.
Anna Bossong, analyst at ING Barings, said Chemapol would have trouble with a planned 600 million crown issue of global depository receipts (GDR) expected later this year if the company is not more forthcoming.
"I think it would be very difficult. One of the problems this company has is a difficulty with transparency. Increased transparency would be the first thing foreign investors look to before they would invest into GDRs," Bossong told Reuters.
Chemapol originally planned the issue for the last year, but then delayed it, saying domestic investors had already sufficient demand for the nominal 826 million crowns in new shares issued last autumn.
Most of the new issue was gobbled up by existing shareholders which includes six major local banks -- Komercni Banka, Ceska sporitelna, IPB, Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka, Agrobanka and Union Banka -- and management.
Only a handful of shares have traded on the PSE since it was listed last week.
Chemapol's empire grew from an oil trading company -- a business it partially lost to local refineries -- to include major chemical companies, a small airline, a publishing house, an arms trading firm and sports franchises and clubs.
It is also competing in a tender for a more than one-third stake in the largest Czech defence firm, the debt-strapped jet maker Aero Vodochody a.s.
Chemapol's spokesman Vadim Petrov said the conglomerate is aiming to improve the information flow. "That is a process we are working on intensively," he said.
It has yet to reveal 1996 results. Petrov said they would be released when an audit is finished, probably in April.
On January 1, the firm adopted a new structure creating sub-holdings grouping its distribution, trading, chemical, communications and real estate holdings.
"The new structure is quite good... the sub-holding arrangement is logical and the acquisitions, especially in the chemical industry, logically chain on," said Atlantik's Zak.
But Ondrej Vojtech of Akro Capital warned: "The acquisition policy is known to be too broad-minded, and I have the feeling that they are trying to get money from everywhere."
Petrov said this year Chemapol would try to stabilise and consolidate its holdings, and is not planning any large acquisitions, apart from the potential Aero stake.
The group posted audited net profit of 62.5 million crowns in 1995. It had total sales of over 40 billion crowns in 1995 and 29 billion crowns in the first half of 1996.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003 ($ = 27.66 Czech Crowns)
