Czech Finance Minister Ivan Kocarnik on Friday revealed details of his plan to restructure energy prices, which could pave the way to the rapid privatisation of energy distributors.
Kocarnik told a news conference his plan includes a two step rise in electricity, natural gas and heating rates for households, the first on July 1 and the second a year later.
He said he would seek cabinet consensus for the plan under which average electricity rates for households would rise 35 percent in July to 1.49 crowns per KWh, while the price for industrial customers would remain flat at 1.70 crowns per KWh.
Under the current pricing structure, household rates are cross-subsidised by revenues from industry.
"We have to eliminate, or reverse, this ratio," Kocarnik told reporters. He said gas prices would also increase by 35 percent in the first stage.
He added half the electricity rate hike would come in the form of a VAT increase on energy and fuels to 22 percent from five percent, while the other half would become revenue for suppliers.
Kocarnik said proceeds from the VAT increase, a step towards unifying tax rates and holding down consumption, would be used for social transfers to those most affected by the price hikes.
The minister said the second increase, planned for mid-1998, would only occur if the cost levels of energy companies required it.
The second stage calls for a 32 percent rise in electricity prices, a 21 percent gas price increase, and a 10 percent rise in heating prices. The ministry has already approved a 39 percent heating price increase to be carried out this year.
Kocarnik said the government's schedule of increasing energy prices slowly -- by about 10 to 15 percent every year -- was sending the wrong signal to consumers and producers, and created high inflation expectations.
The three-party governing coalition is due to meet in February to debate further deregulation of controlled prices, including rents.
A decision on further action in the energy sector will create good conditions for the often delayed privatisation of state holdings in energy companies, said Kocarnik.
"In the very forseeable future, I will submit a proposal on the privatisation of the distribution companies," he told the news conference.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
