The Czech parliament began debate on Tuesday on a post-World War Two reconciliation agreement with Germany which the Prague government sees as key to EU and NATO membership, while opposition deputies call it a betrayal.
It faces a potentially long and unpleasant fight in the Czech lower house, especially from the ultra-right Republican Party and the Communists, who claim it lets Germany off lightly for Nazi attrocities and the dismemberment of Czechoslovakia.
Deputies voted narrowly to move the sensitive declaration, which was already signed last month by Czech Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus and German Chancellor Helmut Kohl, to the top of the agenda for the session.
"The declaration was adopted in the (German parliament) two weeks ago with a large majority. I believe the Czech parliament will approach it in the same way," Klaus told the chamber.
In the accord, Bonn expresses regret for the 1938-45 Nazi occupation of the Czech lands and Prague its sorrow for brutality in post-war expulsion of 2.5 million ethnic Germans.
The text also includes German support for Czech membership of the European Union (EU) and the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO).
Klaus said the accord was an important international message that the Czech Republic does not have open political issues with its neighbours.
The declaration does not need to be ratified by parliament but a rejection by deputies would embarrass Klaus's minority coalition government, which wants as strong a show of support.
The Republicans have promised a filibuster in an attempt to block the declaration from coming to a vote, but analysts believe the measure will pass, if just narrowly.
A vote, technically, could come later on Tuesday, but many expect the debate to take days.
The main opposition Social Democrats (CSSD) have not said if they will support the declaration and have sought a separate parliamentary resolution, partly on the grounds that the text does not acknowledge the legal validity of the Czechs' actions.
But Klaus told deputies that the accord respected legal norms in both states and did not question the results of the 1945 Potsdam conference, at which the Czechoslovak government was given the right to expel the ethnic Germans.
He also said the text did not affect Czechs' rights to property seized from the ethnic Germans.
The CSSD leadership has agreed to allow its members a free vote, probably ensuring that the government will get the votes it needs from the opposition to approve the accord.
"I know about three or four Social Democrats who would vote for the declaration," CSSD vice-chairman Karel Machovec told Reuters, saying he was among those who would vote in favour.
The accord remains controversial in Germany, where relatives and supportes of the Sudeten Germans have demanded restitution of proerty confiscated by the Czechs.
"The Czech Republic in accordance with its legal order and many norms of international law, considers these ownership questions to be definitely closed," Czech Foreign Minister Josef Zieleniec told the house.
The parliamentary group of Klaus's Civic Democratic Party (ODS) on Tuesday rejected calls for a separate resolution which might provide a Czech interpretation of the declaration.
But Machovec said a separate joint resolution would ensure a larger majority in favour of the declaration.
