Opposition leader Milos Zeman asked Czech parliament on Wednesday to approve a separate resolution which would "clarify" his concerns about a post-World War Two reconciliation pact with Germany.
But deputies in Zeman's own Social Democratic party (CSSD) admitted that the votes were probably were still there, without the extra resolution, to push the deal with Germany through parliament, and save the Czech government from embarrassment.
As debate dragged into a second day on the declaration -- already signed by the Prague and Bonn governments and approved by the German parliament -- Zeman demanded the accompanying rider, which the governing coalition has already rejected.
"I would want to believe this parliament would find the courage to express itself on the declaration in its resolution, as the parliament of a sovereign state," said Zeman, who chairs the lower house and the CSSD.
Czech Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus's three-party conservative coalition, which is two seats short of a majority in the lower house, has rejected any sort of extra resolution which may "interpret" the already-signed declaration.
In the accord, Bonn expresses regret for the 1938-45 Nazi occupation of the Czech lands and Prague its sorrow for brutality in post-war expulsion of 2.5 million ethnic Germans.
The text also includes German support for Czech membership of the European Union (EU) and the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO).
It also skirts around the most sensitive issues of direct compensation for property seized from the expelled Germans.
German politicians sympathetic to families of expellees, now mostly residing in southern Germany, have said that the issue of individual compensation for property was still open, despite the inter-governmental declaration.
Zeman said the comments made by German Chancellor Helmut Kohl, after he signed the document, and later by Finance Minister Theo Waigel, showed that Bonn considered the "property problems" still unresolved.
"These subsequent statements are the basic reason for my concern," Zeman told Czech parliament.
CSSD vice-chairman Karel Machovec said that while the add-on resolution, which has yet to be presented, might help ensure a larger majority for the declaration, he acknowledged the government probably had the votes to win.
"I know about three or four Social Democrats who would vote for the declaration," Machovec told Reuters, saying he would be among members voting in favour of the deal with Germany.
But debate in the Czech lower house looked set to continue late into the week, with small opposition parties attempting filibusters and other procedural moves to block the declaration from coming to a vote.
The ultra-right Republican Party and the Communist Party claim that the declaration lets Germany off lightly for Nazi attrocities and the dismemberment of Czechoslovakia.
