A debate in the Czech parliament over a sensitive post-World War Two reconciliation agreement with Germany dragged into a third day on Thursday, with small opposition parties trying various tactics to obstruct a vote.
Supporters of the Czech-German declaration, aimed at putting to rest more than 50 years of lingering political questions over World War Two and its aftermath, have tried to limit debate but a quick conclusion appeared unlikely.
The ultra-right Czech Republican Party, vehemently opposed to the declaration which has already been signed by the Prague and Bonn governments and approved by the German parliament, submitted its own counter-declaration.
In an unruly morning session of the Czech lower house, Republican deputy Josef Krejsa put forward a proposal calling for 305 billion marks ($180 billion) in compensation for the Nazi occupation of Czech lands, along with the freezing of all German assets in the Czech Republic until the money is paid.
Political analysts said the Republican intitiative had virtually no chance of being approved, but it formed the basis for a continuing series of speeches and tactics aimed at obstructing a final vote.
In the declaration, Bonn expresses regret for the 1938-45 Nazi occupation of Czech lands and Prague expresses its sorrow for brutality in the post-war expulsion of 2.5 million ethnic Germans.
It also sets up a fund for compensating victims of Nazi aggression, but does not address the issue of direct compensation for ethnic Germans whose property was expropriated.
The Republicans and the unreformed Communist Party say the declaration lets Germany off lightly for Nazi attrocities and the dismemberment of Czechoslovakia.
Bonn considers individual property questions still open but the Czech government has rejected this interpretation.
With the debate getting increasingly nasty, Czech Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus called an emergency meeting of his cabinet on Thursday in an effort to kill the Republican filibuster which threatens to go on for days.
The meeting resulted in a cabinet boycott of Thursday's regular parliamentary question and answer session, and a call for the house's immunity committee to investigate whether Republicans broke house rules, or the law, with abusive comments.
In an example of the tenor of the debate, Krejsa called Deputy Foreign Minister Alexander Vondra "the anal speleologist of the awakening German empire" for negotiating the deal with Bonn.
The Czech lower house suspended its rules to allow debate to continue all night and into Saturday if necessary, but Klaus indicated a decision might not come before next week.
He called on parliament to suspend its plans to take a nine-day break after the Saturday session.
"The government considers it to be beneficial that the chamber continues next week in the debate on the open item (declaration)... it will try after an agreement with all of you to find a way how this will be possible to be secured," Klaus told the house. ($ = 1.684 German Marks)
