The lower house of the Czech parliament ended four days of acrimonious debate on Friday by approving a post-World War Two reconciliation agreement with Germany already signed by both governments.
The parliamentary statement of approval for the declaration -- which includes a separate clause implying, in part, that post-war property restitution questions against the Czechs are closed --  was carried by 131 votes to 59.
Germany's parliament had already approved the declaration in January by a large majority.
The Czech debate over the sensitive agreement turned ugly at times amid stalling tactics by ultra-right Republican and Communist opposition deputies who see the pact as a sellout to Bonn, and who were trying to obstruct a final vote.
Approval of the declaration, expected to pass easily in the Czech upper house, is seen by the Prague government as a prerequisite for NATO and EU membership.
The pact also seals Germany's final post-war reconciliation with a neighbouring country.
The agreement expresses Bonn's regrets for the 1938-45 Nazi occupation of the Czech lands, and Prague's sorrow for Czech brutality in the post-war expulsion of 2.5 million ethnic Germans.
While the bilateral agreement sets up a fund for general victim compensation programmes, it does not directly deal with the thorny issue of restitution to expropriated ethnic Germans. Instead it says the issue should never again become a political consideration.
The parliamentary preamble approved with the declaration makes reference to speeches by Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus and Foreign Minister Josef Zieleniec introducing the measure this week in which both insist that post-war property restitution questions are closed.
Bonn insisted after the agreement was signed that individual property claims can still be made, but Klaus and Zieleniec both rejected this.
The largest opposition party, the Social Democrats (CSSD), demanded that references to the introductory speeches by Klaus and Zieleniec be included in the preamble -- especially because of their comments on property issues -- to ensure a large majority in favour of the declaration.
The preamble says simply that parliament, "after listening to the prime minister... and foreign minister, and on the basis of the government's reasoning", agrees with the declaration "which expresses the will of both states to prevent the past from troubling the joint European future."
Zieleniec said after the vote (corrects from "after the speech") that the preamble, which may raise eyebrows in southern Germany where most of the expellees now live, was not aimed at any specific issue, despite the CSSD's protests.
"It is a formulation which does not interpret the declaration nor does it stress any of its parts above others," Zieleniec said.
Top German politicians had cautioned the Czech parliament not to reinterpret the pact, which took nearly two years to negotiate.
