The Prague Cultural Heritage Office is taking the Terminator head-on by rejecting plans for altering an historic city-centre building into a Planet Hollywood theme restaurant, a Czech daily said on Tuesday.
The heritage watchdog said designs for the film-kitsch cafe, one in a chain co-founded by Arnold Schwarzenegger, star of the Terminator films, would destroy some of the classic house's features in a UN protected heritage zone.
"It is a historically valuable object, and in a UNESCO reservation, therefore we can not allow its devastation," the daily Mlada Fronta Dnes quoted Ladislav Spacek from the office as saying.
Numerous licences are required for building in Prague's historical centre, as bureaus specialising in everything from architecture to anthropology are consulted before the final licence for opening the site is granted.
But local partners in the project said it will go forward.
Schwarzenegger, who founded the chain along with fellow screen stars Demi Moore, Bruce Willis and Sylvester Stallone and British entrepreneur Robert Earl, came to Prague in August to inaugurate construction by donating a laser gun from his latest sci-fi thriller "Eraser".
The heritage office said the planned destruction of the building's inner walls, in order to get more room for film projections, and permanently sealing windows facing a boulevard in Prague's banking district, would kill the house's character.
"They want to turn this attractive object into a dead house, that is unthinkable for us," Spacek told the paper.
The paper quoted local partner Prague Investments  as saying that Planet Hollywood would stick to its concept.
"I think that everything will be solved to the satisfaction of both sides," Jitka Cihakova said.
Officials from the heritage office and Prague Investments were not available for additional comment.
The site previously housed a stamp collector's shop and optician.
The construction has already gotten off to a rough start. Last week scaffolding collapsed, injuring one worker and demolishing a garden restaurant that Planet Hollywood installed in front of the future diner.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
