The leading Czech opposition party, the Social Democrats (CSSD), confirmed chairman Milos Zeman and his confrontational style at a weekend national conference, while eliminating his main rivals.
But Zeman only partly succeeded in uniting the party leadership as he disposed most of his internal oppositon, including the more compromising deputy chairman Karel Machovec.
Still, the conference rejected one of Zeman's favourites for a senior party post, and confirmed as deputy chairwoman Petra Buzkova, the most popular Czech politician according to opinion polls, over Zeman's objections.
Despite achieving relative success in last June's elections -- where the CSSD finished a surpisingly strong second, stripping the conservative government's majority in parliament -- delegates elected Zeman with only 72 percent of the vote.
That was about 14 percentage points lower than at the 1996 national CSSD congress.
The leftist daily Pravo said Zeman's position will not likely be as solid in the party despite throwing off Machovec. Commentator Alexandr Mitrofanov said that it was likely that the new leadership "would not give Zeman peaceful work in the circle of the faithful".
Many Czech commentators criticised the CSSD on Monday for taking a more radical route.
The right-leaning daily Mlada Fronta Dnes said, "Zeman's dream of showing the Social Democrats to the public as a serious alternative to the government dissolved... in the wind of partisan passions."
It said the CSSD has defined itself as by showing diletantism and devoting time to elimination of internal enemies rather than to finding alternative solutions.
"Zeman bets on political superstition and carelessness of people othrwise adult and reasonable," wrote Jefim Fistejn in the frequently pro-governemnt daily Lidove Noviny.
Zeman has aimed at voters of unreformed communists and ultra-right republicans as a source of more votes, while Machovec was campaigning for a shift to the centre and less emotional clashes with the government.
An opinion poll released by the state-funded research agency IVVM on Monday showed the CSSD's gap with Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus's Civic Democratic Party grew in early March to 26 to 19 percent, from February support of 24 to 21 percent.
Over the four years of his chairmanship, Zeman has adopted a strictly anti-government rhetoric, and managed to lead the party from the opposition wilderness to a major force.
But the CSSD had a huge rift late last year when several deputies, including Machovec and budget committee chairman Josef Wagner, broke ranks in voting with the government on its 1997 balanced budget.
Delegates at the conference responded to Zeman's calls and voted to expell Wagner from the party, and denied the deputy chairman's post to Machovec.
In his keynote speech at the conference, Zeman called for a fast action on what he said was an impending economic crisis, and on white-collar economic crime, and fast action to reverse the growing trade deficit, including pro-export measures.
The party confirmed its support for Czech NATO and European Union membership, but repeated calls for a referendum on both.
