The Czech opposition Social Democrats (CSSD) sought to bury internal rifts at their party conference on Friday, aiming to convince the country they are ready to hold power.
The CSSD casts itself as a potential leader should Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus's conservative Civic Democratic Party (ODS) be unable to keep the sometimes fractious three-party ruling coalition together.
Although a general election is not scheduled until 1998, Klaus's government has wobbled since losing its firm majority in lower house elections last June.
CSSD chairman Milos Zeman opened the meeting with a call for party unity, appearing to take a shot at members who broke ranks in recent key votes in parliament.
"If we want to win the election, we can't be a bunch of anarchists," Zeman said in an opening speech. "After approval of a majority decision we all have to pull in the same direction."
The CSSD polled a strong second in last June's general elections just three percentage points behind the ODS thus reducing Klaus's coalition to a minority in the lower house, but it has been jolted by internal battles since then.
A party rift in December over the 1997 budget -- when a handful of rebel CSSD deputies broke ranks to allow the government's draft to survive -- drove a wedge between the party's moderate and more radical wings.
Analysts said the congress, in a steelworks meeting hall near the industrial centre of Ostrava, was crucial in casting the party's long-term political balance, with radicals from within pushing for party unity and a further shift to populism.
"Hardly anybody expects a shift toward more reasonable and factual policies... It can be said almost with certainity that the current confrontational course will be confirmed," wrote Vladimir Mlynar in the influential weekly magazine Respekt.
Party leaders will be elected again on Saturday, and the conference is to finalise a party platform on Sunday, with contentious points on the direction of economic reforms and confrontation with the cabinet expected to spur heated debate.
Opinion polls have shown little change in the Czech political landscape since the June elections.
Some analysts said that the more confrontational wing, led by chairman Zeman, would knock down a challenge from moderates who include first vice-chairman Karel Machovec.
Two of the four CSSD deputies who crossed over on the budget were later expelled from the party for, as Zeman said, "damaging party interests", and Zeman threatened to resign as chairman if the budget rebel Machovec is re-elected.
"Zeman is more of a radical, but he's on the edge. A victory of radicals, often former communists, would create space for the government coalition," said political science professor Jindrich Fibich of Prague's Charles University.
"Zeman knows he would lose centrist voters. I think there might be some type of a partial compromise between the two wings, but some of (the moderates) will have to go."
Zeman is proposing that the congress should tighten control of party discipline and eliminate inter-party factions by concentrating more power in the chairman's hands.
But Zeman has also said he is willing to form a future coalition with the Christian Democrats (KDU-CSL), a centrist party which is the largest junior member of the government.
Still, said Fibich: "If there is no compromise and the (CSSD) moderates are liquidated, KDU would stick more with the current coalition," said Fibich.
