The Czech Republic took a large step on Wednesday toward ending more than 50 years of total dependence on Russia for natural gas, finalising a 20-year supply agreement with Norway.
Czech Industry and Trade Minister Vladimir Dlouhy told a business forum, including Norwegian King Harald, that the deal should allow for gas supplies to begin from May 1, and gradually wean Prague from Russian gas.
Although Prague's political domination by Moscow ended with its 1989 democratic revolution, the Czechs still rely on Russia for most of its energy needs and Russian raw materials remain a major element of Czech imports.
"I am pleased and honoured to say...that the final negotiations were completed," Dlouhy told the forum, which also included Norwegian government and business officials.
Dlouhy said that under the deal, supplies would increase from 1.4 million cubic metres a day to around three billion cubic metres annually. The total supply as laid out by the agreement should be 53 billion cubic metres (bcm).
The ministry was considering other options including potential deals with German, Dutch and British suppliers or a second delivery route of Russian gas.
But Dlouhy told journalists after the announcement: "We picked Norway because it was economically very advantageous."
No financial terms of the agreement were disclosed.
The deal is expected to be presented to the government in the coming weeks, which must first approve it before state-owned gas transporter Transgas will sign a final contract.
A consortium of Norwegian firms, including Statoil, Norsk Hydro ASA and Saga Petroleum ASA, is involved in the deal, though the Norwegian government must still decide which gas producing platforms the supplies will come from.
The deal, on the eve of a summit between U.S. President Bill Clinton and Russian President Boris Yeltsin where Czech NATO membership is to be discussed, also comes soon after Russia's ambassador to Prague hinted of economic reprisals should the Czechs join the western security alliance.
Czech officials say moves to build a pipeline linking Prague to Middle Eastern oil from the Adriatic Sea, to buy U.S. supplied nuclear fuel for Czech power plants, and the Norway gas deal, complete "strategic long-term targets".
Czechs consume around nine bcms per year of natural gas, with demand expecting to rise to 12 to 13 bcms after the turn of the century. Russia's Gazprom is still expected to remain a main supplier to the Czechs.
The deal also signals an expected push in the sector by Norway into central and eastern Europe. Statoil officials at the signing said the firm is also looking to supply Poland and Hungary with natural gas.
"There's a lot of interest to supply other central European countries as well," Egio Haaland, Statoil marketing manager for eastern Europe said, adding the amount of gas delivered to the Czechs would be just under what supplies to Hungary and Poland would be.
-- Prague Newsroom, 420-2-2423-0003
