A U.S.-led consortium won a controversial Czech Defence Ministry tender on Thursday, but its American rival Unisys Corp immediately said it would appeal the decision.
Defence Minister Miloslav Vyborny announced that the consortium led by Electronic Data Systems Corp and Digital Equipment Corp had won a 1.3 billion crown ($44 million) information systems contract.
The battle to supply the system, which will help Czech armed forces to become compatible with the NATO alliance, has been long and bitter.
Unisys won an original four billion crown supply tender last August. But the tender was later cancelled when Czech competition authorities found irregularities in the process.
Vyborny said a commission set up to evaluate binds in the latest tender had actually put Unisys narrowly ahead of EDS-Digital. But the ministry had decided to ignore its recommendation due to the consortium's lower price and greater experience, he told an news conference.
Jan Vesely, director of the Czech unit of Unisys, said his company would first appeal directly to the ministry. "In the event of a negative answer, there is the Economic Competition Office," he said.
Unisys said the EDS bid did not cover all the components which were required. EDS officials in Prague declined to comment and ministry officials were not contactable.
A number of other Czech military tenders have been marked by controversy, sometimes amid allegations of graft.
Installation of the staff information system is a large step on the Czech army's path to compatibility with the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation's military command.
NATO leaders will decide in July which former communist countries will be invited to join the alliance. The Czech Republic is a front runner along with Poland and Hungary.
Vyborny said EDS-Digital had put in a bid of 1.295 billion crowns while Unisys was nearly 109 million crowns more expensive.
The tender commission, which rated the bids but was not authorised to take any decision, put Unisys marginally ahead of EDS. Both were well ahead of International Business Machines Corp and Deloitte and Touche unit IDOM.
"(The bids of) two companies, Unisys and EDS, are in technical terms almost identical. In price terms, without question, the best bid was submitted by EDS," Vyborny said. "The experience of EDS-Digital with staff information systems is greater. It is a bid offering a well-tested system which EDS has implemented in 14 NATO countries," he added.
Unisys said it was suspicious that the original tender was abolished and rankings were changed when it won again.
"We consider this decision on ranking in the public tender to be unobjective and unjustified, and we will surely appeal against it," the Unisys statement said. ($ = 29.46 Czech Crowns)
