The Czech government expects the country's gross domestic product (GDP) to grow 5.4 percent in 1997 after an expected 5.1 percent this year, Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus said on Wednesday.
Speaking after a cabinet session discussing the 1997 budget proposal, Klaus said the new budget was based on an annual average inflation forecast of 8.6 percent for next year, down from a revised forecast of 9.0 in 1996.
The prime minister said the country's current account deficit could reach 5.8 percent of GDP in 1997, after a projected 5.7 percent this year.
The current account gap, caused by a balloning trade deficit, is expected to climb to about 150 billion crowns ($5.69 billion) this year from 96 billion in 1995.
"We expect that we will not yet turn around the trade deficit, nor the deficit of the current account," Klaus said.
He said the budget, which will go to the cabinet next week for final approval before going to parliament, was planned as his government's fifth straight balanced budget, with spending and revenues standing at 549.1 billion crowns.
The cabinet would propose cutting personal income taxes by raising the threshold for taxable income to 28,800 crowns from the current 26,400, and by widening the tax brackets for individuals.
Corporate tax should remain unchanged at 39 percent.
"The cabinet did not find more room (for tax cuts) other than the possibility to cut taxes in the level of about 2.8 billion crowns," Klaus told the news conference.
Klaus and his centre-right coalition partners made lowering taxes one of the cornerstones of their political programmes prior to June's parliamentary elections, in which they lost a majority in the lower house of the parliament.
Klaus said government consumption should show a relative decline when the growth of the economy was factored in, while household consumption should rise four percent and creation of fixed capital by 13 percent.
"That is a continuation of the fast investment wave, which is going on in this economy, which is the condition and guarantee of its positive development and export ability." ($1=26.36 Czech Crown)
