Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus said on Tuesday that improving the regulation of beleaguered Czech capital markets was on his agenda, but he took a shot at critics who have said the improvement was coming too slowly.
Speaking at a banking and finance forum in Prague, Klaus said that "we are searching for new forms of regulations."
"But I disagree with those critics, mostly foreigners, who look at the existing quality of our capital markets and are surprised that they do not equal Wall Street, the City of London or any other well-established western financial centre yet," Klaus told the conference.
"Their high-brow attitude and their absolutist, almost doctrinal phraseology is something what does not help much."
However Klaus, a professor of economics and fierce anti-regulation campaigner, added that finding the right extent of capital market regulation was an "imminent task".
Many foreign equity analysts and investors frequently criticise the Czech markets for a lack of quality company information and clear pricing of shares, insider trading, and poor oversight of numerous investment funds.
Many analysts use Poland and its more stringent capital market regulation as an example of why the Warsaw Stock Exchange attracts much more foreign investment than Prague.
Separately, Klaus said that the country had too many banks and investment funds, and many were poorly managed.
A crisis in small private banks peaked last year when Agrobanka, the fifth largest and the largest fully-private bank, was put under forced administration by the central bank, the last and largest in a dozen recent interventions.
Klaus said a liberal approach to granting banking and capital markets licences in the early 1990's came from the need for more private financial houses and competition, and nobody knew what the right number of institutions would be.
"We have too many banks and too many investment funds now, and we also know that not all of them function perfectly or are in the best possible hands," Klaus said.
The Finance Ministry's capital markets oversight office has recently stepped up its activity with a wave of actions against illegal asset-stripping by managers of mostly smaller Czech investment funds.
But the ministry is still under fierce criticism from investors and the media for a lack of activity.
Klaus has revealed a plan to gradually separate the capital market supervision from the Finance Ministry, a process which has started in February by creating a separate Securities Bureau within the ministry.
Under the plan, the Czech Securities Registry started publishing over-the counter trades registred at the centre earlier this year.
Klaus also admitted that a period at the start of the privatisation process in the early 1990's when state firms were not yet privatised led to a loss of many assets as state supervision relaxed but new owners were still not in place.
"This is something what the future privatising countries should avoid," Klaus told the conference.
-- Prague Newsroom, 420-2-2423-0003
