CEZ a.s., the Czech Republic's main electricity generator, posted higher than expected 1996 profits on Friday, though company officials were not as optimistic about the company's bottom line this year.
CEZ said its preliminary 1996 net profit, calculated under international accounting standards, edged up to 9.7 billion crowns from 9.31 billion in 1995.
Under Czech accounting, which differs in areas such as interest payments, leasing payments and measuring profits and losses carried over from previous years, net profit dipped to 7.85 billion from 8.06 billion.
Petr Voboril, head of CEZ's planning department, said the result was slightly above the firm's expectations, adding that the company had funds to pay its first-ever dividend, expected to be between 30 and 45 crowns per share on the earnings.
"The profit is on the level where we expected, or little above that," Voboril told reporters and analysts.
Analysts too were encouraged by the figures and dividend announcement, though CEZ shares failed to immediately respond to the data, closing down five crowns at 1,055 on the Prague Stock Exchange.
"Based on IAS figures, the results were better than I expected...I expected about nine billion crowns so its slightly higher," said Miroslav Nosal, an analyst at Patria Finance.
"I expect the shares will respond favourably to the results and the fact that CEZ said dividends will be suggested to the shareholders at the AGM," he added.
CEZ officials have said several times that they would like to pay a dividend for 1996, but Voboril admitted the firm's majority shareholder, the state, may not be in favour of the move.
A spokeswoman at the minstry of industry and trade, which manages the state's 67 percent stake, told Reuters a final decision had yet to be made on whether the proposal would be approved.
"It's early for a final position. The ministry is considering the possibilities of dividend payments at CEZ and also the distribution companies," ministry spokeswoman Zuzana Fialova.
In addition, Voboril said the company expects 1997 profits to fall to the level of six billion this year as write-offs will increase.
He warned that the slow deregulation of energy prices and a less than desired price increase that CEZ may bill regional power distributors for electricity, as well as rising fuel prices and other costs, threatened to hit the company's perfomance in the future.
But he said that the company's creation of internal sources has been on and upward trend thanks to higher write-offs, despite profits falling under Czech standards, which are the basis for taxation and dividend payments.
Voboril said CEZ would tap international debt markets in the middle of this year with a bond issue, but declined to give more details.
In the results statement, prepared under international accounting standards, operating revenues grew by 9.4 percent last year to 55.4 billion, while operating expenses were up by 17.3 percent.
Earnings prior to tax fell 6.9 percent to 15.6 billion, but net profit rose due to a 20.8 percent decrease in tax payments, to 5.9 billion.
The company managed to increase its market share to 80 percent from 77 percent in 1995. Earnings per share rose to 180 crowns from 173, and return on equity fell to 10.4 percent from 11.1 percent.
Voboril said CEZ invested 22.3 billion crowns last year, and commissioned equipment worth 25 billion, including two hydroelectric power plants.
-- Prague Newsroom, 420-2-2423-0003
