The Czech government gave its final approval on Wednesday to a 20-year contract for natural gas supplies from Norway, ending total dependence on Russian gas, Industry and Trade Minister Vladimir Dlouhy said.
"The government today gave its final approval to the Norwegian option of diversifying imports of natural gas including the diversification of the transport route," Dlouhy told a news conference after a cabinet meeting.
The deal, approved by Czech and Norwegian ministers last month, angered officials at Russia's gas company RAO Gazprom which called the move economically unjustified.
Financial details have not been disclosed, but the Norwegian gas is expected to cost more than Russian supplies.
A consortium of Norwegian firms, including Statoil, Norsk Hydro ASA and Saga Petroleum A/S, is involved in the deal, though Norway must still decide which gas producing platforms will supply the Czechs.
Under the deal which begins on May 1, supplies would start at 1.4 million cubic metres a day, increasing to about three billion cubic metres annually.
The total supply as laid out by the agreement should be 53 billion cubic metres (bcm) over 20 years.
The Norwegian gas is to be delivered through a pipeline via northern Germany which feeds into the Czech Republic.
Czechs, who for the past half century have taken all of their natural gas from Russia, now consume around nine bcm of gas per year. Total consumption is expected to rise to 12-13 bcm after the turn of the century.
Russia's Gazprom is still expected to remain the main supplier to the Czechs, but Gazprom officials said last month the Norwegian incursion could hurt Gazprom's competitive position in Europe.
"Gazprom is closely following the development of events in the Czech Republic, and remaining its fundamental partner in the field of gas supplies, will do everything possible to widen co-operation," Gazprom said.
Prague said it picked Norway after considering potential deals with German, Dutch and British suppliers, as well as a second delivery route of Russian gas.
The deal also signals an expected push in the sector by Norway into central and eastern Europe. Statoil officials said at an initialling of the agreement last month in Prague that it was also looking to supply Poland and Hungary with natural gas.
-- Prague Newsroom, 420-2-2423-0003
