Czech Foreign Minister Josef Zieleniec said on Thursday that a long-awaited Czech-German post-World War Two reconciliation treaty would not bring any change to laws which expelled millions of ethnic Germans.
Zieleniec told reporters he welcomed German Chancellor Helmut Kohl's statement on Wednesday that he hoped the sensitive document closing the book on the Nazi occupation of Czech lands and its aftermath would be signed by year's end.
But Zieleniec said there would be no tinkering with Prague's post-war laws which expelled and expropriated over 2.5 million ethnic Germans, known as Sudeten Germans, after the Czech lands were liberated from Nazi occupation in 1945.
"I want to say something clearly: the declaration will not at all mean not even a hint of a change of the Czech legal order," said Zieleniec.
"I am glad Mr. Chancellor spoke on this issue, it is a sign Czech-German relations are an important part of German political activity at present, and that these relations are in the focus of Germany's key politicians," he added.
Intensive bilateral talks on the declaration, now running for more than a year, have been held amid calls by politically powerful groups repesenting the expelled Germans for compensation from Prague.
The Czech government has given symbolic compensation to Czech victims of Nazi occupation, but the Bonn government has yet to offer compensation to the Czechs similar to payments made to victims of Nazism in other European countries.
The expelled Germans' groups, concentrated in southern Germany, have demanded the abolition of the post-war decrees issued by then-Czechoslovak President Edvard Benes.
Attempts to cancel the decrees by some individuals through Czech courts have failed.
Kohl pleaded for patience in his address to the Bundestag on Wednesday: "We want to conclude this agreement this year," he said, adding that he wanted it to be symbolically crowned by a speech in Bonn by a representative of the Czech government.
After a meeting with ministers on Thursday Czech President Vaclav Havel, who has spearheaded Prague's warming of relations with Bonn despite holding a mostly ceremonial position, said he agreed with Kohl.
"There's nothing left but to say that it is good that Mr. Chancellor (Kohl) would like to have the declaration signed by the end of the year."
