Czech engineering concern Skoda a.s. said on Thursday it had agreed with Czech steelmaker Trinecke Zelezarny a.s. to cooperate in steel production and privatisation projects.
Skoda said the deal would help make the ailing Czech steel industry more efficient through coordinating the modernisation of production in complementary areas.
Skoda, which makes heavy iron finished and semi-finished goods, said in a statement from its headquarters in Plzen that both companies would specialise and coordinate in unspecified areas of production, aiming to cut costs.
Skoda's spokesman Karel Samec said selected products would be manufactured in the cheaper of the two mills.
"This scheme will also be used in the future in other companies," Samec said in a statement. "Cooperation and... participation in privatisation is necessary, bearing in mind the current stagnation of the steel production in the world."
Samec declined to specify which privatisation projects Skoda had under consideration.
The Industry and Trade Ministry plans to sell 19 percent stakes of the 67 percent it holds in two other steel firms -- Nova Hut a.s. and Vitkovice a.s.
The plan has yet to be approved by the full cabinet.
Trinecke Zelezarny, one of the four biggest steelmills located in the northeastern town of Trinec, was partially privatised through a direct sale of a 51 percent stake to a domestic investment group and the government's voucher scheme.
A steel industry source told Reuters on Thursday that Skoda, which has rapidly acquiried companies in the post-Communist era, was also considering acquiring the troubled Poldi Ocel steel mill west of Prague.
Skoda's Samec told Reuters he "was not aware" of any plans that would lead to Skoda acquisitions in Nova Hut or Vitkovice, and that "it was too early to talk about other projects".
The government in 1993 agreed to sell a controlling stake in Poldi to the small Czech company, Bohemia Art which has never fully paid for its majority interest.
Production in Poldi came to a halt earlier this year because the company was not able to pay its energy bills.
Skoda was involved in inconclusive talks earlier this year on bailing out Poldi. Bankruptcy cases against Poldi are slowly moving through the courts.
Skoda, based in the western city of Plzen, makes everything from drink cans to trolleybuses and nuclear components and has shown a large appetite for acquisitions. It is no longer affiliated with the car maker Skoda Automobilova a.s.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
