Czech engineering group Skoda a.s. said on Tuesday it had won an order to supply trolleybuses worth more than $170 million to the city of San Francisco, the largest order of Czech goods ever to the United States.
Skoda spokesman Jaroslav Hudec said the electrically powered buses would be produced in the Czech Republic and assembled at Skoda's subsidiary, Electric Transit International (ETI) in Baltimore.
"We consider victory in this tender to be an extraordinary success not only in view of the expected volumes of supplies ... but also because the U.S. market is among the most prestigious and demanding in the world," Hudec said.
Plzen-based Skoda, no longer affiliated with the Czech car maker Skoda Automobilova a.s., has made an aggressive push into new markets, aiming to offer western-quality units with the comparative cost advantage of eastern European production.
The San Francisco contract would open the way for Skoda, an engineering conglomerate which makes goods ranging from nuclear power components to drink cans, to win more business in the United States, Hudec said.
"Considering the ecologization of public transport in the U.S., Skoda Plzen has real chances to win further orders... and also bring the brand Skoda to the U.S. market ...," he said.
Electric Transit International (ETI) President Ladislav Tetal said the order would virtually replace San Francisco's entire fleet of 300 buses, as the city retains only a few dozen younger vehicles.
He said the deal had no connection with San Francisco's landmark cablecar lines which will continue to be a symbol of the "City by the Bay."
The total for the order with details of the financial and technical conditions would be finalised by mid-year, Hudec said, but declined to give further details.
The deal must still be approved by the San Francisco Board of Supervisors in a vote scheduled for April 22, ETI said.
Skoda has made more than 12,000 trolleybuses since 1936 -- many of which can be seen running in cities throughout the former communist bloc.
Earlier this decade Skoda won a contract to supply 54 trolley buses to the city of Dayton, Ohio, and founded a U.S. joint venture with private partners in Baltimore, ETI, to assemble the buses. Skoda holds a majority stake in ETI.
The Dayton supply is scheduled to be completed in 1998. Skoda said it is also pursuing joint ventures to build trolley buses in Russia and Iran.
