Engineering group Skoda a.s. said on Tuesday it had won an order to supply more than $170 million in trolleybuses to the city of San Francisco, the largest supply of Czech goods ever to the United States.
Skoda spokesman Jaroslav Hudec said the electric-powered buses would be produced in the Czech Republic and assembled at Skoda's subsidiary, Electric Transit International (ETI) in Baltimore.
"We consider victory in this tender to be an extraordinary success not only in view of the expected volumes of supplies...but also because the U.S. market is among the most prestigious and demanding in the world," Hudec said.
Plzen-based Skoda, no longer affiliated with the Czech car maker Skoda Automobilova a.s., has made an aggressive push into new markets, aiming to offer western-quality units with the comparative cost advantage of eastern European production.
The San Francisco contract would open the way for Skoda, an engineering conglomerate which makes goods ranging from nuclear power components to drink cans, to win more business in the United States, Hudec said.
"Considering the ecologisation of public transport in the U.S., Skoda Plzen has real chances to win further orders... and also bring the brand Skoda to the U.S. market in relation to other production of our factories," he said.
Skoda has made over 12,000 trolleybuses since 1936 -- many of which can be seen running in cities throughout the former communist bloc.
Local Czech media reports quoted ETI officials as saying the San Francisco order could be for about 250 single-section and higher capacity buses through to the year 2000.
The total for the order with details of the financial and technical conditions would be finalised by mid-year, Hudec said, but declined to give further details.
Earlier this decade Skoda won a contract to supply 54 trolley buses to the city of Dayton, Ohio, and founded a U.S. joint venture with private partners in Baltimore, ETI, to assemble the buses. Skoda holds a majority stake in ETI.
The Dayton supply is scheduled to be completed in 1998. Skoda said it is also pursuing joint ventures to build trolley buses in Russian and Iran.
Guy Creasy, equities analyst at IB Austria Securities in Prague, said that while the San Francisco order was indeed a positive signal for Skoda shares, lingering questions over the cost of recent acquisitions remained.
"I don't think (the order) is a drop in the bucket, but I don't think it will make the difference between profit and loss," he said. "I don't think it will make us change (Skoda's share recommendation) to a 'buy'."
Creasy said that it was not yet clear how earnings from the order would be divided with Skoda's U.S. partners.
Analysts have been wary about Skoda shares, awaiting 1996 results which should show the impact of buying two ailing Czech truck makers, Liaz a.s. and Tatra a.s..
Skoda shares gained 25 crowns in Tuesday's fixing on the Prague Stock Exchange to 871 crowns, reversing a downtrend in the stock which ended 52 crowns lower on Monday. The shares showed thin activity after the Tuesday fixing.
Skoda said in a statement on Monday that it planned to raise its basic equity by 2.5 billion crowns through an unspecified share issue still to be decided by shareholders.
The Czech state National Property Fund (NPF) in March said it would sell its remaining 8.7 percent stake in Skoda soon through the Prague share markets.
News of the San Francisco order comes as the Czech Republic has posted record trade deficits. The country's current account deficit topped eight percent of gross domestic product last year, up from four percent in 1995.
