The Czech Republic officially ended its dependence on Russian natural gas supplies on Monday, signing a final delivery contract with Norwegian suppliers Statoil, Saga Petroleum and Norsk Hydro.
Officials from Czech state monopoly gas importer Transgas and the Norwegian suppliers signed the deal which will see some 53 billion cubic metres of gas transported to the Czech Republic over the nex 20 years.
Transgas Director Miroslav Grec told a news conference after a signing ceremony that deals were also completed with transporters Netra GmbH and Verbundnetz Gas AG to ship the gas from a north-German terminal at Emden to the Czech border.
"The contract was signed for 20 years, and supplies will start as soon as in May this year," Grec said.
The signing of the contract officially and effectively ends the Czech Republic's dependence on natural gas supplies by Russia's Gazprom. Czechs currently consume slightly over nine billion cubic metres (bcm) of natural gas per year, with projections of demand rising to 13.8 bcm in 2010.
Grec said supplies this year would reach some 0.4 bcm, and gradually rise to three bcm annually by 2002.
Statoil Executive Vice-President Peter Mellbye said his company was now looking into other central and eastern European countries to build on its sucessfull penetration into the Czech market.
"Transgas is our first, and therefore a very important partner (in the region)," Mellbye said.
The partners denied to disclose price terms of the agreements. Verbundnetz officials said its delivery contract was worth "about 600 million marks".
Grec said that the introduction of competition in supplies would improve the negotiating position for future deliveries from Russia or elsewhere. The Czech Republic's delivery contract with Gazprom ends in 1998.
The Czech Republic has already diversified crude oil and nuclear fuel supplies to win independence from Russian sources it had been exclusively tapping in the communist era.
-- Prague Newsroom, 420-2-2423-0003
