U.S.-based Unisys Corp said on Tuesday it had appealed to the Czech Economic Competition Office against a Defence Ministry decision awarding an army contract to a consortium of Electronic Data Systems and Digital Equipment Corp.
"Unisys has submitted...a proposal for investigation of the decision of the Defence Minister of the Czech Republic," the company said in a statement.
Last week, Defence Minister Miloslav Vyborny rejected a first round appeal by Unisys and IBM Corp saying he believed his decision in March to award a 1.3 billion crown army information system deal to EDS-Digital was correct.
Installation of the staff information system is seen as a large step on the Czech army's path to compatibility with the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation's military command.
Vyborny chose EDS-Digital despite a recommendation by a steering committee to chose Unisys's bid.
"By this step (the appeal), Unisys is continuing in its effort for recognition of its victory in the public tender...because it is convinced of the seriousness of its arguments," the statement said.
Vyborny has said that he decided in favour of EDS-Digital due to the lower price of its bid. Unisys has said that price was not weighted in accordance with the tender rules, and that EDS-Digital's offer was not complete. EDS declined to comment.
Unisys won an original four billion crown supply tender last year, but it was cancelled in August when competition authorities found irregularities in the process.
Vyborny said after the second tender that the ministry had decided to ignore the recommendation of the tender committee also because some members' evaluations were far different than the rest of the committee.
Unisys has said it was suspicious that the original tender was abolished and rankings were changed when it won again.
"Unisys is proposing cancellation of the decision and hopes the government of the Czech Republic will deal with the situation around this strategic order," Unisys added.
A number of other Czech military tenders have been marked by controversy, sometimes including allegations of graft.
NATO leaders will decide in July which former communist countries will be invited to join the alliance. The Czech Republic is a front runner along with Poland and Hungary.
-- Prague Newsroom, 420-2-2423-0003
