The Czech government announced a sweeping series of economic measures to jump start the economy on Wednesday, but admitted that even with the moves, GDP growth would slump badly in 1997.
In releasing the 11 page plan late Wednesday afternoon, Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus said cuts of almost five percent to budget expenditures, limits on public sector wage growth and a speeding up of privatisation would affect almost every Czech.
He said the measures are aimed not only at improving the economy, but also "the completion of the concept of the transformation of the Czech economy."
"Therefore it must be a very complex combination of individual measures, but also of explicit change of the original objectives of the government's policy," he said.
But Klaus told reporters that even with the measures, he would consider it a "success" if 1997 GDP growth reached half of the 5.4 percent, year-on-year growth rate forecast in the budget.
While the statement said monetary policy was not mentioned in the document because this area is for the central bank to decide, it nonetheless chided the central bank for its tight monetary policy.
"There must be an inverse development in monetary and fiscal policy," the statement said. "Monetary policy, after the restriction in middle of the last year...(it) must make a move in the opposite direction," it said.
Added Klaus: "There is an argument... That the state does not consider it rational to strive to alter the exchange rate. We are not altering the central parity of the crown and we are convinced that the fluctuation band plus and minus 7.5 per cent is fully sufficient."
The crown is fixed daily by the central bank at +/- 7.5 percent of the mid-point of its dollar/mark basket.
The Czech economy has enjoyed several years of demand-led growth as industry imported technology and a sharp rise in wages provoked a consumer boom.
But industrial and construction output have both declined for two consecutive months and the burgeoning trade deficit, at a record 160.3 billion crowns in 1996, has shown no signs of letting up.
The government measures include:
*Some 25.5 billion crowns cuts in budget expenditure, originally approved at 549.1 billion crowns.
*A limiting of public sector wage growth to 7.3 percent, from an originally-planned 11.9 percent.
*A speeding up of privatisation, including banks.
*Tightening of capital market regulation, including the setting up of an independent watchdog and the separation of investment and commercial banking.
*Implementation of an import deposit programme forcing importers to place a still to be determined percent of the value of imports on interest-free deposit at the central bank.
The government also said it would propose a lowering of the corporate tax rate in 1998 to 35 percent from 39 percent this year, but some excise taxes would rise to help boost revenues.
