A Czech cabinet decision to require deposits on consumer goods imports will be less harmful for inflation than the rejected option of import surcharges but may have little impact on the trade deficit, analysts said on Friday.
But they praised a government plan, revealed on Wednesday as part of an economic revival package, to cut public sector wage growth to 7.3 percent this year from the planned 11.9 percent, saying this would be more effective in pushing down demand for imported products than the deposit programme.
The analysts polled by Reuters said the deposit programme, which will come into effect on Monday, would not have a great impact on consumer prices.
Under the deposit scheme, importers will be required to deposit 20 percent of the value of imported consumer goods on an interest-free account for 180 days.
The commercial banks will channel the money from their branches to state-held development bank Konsolidacni Banka.
Industry and Trade Minister Vladimir Dlouhy, officially announcing the new measure on Friday, said he hoped the restriction would reverse the trend of the widening trade deficit, but did not make a more specific forecast.
"Deposits are a better way than an import surcharge, which would raise inflation, and import quotas, which would be unwelcome internationally," said ING Barings analyst Boris Gomez.
He saw little impact on the trade deficit from the deposit scheme but added that imports could fall as a result of a decline in domestic demand caused by lower wage growth.
"I believe that the government will be able to go ahead with the wage restrictions. The question is whether the private sector will follow," Gomez said.
Minister Dlouhy said the deposits would apply to some 30 percent of imports, including selected foodstuffs, cars, electronics, textile products, furniture, and appliances.
Vladimir Kreidl of investment bank Patria Finance said the wage growth limits were "very drastic and ambitious" and said staff were likely to be laid off in order to meet the target.
"If well implemented, the measures should benefit the economy...The trade deficit should be reduced by 30-50 billion crowns from the originally expected 200-220 billion (1997 deficit)," Kreidl said.
The trade gap rose to 160.3 billion crowns last year from under 100 billion in 1995, and official estimates before imposition of the import deposits were projecting this year's deficit to range around 210 bilion.
But Pavel Sobisek of Zivnostenska Banka said the import deposits would have virtually no impact on the trade balance.
"I am leaving my prediction (of the foreign trade deficit) unchanged at 180 billion," he said, addding that a major change could come only through a change of the exchange rate policy.
Analysts said the programme would have minimal impact on inflation, which fell to 6.8 percent year on year in March.
"The effect in the cost of imported goods would be a year-on-year increase in inflation of about 0.3-0.4 percent," said Jack Schrantz, head of research at Raiffeisen Capital and Investment in Prague.
"But this will be offset by other factors such as decreased government spending and a slowdown in the economy," he added.
Other measures taken by the cabinet include 25.5 billion in budget cuts, setting up an independent capital market oversight body, promoting exports, and fighting more intensively against economic crime.
The package also calls for speeding up privatisation of state-held companies, relaxation of monetary policy, and separation of banks' investment and commercial arms.
-- Prague Newsroom, 420-2-2423-0003
