Czech National Bank (CNB) Governor Josef Tosovsky said media reaction to the failure of Kreditni Banka a.s. last month temporarily destabilised the banking sector, but it is basically sound.
After closed-door testimony to a parliamentary banking commission, Tosovsky told reporters the system -- especially the four largest banks where most activity is centred -- is on a firm footing after a period of consolidation.
"It sounds parodoxical at the present time when its credibility is declining, but the banking sector is in very good health," Tosovsky said.
"The four biggest banks have a market value of about 110 billion crowns, while in 1990 they had a negative value... these banks represent more than 70 percent of the sector."
The governor said the public uproar after the collapse of the medium-sized Plzen-based Kreditni Banka last month led to a decline in confidence in Czech banks, but he blamed the media and politicians for this.
He said the collapse caused a liquidity crunch in the system, but he declined to say which banks, if any, were threatened by the reaction.
"We rather consider it as a liquidity problem than anything else, but I obviously cannot give information about any concrete banks," he said.
Kreditni was the 11th bank to need help from the central bank, which tightened its oversight of operations in a move to consolidate the country's banking sector.
But the case of Kreditni, whose estimated losses totalled nearly 12 billion crowns, was followed by reports in local media that larger banks might be in trouble.
One report in the weekly Respekt claimed Agrobanka a.s., the largest fully private bank, had been ignored by the interbank lending market and was suffering liquidity problems.
The bank has yet to comment publicly on the report.
Then the chairman of parliament Milos Zeman, who leads the opposition Social Democrats, claimed in a television discussion programme that the largest savings bank Ceska Sporitelna a.s. had unspecified problems.
The bank strongly denied this, and said Zeman's remarks led to unusually high withdrawals in the following days.
Tosovsky said the CNB was prepared "to function as the last resort creditor, in certain moments -- above all if there is a liquidity problem."
Tosovsky, who sits on a select government committee investigating Kreditni's failure, said he would support a separate parliamentary commission probing the subject as well.
He said that after a three-year moratorium on granting new banking licences ended earlier this year with the CNB's awarding of two licences to a German and a British bank, the central bank might consider other candidates.
"We do not intend to seal off the market hermetically, so we are looking for a policy of something in between... and give a chance to quality institutions," Tosovsky said.
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
