Pope John Paul arrived in Prague on Friday, saying he hoped his visit to the Czech Republic would bring a new step forward in the spiritual growth of all Czechs.
The 76-year old Pontiff, on his third visit to Prague since the fall of communism in 1989, was greeted at the airport by President Vaclav Havel and other Czech political and religious leaders.
Some 200 schoolchildren waved yellow and white Vatican flags as the Pope slowly descended the aircraft steps and shook Havel's hand before touching a bowl of Czech earth.
Pope John Paul said in a speech he hoped his visit would help bring about "a fresh step forward in the ever-increasing spiritual and ethical growth" of all Czechs.
He paid tribute to Havel, a former dissident playwright who spent several years in jail under communism, as being "among those who brought about the rebirth of this country".
The Pope is in the Czech Republic chiefly to mark the 1,000th anniversary of the death of St Adalbert, the first Czech bishop who also took the gospel to Poland.
Adalbert, or Vojtech in Czech, is seen by Catholics as a figure of spiritual significance for Europeans of all denominations.
"I am certain that the heritage of Christian values of which St Adalbert was a special witness in times marked by ignorance and cruelty will not leave indifferent those who, although far from belief, have at heart the civil, cultural and spiritual roots which have so profoundly marked the history of your homeland," the Pope said.
He also paid tribute to late Czech Cardinal Frantisek Tomasek, who for 40 years championed religious freedom in communist Czechoslovakia and died in 1992.
"He will certainly be rejoicing in heaven to see me return among his people...History is truly guided by the almighty hand of God," he said.
Havel said in his speech that Adalbert cherished a dream of European spiritual unity and saw his Czech homeland as part of the Christian community of the continent.
"This community was to be based on a spiritual and moral renewal and on readiness to embrace common values -- which is needed today just as it was then," Havel said.
The president said the martyred saint had left a legacy of peace, integration and unity which was shared by the many European nations commemorating his millennium.
The Pope's last visit to the Czech Republic, in May 1995, proved controversial when he canonised Jan Sarkander, tortured to death by Protestants in 1620. Some Protestants say Sarkander was a traitor who encouraged a Catholic invasion.
But Havel said Adalbert's tradition did not divide Czechs among themselves or with others.
"It unites our people across denominations and serves as a bridge linking us with our Central European neighbours as well as with other nations," he said.
The Pope, whose health has been fragile in recent years, walked slowly but unassisted and stood to deliver his speech.
He is to mark Adalbert's death with a mass for young people in the town of Hradec Kralove, some 100 km (60 miles) from Prague, on Saturday and hold another open air mass and an ecumenical service in the capital on Sunday.
