Czech power utility CEZ a.s. on Wednesday reported lower first half profits as the effects of a prolonged battle over price agreements with regional distributors took a bite out of its bottom line.
Despite an unusually long winter that boosted first half revenues, company officials told a news conference that net profit, according to international accounting standards, eased to 5.95 billion crowns from 6.26 billion in the previous year.
They added the firm's net profit calculated according to Czech accounting standards fell year-on-year to 5.1 billion in the first half from 5.57 billion crowns.
CEZ, the country's largest firm in terms of revenues, and six out of the country's eight regional power distributors have been at odds for months over the terms of long-term supply agreements, and have been fighting over prices since last year.
CEZ's Petr Voboril said that in the first quarter, CEZ charged 1,020 crowns and last year's average price of 1,033 crowns per megawatthour as deposit payments in the second quarter while the agreements are sorted out, but even that wasn't enough to keep profits from slipping.
"Most of the distributors do not even pay the full provisional price. At the end of the first half they owed us almost two billion crowns," said Voboril, director of CEZ's planning and financial analysis department.
He told reporters that the drop would have been sharper if it was not partially covered by higher-than-planned energy sales due to the long winter.
CEZ operating revenues, according to international standards, rose to 28.51 billion crowns from 26.09 billion as the company raised its market share to 79.8 percent from 76.3 percent.
The firm still plans to post flat profit for the entire year, and to pay its first-ever dividend of 3.3 percent of the 1,000 crown nominal value of its shares, Voboril said.
CEZ posted an international standard 9.3 billion crown 1995 net profit, and an 8.1 billion crown Czech accounting net profit.
Until this year, CEZ has re-invested all earnings into its extensive desulphurisation programme and the construction of a nuclear power plant at Temelin.
CEZ shares dipped two crowns on the Prague Stock Exchange on Wednesday to 1,043 crowns, with most analysts saying the market had already discounted the lower profit figure.
But warned Jan Sykora, a broker with Prague's Wood and Company: "There are still many unclear things. CEZ, despite the increase of market share, will rather lose its positions."
-- Prague Newsroom, 42-2-2423-0003
