Satellite television company DirecTV will on Monday slash the price of its entry-level receiver dish to $199 to grab customers before digital cable TV competitors get going, sources close to the company said.
"The new entry level price will be about $199," a source said, declining to be identified. DirecTV declined to comment.
DirecTV, part of Hughes Electronics Corp, is responding to recent similar price cuts by rival Echostar Communications Corp. DirecTV's cheapest dish currently costs $499, although models costing up to $900 are available.  
The price cuts are linked to taking a package of basic programming service which costs around $360 a year.
AT&amp;T Corp, which has a 2.5 percent stake in DirecTV and markets the service directly, will not be changing the price of its own package which already offers the dish for $199 to consumers who are in its True Rewards program.
Consumers in that AT&amp;T program have to use loyalty points earned towards the cost of the service.
The dishes are made by Thomson Consumer Electronic Corp's RCA. Thomson is owned by France's Thomson Corp.  
However, another source said AT&amp;T would begin to apply discounts to the cost of programming, reducing it to $155 a year from the current $360 for True Rewards members.
AT&amp;T declined to comment.
DirecTV is the largest U.S. direct satellite service, with 1.7 million subscribers, and growing at 20-30 percent a year.
PrimeStar is the second largest with 1.35 million. It is owned by a group led by cable TV firm Tele-Communications Inc . EchoStar is third with 105,000.
The turf war is already on between telephone companies, cable TV firms and satellite operators for a digital entertainment market worth tens of billions of dollars.
Phone firms are planning to offer wireless cable that beams programs by line of sight, cable TV companies are planning upgraded cable services and internet access over high speed networks, but satellite companies already have a lead.
"They are two or years out in front while the cable TV firms and telcos are just getting started," said Jimmy Schaeffler, an analyst at the Carmel Group.
One advantage of satellite services -- not lost on AT&amp;T, which has an option to take a stake of up to 30 percent in DirecTV -- is that consumers who buy a dish are not likely to write off the cost by switching to another provider.
AT&amp;T, which is suffering from heavy competition in long distance telephone services, is hoping to cut the loss of customers by tying them in to a satellite TV service.
"The bottom line is that this is all about market share," said Schaeffler.  -- New York Newsroom 212 859 1712
