Third quarter results at both MCI Communications Corp and Sprint Corp will be restrained by the cost of new ventures, and in Sprint's case the issue of new shares will lower per share earnings.
But analysts say both have so far escaped the problems which have hit AT&amp;T Corp in the consumer long distance market, and which led to AT&amp;T's profit warning in September.
"MCI will have increased earnings, but will continue the second quarter trend of slower long distance volume growth," Massick said Bette Massick of brokerage Bear Stearns.  
Sprint's earnings per share are expected to be lower than a year ago because of investment in the international Global One venture and in Personal Communications Services.
Sprint's shares in issue will rise to about 435 million, from 351 million a year ago, because of stock issued to partners Deutsche Telekom  DTK.CN and French Telecom.
MCI's heavy investment in media, Internet and satellite services with News Corp Ltd is not expected to break even for several years.
"The dilutive effects of the MCI ventures will increase year over year," Massick said.  
AT&amp;T said on September 24 that earnings per share could be as much as 10 percent below analysts' forecasts of $0.92 per share for the third quarter.  If this fear were realized, it would report earnings of $0.83, 13.5 percent below the $0.96 of a year earlier.
Analysts say AT&amp;T's problems were an expensive and flawed consumer market strategy of trying to win customers by offering them $100 checks and the competitive effect of small, fast-growing resellers and "dial around" services.  
Resellers include companies like Excel Communications Inc, which have produced 50 percent-plus annual revenue growth by using independent sales representatives to sell to friends, family and associates.
Dial around is so named because customers use a 1-800 number to access a rival service advertising cut price rates for long distance or international calling, without switching their long distance provider.
The long distance giants do not lose the customer, but notice a fall in average billable revenue.  
MCI expects higher customer turnover in consumer markets because of increased competition. But neither it nor Sprint depends as heavily on the consumer market as AT&amp;T does.
Merrill Lynch analyst Dan Reingold said in a research report that demand demand for Sprint's services is robust.
"Our forecast minute (of use) growth rate of 9.1 percent should be almost double the industry average...indicating that Sprint continues to take market share," Reingold said.
By contrast he expected AT&amp;T minutes of use to grow by 6.2 percent from a year ago, and revenue on this to rise just 1.5 percent.
This growth gap of 4.7 percentage points would exceed the 3.4 percent of the second quarter, he said.
Analysts say Sprint and MCI are not immune to the threat from dial around and resellers, but in any case the threat will be contained in the next two or three years.
"I think the idea of packages or bundles of services will be very much a threat to the small dial around competition because they won't be able to compete up and down the product chain," said Guy Woodlief of brokers Dean Witter Reynolds.  
AT&amp;T's adoption of a flat rate 15 cent long distance charge should help it regain market share, especially against Sprint, which charges a flat 25 cents during the day.
Such is the danger is adopting a clear pricing policy -- when more than one major competitor does it comparisons become easy and can lead to a downward spiral in calling charges.
"Given AT&amp;T's brand position in the market place, it is going to remain a formidable competitor," said Woodlief. Company   (all in dollars)    Q3 est   yr ago  results date
Sprint Corp................0.73.......0.76..Oct 16
AT&amp;T Corp .................0.83.......0.90..Oct 17
MCI Communications Corp... 0.44.......0.40..Oct 22
Estimates from First Call. Reporting dates from analysts
