AT&amp;T Corp. Chairman Robert Allen is likely step down early to help attract a talented enough successor to take the helm of the nation's largest long-distance company, sources close to AT&amp;T said Friday.
They said the person chosen to succeed Alex Mandl, who resigned as AT&amp;T president and chief operating officer in August to head a small wireless communications company, would expect to be able to succeed Allen, 61, well before the four years still to run on his contract.
"I think it is fair to assume that," said one source, who declined to be identified.
AT&amp;T would not comment on the search for Mandl's successor and whether the candidate would succeed Allen, who is also chief executive officer.
"The search by the board is a private matter and we won't comment beyond that," said AT&amp;T spokesman Jim Byrnes.
Analysts said one possibility was that Allen would split off the role of chief executive to the new president in a year or so but retain his chairmanship until retirement.
"I expect the (AT&amp;T) system would allow and wish Allen to stay on in a senior official position for some time," said Mark Bruneau at COBA MID, a consulting firm.
An ambitious candidate would want to make an early impact on the strategic direction of AT&amp;T, one source said, noting that the fast-changing telecommunications market may be barely recognisable in four years.
The sources declined to comment on possible candidates, but some names already mentioned in the news media seem to have ruled themselves out.
"There is probably more speculation out there than truth in the media at this juncture" on the candidates, one source said.
Two candidates mentioned by the New York Times on Friday ruled themselves out. William Esrey, chairman of long-distance company Sprint Corp., said through a spokesman he was unaware of being a candidate for the AT&amp;T job.
"His contract with Sprint precludes working with competitors for several years after he leaves the company," the spokesman said.
Similarly, Hughes Electronics Corp. said its president, Michael Armstrong, was unaware of being an AT&amp;T candidate.
The Wall Street Journal reported that Eastman Kodak Co. Chairman George Fisher and former AT&amp;T director James Barksdale, now chairman of Netscape Communications Corp., also ruled themselves out.
The AT&amp;T board meets Wednesday, a day before the company reports third-quarter earnings, and may discuss the issue then.
Allen, a 40-year AT&amp;T career veteran, would be reluctant to depart early but said in a recent press interview that he would consider doing so if a perfect candidate came along.
Expectations of an early departure by Allen were fanned by AT&amp;T's warning in September when it said earnings per share for the third quarter may be 10 percent below analysts' expectations.
The warning crowned a rough year for AT&amp;T, which incurred the wrath of politicians, the media and the public for announcing 40,000 job cuts in January. Meanwhile, the rise in the stock price that job cuts often produce has not materialised, so Wall Street and investors are not happy either.
AT&amp;T's split into three parts is proceeding as planned, leaving the company to concentrate on its core long-distance telecommunications business, where competition is heating up.
While the Dow Jones industrial average is up nearly 17 percent so far this year, AT&amp;T shares -- adjusted for the company's breakup -- are off 16 percent.
AT&amp;T has hired executive search groups Korn Ferry and Spencer Stuart to seek an outside candidate. Officials at both firms declined to comment.
