AT&amp;T Corp chairman and chief executive Robert Allen will step down early as the price of attracting a talented enough successor to take over, sources close to the company said on Friday.
The sources said that whoever is chosen to succeed Alex Mandl, who quit in August as president and chief operating officer, would expect to be able to succeed Allen, 61, well before the four years still to run on his contract.
"I think it is fair to assume that," said one source, declining to be identified.  
AT&amp;T would not comment on the search for Mandl's successor and whether the candidate would succeed Allen.
"The search by the board is a private matter and we won't comment beyond that," said AT&amp;T spokesman Jim Byrnes.
Analysts say one possibility is that Allen would split out the role of chief executive to the new candidate in a year or so but retain his chairmanship until retirement.
"I expect the (AT&amp;T) system would allow and wish Allen to stay on in a senior official position for some time," said Mark Bruneau of consultant COBA MID.  
An ambitious candidate would wantct on the strategic direction of AT&amp;T, one source said, noting he fast-changing telecommunications market may be barely recognizable in ars.
The sources declined to comment on who the candidates might be, but many aired in the media already seem to have ruled themselves out.
"There is probably more speculation out there than truth in the media at this juncture (on who the candidates are)," said one of the sources.  
The AT&amp;T board meets next Wednesday, a day before its third quarter results, and may discuss the issue then.
Allen, a 40-year AT&amp;T career veteran, would be reluctant to depart early, but in a recent press interview said he would consider it if a perfect candidate came along.
AT&amp;T has hired executive search groups Korn Ferry and Spencer Stuart to look for an outside candidate, but officials at the firms declined to comment on the process.  
Two candidates mentioned by the New York Times on Friday virtually ruled themselves out. William Esry, chairman of long distance telephone company Sprint Corp, said through a spokesman he was unaware of being on any AT&amp;T candidate list.
"His contract with Sprint precludes working with competitors for several years after he leaves the company," the Sprint spokesman added.
Similarly, Hughes Electronics Corp said president Michael Armstrong was unaware of being an AT&amp;T candidate.  
The Wall Street Journal reported that Eastman Kodak Co chairman George Fisher and former AT&amp;T director James Barksdale, who is chairman of Netscape Communications Corp, also ruled themselves out of the speculation.
Expectations of an earlier end to Allen's career have been fanned by AT&amp;T's profit warning in September, in which it said earnings per share for the third quarter may be 10 percent below analysts' expectations.
The warning crowned a bad year for the largest U.S. telecommunications firm.  
AT&amp;T incurred the wrath of politicians and the media for announcing 40,000 job cuts in January, but an improved stock performance it was meant to produce has not appeared, so Wall Street and investors are not happy either.
While the company's split into three parts is going ahead as planned, the remainder of AT&amp;T is now more firmly wedded to the long distance telecommunications services sector, in which competition is heating up.
While the Dow Jones Industrial Average is up 16 percent in 1996, AT&amp;T -- adjusted for its split -- is down 16 percent. -- New York Newsroom 212 859 1712
