Sprint Corp said on Tuesday  it put its local telephone ventures with cable television companies on a back burner because there are more immediate opportunities in reselling existing local telephone service.
"For a lot of reasons the wireline ventures with the cable TV companies moved ... to a back burner," Arthur Krause, Sprint chief financial officer told Reuters.
Sprint's cable partners are Tele-Communications Inc, Comcast Corp and Cox Communications Inc, which together reach 30 million households.  
They had planned to be an early part of Sprint's plan to offer bundled local, long distance and wireless telephone with cable TV on a single bill across the United States.
Krause said faster-than-expected legislative action from the Federal Communications Commission had opened up chances of earlier interconnection deals with incumbent local telephone companies than had been expected two years or so ago.
Some analysts believe there are technical and strategic difficulties too, which have already led to local services being arranged as several separate ventures rather than one common branded service as originally planned.  
Krause predicted Sprint's first such resale deal would precede any offerings of local service in partnership with the cable TV companies, but gave no exact timings.
He noted that resale was always a major part of the plan, because Sprint can only reach 11 million of the 100 million U.S. homes through its own local telephone service unit, and its cable partners reach only another 30 million.
Eventually local service would be provided broadly on Sprint-owned facilities, he said.  
Sprint reported third quarter earnings on Tuesday and pleased analysts with its operating performance, but the stock remains weighed by worries over its ambitious plans, like Sprint PCS, a multi-billion dollar wireless venture.
Krause said the market should see Sprint as two companies.
"We have been encouraging people to look separately at the core operation and at the ventures," he said.
Sprint's core telephone operations should be analyzed based on their earnings, while the new cash-hungry ventures  should be approached on a discounted cash flow basis, he said.  
"(Otherwise)...the value of the new ventures ends up as less than zero," he said.
Krause declined comment on estimates of dilution caused by Sprint PCS ahead of the finalization of the venture's 1997 business plan, which he expected within 30 days.  Analysts expect dilution of $450 miilion to $650 million in 1997.
Krause said he was encouraged that churn, or customer turnover, was declining in its long distance operations, particularly when others were being hit hard.
"(Nevertheless) churn rates still exceed what anyone would hope they would be," he said.
AT&amp;T Corp said in September that high churn in this competitive marketplace was one of the reasons that it predicted an earnings shortfall for the third quarter.
Krause said Sprint's marketing encouraged customers to remain with the company.
"Sprint Sense has a cashback plan that basically rewards people who stay a year or longer," he said, of a consumer market plan.  For small business customers he said that the "Fridays Free" campaign had been equally successful. -- New York Newsroom 212 859 1712
