Sprint Corp showed a dynamic performance in all businesses in the third quarter of 1996, and better than MCI Communications Corp or AT&amp;T Corp will manage in long-distance telephone, analysts said.
But uncertainty surrounding the success of expensive new ventures, and continuing dilution of earnings from funding them, are a big and enduring question mark for investors.
"There is a two-sided story here: The businesses are growing very well, but there is all this dilution from new ventures," said analyst Richard Klugman of PaineWebber.  
Sprint third-quarter earnings per share were broadly in line with analysts' estimates at $0.72, down from $0.76 a year ago, weighed down by the cost of new ventures, a 24 percent increase in shares in issue and a two point tax rate rise.
But top line growth was outstanding, analysts said. Call volume carried soared by 21 percent from a year ago, while revenues increased 14.1 percent over the same period.
"Clearly this is going to be the strongest growth of the big three (AT&amp;T, MCI, Sprint) in long-distance volume and revenues," said Better Massick of brokers Bear Stearns.  
However, the shares managed only a restrained rise of 1/2 to 40-3/8 by 1300 EDT/1700 GMT Tuesday.
Two complex multi-billion dollar ventures, Sprint PCS and Global One, caused respectively four and six cents per share of earnings dilution in the third quarter, and more is seen.
Sprint PCS is a wireless Personal Communications Services (PCS) national network being built for tiny new mobile phones that have better battery life and building penetration than existing cellular services, and extra features like paging.  
Sprint owns 40 percent of Sprint PCS, Tele-Communications Inc owns 30 percent, and Comcast Corp and Cox Communications Inc each own 15 percent.
"The question mark over the company is PCS and its ability to execute the strategy," said Simon Flannery of J.P. Morgan.
PCS services are already operating in one metropolitan area, Washington-Baltimore, and Sprint expects to launch two more in November and to be in 15 to 20 by the year end.  
But as each new market opens, the amortization of the license cost -- Sprint paid a total of $2.1 billion for licenses -- plus marketing, network costs and subsidised handset costs also kick in.
Analysts estimate that Sprint could suffer $450 million to $650 million dilution from those costs in 1997. The more successful it is with PCS, the higher these costs will be.
"PCS will not breakeven for years," Klugman said. "But Global One should breakeven sometime in the second half of 1997," he added.  
Global One is an international venture designed both to act as a carrier of services for other telecommunications companies, and a one-stop shop for multinational corporations.
It is half owned by Sprint, and a quarter each by France Telecom and soon-to-be privatised Deutsche Telekom.
The European companies also took a 20 percent stake in Sprint for $3.66 billion in January, which accounts for the extra shares in issue.
Sprint said that Global One is on course for annualised revenues of $1 billion a year by the end of 1996, but Flannery said it was harder to figure out the earnings position.
"The visibility of earnings at Global One is not very good yet," Flannery said. -- New York Newsroom 212 859 1712
