Ameritech Corp. and Sprint Corp., the two biggest telecommunications companies in the Midwest, Tuesday reported double-digit profit increases in the third quarter of 1996 and said they expect more to come.
Sprint, a long-distance and local carrier based in Kansas City, Mo., said net income rose 16 percent to $312.4 million from $268.5 million in the 1995 quarter. Revenues grew 10.6 percent to $3.54 billion from $3.21 billion.
Earnings per share fell to 72 cents from 76 cents, mainly because of a 20 percent stake taken in Sprint by France Telecom and Germany's Deutsche Telekom which lifted the number of shares outstanding by 24 percent.
Ameritech, based in Chicago, said net income for the three months ended Sept. 30 edged up to $519 million, or 94 cents a share, from $512 million, or 92 cents a share.
Both companies' earnings were broadly in line with analysts' consensus forecasts carried on First Call, which tracks estimates.
"We currently expect to once again report double-digit volume and revenue growth ... in the fourth quarter," Sprint Chief Financial Officer Arthur Krause said.
Ameritech, whose core business is local phone service in the Midwest, said revenues rose 10 percent to $3.7 billion from $3.4 billion.
"Each of our three strategies -- growing our core business, investing in high-growth initiatives and geographic expansion -- plays an integral role in our ability to create sustainable double-digit growth," said Ameritech Chief Executive Richard Notebaert.
Analysts were impressed by Sprint's strong showing in long-distance service, an area where industry giant AT&amp;T Corp. recently slipped up and warned of lower profits.
"Clearly this is going to be the strongest growth of the big three (AT&amp;T, MCI Communications Corp. and Sprint) in long-distance volume and revenues," said analyst Bette Massick of brokers Bear Stearns.
However, some were concerned that the cost of investments such as Sprint PCS, a wireless venture, were eating up profit growth.
"There is a two sided story here: the businesses are growing very well, but there is all this dilution from new ventures," said analyst Richard Klugman at Painewebber.
Sprint PCS is a wireless Personal Communications Services (PCS) national network being built for tiny new mobile phones designed to have better battery life and building penetration than existing cellular services, and extra features including paging.
Sprint owns 40 percent of Sprint PCS, Tele-Communications Inc. owns 30 percent, and Comcast Corp. and Cox Communications Inc. each own 15 percent.
PCS services are already operating in one metropolitan area, Washington-Baltimore, and Sprint expects to launch two more in November and to be in 15 to 20 by the year end.
The other venture is Global One, an international firm designed as a carrier of services for other telecommunications companies and as one-stop shop for multinational corporations.
It is half owned by Sprint, and a quarter each by France Telecom and soon-to-be privatised Deutsche Telekom.
For the year to date, Sprint's net income grew 27 percent to $938.5 million, or $2.22 a share, from $739 million, or $2.10 a share. Sales expanded to $10.42 billion from $9.42 billion.
Ameritech said nine-month net income slipped 1.9 percent to $1.56 billion, or $2.83 a share, from $1.60 billion, $2.88 a share, despite a 12 percent growth in revenues to $11.0 billion from $9.9 billion.
The company said international investments drove more than one-third of its earnings growth in the quarter, led by investments in Belgacom of Belgium, Matav of Hungary and Telecom New Zealand.
In the third quarter telephone lines increased by 3.7 percent to 19.6 million, while cellular customers increased by 37 percent to 2.3 million.
Ameritech's shares fell 87.5 cents to $54.375 while Sprint added 37.5 cents to $40.25, both on the New York Stock Exchange.
