GTE Corp said on Wednesday that it expects to continue increasing earnings per share by at least 10 percent for the forseeable future, on revenues seen rising six to eight percent per year.
"At this point there is nothing on the horizon to suggest we should be backing off from that (earlier forecast)," chief financial officer Michael Kelly told Reuters.
GTE earlier reported third quarter earnings per share of $0.78, 10 percent ahead of a year ago and exactly in line with analysts' consensus estimates carried on First Call.  
However, analysts were pleased by very strong growth in the business fundamentals, which included an industry-leading 7.4 percent rise in access lines and a 20 percent growth in cellular users. The stock was 2-3/4 firmer at 41-3/8 in early afternoon.
Kelly was delighted with GTE's line growth.  "We just don't see it stopping; its unbelievably strong," he said.
GTE's local calling areas are mostly suburban, where families who telecommute are most likely to live, and where families have adolescent children who need their own lines -- as well as a computer or two in the home needing a line.  
On top of this GTE areas are concentrated in Sunbelt areas like Florida, where economic growth has been very strong, or California, where it is rebounding from recent weakness.
"GTE is in a position to grow faster that the regional Bells because of their concentration in suburban markets," said Bette Massick of Bear Stearns, noting that an end to sales of local operations has unmasked this growth.
Kelly said that GTE had worked hard to cut its customer turnover -- or churn -- in cellular services, which increases marketing costs substantially.  Targeting high value customers had paid dividends, without hitting overall growth.  
As a result, average monthly bills are $61 per month, $3 above the industry average, and churn has fallen 18 percent from a year ago.  Most customers are now on term contracts.
"Our (consumer) bad debt is coming down also," Kelly said.
GTE offers long distance across 31 states, including all the areas where it already offers local service -- a privilege which regional Bells will only be allowed when they have proven their own local calling markets are competitive.
It has already garnered 500,000 customers since it began in March and expects to reach one million soon after the end of 1996 at the expense of the industry's big three players.  
"...Most of our business is coming from the three traditional dominant players," Kelly said.
AT&amp;T Corp, MCI Communications Corp and Sprint Corp are the industry's big three.
Kelly said that the long distance customers gained seemed above average in terms of call duration and spending.
GTE in late August began providing customers in Tampa with a single bill for all their GTE cellular, local, long distance and Internet services and will roll this out to new regions as soon as possible.
Single billing has long been desired by the industry as a tool to retain customers, who like the convenience of writing a single monthly check, but few companies have the software in place to support it. -- New York Newsroom 212 859 1712
