GTE Corp. Wednesday said earnings rose 9 percent in the third quarter, boosted by strong demand for new phone lines from people setting up businesses or hooking up computers at home.
The results were in line with expectations, but GTE's stock jumped as investors cheered the report from the nation's largest local telephone company, as well a court ruling late on Tuesday that suspended key parts of federal rules designed to foster competition in local phone markets.
Other local phone company stocks also rose after the ruling by a three-judge appeals court panel in St. Louis. The judges said they had "serious doubts" about the Federal Communication Commission's authority to impose its pricing policies.
The FCC rules, among other things, would require the Baby Bells and other local carriers to lease their phone lines to new competitors at steep discounts of up to 25 percent.
Analysts said state regulators were likely to call for lower discounts. The appellate panel put the new rules on hold while it considers a court challenge to the FCC's plan.
The challenge to the FCC rules had been spearheaded by GTE, which was joined by some of the Baby Bells, other local carriers and state regulators.
"(The legal challenge) improves the probability for getting higher prices to resell local networks than under the FCC guidance," said Bette Massick at brokers Bear Stearns.
GTE jumped $3.625 to $42.25 in consolidated afternoon trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
Other Bell stocks that rose included BellSouth, up $2.50 to $38.875, Bell Atlantic, ahead $2.125 to $60.875, Nynex, which gained $1.625 to $44.50, Ameritech, up $1.75 to $56.125 and Pacific Telesis, which added $1.375 to $34.625, all on the NYSE.
In its report, Stamford, Conn.-based GTE said net income rose to $756 million, or 78 cents a share, in the quarter ended Sept. 30, from $695 million, or 72 cents a share, in the 1995 period.
The results matched analysts' forecasts of 78 cents a share, according to First Call, which tracks estimates. The 1995 figures included a gain of $11 million, or 1 cent a share, from the sale of secondary telephone properties.
Sales grew 7 percent to $5.34 billion from $5.0 billion.
In addition to strong line demand, GTE cited growth in its cellular and long-distance services.
"The continued pace of our revenue growth, driven by record line growth as well as strong demand for new and enhanced services, is particularly encouraging," Chairman Charles Lee said in a statement.
The number of domestic access lines grew 7 percent in the quarter, with more than half the growth in the residential side of the business from additional lines to the home, GTE said.
GTE said its number of cellular customers grew almost 5 percent in the quarter, while cellular revenue surged 15 percent.
It also said it doubled its number of long-distance customers to more than 500,000 from the end of the second quarter.
