With most of their third quarter results in, regional Bells are fulfilling their promise to build out more telephone lines, to put more new services on each line and to make more money doing it.
Share analysts say the Bells and GTE Corp show no signs of slackening demand and are preparing themselves well for the challenge of full competition in their local markets.
"I would characterise the quarter as a cause for celebration in just about every instance," said Bill Vogel of Dillon Read, a long-time bull on regional Bell stocks.
Thursday saw results of Bell Atlantic Corp BellSouth Corp Pacific Telesis Group and SBC Communications Inc, following results on Tuesday from Ameritech Corp and on Wednesday from GTE Corp. NYNEX Corp and U S West Inc report next week.
Earnings per share growth averaged 8.25 percent, ranging from 3.0 percent at Ameritech to BellSouth's 12.5 percent. All were within a cent of analyst's First Call estimates.
"Generally the bottom line results have come in as expected," said Goldman Sachs analyst Julie Kennedy.
Annual access line growth has averaged 4.9 percent, well above levels seen in the 1980s and early 1990s, boosted by demand for Internet access, home computers, facsimile machines and extra business lines.
"The temporary scare the market had with Ameritech's line growth seems a one-off," said Kennedy.
Ameritech saw a dip in line growth to 3.7 percent from 4.4 percent from a year ago, but it followed a drop in advertising and seemed to reflect changed priorities, analysts said.
Pacific Telesis, which is being taken over by SBC, reported strong results which reflected a bounce-back in the California economy. The toll market, a problem area for the company in previous quarters, came good with stable market share and a 6.1 percent increase in revenues year-on-year.
Vogel said the market was absorbing competitive access providers (CAPS) like MFS Communications Co Inc and Teleport Communications LP, without hitting the Bells' growth.
"Results show that the main business lines of the Bells are untouched in both price and volume by the CAPS," he said.
Nevertheless, Bell shares remained muted on Thursday, with none of those reporting results moving more than 1.5 percent.
The Bells have underperformed the broad market this year, with analysts saying investors remain concerned about regulation and competition stemming from the 1996 Telecom Act.
This week's good news, in the shape of a legal challenge to Federal Communications Commission (FCC) jurisdiction over the pricing process for reselling local circuits to competitors, is still lost in the broader Bell worries.
The FCC has to review the prices the Bells can charge for access to their local customers in 1997.
"The cloud over these stocks, what has to be decided by the FCC on access charges, has still not lifted," Kennedy said. -- New York Newsroom 212 859 1712
