Like an ageing prizefighter, AT&amp;T Corp is destined to slug it out with vigorous rivals both big and small in the $75 billion long distance telephone arena, with no lift in earnings performance in sight.
Though AT&amp;T has just started to improve its marketing punch, share analysts say by the time it shows up in earnings it will be facing fresh opponents -- muscular regional Bells.
"It is hard to find a positive medium-term outlook for AT&amp;T," said Bette Massick of brokers Bear Stearns, adding that more attractive stocks could be found elsewhere.  
Thursday's third quarter earnings were in line with analysts' estimates, revised after September's profits warning.  But few analysts give hope for a quick profit rebound now that the company's fortunes are so clearly tied to its long distance marketplace.
AT&amp;T earlier reported a 12 percent earnings per share decline to $0.84 from $0.96 a year ago -- with increased competition and higher marketing expenses hitting long distance -- while financial services sank into losses.  
"I don't see much earnings improvement next quarter or in the first two 1997 quarters," said Simon Flannery of brokers J.P. Morgan.  The shares were 1/2 lower at $39-3/8.
AT&amp;T said it has been encouraged by early responses to its new $0.15 a minute flat price for long distance, and analysts say this should stem the weakness for now.
AT&amp;T has a higher proportion of revenues from the consumer long distance market place than its two archrivals MCI Communications Corp and Sprint Corp.  
The spinoff of Lucent Technologies Inc in September and of NCR Corp at the end of 1996, plus numerous unit sales, can only tighten the dependence.
Companies like GTE Corp -- which took half a million long distance customers in its first six months -- and Southern New England Telecommunications Corp are entering the market in a big way, mostly in the consumer area.
They join hundreds of tiny aggressive companies like Excel Communications Inc, which lease the circuits of the big players and then compete with them at low prices.  
By the second half of 1997, dependent on the state of a legal tussle over U.S. Federal Communications Commission resale rules, regional Bells will be starting to enter the long distance market themselves.
By this time AT&amp;T, like other long distance players, is hoping to offer local calling using the circuits of the regional Bells. But the legal challenge led by GTE may succeed in shutting the FCC out of the resale pricing process.
"If so, it will cost AT&amp;T more to get into the local market," Massick said.  
Major players by then will be starting to offer packages including wireless, local and long distance and in some cases satellite or cable television too, all on one bill.
This should shut out some of the small resellers and throw the fight onto brand names, where AT&amp;T should be strong -- but the outcome is far from clear, analysts say.
In the meantime, they are hoping for strong action at the loss-making Universal Card credit card unit.
"The credit card business was very disappointing; that's something to watch going forward," Flannery said.
Analysts were concerned by a worsened risk profile and bad debt record at the unit.  If this can happen during buoyant economic times, a recession would be very painful, they say. -- Nick Louth, New York Newsroom 212 859 1712
