Whoever takes over from Robert Allen as chairman and chief executive of AT&amp;T Corp has a major task on hand to wake the sleeping giant, reverse its loss of market share and move strongly into new market opportunities.
"You need to do something to increase the growth rate at the margin, to throw out this rearguard mentality," said analyst Bill Deatherage of brokers Bear Stearns.
AT&amp;T's core long distance market share has fallen to 55 percent from 60 percent in two years, while it has failed to capitalize profitably on the growth of new areas.  
"They need to get away from the price game; they cannot win that way," said Chris Landis, a consultant at TeleChoice Inc, and a former AT&amp;T executive.
While AT&amp;T made the right move into wireless with the purchase of McCaw Cellular, the integration of the products on one invoice is very important and has yet to happen.
"You need someone who can sell a bill because that is how you communicate with your customer," said Landis.  
Whoever is recruited to fill the vacant slot of chief operating officer, created when Alex Mandl left in August, will expect to take over as chief executive and chairman from Allen quickly, and will insist on a firm timetable.
"The problem is going to be getting the talent you need while Bob Allen is still around," said Landis.
Sources close to the company say AT&amp;T has narrowed down its search to a shortlist of eager candidates -- none yet identified in the press -- but say an announcement is unlikely until the latter part of the week at the earliest.  
Television channel CNBC said Tuesday that Ameritech Corp's Richard Notebaert is the latest to emerge as a possible successor to Allen.  Ameritech said chief executive Notebaert was abroad and unavailable for immediate comment.
As a regional Bell chief executive he has powerful credentials for the post, but it remains unclear whether AT&amp;T's search is focused within the industry, or would be broadened to a candidate with powerful marketing skills from some other industry.  AT&amp;T, and the two executive search firms involved, Korn Ferry International and Spencer Stuart, have declined comment consistently on the succession issue.  
However, while the guessing game over successors has held sway in the press, it has been a snooze for investors, said analyst Bill Deatherage of brokers Bear Stearns.
"This is discussed much more in the press than by investors," Deatherage said.
He said that even if investors knew the candidate, it would be months at least before he or she would be able to have a discernible effect on the huge inertia in the corporation.
Some analysts have suggested that Allen may stay on as chairman while the new recruit rapidly steps up to become chief executive, but Landis thought Allen's continued presence would overshadow the new executive.
"Insiders would much rather see Bob Allen leave sooner than later and it could be his best act to show his love for the company," he said. -- New York Newsroom 212 859 1610
