WorldCom Inc. said Monday it will acquire MFS Communications Co. Inc. in a stock swap worth about $14 billion, creating a giant international business communications company.
The combined company, to be called MFS WorldCom, will provide "a single source for a full range of local, long distance, Internet and international service over an advanced fiber optic network," Worldcom said.
The merged company will have current annualized revenue of about $5.4 billion, with more than 500,000 business customers throughout North America, Europe and Asia. It will have an end-to-end fiber optic network with 25,000 miles of fiber in service or under construction connecting all major metropolitan areas in the United States.
"We are creating the first company since the breakup of AT&amp;T to bundle together local and long distance services carried over an international end-to-end fiber network owned or controlled by a single company," said Bernard J. Ebbers, president and CEO of WorldCom.
The deregulation of the telecommunications industry early this year promises to bring end-to-end service, but neither AT&amp;T Corp. nor any regional Bell can yet achieve it because of regulatory checklists and negotiating tussles.
"We think this gives us at least a two-year headstart over our competitors," Ebbers said in an interview.
The merger comes only weeks after MFS' $2 billion purchase of UUNET Technologies Inc. was completed on Aug. 12. That merger created a single source for Internet, voice, data and video services over an international fiber optic grid. MFS' stock has risen 41 percent a year since it went public three years ago.
In the latest deal, which was unanimously approved by both companies' boards, each share of MFS common stock will be exchanged for 2.1 shares of WorldCom common stock.
"As of Friday's closing, the merger consideration for MFS stock is approximately $14 billion," the statement said.
MSF's stock leaped $10 to $44.875 on Nasdaq in late trading.
However, worries that the deal was too generous hit Worldcom's stock, which has soared an average of 57 percent a year over the last 10 years. It fell $3.75 to $22.625 on Nasdaq after the company said the merger would dilute earnings for three years.
Although the transaction was valued at $55.39 per WorldCom share based on Friday's closing price, the steep drop in WorldCom's stock brought the value down to $47 per share, traders said.
"Over time, I think the deal will be viewed very positively, but it will take time," one takeover trader said.
Omaha, Neb.-based MFS is a major provider of communications services for business and government. Its local networks in dozens of major U.S. cities enable it to outflank the regional Bells' lock on access to local business customers, giving it a strong bargaining position in the merger.
"He (Ebbers) had the only one sizable company to merge with whose stock we really wanted (to own)," James Crowe, chief executive of MFS, told reporters.
Despite the substantial stock premium for MFS, savings would soon cover the cost of the deal, Ebbers said.
Jackson, Miss.-based WorldCom said it expects significant cost savings from reduced line and access costs. The deal will also eliminate duplication of capital spending programmes and position the combined company to take full advantage of the recent easing of telecommunications laws, it said.
Specifically, MFS no longer has to build a $500 million intercity network, because WorldCom already has one. WorldCom will not have to take a share in a $450 million transatlantic cable for its expanding international business because MFS is already a partner in one.
Ebbers said access charges that Worldcom pays to local telephone companies to reach their local customers would drop because MFS already has local lines to businesses in 45 U.S. cities, rising to 85 cities in two years.
UUNET, the internet service provider that MFS bought earlier this month, will have the biggest savings.
WorldCom said the companies hope to close the latest merger in four to eight months, subject to federal regulatory approval. Shareholders will vote on the deal at special meetings.
Worldcom said in a separate statement that it has adopted a shareholder rights plan to discourage a hostile takeover. It said move was not affected by the deal with MFS.
