John Walter believes that making strategies work within the machinery of AT&amp;T Corp will be the core both of his job as chief operating officer and when he steps up to become chief executive (CEO) in 1998.
"You can have the greatest strategy in the world, but if you dont execute, it doesnt matter," Walter told Reuters.
Walter, chairman and chief executive of commercial printing firm R.R. Donnelley &amp; Sons Co, was on Wednesday appointed by AT&amp;T as president and chief operating officer, and heir apparent to AT&amp;T CEO and chairman Robert Allen.  
Walter will immerse himself in the operations of AT&amp;T during the 14 months when he and Robert Allen work as a team, and emerge capable of holding the reins.
"I'm very comfortable with my ability to move this enterprise forward," he said in a telephone interview.
Walter declined to outline areas where he believed AT&amp;T had failed, but underlined achieving objectives and having an appropriate cost base as his clear focus.
"We have to have a cost platform which allows us to compete effectively or we are disadvantaged even before we come into the ring," he said.  
Analysts have repeatedly criticised AT&amp;T's inability to meet its objectives, which has resulted in an erosion of the value of the brand name and a sliding share price.
AT&amp;T has flung tens of millions in $100 checks at consumer long distance customers only to find them desert again to rivals in the industry. Its share in the $75 billion market has fallen to around 55 percent from 60 two years ago.
"They haven't had the level of execution on the consumer side that we should have seen," said consultant Chris Landis of TeleChoice, who is also an ex-AT&amp;T executive.  
AT&amp;T has made repeated attempts to make money in online services and the Internet, but has sold off almost all its creative content efforts and has retreated to a core offering of Internet access.
For every acquisition that worked well, like the 1994 purchase of McCaw Cellular, there have been others that failed, like the $7.5 billion 1991 takeover of NCR Corp.
Adjusted for the split-off of Lucent Technologies Inc, AT&amp;T shares have fallen 16 percent this year, about the same as the broad market has risen.  
Among Walter's favorite quotes: "When you hire, hire people better than you and then you'll build a company of giants. Hire people worse than you and you'll disappear."
Printing industry analysts say Walter has used technology very effectively to make Donnelley grow, but some say growth came at a price.
"A lot of things have been going wrong," said one analyst, citing the lower earnings outlook and falling stock price.
But analyst Rudolf Hokanson of Deutsche Morgan Grenfell said Walter was an effective manager.
"He tried to make people more accountable, tried to flatten some of the reporting structure," said Hokanson.
-- New York Newsroom 212 859 1712
