With AT&amp;T Corp losing market share and floundering in new markets, Wall Street had been expecting a well-known industry leader to take over from Chairman Robert Allen and turn the company around.
Instead, AT&amp;T has recruited a relative unknown, John Walter, chairman and chief executive of R.R. Donnelley &amp; Sons Co. He may be up to the job, but the market will be kept guessing for 18 months while Allen serves out his time.
"He may be exactly what they need, but we won't know for a while," said consultant Jeffrey Kagan of Kagan Telecom.  
Analysts and consultants say Walter is well respected but has never faced the scale of challenge he will find at AT&amp;T, which bestrides the crossroads of communication, software, computing and the Internet.
"AT&amp;T is the biggest battleship you have ever seen. Donnelley is not a small company, but AT&amp;T is 10 times the revenues and has three times the employees," said David Goodtree, a consultant at Forrester Research.
AT&amp;T appointed Walter as its new president and chief operating officer, effective November 1.  
But he will not take over as chief executive from Allen until January 1998. Four months later he will become chairman at AT&amp;T's annual meeting.
"Allen does have an image problem, though I don't have that opinion of him," said Barry Sine of SBC Warburg, who cut his rating on AT&amp;T stock to hold from buy today. "The long handover period is an issue for the market."
AT&amp;T's share in the $75 billion long distance telephone market has fallen to around 55 percent today from 60 percent two years ago. Marketing stumbles hurt earnings in the recent third quarter, and investors are losing patience, analysts say.  
AT&amp;T stock was down two points at 37-7/8 at noon EDT/1600 GMT in heavy volume. Adjusted for the split-off of Lucent Technologies Inc, AT&amp;T shares have fallen 16 percent this year, about the same as the broad market has risen.
Sine said of Walter, "This is not a candidate to lead the rally."
Analysts say top candidates to succeed Allen, such as George Fisher of Eastman Kodak, may have been put off by the lengthy 18-month transition time while Allen remains in charge.  
"I heard the reason Fisher didn't take the job was the 18-month delay before taking the reins," Kagan said.
However, a source close to AT&amp;T, speaking on condition of anonymity, said no tentative or firm offer was made to any candidate who subsequently withdrew. AT&amp;T declined comment on the matter.
"I was expecting 12 months (handover) at most," said Chris Landis, an analyst at consultancy Telechoice Inc and a former AT&amp;T executive. "I think most insiders were too."  
Walter has qualities and experience that AT&amp;T will be able to make good use of, analysts said. His printing company specialized in high volumes and quick turnarounds.
"That's a good quality to have at AT&amp;T because you are talking about billions of phone calls a month," said Goodtree.
Donnelley is a formidable user of technology and has used telecommunications to transform its business. It is also a significant customer of AT&amp;T.
Cable &amp; Wireless Plc Chief Executive Richard Brown spoke favorably of Walter.  
"I think AT&amp;T is fortunate to get John Walter," Brown told Reuters. "John Walter is a leader...He know the telecoms world but he is not directly involved. He's a quick study."
On the downside, there is the huge leap of scale and the different nature of AT&amp;T's business. Donnelley is a project-based company, while AT&amp;T is a process-based company requiring different management techniques.
While Walter has made great inroads in the business market where Donnelley finds its customers, he has little experience in consumer markets where AT&amp;T is having its biggest trouble fighting off aggressive competitors.
In an interview this summer, Allen told Business Week magazine that he would be prepared to step down early "if we find God, or something short of that.."
John Walter has found some adherents at AT&amp;T, but the stock market is not yet ready for a conversion.
