AT&amp;T Corp said that the decision to wait 14 months before newly appointed President John Walter takes over as chief executive from Robert Allen made sense while he learned about a different business.
"It was something that Bob Allen felt made sense and something that made sense to John (Walter)," Hal Burlingame AT&amp;T senior vice president for human resources, told Reuters. "It had a lot of input from the board (too)," he said.  
AT&amp;T appointed Walter as its new president and chief operating officer from November 1, following AT&amp;T board approval last night. Walter is chairman and chief executive of printing firm R.R. Donnelley &amp; Sons Co.
Walter will not take over as chief executive from Allen until January 1998, 14 months time, and will become chairman in May 1998 at AT&amp;T's annual shareholder meeting.
In the meantime they will work together, while Walter gets to more fully understand AT&amp;T's business, Burlingame said.  
"They will work together very tightly on all the issues confronting the business, but Bob will obviously be chairman and CEO during that process," he said.
Analysts had expected a full handover to whoever was chosen to succeed Allen in six or 12 months, and said the slower timetable was one reason for the stock price fall.
AT&amp;T stock was down 1-7/8 at 38 at 1430 EDT/1830 GMT in heavy volume.  
Burlingame declined comment on what Walter would be paid, except to say that his package would have a very strong alignment with the interests of AT&amp;T shareholders. Details will be available with the next 10K filing.
"Mr Walter had a very fine plan with a lot of futures built into it at R.R. Donnelley. We hav recognised that in the program we put together," Burlingame said.
AT&amp;T separately told a news conference that the main part of the pay would be performance-related, and that the package, while competitive, was by no means a record-breaker.  
Donnelley's last proxy filing showed Walter's compensation for 1995 as $900,000 plus a bonus of $555,000 and other annual compensation of $36,427.
Walter's predecessor as AT&amp;T chief operating officer and president, Alex Mandl, left in August to join a startup firm called Associated Communications for a package that included a mighty $20 million salary.
Burlingame said AT&amp;T started with a list of more than 30 names from executive search firms, and narrowed those down to 17 early in September, when candidates were first approached.  
A lengthy board meeting on September 13 in West Virginia whittled down the number from 17 to six. Extensive discussions took place with Walter in the last week before his appointment was confirmed.
"The (stock) market doesn't know him yet, but this a person who will be regarded very positively as people come to know him," Burlingame said. -- New York Newsroom  212 859 1712
