WorldCom Inc. said Monday it agreed to acquire MFS Communications Co. Inc. in a stock swap worth about $14 billion, creating a giant international business communications company.
The combined company, to be called MFS WorldCom, will provide businesses with local and long-distance telephone, data communications and Internet services all on one network -- something no competitor yet can on a significant scale.
"We are creating the first company since the breakup of AT&amp;T to bundle together local and long-distance services ... controlled by a single company," said Bernard Ebbers, chief executive of WorldCom.
The deregulation of the telecommunications industry early this year promises to bring end-to-end service, but neither AT&amp;T Corp. nor any regional Bell can yet achieve it because of regulatory checklists and other issues.
"We think this gives us at least a two-year headstart over our competitors," Ebbers said in an interview.
For WorldCom, the fourth largest U.S. long-distance company, the deal will allow it to muscle into business markets that the regional Bells and biggest long-distance providers thought they had to themselves.
For MFS it provides the long-distance connection between its metropolitan circuits that it long needed, and a very healthy premium over the prevailing share price.
The merged company will have current sales of about $5.4 billion a year, with more than 500,000 business customers throughout North America, Europe and Asia.
It will have an end-to-end fiber optic network with 25,000 miles of fiber in service or under construction connecting all major metropolitan areas in the United States.
The merger comes only two weeks after MFS's $2 billion purchase of internet provider UUNET Technologies Inc. was completed on Aug. 12. Monday's merger is expected to close within eight months, the companies said.
Under the agreement approved by both companies' boards, each share of MFS common stock will be exchanged for 2.1 shares of WorldCom common stock. Owners of MSF stock will control about 56 percent of the enlarged company.
MSF's stock leaped $9.75 to close at $44.75 on Nasdaq.
But Worldcom stock fell $3.75 to $22.625 on Nasdaq after the company said the merger would dilute earnings for three years.
Although the transaction was valued at $55.39 per WorldCom share based on Friday's closing price, the steep drop in WorldCom's stock brought the value down to $47 a share, traders said.
"Over time, I think the deal will be viewed very positively, but it will take time," one takeover trader said.
Omaha, Neb.-based MFS has local networks in dozens of major U.S. cities, which could help it outflank regional Bells' lock on access to local business customers. This gave it a strong bargaining position in the merger talks.
"He (Ebbers) had the only one sizable company to merge with whose stock we really wanted (to own)," James Crowe, chief executive of MFS, told reporters.
Despite the substantial stock premium for MFS, savings would soon cover the cost of the deal, Ebbers said.
Jackson, Miss.-based WorldCom said it expects significant cost savings from reduced line and access costs. For example, MFS no longer has to build a $500 million intercity network, because WorldCom already has one. WorldCom will not have to take a share in a $450 million trans-Atlantic cable for its expanding international business because MFS is already a partner in one.
Ebbers said access charges that Worldcom pays to local telephone companies to reach their local customers would drop because MFS already has local lines to businesses in 45 U.S. cities, rising to 85 cities in two years.
Worldcom said in a separate statement that it has adopted a shareholder rights plan to discourage a hostile takeover. It said its move was not affected by the deal with MFS.
However WorldCom could nevertheless be a target for a regional Bell, tempted by the company's long-distance network, said mergers and acquisitions advisor Robert McNamara at consultant Broadview Associates.
"You have effectively put WorldCom into play with this (takeover) move," McNamara said.
