The keys to WorldCom Inc's $14 billion takeover of MFS Communications Co Inc are savings on duplicated costs and a chance to be the first with end-to-end service in U.S. businesses telecommunications.
WorldCom chief executive Bernard Ebbers acknowledged that there was a substantial premium in the stock terms offered for MFS but said savings would soon cover the cost of the deal.
"It is not to say that price isn't important, but it really depends on how quickly you pay for it," Ebbers told Reuters in an interview on Monday.  
MFS, with local networks in dozens of major U.S. cities, was in a unique position to outflank the regional Bell's lock on access to local business customers. It was in a position to get the terms it wanted.
"There aren't a lot of MFS's out there," Ebbers said.
"He (Ebbers) had the only one sizeable company to merge with whose stock we really wanted (to own)," James Crowe, chief executive of MFS, told reporters.
WorldCom stock soared a heady 57 percent a year over the last ten years. MFS has grown 41 percent a year in the three years since it was floated.  
Ebbers said savings and new market opportunities would mean the deal would pay for itself within five or six years, though for the first three years, 1997-1999, earnings per share would be diluted, but solidly accretive thereafter.
Worries that the stock transaction was too generous for MFS hit Worldcom stock, which was 3-3/4 or 15 percent lower at 22-5/8 in early afternoon. MFS soared 10 to 44-7/8, with both atop the active shares list on Nasdaq.
Ebbers said communicating the deal's advantages may take time. "If that happens we will have a significantly increased stock price from where we are today," he said.  
UUNET, the internet service provider which MFS completed buying earlier this month, will have the biggest savings.
Now it can provide both local and long distance connections without having to pay fees on outside networks. These fees had previously swallowed up half of its revenues.     Most
importantly, the combined company MFS WorldCom can present a comprehensive business package without having to use the networks or pay the fees of others.
End-to-end service is the promise of the U.S. deregulation which became law early this year, but neither AT&amp;T Corp nor any regional Bell can yet achieve it either because of regulatory checklists or negotiating tussles.
"We think this gives us at least a two-year headstart over our competitors," Ebbers said.
By being first, Ebbers expects to reap wholesale business from the regional Bells and GTE Corp, companies which at a retail level are its competitors.
Ebbers said that any Bell which wanted to offer local telephone service outside its own region could simply resell the MFS WorldCom network, under the Bell's own brand name. -- New York Newsroom  212 859 1712
