Lucent Technologies Inc is beginning to reap the rewards of severing its umbilical to AT&amp;T Corp as regional Bells customers flock back.
Lucent's final fiscal 1996 quarter showed a surge in Bell orders as ageing networks were upgraded for demanding data and multimedia services. Lucent network system sales jumped 42.4 percent year-on-year to $3.2 billion in the quarter.
"It is underpinned by some fundamental demand that could keep it going," Don Peterson, Lucent's chief financial officer, told Reuters in an interview.  
One of the motives for AT&amp;T's divestment of Lucent was a loss of orders. The Bells, seeing AT&amp;T as a big new rival in their local calling areas, shied away from sharing their technological shopping lists with an AT&amp;T unit.
"That was a reason for the down quarter last year," Peterson said. Lucent's changed year end to September 30 from December 31 means this year only had three quarters. The 1996 final quarter corresponds to the third quarter in past years.
Overall revenues climbed 24.7 percent to $5.9 billion in the quarter from a year ago, though comparisons are likely to be less favorable next quarter.  
"The next quarter will be good as well, I am expecting, but it will be comparing itself to a record fourth quarter in 1995," he said. "It would be a mistake to expect 25 percent growth again, unfortunately."
Increased orders have led to the hiring of 5,000 new factory workers even as Lucent implements a plan to cut jobs overall.
Peterson said the company cut 12,600 of the 23,000 posts scheduled to be eliminated from Lucent's 125,000 workforce by 1998. But with the new hires, net job cuts only amount to about 7,000.  
The closing of the Phone Center stores, the pruning of product lines and a drop in rental revenues combined to hold back revenues. Still, a host of new products, including a long-range cordless phone and sophisticated answering machines, are being prepared for 1997.
Next year, "we're going to have 70 percent of a sales in products that aren't on the shelf today," he said.
Peterson predicted that new products would continue to galvanize the company's performance.  
Voice processing, a $3 billion market that is growing at 20 percent a year, would bring products for handling services such as phone banking and voice mail, as well as linking databases and phone systems for telemarketing.
"We'll see an increase in the data focus in our business," he said, noting soaring use of frame relay and the Internet.
In business communications, Peterson expected the emergence of a "voice server" product in both public and private networks.
Such a product would combine the roles of telephone exchange with a network server just as fiber optic cables now carry a mixture of data and voice, both digitized.
-- New York Newsroom 212 859 1712
