CIDCO Inc said its sales so far in the second half were similar to those in the first six months of the year -- as the company predicted in July -- though sales of caller ID equipment in California were even worse than expected.
"We were right on in July. If anything it is worse than we had ever thought (in California)," Chief Financial Officer Scott McDonald told Reuters on Thursday.
Still, McDonald, who is also chief operating officer, said he was comfortable with analysts' current 1996 estimates, which were revised down sharply after the July statement.  
"Everything about the second half -- that is still the indication. Yes, we're happy with the guidance...," he said, referring to the company's statement during the summer.
In July, the company said it was unlikely to meet analysts' sales forecasts for the second half and instead expected sales in line with those in the first six months.
It said its lower expectations reflected weakness in California, uneven sales through Ameritech Corp and delays in new products.  
Caller ID services have taken off across the United States in recent years, with additional demand generated when long-distance caller ID received federal approval last year.
However, regulators in California had reservations about caller ID on privacy grounds and only approved Pacific Telesis Group's launch the service in the state in July 1996.
McDonald said the negative publicity about privacy for callers has inhibited sales despite a recent PacTel marketing campaign, and sales are not expected to pick up rapidly.  
"I would think they would be a little better, but not much," he said, referring to California caller ID sales in 1997. "You open up a seventh of the U.S. market, and all of a sudden it turns out to be a dud."
Sales of caller ID by Ameritech continue to be choppy -- as cited in the sales warning -- because of management changes at the company and on-off publicity for its caller ID service. Still, McDonald expects improvements soon.
Ameritech offers local telephone services in Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, Ohio and Wisconsin.
