Rivals the world over will shudder if British Telecommunications Plc and MCI Communications Corp merge, marrying MCI's aggressive marketing and quick reactions with the deep pockets and reach of BT.
Already first with a one-stop telecommunications shop for multinational corporations, a unified BT/MCI would pose an even greater threat in newly competitive U.S. markets, analysts said.  
"This is AT&amp;T Corp's worst nightmare. Bob Allen (AT&amp;T chief executive) will not get a wink of sleep this weekend," said consultant Jeffrey Kagan of Kagan Telecom.
The two companies on Friday confirmed market rumors that they were considering a merger and would make an announcement by the end of the weekend, but gave no further details.
However, a source close to the deal told Reuters that the deal would be a cash and stock offer from BT for MCI, the junior partner in market capitalisation.  
No price has yet been agreed upon, the source said, but analysts are speculating on $40 a share which would value MCI at $28 billion, and leave BT with a bill for $22.1 billion for the 80 percent of the company it does not already own.
"If it is true, it would have huge implications for the U.S. market," said analyst Ken McGee of the Gartner Group.
"MCI had taken competition about as far as it could go, and needs an infusion of capital for the next stage," he said.
MCI has around 20 percent of the $75 billion U.S. long distance market, compared to 55 percent for AT&amp;T, but both are also entering the $90 billion local calling market.  
There they will meet seven regional Bells, once a legal challenge to the 1996 Telecom Act is resolved. The act was designed to let long-distance and local companies compete in a unified market place.
"It gives MCI an enormous warchest to attack the local markets and defend itself against the regional Bells in the long distance market," said analyst Guy Woodlief of brokers Dean Witter Reynolds.
"It would allow MCI to go after the U.S. local market with a fury that the Baby Bells have never seen," Kagan said.  
Analysts said BT has a very strong balance sheet and free cash flow, which could help fund the coming multi-front marketing war from wireless, long distance and local calling to satellite TV, Internet and business data services.
One conundrum is the MCI/News Corp media joint venture. BT would end up with MCI's about 13 percent non-voting stake in News Corp, which could cause regulatory problems for BT in the British media market.
However, elsewhere it would provide a deep fund of capital for global markets where communication and entertainment are gradually fusing, analysts said.  
"BT has a hell of a strong balance sheet, that's for sure," said Richard Klugman, an analyst at brokers PaineWebber.
Some analysts said the timing was perfect, calling President Bill Clinton's bluff before the November 5 election. "Wonderful timing isnt it?" said Frank Dzubeck, president of consultants Communications Network Architects.  
He said that with the U.S. bashing Europe over freeing air routes and opening markets such as that of Deutsche Telekom AG in Germany, it will now be tested on how open the U.S. market itself is to a foreign company like BT, whose home market is fully open to competition.
Dzubeck said that BT would be able to unify the global strategy and sort out some of the problems in concert, their global multinational business venture with MCI and make sure those problems are not replicated elewhere.
One competitor to MCI, Sprint Corp got an unexpected boost on Friday from the news of the merger talks.
Sprint's stock rose 4-1/2 to 43-3/4, with analysts saying an expected $40 per share value for MCI, would allow investors to focus on the long-term value of the network Sprint is building too. -- New York Newsroom  212 859 1610
