Hordes of aggressive telephone resellers banging at the gates of AT&amp;T Corp, Sprint Corp and MCI Communications Corp have already grabbed $12 billion of the $80 billion long distance market.
But Monday's merger between MFS Communications Co Inc and WorldCom Inc allows tiny resellers to swarm into a rich citadel industry giants see as their own.
"Its international services, data, Internet and intranet as well as local service resale," said analyst Daryl Edmonds of brokers Bear Stearns.  
MFS is a provider of local calling networks to businesses, while WorldCom is a long distance and international carrier.
MFS WorldCom will be a ferocious competitor itself, able to offer end-to-end business services, but as a carrier's carrier it will allow in many resellers to new markets, by offering "own brand" telecommunication services off the shelf.
Fast growing resellers like Excel Communications Inc, one of over 400 such firms in the industry, have helped to eat away at the long distance telephone market and set the standard for cheap service, analysts say.  
For long distance companies, and regional Bells trying to defend their home turf, it will mean more competition, more pressure on margins and harder work to keep customers.
Profit margins and growth rates in high speed data, dedicated access Internet, international calling and broadband applications like videoconferencing are way beyond that seen in long distance, which is becoming a commodity market.
Resellers would threaten future sources of growth for the biggest firms in the industry.  
"You now have one company, MFS WorldCom, which crystallizes the brave new world (of competition)," said Simon Flannery of brokers J. P. Morgan.
He said resellers could always have pieced together such services, but this merger will make it easier.
Resellers focused on consumer services will not even be competing with MFS WorldCom's own branded product, which is pitched at small businesses.
UUNET, which MFS bought for $2 billion earlier this month, will be particularly empowered as a carrier of the internet services of others.  
As part of MFS WorldCom it will be able to call on 2,900 sales people across the country instead of 63.
"We think it is a very positive move for the reseller market place," MFS WorldCom chief executive designate Bernard Ebbers said during Monday's merger news conference, mentioning Excel and GTE Corp as possible buyers of services.
GTE and some regional Bells are already buying long distance services from WorldCom for their entry into that market. Using MFS's networks, they could now extend local services into cities in other parts of the country.  
This new competition is one of the aims of the 1996 Telecommunications Act, but the irony is this merger -- of an outsider in long distance and an outsider in local telephone -- could have happened even without deregulation.
"Both companies were unencumbered by national regulation," said Edmonds though he noted that to reach the greatest market opportunity they still need access to some elements of the Bell's local networks, a process eased by the telecom act.
"MCI or Sprint will say 'we can do this too'," said Flannery.
However, they are some way behind in their reach.
MCI this morning detailed its local phone service plans, but its MCI Metro network will only reach 25 cities by March 1997, while MFS already has 45 cities up and running.
However, analysts reckon it will be some time before MFS WorldCom can become a threat in the really high margin areas of dealing with the national or global communication accounts of large companies.
-- New York Newsroom 212 859 1712
