The $20 billion merger of MCI Communications Corp. and British Telecommunications Plc will create a supercarrier posing a potent threat to rivals in the U.S. market place, industry analysts said Monday.
"In one company you have the resources of an AT&amp;T and the marketing savvy of an MCI," said consultant Jeffrey Kagan of Kagan Telecom.
The new company, Concert will have a market value of $54 billion, roughly the same as AT&amp;T Corp., and could spur more mega-mergers among U.S. carriers. MCI is currently the second largest U.S. long distance company behind AT&amp;T and has about 20 percent of the market.
"Its already going pretty fast. We have had four deals of over $10 billion since April. But we are going to get more," said analyst Guy Woodlief of Dean Witter Reynolds.
The regional Bells as well as GTE Corp., AT&amp;T Corp. and Sprint Corp. will all have to re-examine their market strategies and see where they may be vulnerable.
"It clearly ups the competitive ante for the whole industry," said analyst Julie Kennedy of Goldman Sachs.
Concert will push harder into the $90 billion local calling market, both through the MCI Metro venture it already has in major U.S. cities, and through resale of regional Bell circuits, as soon as possible.
"If BT is more prepared to take early losses than MCI is, you could see a renewed emphasis on local markets," Woodlief said, adding he expected to see marketing pushed harder.
AT&amp;T will have to concentrate hard now that it is looking eye-to-eye at a rival its own size.
"Two years out MCI could take the top spot from AT&amp;T domestically, which would have been unthinkable just one short year ago. Three years out you won't recognize this industry," Kagan said.
There are plenty of vital assets, like state-of-the-art nationwide networks in the hands of carriers who don't have enough money to make the most of them, analysts say.
"WorldCom Inc. is still definitely on the block," said David Goodtree, an analyst at consultancy Forrester Research.
WorldCom is in the process of buying business network provider MFS Communications Co. in a $13.3 billion deal. MFS has barely finished buying Internet access provider UUNet when the Worldcom deal was announced.
"Conventional wisdom says GTE or Bell Atlantic (Corp.) would buy WorldCom, but a dark horse would be Cable and Wireless Plc," Goodtree said. Britain's C&amp;W said Monday it would build a trans-Atlantic cable system with MFS.
GTE was a rumored bidder for MCI, while Bell Atlantic and Nynex Corp. agreed to merge in April. None of them, however, owns a national long distance network.
GTE already is offering long distance calling. Bell Atlantic and Nynex, and the other regional Bells will not legally be able to offer long distance until a legal impasse over U.S. telecommunications reform is solved.
The Federal Communications Commission's attempts to implement the 1996 Telecom Act have been stalled by a legal challenge. The FCC had set rules to govern the resale of Bell circuits to new rivals in the local calling market.
Debt-strapped Tele-Communications Inc., the largest U.S. cable television company, is another candidate for takeover as cable networks and phone networks combine.
"Another company ripe for acquisition is TCI. They don't have enough cash to do what they want to do," said Goodtree.
He suggested that AT&amp;T or Sprint would want to buy TCI. Sprint is already a partner with TCI and two other cable firms in a national venture called Sprint Spectrum to bundle local and long distance telephone, wireless and cable TV.
MCI shares added just 50 cents to $30.75 on Nasdaq on Monday, well down from the about $39 per share the deal is worth, reflecting concerns the FCC may block the deal and that approval in any case would take a year.
The deal's actual value varies with the movements of British Telecom shares. British Telecom American depositary shares on the New York Stock Exchange soared $6.125 to $61.625.
If the deal does go through, Concert could get even bigger, with more alliances likely by the time the regional Bells can get into long distance.
"I would assume within 36 months you will have one or more partners from the regional Bells joining the Concert alliance," said Joseph Kraemer, a consultant for A.T. Kearney.
Whatever happens, the market perception of the types of deals that can be done has changed.
"What you witnessed yesterday was the birth of a supercarrier," said Kagan.
