MCI Communications Corp., embracing merger partner British Telecommunications Plc  in a $20 billion match, is growing increasingly distant toward media tycoon Rupert Murdoch and their joint offspring.
At the same time, BT and MCI are seeking Asian telecom partners for Concert, their new global company.
MCI said on Sunday it would cut its stake in a U.S. satellite joint venture with Murdoch's News Corp from 50 percent to 20 percent.
MCI Chief Executive Bert Roberts told Reuters that no major new launches were expected from the $400 million media joint venture with Murdoch's News Corp, and that MCI would sell to Murdoch a $700 million satellite license if it could.
MCI has a stake of just under 9 percent in News Corp, which it bought for $1.35 billion, and has an option to splash out an extra $1 billion to take this to 13.5 percent.
"It is unlikely you will see us increasing our investment (in News Corp)" Roberts told Reuters in an interview. He said that News Corp was aware of MCI's position.
This is all a world away from the first flush of enthusiasm when Murdoch and Roberts announced a broad-ranging alliance in May 1995.
The plan was to take the Australian magnate's publishing and television expertise and put it together with MCI's communications network and marketing skill, especially in the emerging market of the Internet.
But so far, the venture has produced some duds.
MCI's electronic malls on the Internet are now closed, and News Corp's ideas of producing supermarket tabloids to lure middle-aged readers to the Internet have been shelved.
Low-level cross-promotion, like advertising MCI calling cards in Murdoch's U.S. TV Guide, have continued.
The crux of the problem, analysts say, is that there never was much overlap between MCI's blue-chip business clients and Murdoch's blue-collar sports and publishing expertise.
"BT/MCI is going after the High Street, not Melrose Place," said Danny Briere, an industry analyst at consultancy Telechoice.
The satellite offspring American Sky Broadcasting (ASkyB) has been a problem child, expensive and slow to develop in comparison with some rivals.
In January, MCI and News Corp said they would offer digital television direct to the home across the U.S. market within two years, using the $700 million license MCI won in an auction.
But the same month, AT&amp;T announced an alliance with General Motors Corp.'s Hughes Electronics  DirecTV, a company that was already offering digital satellite services, and which now has two million subscribers.
MCI is clearly taking a second look.
"We would be willing, consistent with our lowering our investment position (in ASkyB), to move those to News Corp. That will take FCC approval," Roberts said.
BT Chairman Sir Iain Vallance said he expected to look hard for new partners to fill out the global telecommunications alliance in Asia.
"I think we will be more attractive to Asian partners than we would had we stayed separate," Vallance told Reuters in an interview. He declined to say which companies he had his eye on, but sources close to the company say Japan's NTT Corp. is considered the real prize.
Vallance said any partner would tie up closely to the business venture first.
"I think it is more likely that, in the first instance, we would invite partnership in Concert Communications Services rather than the parent itself," he said.
The source said that Concert would rely on chief executive Sir Peter Bonfield and his close links to the Japanese market to lure NTT aboard. Bonfield is a former head of ICL, a British computer company majority owned by Fujitsu Ltd. -- New York Newsroom 212 859 1610
