The long-heralded wireless revolution is arriving in dozens of cities across the United States this week, with new tiny digital mobile phones offering clear connections, better battery life and few dropped calls.
For consumers it means lower prices, greater choice, and new add-on features like voice mail and paging built into the phone. For wireless firms new and old it means a huge fight to grab and keep customers in much more competitive markets.
"Fundamentally, wireless services will get cheaper," said David Roddy, chief telecommunications economist of Deloitte and Touche Consulting.
On Tuesday PrimeCo, a consortium of three regional Bells and AirTouch Communications Inc. will announce its new digital Personal Communications Services offering in a dozen cities across the country, covering 32 million people.
PrimeCo will start services in Chicago, Richmond and Norfalk in Virginia, the Texas cities of Houston, Dallas/Fort Worth, San Antonio and Austin, New Orleans and all of Florida.
"We are offering people a value proposition, and it will be a hassle-free experience," said PrimeCo spokesman Reg Rowe.
On Thursday Omnipoint Corp. will announce its own PCS service in metropolitan New York, fighting existing cellular providers AT&amp;T Corp., and merger partners Bell Atlantic Corp. and NYNEX Corp..
Eventually, Omnipoint will cover broad areas in the Northeast, where 40 million people live.
PCS refers to systems using licenses auctioned by the Federal Communications Commission in 1995. Two or three PCS providers will enter every city in the next three years to compete with two existing cellular service companies.
"We're already starting to spot bare bones pricing as companies vie for market share," Roddy said.
Building PCS networks across the country will cost at least $30 billion, and new entrants have to grab customers quickly, even at a loss, to get cash flowing in to start paying the interest charges. Bondholders will be watching closely.
"In some areas it could turn into a bloodbath. It's difficult to find a business plan that says five carriers can serve a given market and make money," Roddy said.
Comparing price is tough because of the variables of phone cost, monthly cost, per minute airtime and so on, but scales are expected to be similar to that offered by American Personal Communications, an affiliate of Sprint Corp..
APC offers customers in the Washington DC/Baltimore area phones for between $150-$200, a $15-a-month flat fee with 15 minutes free and a 31-cent-per-minute call charge.
Cellular's old pricing structure of year-long contracts, free phones but pricy airtime is changing.
"Nobody's doing contracts anymore, and one-cent phones are on their way out," said an Omnipoint spokesman.
APC's PCS service launched in November 1995 was the first in the country, undercutting cellular rivals by 30 percent.
In the first seven months of operation, APC gathered over 100,000 customers, many of them new to wireless. But as cellular rivals cut prices too, they also drew in extra customers, showing the depth of the potential marketplace.
Cellular providers are now upgrading their services too.
AT&amp;T in October launched its Digital PCS, which is not based on PCS license frequencies but does offer similar features. These include call waiting, voicemail-to-pager, and the benefits of doubled battery life and small handset size.
"About a third of our new customers signing on nationally are choosing Digital PCS," said AT&amp;T vice president Jane O'Donaghue, in the first hint of how the campaign is going.
The cost is $25 per month with 30 minutes of free airtime and a phone costing between $150 and $250.
Confusingly, AT&amp;T will start offerings its real PCS service next year. While it currently covers 76 million people with Digital PCS, its real PCS network when complete in 1998 will give virtually complete national coverage, reaching 212 million customers.
PrimeCo, which includes Bell Atlantic, NYNEX and U S West as well as AirTouch, has a special feature in its phones for customers who want to avoid running up big bills.
Customers can set a maximum monthly bill, and the phone will alert them when they near that figure.
"'First bill shock' has been a problem with cellular phones," said PrimeCo's Rowe.
Wireless companies will find niches to avoid head-on pricing, with some concentrating on the mobile professional, and others on pre-paid wireless calling.
Nevertheless, with crowded markets, consumers will have to sit down and work out which is the best value of all the offerings available.
"Its going to be a pretty confusing marketplace," said Roddy.
