Fast growing telephone reseller Excel Communications Inc said on Wednesday that it expects record earnings and sales growth for the third quarter and the year, and has plans to expand into new services.
"We should have another record quarter and another record year," Jack McLaine, Excel chief financial officer, told Reuters in an interview.
McLaine said the company had plans to offer Internet access, home security monitoring, video service, local telephone services and eventually, wireless telephone.  
Excel reported a 350 percent rise in earnings per share in the second 1996 quarter to $0.36 from $0.08 a year earlier. The company is so far only covered by one analyst, so no consensus of expectations was available.
Excel doesn't own a single phone line itself, but uses the long distance network of WorldCom Inc to reach customers. WorldCom's planned merger with MFS Communications Co Inc , makes entering new markets easier. "Its definitely easier if you can go to one company and buy the product where you will get nationwide coverage rather than have to go various regional carriers to package it together," McLaine said.  
"The move between WorldCom and MFS is a brilliant deal strategically. We have a good relationship with WorldCom and we look forward to talking with them about what these new products are," he said.
Excel is one of around 400 telephone service resellers which have been successfully eating into the market share of industry leaders like AT&amp;T Corp. They now account for $12 billion of the $80 billion long distance market.
Analysts say the MFS WorldCom merger will allow these aggressive competitors into high value markets which are not normally available to companies without owned facilities.  
Excel said its sales approach -- using independent sales representatives to sell to their friends, family and associates -- will be powerful in new markets.
"Our relationship sales base is much stronger than telemarketing or direct mail programs, because the sales person knows the customer, and is able to sit down with them .. and explain the product," he said.
In the second quarter Excel said it had 220,710 sales representatives against 98,450 a year earlier. They earn a commission based on the size of the phone bill of those they sign up.
Excel's first new resold product is paging, which it has previously announced it is launching next week. It will be using the paging network of PageMart Wireless Inc. Internet service should follow in 1997, McLaine said. -- New York Newsroom  212 859 1712
