Soft drinks and confectionery group Cadbury-Schweppes Plc, expected to report a solid eight percent rise in first half profits on Wednesday, faces questions about the performance of its 7UP soft drink in the U.S.
"One of the main questions will be the success or otherwise of the relaunch of the 7UP brand," said Mark Duffy, food manufacturing analyst at SBC Warburg. Competitor Sprite, owned by Coca-Cola, has seen an agressive marketing push and is ranked the fastest growing brand in the U.S. after Cadbury's Dr Pepper.  
Analysts forecasts for pretax profits range from 218 to 232 million stg, after restructuring costs, up from 206 million last time. A dividend of 5.1 pence is expected, up from 4.9p.
A restructuring cost of some 35 million is anticipated, with the bulk of it or about 25 million, stemming from the closure of its smaller production plant in France.
Most of the profit improvement is expected to come from Dr Pepper in the U.S., which will contribute earnings for the full six months period for the first time.  
It bought Dr Pepper/7UP -- the third largest soft drinks group in America -- in January 1995 for $1.71 billion, shifting the company's biggest profit centre to the U.S. from Britain.
Cadbury's U.S. drinks business should turn in about 112 million stg in trading profit against 59 million in the first half of 1995, due entirely to the contribution of Dr Pepper.
All other areas of the group's business are likely to show only small changes compared with last year.
"The significant things are Dr Pepper, restructuring in Europe and a touch of weakness in UK beverages," said John Campbell, food and drink analyst at Paribas.  
"UK beverages is partly a weather issue and partly due to the fact that although gross margins are reasonaly steady, the market generally is just a bit more competitive."
Campbell estimates UK beverages will contribute 47 million stg in operating profit down from 50 million last time.
Broadly, analysts expect a pretty flat performance from the group's confectionery business, with a consensus forecast of 110 million stg for operating profits. On average, analysts calculate beverages will chip in trading profits of 150 million.  
After the sale of its 51 percent stake in the Coca-Cola &amp; Schweppes Beverages (CCSB) operations to Coca-Cola Enterprises in June for 620 million stg, many analysts want to see a clear statement of strategy from the company.
"The market needs more clarity on strategy following the sale of CCSB," said Duffy. "We think it was a positive growth business and the sale came as a result of pressure from Cola owned bottlers globally. It was not pro-active at all."
There are some latent worries about the company's future growth strategy.  
"All they see at the moment is a stronger business financially, with the fundamentals ahead reasonably positive -- but where will they find additional growth?" said Campbell.
It lies in only fourth place globally in confectionery, behind Nestle, Mars and Suchard, and could embark on buying confectionery firms in emerging markets.
It might use its big Australian confectionery business as a launch pad into the growing Far East sugar confectionery market.
But so far, say analysts, the company has not said when shareholders can expect a return on investments in emerging markets: one of the largest so far, a 75 million Russian plant.  
Cadbury announced an investment of 20 million stg in building a new plant at Wrocoaw in Poland in 1993 and a joint venture in China at a cost of 20 million. Net debt at 1.34 billion at the end of 1995 should fall to about 510 million by the end of 1996 as a result of the CCSB sale and providing there are no further acquisitions. Gearing should fall from 45 percent to 15 percent over the same period giving plenty of scope for acquisitions.
There are also rumblings in the investment community about the logic of a tie up with PepsiCo globally, which would offer big cost-savings in production and a good mix of brands.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 6437
