British brewing to leisure group Bass Plc said on Monday it had sold 47 Holiday Inn full service hotels and 14 Holiday Inn management contracts in the mid-market sector in North America to the Bristol Hotel Company.
In return Bass will take a 36.1 percent stake in Bristol, which it plans to retain, plus loan repayments totalling $300 million and $91 million in cash, to be used in the business.
This results in a total value of $640 million for the deal, although based on the closing price of Bristol stock on Friday it is valued at $659 million.
Bass' decision to sell the hotels fits with its declared strategy of expanding its Holiday Inn franchise system and exiting from owning and managing hotels in areas where it has established a presence in franchising.
"We have always seen franchising as our primary business. Owning and managing hotels is simply a means of supporting that operation," said Bass finance director Richard North.
"We have reached the point in the U.S. where that is no longer necessary and where we are at the appropriate time in the cycle to sell these assets," said North in an interview.
The 61 hotels transferred, which have a book value of $638 million, generated profits of $69 million in the financial year to September 30 after payment of franchise fees. Bristol will spend $150 million on refurbishing the properties over the next three years.
Bass, which confirmed last week it was in talks with Bristol, said the deal would have no significant effect on its earnings.
In a separate statement issued in New York Bristol said the acquisition should improve earnings slightly in 1997, excluding the cost of integrating the 61 hotels and transaction fees.
Holiday Inn franchisees in the United States get about 33 percent of their occupancy through the Holiday Inn reservation system compared with 13 percent on average in Europe.
"We believe we are way up on the cycle in the U.S. In fact our assessment is that there is a little bit left to go, but of course you can only really tell with hindsight," said North, referring to property prices in the United States.
Bass shares were off 15p at 800p after the stock went ex-dividend from the start of trading on Monday.
"It allows them to get out at a reasonable price and invest the cash in areas of expansion like the Far East," said Dermott Carr, an analyst at Nikko Europe.
Bristol also agreed to convert a further 10 of its 39 existing hotels to the Holiday Inn brand. These conversions, together with the 61 hotels transferred under the deal, will result in 84 out of 100 Bristol properties being named Holiday Inn or Crowne Plaza.
Bass owns 60 Holiday Inns in Europe, the Middle East and Africa and 39 in the Asia-Pacific region. It has no plans to sell its Crowne Plaza hotels in North America.
Under the Holiday Inn franchise scheme, hoteliers pay a fee to join, relative to room numbers, plus five percent of gross room revenues per annum. They also pay a 0.5 percent fee for access to the computer booking system and a one percent annual fee for marketing, both linked to room revenue.
