The sale of 47 Bass-owned Holiday Inn hotels in North America to the Bristol Hotel Co forms part of Bass's plan to build a global franchise business, Bass finance director Richard North told Reuters in an interview.
"We have always seen franchising as our primary business. Owning and managing hotels is simply a means of supporting that operation. We have reached the point in the U.S. where that is no longer necessary and where we are at the appropriate time in the cycle to sell these assets," he said.
"The value we have obtained is very attractive," he added.  
Earlier Bass announced the sale of 47 Holiday Inn full service hotels and 14 Holiday Inn management contracts in the mid-market sector in the U.S. in a deal worth $659 million.
"If you take the current market price, add $75 million and look at the profits of these hotels and work in the franchise fees and the 39 percent effective tax rate that works out at a PE (price/earnings ratio) of 18.6 times," North said.
As part of the deal Bristol will spend $150 million on refurbishing the properties over the next three years. The 61 hotels transferred generated profits of $69 million in the year to September 30 after payment of franchise fees.  
"We believe we are way up on the cycle in the U.S. In fact, our assessment is that there is a little bit left to go but of course, you can only really tell with hindsight," said North.
Holiday Inn franchisees in the U.S. get about 33 percent of their occupancy through the Holiday Inn reservation system compared with 13 percent on average in Europe.
"We want to get Europe up to the same sort of level as the U.S.," said North. Under the Holiday Inn franchise scheme, hoteliers pay a fee to join relative to room numbers and then five percent of gross room revenues per annum and 0.5 percent of gross room revenues for the IT reservation system and a further one percent for marketing. Bristol agreed also to convert a further 10 of its 39 existing hotels to the Holiday Inn brand. These conversions, together with the 61 hotels transferred under the deal, will result in 84 out of 100 BRistol properties being named Holiday Inn or Crowne Plaza.
Bass owns 60 Holiday Inn's in Europe, the Middle East and Africa and 39 in the Asia-Pacific region. Bass has no plans to sell its Crowne Plaza hotels in North America.
As part of the sale to Bristol, Bass will also take a 36.1 percent stake in Bristol, which it plans to retain.
"We are very impressed with the management team and their entrepreneurial flair and we are very pleased to retain an interest in the company," said North.
Bristol also has a proven ability in developing older full service hotels, he added.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 6437
