British brewer and hotels company Vaux Group Plc has seen beer sales to independent pubs rise six percent compared with last year thanks to a new supply contract with a big pub chain won since the end of its financial year to September 30, chairman Paul Nicholson said.
"Sales to the free on-trade were up 2.4 percent in the year just ended and so far they are up six percent because we've picked up one major contract since the beginning of the year," said Nicholson, who declined to give any further details.  
Vaux managed to increase sales of beer it brews by one percent during its financial year in a market down 0.5 percent. It improved market share in the north east of the country. About 40 percent of Vaux beer is sold to its own tied estate of 749 pubs, while 30 percent goes to the free on-trade -- pubs, clubs and restaurants -- and 30 percent into supermarkets.
The company launched Double Maxim and Lampton's, two new "nitrokegs" -- popular chilled ales -- during the year, which helped push sales up, but the sales of its leading brand Scorpion lager also increased to 25,000 barrels for the year, Nicholson said.  
Vaux's beer sales to the free pub and club market were also encouraged by higher discounts. On average customers saw their discount levels rise by about 8.0 pounds a barrel.
The company also increased the discount per barrel it allows to its tied estate by 4.50 pounds to 85 pounds.
Renewed consumer confidence is providing a special fillip to the group's 30-strong chain of Swallow hotels where increased leisure spending has had an impact, said Nicholson.
Bookings for the Christmas period were six percent up on last year, he said.
"Our bookings for Christmas over the next two weeks are six percent up and running throgh the next three months they are three percentage points up. It's a healthy increase in demand."
Revenue per available room rose 14 percent in the year, and has continued to run at that rate since the year end, he said.
Occupancy levels are currently four or five points ahead on where they were last year. In the year ended September 30, 1996 occupancies rose to 71.7 perecnt from 67.8 percent.
Achieved room rates were up from 42.56 pounds to 45.75 pounds in the group's financial year ended September 30, 1996.
Swallow improved trading profits by 4.3 million to 24.1 million stg in the year. Brewing improved profits 26 percent to 4.5 million. Profits from Vaux's managed pubs were up 17 percent at 9.0 million.
Vaux plans to spend 48 million stg on developing its managed estate and building new hotels in the next year, up by 8.0 million stg, said Nicholson.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 6437
