Brewer to hotels group Vaux Plc reported a nine percent rise in its pretax profits on Wednesday to 34.8 million pounds ($57.74 million) and chairman Sir Paul Nicholson said its new financial year has started well.
"The new year has started well with beer sales well up," said Nicholson in an interview. "I think at the moment consumers are feeling good and that very strongly benefits our hotels where we have seen a strong increase in the leisure market."
Vaux's 30 mid-market Swallow hotels were its star performer in profit terms in 1996 -- Swallow trading profits rose 4.3 million to 24.1 million stg.
"Our bookings for Christmas over the next two weeks are six percent up and running through the next three months they are three percentage points up. It's a healthy increase in demand," said Nicholson.
Sales of beer were helped by the launch of two ales -- Double Maxim and Lambton's. Vaux, which operates an ale and lager brewery in Sunderland and a smaller draught ale brewery in Sheffield, saw its beer sales rise one percent in the year to September 30, 1996 whereas sales in the market overall were down 0.5 percent.
The brewing and wholesaling side of the business improved profits 25 percent to 4.52 million, despite Vaux offering higher discounts. Vaux's independent pub and club customers received an average further discount of eight pounds per barrel in the year.
The company also increased the discount per barrel it allowed to its tied estate of pubs by 4.50 pounds to 85 pounds.
Vaux's managed pubs improved profits 17 percent to 9.0 million and on a like-for-like basis liquor sales were ahead by 6.3 percent and food sales by 13.1 percent with profits up 10.1 percent. Vaux owns 868 pubs of which 163 are managed and plans to convert 25 more from tenanted to managed pubs.
Vaux is in talks to sell its 38-strong care homes business, which it no longer believes fits with its core business activity, said Nicholson, but he declined to say who the interested party was or how much they were worth.
The company's shares were off 3-1/2p at 253p in early trade.
($1=.6027 Pound)
