British leisure and brewery group Whitbread Plc said on Thursday it had appointed David Thomas as its chief executive designate to take over from Peter Jarvis who is to step down next summer.
Thomas's appointment was viewed by the investment community as a natural progression from the Jarvis era, which saw Whitbread aggressively transform itself from a brewer to a diversified leisure company in less than six years.
Since 1985, Whitbread has changed its business mix. Beer now only accounts for 14 percent of profits, with the rest coming from its managed estates, restaurant and leisure arm.
Analysts expect Thomas to press ahead with Whitbread's expansion into the leisure and restaurant business while retaining its interest in brewing.
"It's just going to be basically more of the same, he's going to continue to take them down the retail, leisure route," said Charles Winston, an analyst at BZW.
A slide in Whitbread shares, down 12.5p at 763p, was attributed more to profit-taking than any disappointment at the new executive appointment.
"It's more of a tribute to Jarvis than a thumbs down for Thomas. They have also had a very good run up of late," said one analyst who declined to be named.
"We knew he was going to leave before retirement age although these announcements are always a bit of a surprise when they come," said John Beaumont, an analyst at Merrill Lynch.
But he added: "The appointment of David Thomas seems like a natural progression for the company."
Thomas, who was appointed to the main board in 1991 and took over the restaurant and leisure division in 1992, is credited with accelerating the development of Whitbread's existing brands -- Travel Inn, restaurants TGI Friday's and Beefeater.
He was also the architect of Whitbread's drive into the pub food market through Brewers Fayre.
Jarvis, aged 55, has hinted to reporters at recent news conferences that he would prefer to leave the company before reaching retirement age in order to pursue outside interests. He is currently a non-executive director of Burton, Rank and Barclays Plc.
