One hundred years after Cadbury launched Britain's first milk chocolate, the average Briton now eats 13 kilos of confectionery each a year, exceeded only by Denmark and Ireland in the sweet tooth stakes, though the Swiss eat more chocolate.
British confectionery sales grew by five percent last year to a record 4.9 billion pounds ($8.28 billion), according to a review by Cadbury and its sweet-making arm Trebor Bassett published on Tuesday.
Cadbury marketing director Alan Palmer told a news conference, "The market will break the magical five billion barrier for the first time next year."
The Swiss consume the hightest amounts of chocolate averaging 10 kilos per person a year compared to eight kilos in Britain.
Volume sales in Britain rose by two percent to 833,000 tonnes last year, a growth of more than 12 percent over the last decade, said the Confectionery Market Review.
"The long-term growth trend in snacking and the decline in formal meals is just one reason why the market for confectionery will grow," Palmer told Reuters. "And the growth in the gift market for confectionery where there are bigger gift boxes of chocolate is another reason," he said.
"The question is how fast it will grow rather than any risk it will not grow."
Bruce Burnett, Trebor Bassett marketing director, told reporters the key to the market's expansion has been the major investment in media advertising, the advent of commercial television and new brand innovation.
Cadbury's 10 million pound sponsorship last year of the nation's top-rated soap opera Coronation Street became the largest TV sponsorship deal in Britain. The company also sponsored the British Olympic team at the 1996 Atlanta games.
Palmer said the confectionery industry spent 100 million pounds last year on TV advertising alone, of which about one-third came from Cadbury-Schweppes.
In 1996 the industry spent 128 million pounds on media advertising -- 39 million on sweets and 89 million on chocolate -- more than the National Lottery and soft drinks combined.
Children's average pocket money grew by 17 percent in 1996 to 2.40 pounds a week -- the highest annual increase since the early 1980's -- and a colder, more typical summer helped make sales more buoyant.
Milk chocolate now accounts for almost 90 percent of chocolate eaten in Britain, where there are about 500 different confectionery brands on sale.
Chocolate continues to make up most of the confectionery market with 70 percent of sales at 3.4 billion pounds while sweets accounted for 30 percent at 1.5 billion, said the review.
Within the chocolate market, 1.465 billion worth of snack bars were sold last year, with Kit-Kat owned by Nestle Rowntree the top seller. A total 550 million pounds worth of moulded bars were sold, and Cadbury's Dairy Milk remained top seller.
The Cadbury brothers launched Britain's first milk chocolate in 1897 in three penny and six penny packs. It was the forerunner of Cadbury's Dairy Milk which went on sale in 1905.
In 1904 George Cadbury Junior perfected a process for getting pure liquid milk into the product which made it less dry and coarse than using powdered milk.
Cadbury chocolate contains typically half as much cocoa solid as mainland European chocolate.
Chocolate became more affordable in the intra-war years in Britain, falling from two shillings per half pound at the end of World War One to eight pence at the start of World War Two.
Cadbury holds a 20 percent share of total confectionery sales in Britain and Trebor Bassett 10 percent. Nestle Rowntree has a 20 percent market share and Mars 18 percent.
($1=.5921 Pound)
