British cider maker Matthew Clark outlined a recovery plan on Tuesday aimed at tackling the phenomenal rise in popularity of "alcopops" and a cut throat industry-wide price war.
"We have drawn a line under the issues we face," said business development director Peter Huntley in an interview.
The company estimates it will lose 22 miillion pounds ($36.80 million) over the year from a combination of lower sales and tougher competition over pricing and supply contracts to national and regional brewers.
Sales of Diamond White and K cider were off some 30 percent due to the emergence of "alcopops", costing Matthew Clark about 11 million pounds in annual profits.
"The decline in Diamond White and K is still in progress, but it is a quiet period of the year and our marketing plan will hit the market in April and we expect it to arrest the decline very quickly," he said.
Alcopops -- cola and fruit flavoured alcoholic drinks -- have grown to annualised sales of 80 million litres a year in 18 months and hit sales of Diamond White, the dominant premium packaged cider brand, six times more than premium lagers.
Price competition produced deep promotional discounts in supermarkets and will cost Matthew Clark about four million pounds in lost profits at the full year, said Huntley.
"The level of discounting and below the line price support, and promotional support this summer has been at levels which have just not been seen in the cider industry for the last five years," he said.
"For example on a two-litre Old English and Blackthorn, the discounting we had to do this summer to match the market was to take 30 percent off the price, so it was down from 2.99 pounds and 3.19 pounds to 1.99 pounds."
But Huntley said Clark "expects to pull back on the level of promotional discount" that went on during the summer.
Matthew Clark now has a 38 percent market share, down some three to four percentage points over the last year, putting it well behind its larger rival Bulmer HP Holdings Plc which has some 52 percent of the market.
The company unveiled a plan to spend more on advertising in an effort to rebuild its cider brands, including a new campaign for Diamond White aimed at bringing back 18 to 24-year-old drinkers and the relaunch of Blackthorn in the spring.
It also pledged to increase prices from this month and do away with deep promotional discounts in supermarkets.
Matthew Clark shares rose 30p to 330p by early afternoon with analysts saying they liked the frank way the company had presented its recovery strategy.
The company's shares plunged 60 percent after a profits warning in September, wiping more than 290 million pounds off its market value.
"They gave an open, frank and honest assessment of what there problems were and what they are going to do to sort them out," said Merrill Lynch analyst John Beaumont.
"A lot depends on how Bulmer will react, of course. Will they both stop cutting each other's throats and stop chasing each other's accounts?" he said. ($1=.5979 Pound)
