Confectionery and soft drinks group Cadbury-Schweppes on Wednesday reported healthy first-half results and said it was positive about its expected full-year performance.
Chief executive David Wellings said the group was trading in line with plans and still aimed to be one of the top three world confectionery firms by the end of the decade.
"I think the word we used is robust. That means the business is performing to plan. The base business is performing well and our acquisitions are also growing to plan, especially Dr Pepper," he said in an interview.
For the half year to June 15, the company reported a 12 percent rise in pretax profits to 231 million pounds ($362 million) on sales up 13.3 percent to 2.293 billion pounds.
"The outlook for the year as a whole is positive with further growth expected for both business streams," chairman Dominic Cadbury said in a statement.
Analysts' forecasts for pretax profits ranged from 218 million to 232 million pounds, after restructuring costs. The shares rose 11-1/2 pence to 523 on the news.
"The results were at the upper end of the market range and will be well received," said Paribas analyst John Campbell.
The group's confectionery business posted a three percent profits rise to 105 million in the half year while its drinks business chipped in 198 million, up from 165 million.
"I think that is the pattern ahead, a base business growing well and a thrust into emerging markets at a pace which management believes is reasonable," he added.
Cadbury's factories in Russia and China came on stream in the first half and Poland reached breakeven point in its second year of confectionery production.
"We have a very clear objective in our confectionery stream and that is to be one of the top three by the year 2000. That means we need to sell one million tonnes of chocolate a year by the year 2000," Wellings said.
The company is the third largest soft drinks group in the world but trails in fourth spot behind Nestle, Mars and Suchard in confectionery.
The profits increase was driven by the first full six-month contribution from Dr Pepper/7Up -- the third largest soft drinks group in the United States -- acquired in January 1995 for $1.71 billion.
"The acquisitions we made in 1995 are continuing to perform to expectations and that includes our Canadian acquisitions as well as Dr Pepper," he said.
Cadbury acquired Allan Candy for an undisclosed amount and Neilson Group for 108 million last year, making it the market leader in Canadian confectionery.
"In North America both confectionery and soft drinks will continue to grow and that is about lifestyle and the breakdown of formal eating occasions and increased opportunities to snack," Wellings said.
"So we will continue to see single-digit growth even in the mature markets like the U.S. and the U.K., but across Europe growth is going to be steady. The French, for instance, still tend to eat two large meals a day and resist the trend towards snacking."
Sales volumes of its 7Up soft drink were nearly two percent ahead of last year after a relaunch of its design and advertising but still behind Coca-Cola-owned Sprite as rivals stepped up their promotions.
When it was first acquired, 7Up had level pegging with Sprite and Cadbury is trying hard to turn the brand around. The Dr Pepper brand, however, is outpacing growth in the U.S. market.
The company agreed to sell its 51-percent stake in Coca-Cola &amp; Schweppes Beverages for 622.5 million, which will greatly reduce debt and provide more scope for acquisitions, although Wellings declined to be drawn on what they might be.
The group set aside 35 million pounds for restructuring of its Schweppes France operation -- reflecting the decision to set up in partnership with San Benedetto, the Italian producer of mineral water and soft drinks -- to build a new plant and close down two existing older ones. ($1=.6382 Pound)
