David Wellings, chief executive of confectionery and soft drinks company Cadbury-Schweppes, said the group was trading in line with plans, and still aims to be one of the top three in confectionery by the end of the decade.
"I think the word we used is robust, that means the business is performing to plan. The base business is performing well and our acquisitions are also growing to plan, especially Dr Pepper," Wellings said.  
"I think that is the pattern ahead, a base business growing well and a thrust into emerging markets at a pace which management believes is reasonable," he added.
Cadbury-Schweppes posted a three percent increase in trading profit to 105 million stg from its confectionery business in the half year to June 15. Trading profits from its drinks business rose to 198 million from 165 million.
"We have a very clear objective in our confectionery stream and that is to be one of the top three by the year 2000. That means we need to sell one million tonnes of chocolate a year by the year 2000," Wellings said.  
The profits increase was driven by the first full six-month contribution from Dr Pepper/7Up -- the third largest soft drinks group in the U.S. -- acquired in January 1995 for $1.71 billion.
"The acquisitions we made in 1995 are continuing to perform to expectations and that includes our Canadian acquisitions as well as Dr Pepper.
Cadbury acquired Allan Candy for an undisclosed amount and Neilson Group for 108 million last year, making it the market leader in Canadian confectionery.  
The company is the third largest soft drinks group in the world but trails in fourth spot behind Nestle, Mars and Suchard in confectionery. "Obviously there are areas of the world where we can expand more quickly than others like Eastern Europe," he said.
Cadbury's factories in Russia and China came on stream in the first half and Poland reached breakeven point in its second year of confectionery production.
In the half year to June 15 Cadbury-Schweppes posted a 12 percent rise in pretax profits to 231 million on sales of 2.29 billion up from 2.03 billion.  
"In North America both confectionery and soft drinks will continue to grow and that is about lifestyle and the breakdown of formal eating occassions and increased opportunities to snack," Wellings said.
"So we will continue to see single digit growth even in the mature markets like the U.S. and the UK, but across Europe growth is going to be steady. The French for instance still tend to eat two large meals a day and resist the trend towards snacking," Wellings said.  
7Up volumes were nearly two percent ahead of last year after a relaunch of its design and advertising but still behind Coca-Cola-owned Sprite, as competitors stepped up their discounting and promotions.
When it was first acquired 7Up was level pegging with Sprite and Cadbury is trying hard to turn the brand around. The Dr Pepper brand, however, is outpacing growth in the U.S. market. The company agreed to sell its 51-percent stake in Coca-Cola &amp; Schweppes Beverages for 622.5 million which will greatly reduce debt and provide more scope for acquisitions, although Wellings declined to be drawn on what they might be.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 6437
