Drinks group Guinness Plc assured investors on Friday that its joint ventures with French luxury goods company LVMH were secure despite a decision by LVMH to sell a third of its shares in Guinness.
"Our commercial arrangements with LVMH are unaffected by this announcement," said Guinness finance director Phil Yea.
Guinness and LVMH's champagne and cognac arm Moet Hennessey operate some 15 joint ventures worldwide, including a New York company which distributes their top brands like Dewar's scotch and Moet champagne in the United States.
LVMH Moet Hennessey Louis Vuitton sold 135 million of its Guinness shares or about 7.0 percent of its holding in the company, at 414p per share, to raise about 559 million pounds ($934.9 million).
Analysts said the sale was driven by a number of factors, including rumours circulating in London that LVMH needs the funds to buy the rest of American duty free chain DFS, and by the strength of sterling against the French franc.
LVMH currently owns 58.75 percent of DFS.
"I don't think LVMH liked the trading statement from Guinness on Wednesday, it showed that the market for spirits is just not going to get any better. I think they have just had enough of the rotten share price performance of Guinness over the years," said one analyst who declined to be named.
LVMH said it would keep its remaining 14 percent stake in Guinness and seek to further develop the longstanding business ties between the two companies.
Guinness said the sale meant they each now owned a similar amount of each other's shares and the company snapped up 2.3 percent of its shares released by the LVMH sale.
"In 1994, Guinness reduced the amount of capital invested to secure its long term involvement in Moet Hennessey and today's part disposal by LVMH has a similar effect from their perspective," said Yea.
The LVMH sale gives it a stake of 268 million Guinness shares worth 1.14 billion pounds, while Guinness' stake in Moet Hennessey was valued at 1.026 billion in its last annual report.
The original cross-shareholding of 12 percent was taken up in 1988 but had crept up to 24 percent by 1994 when the relationship was reformed.
Guinness agreed to sell its 24 percent stake in exchange for a 34 percent holding in Moet Hennessey plus cash, while LVMH agreed to bring its Guinness stake down to 20 percent.
At the time, both companies also agreed that if LVMH ever reduced its stake in Guinness to below 15 percent it could not raise it again without a special shareholders' resolution.
Bernard Arnault, chairman of LVMH, has a seat on the main Guinness board and Guinness chairman Tony Greener has a seat on the LVMH board. Guinness also has two seats on the six-strong Moet Hennessy board.
Insiders say the relationship between Arnault and Guinness has been stormy and uncertain in recent years.
Analysts have had to second guess his next move against the background of a poor performance from Guinness shares relative to the sector and the stock market over the last five years.
"It takes away the fear that LVMH would sell the lot and it means that Guinness has got an excellent deal in terms of buying at a price which won't recur," said Ron Littleboy, analyst at Nomura.
Guinness's shares initially fell 22p to 414p in early trade before rebounding to 430, after Guinness announced it had repurchased some of its own shares.
The company currently has shareholder approval to buy back up to 10 percent of its own shares and many analysts expect it to buy back more after its full year results on March 20.
($1=.5979 Pound)
