David Jones, chief executive of British fashion retailer Next Plc, on Monday rejected as nonsense press reports that he had been approached by headhunters to take over the top job at Sears.
Some shareholders at stores group Sears are disgruntled with the dismal performance of the group and are calling for a radical shake-up including a demerger of its very profitable Selfridges department store and the sale of the struggling British Shoe Corporation.
Sears was back in the spotlight last week when it issued a profit warning and reported disappointing Christmas sales, leading to suggestions that chief executive Liam Strong's job was on the line.
The Sunday Telegraph newspaper reported that Jones was offered the job of chief executive of Sears but had decided to turn it down.
But Jones told Reuters in an interview on his carphone, "I'm very happy in my current job. I am not intending to leave Next. As far as I am concerned no one is headhunting me for any job."
Although Sears sold its mail order business Freemans earlier this month to Littlewoods  LWD.CN for 395 million pounds ($656 million) and pledged to return about 410 million in cash to shareholders in six months' time, some investors are calling for deeper changes.
Sears shares, which traded at 90p on Monday, have underperformed the stockmarket by over 40 percent since Strong took the helm five years ago.
Jones is accredited with rescuing Next from the brink of collapse in the early 1990s -- in the midst of Britain's deepest recession since the second world war -- by combining a sell-off programme of non-core assets, such as mail order business Grattan, and a sharper focus on the main brand.
He sold shops and merged others, improving the Next profile on the high street and reducing shoppers' confusion about the range and type of products on sale.
On December 6, 1990, Next shares reached a low of 7p compared with 573p today. Next now has a return on equity of 32.49 percent, against 12.5 percent at Burton Group, 11.79 percent at Laura Ashley, and 9.54 percent at Sears.
Sears also rejected press reports that headhunters had been appointed by the company charged with finding Strong's replacement.
"We have not employed any headhunters. The chairman and the board are strongly supportive of Liam Strong," said a spokeswoman at Sears. "We are not seeking a replacement for Liam."
Sears last week reported like-for-like sales at its troubled British Shoe Corporation unit, owner of Dolcis, Shoe Express and Shoe City, fell 2.8 percent in the six months to January 6. "We are just about at the end of our tether," said one small shareholder, who declined to be named. "It just seems like nothing goes right for them."
A spokeswoman for Philips and Drew Fund Management, Sears' single largest shareholder with over 12 percent of the stock, declined to comment on their view but confirmed it had met Sears management last week for a regular update. ($ = 0.602 British Pounds)
