Growth in fast-food, snacking and eating out in Britain is driving profits at food retailer Watson &amp; Philip, owners of the 526-strong chain of Alldays convenience stores, chief executive Colin Glass said on Wednesday.
And the trend shows no sign of abating, he said.
"What is happening is there has been a major demographic shift with an increasing number of single occupancy household or households where both people work. Customers are spending more on prepared food rather than food they cook at home," Glass said in an interview.
The company's shares soared 44p to 389p on Wednesday, making it the stockmarket's biggest climber. Earlier Alldays reported sales in comparable stores up by 2.2 percent in the year to October 27, 1996.
Group pre-tax, pre-exceptional profits were 20.1 million pounds ($33.31 million) in the year, up 11 percent.
The convenience food store chain also had an operating margin of 5.4 percent in the year, up from 4.9 percent.
"The product at Alldays will be consumed or start to be consumed within two minutes of the customer being in the store," said Glass. As a result the company has adopted two strategies aimed at achieving profits growth.
First to change the product mix to bring in more videos, fast food and drinks -- grocery and household goods now make up less than a quarter of Alldays's range -- and secondly to open more stores, said Glass.
The company plans to open about 150 more Alldays stores in 1997 mainly in the midlands and northern England and by the millenium Glass said the Alldays network of stores would be increased to 1,000.
Watson &amp; Philip also plan to put Dunkin' Donuts into 60 of its stores over the next month, said Glass. The company will franchise Dunkin' Donuts from its owner Allied Domecq. The company is also currently testing the Domino Pizza brand with its customers in six stores.
Glass said the company had a medium term target of seven percent margins at its 286 company-owned stores, adding that margins at its 240 franchised outlets were likely to remain at current levels.
W&amp;P has a franchise agreement with Total Oil Ltd which will lead to over 50 Total-owned petrol stations incorporating Alldays stores, at Total's cost, over the next year.
Analysts had downgraded their profit forecasts for the company's full-year results after it issued a profits warning in October, sending its shares down almost 40p on the day.
At the time market forecasts ranged from 18.5 million to 21.8 million pounds.
($1=.6035 Pound)
