Food and drink group Grand Metropolitan Plc said on Thursday it was hanging a "for sale" sign on its national food businesess in Europe in an effort to focus on its major international brands -- Pillsbury, Green Giant, Haagen-Dazs and Old El Paso.
"We have people indicating strong interest and indicating prices that are acceptable to us," said Paul Walsh, chief executive of GrandMet's Pillsbury Company in an interview.
He said he expected the sell-off to be complete by January 1997.
In the shop window in Britain are Shippams, meat pie maker Peter's Savoury Products, Memory Lane Cakes and Fleur de Lys.
Also on the block are Germany's Hofmann-Menu and Goldstein, cake and pastry maker Brossard in France and Italy, waffle maker Suzy and biscuit firm Desobry in Belgium and cake maker Driehoek in the Netherlands.
Analysts expect them to fetch about 140 million pounds ($220 million).
Their combined sales last year were 370 million pounds with operating profit of 10 million and operating capital used of 129 million pounds at September 30, 1995.
Before the announcement, GrandMet's European foods business showed sales of $1.2 billion, which are forecast to fall to about $450 million once they are sold.
The European foods business posted a trading profit of 23 million pounds in the year to September 1995, up from 12 million in 1994, after a hefty restructuring and plant closure programme undertaken in 1993.
The company does not disclose earnings for each individual subsidiary but Brossard in France is easily the largest and similar in sales terms to Germany's Erasco Group, which Campbell Soup agreed earlier to buy from GrandMet for about $210 million.
"My plan in foods is to focus on our leading brands," said Walsh, adding that the sell-off of so-called tertiary brands would allow GrandMet to concentrate on its main brands.
The businesses were also providing an inadequate return on capital, he said. "You can expect GrandMet to be very eager to improve total return to shareholders. Several of us have held this view for a long while.
"I think it's compatible with GrandMet's mission to improve shareholder returns. We intend to fix that."
GrandMet shares were steady at 469 pence.
($1=.6373 Pound)
