British sweetener and animal feed producer Tate &amp; Lyle Plc issued a profits warning on Thursday as the strength of sterling on foreign exchange markets stripped 7.1 million pounds from its profits in the first quarter.
"Results for the half year to March 1997 are expected to be below those for the corresponding period but above those achieved in the second half of the 1996 financial year," said the company in an annual statement to shareholders.
The company made pretax profits of 168.2 million pounds ($272.4 million) in the six months to March 30, 1996 and full year profits of 276.3 million, down 11.2 percent on the year.
Tate &amp; Lyle said if current exchange rates prevailed for the rest of its financial year, results for the full-year would be "marginally" lower than the 1996 year.
But Tate shares staged a recovery from their recent lows, gaining 10 pence to 435, after remarks about the performance of its North American unit Staley were less negative than had been feared.
The company said the currency impact resulted from the translation of foreign currencies and the EU Common Agricultural Policy currency mechanism.
The revaluation of the green pound hit results at Tate &amp; Lyle Sugars in the first quarter where profits were cut by 1.6 million pounds.
"Excluding this currency impact, profit before tax for the quarter was, as expected, below the corresponding period last year which had benefited from good margins in maize sweeteners in the U.S.," said the company.
The company said results for the year in dollars at Staley would be in line with its forecasts because of reduced costs and a shift in production towards non-high fructose corn syrup products.
Tate said high fructrose corn syrup prices remained highly competitive but "management initiatives have reduced costs and directed production towards non-HFCS products."
The company added that favourable trends in America's sugar markets and reduced operating costs had resulted in higher dollar profits in the group's American sugar companies compared with last year's first quarter.
It said the improvement would more than offset the expected downturn at Staley.
"The statement wasn't as bearish as some had feared," said one senior trader.
David Lang, analyst at Henderson Crossthwaite, said there were signs that Tate's prospects were improving, pointing to the company's statement that first-half profits would be above levels in the second half of last year.
"I think the market should take comfort from that. There is a major turnaround coming," Lang said.
"If you take a long-term view you would be a buyer. The recovery is starting lower than we thought and next year could be tough, but the long-term outlook is improving."
The company said profits from its sweetener and starches operations in Africa improved in the first quarter.
But lower production cut profit contributions from Australia and adverse conditions in Russia and Thailand hit results from sugar trading operations.
($1=.6175 Pound)
