Sir Ian Prosser, chairman of British brewer to leisure group Bass Plc, warned shareholders on Thursday that the business was running slightly behind its forecasts, sending its shares tumbling.
"In the first 16 weeks of the year, the business has continued to make progress, although slightly behind our expectations," Prosser told shareholders at the annual meeting.
The company's 2,200-strong hotel chain Holiday Inn has moved forward in the first 13 weeks of the year, but as expected, the rate of growth in dollar profits is below last year, he said.
Bass shares fell 21-1/2p to 831p on the trading statement.
"The tone of the statement was negative and clearly intended to lower market expectations but it's difficult to put a finger on exactly where the disappointments lie, with the exception of leisure," said Mark Puleikis, analyst at Merrill Lynch.
In an interview with Reuters shortly after the meeting Prosser declined to add to the trading statement.
Brokers currently estimate Bass will report pretax profits of between 798 million and 670 million pounds ($1.10 billion) in 1997.
In America franchise revenue per available room (REVpar) from Holiday Inns has grown by 7.0 percent (11 percent in company-managed hotels) in the first 13 weeks of the year, Prosser told the meeting.
"In Europe trading is good with growth in RevPar of 7.5 percent, but with the Chinese market softening, revpar has fallen by 4.0 percent in Asia," he said.
In Bass Taverns, managed house turnover grew by 9.0 percent and food revenues increased by 21 percent, while machine revenues rose 9.0 percent during the period.
Operating costs in the pubs have risen in line with turnover, he added.
Prosser said profits at Bass's other leisure retailing businesses were "a little ahead" of last year, with all businesses except Gala trading well.
Gala admissions per club were some 4.0 percent lower, and spend per head was off 1.0 percent versus last year.
Bass Brewers profits continued to grow, with total beer volumes up by 2.5 percent, but margins were slightly down on last year due to intense competition, Prosser said.
He also said the soft drinks market has been flat since the start of the year, but added that the company's Robinsons brand continued to make progress.
