Anglo-Dutch consumer giant Unilever NV/Plc should report a 10 percent improvement in underlying profits for the full year on Tuesday but the increase will be marred by sterling's surge on foreign exchange markets.
Analysts also expected Unilever to unveil a hefty charge for reorganising some of its newly acquired businesses like personal products company Helene Curtis and industrial cleaner Diversey.
On average, 24 brokers polled forecast 1996 pretax profits of 2.525 billion stg up from 2.319 billion for the year to December 31, 1995.  
The company is expected to take a currency hit of about 50 million stg in the fourth quarter rising to as much as 210 million in 1997.
A restructuring charge of 80 million stg on average for the fourth quarter should bring the total to about 220 million net for the year.
Most of the curency movement took place in the fourth quarter and Unilever operates a currency policy of applying constant exchange rates until the fourth quarter, at the end of which it calculates and applies the average rate for the year.  
Sterling has apprectiated by 11.1 percent since October 1, 1996 against the ECU and about 45 percent of Unilever's business is in hard European currency terms.
The real impact of currency movements will come through in the dividend payout, which is set as a percantage of earnings in sterling and Dutch guilder.
Analysts forecast the total dividend in sterling will rise 4.8 percent to 30.8p but by some 8.0 percent in guilders to 8.73 guilders. In early January, many brokers recommended switching out of Unilever Plc to its NV shares to pick-up the benefit, a factor which has dragged down the company's London share price.  
Unilever Plc shares were 7-1/2p lower at 1357p on Friday, but in four out of the last five years the p/e ratio has fallen to 13.5 or 14 times in the early part of the year before climbing steeply ahead of the first half figures.
Brokers' estimated profits for 1997 are dependent on key assumptions about currency rates and the breakdown of income streams by currency -- many are working on the basis of $1.70 average for the year against the pound and 2.65 mark -- but six houses have downgraded their 1997 forecasts over the last month.  
"Our reading of the clues so far is to expect a higher gross restructuring than perhaps others," said Michael Bourke, analyst at Panmure Gordon, who is estimating a charge of 110 million in the fourth quarter to give 250 million net for the year.
"The fourth quarter tends to be where they dump the bulk of their charges and their recent acquisitions have needed considerable reorganisation," he said.
Analysts expect to see profits driven by continued sales growth in the emerging markets of South America and a pick up in North America. However, earnings from Europe and especially Germany are likely to remain depressed.  
"North America and Latam are likely to be big the engines for growth whereas Europe remains a difficult market, but we should see the benefits of rationalisation start to come through there," said Nikko analyst Dermott Carr.
Brokers are keen to get a tighter grip on chairman Niall FitzGerald's strategy. Since taking over as chairman in September, FitzGerald has talked about re-shaping the group to give it a sharper focus.  
"I think the market is expecting a bit too much of one man. I don't think FitzGerald will be as radical as many think but it would be interesting to get a clearer view of what he defines as a non-core business," said Carr.
Generally analysts think Unilever will remain a fairly broad church under FitzGerald rather than a pure, branded food company and unlike the single brand focus of a Coca-Cola or Procter &amp; Gamble. -- London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
