British food manufacturer Dalgety Plc posted an 8.5 percent fall in profits on Monday to 43 million pounds ($70.5 million) in the six months to December 31, 1996 as sales of its beef and animal feeds slid.
The company was hit by evidence showing that the brain wasting disease Bovine Spongiform Encepthalopathy (BSE) in cattle, known as mad-cow disease, could spread to humans who ate infected meat.
The European Union imposed a worldwide ban on British beef exports last March and insisted on the slaughter of thousands of British cattle, a cull which has been delayed.
But Dalgety chief executive Richard Clothier said things should improve. "During the second half the continued improvements in Petfoods, new capacity and new products in Food Ingredients and the declining effects of BSE in Dalgety Agriculture are expected to result in a much improved performance," said Clothier.
Analysts had forecast pre-tax profits of 41-45.5 million pounds. Dalgety maintained its dividend at 8.5p in anticipation of a better second half performance.
"The figures are pretty much as flagged in terms of what it tells us about the shape, size and direction of the company," said UBS analyst Charles Mills.
Dalgety shares were up 2p at 341p in early trade, helped by positive remarks from Clothier.
The export ban on British beef affected Dalgety's manufacturing organisation and temporarily resulted in higher costs of outsourcing and distribution.
In Petfoods, Dalgety improved trading profit by eight percent to 17.9 million pounds in the first half, helped by cat food, with sales of the Felix brand up 16 percent across Europe.
Operating profit from the company's agri-business fell 23 percent to 15 million pounds as a direct result of the effects of BSE on British cattle feed.
"Sales volumes of cattle feed for the six months period fell by 30 percent, as the delay in the culling programme resulted in excess milk production which reduced the demand for feed and created intense price competition in the market," said Clothier.
Operating profit from food ingredients was steady at 15.3 million pounds as fears over BSE reduced the sales of meat seasonings in the first quarter. But demand for alternatives had now offset the decline in beef-based foods, Clothier said.
In food distribution, Dalgety's profits fell seven percent to 5.6 million due in part to the strength of sterling against the dollar. Growth in the American fast food market slowed, affecting hamburger chain McDonald's sales, said Clothier.
"The outlook remains tough in the U.S. but McDonald's are responding with vigour and developments in new markets such as Brazil and Mexico provide good opportunities for future growth," he added.
The group's net debt increased to 305 million pounds from 281 million, giving a gearing ratio of 76 percent. ($1=.6097 Pound)
