Anglo-Dutch consumer products group Unilever NV/Plc Tuesday reported a 15 percent rise in pre-tax profits for 1996 and said it was putting its speciality chemicals businesses up for sale.
Pre-tax profit rose to 2.66 billion pounds ($4.4 billion) on a 6 percent rise in revenues to 33.52 billion ($54.7 billion). 2.
Unilever's stock surged on the results, which were better than the 53 billion pounds ($4.13 billion) analysts had forecast, and the planned sale of the speciality chemicals businesses.
Chairman Niall FitzGerald said the overall economic situation in 1997 was likely to be generally favourable, as in 1996, but he warned about market conditions in Europe, particularly France and Germany.
He said the planned sale of Unilever's speciality chemicals businesses would enable the company to concentrate on achieving growth in its consumer goods operations, particularly in developing and emerging markets.
"We will now seek actively buyers for the totality or the individual businesses and we will then assess those over the next month or two," he told Reuters in an interview. "We would hope to conclude a sale in the course of the next three to six months."
FitzGerald declined to say how much the businesses might be worth. The four units -- National Starch and Chemical Company, Quest International, Unichema International and Crosfield -- have combined revenue of 3.0 billion pounds ($4.9 billion), 9 percent of Unilever's total sales, and showed operating profit of 415 million pounds ($678 million) in 1996, with profit margins of 14.1 percent.
"These are extremely large and important parts of our businesses, but for some time we have been reviewing whether they should be a continuing part of the portfolio -- not because they are poorly performing themselves, they are excellent performers -- but whether we can give them the concentration and the focus that they require," FitzGerald said.
"They are essentially industrial businesses selling not to consumers but to intermediate customers. They are very fine businesses," he said. "But if you look at the way this industry is developing, we have to take a decision either to significantly improve our presence in these markets, perhaps double it, or to exit and in exiting to concentrate on the other 90 percent of our business, which is our mainstream consumer goods business."
The four companies together make up one of the world's largest speciality chemicals groups, employing 15,800 people in more than 35 countries.
Unilever is the world's largest producer of both margarine and ice cream, and its activities span food, personal products, such as Pond's cold cream, and household goods brands, including laundry detergents and Lux soap.
In Europe, Unilever's overall results in 1996 were held back by the impact of poor weather on ice cream sales and the impact of the bovine spongiform encephalopathy beef crisis.
"We see little reason, however, to believe that conditions in Europe, particularly in France and Germany, will improve," FitzGerald said.
Good progress in North American market conditions provided the basis for better results, and the momentum of growth continued strongly in the fast-growing emerging markets.
