Brewer to leisure group Whitbread Plc has turned in a "sound" business performance in the last three months, said chief executive Peter Jarvis in an interview on Friday.
"The performance of core businesses in the last quarter of the year, December, January and Febuary, has been sound," said Jarvis.
The company reports its full year results ending February 28, 1997 on May 7.
"Whitbread Inns in that period have seen like-for-like sales growth in food and drink of between four and five percent. And overall their sales have been well into double digits."
In mid January the company reported an eight percent increase in its sales in the five week period from December 1, 1996 compared with the previous year.
"Our beer company, particularly in takehome had a very strong christmas performance relative to the market. Our market share in takehome beer is the highest it has ever been," he added.
The group's "beer volume for the year that is about to finish is well up on the market which is going to be one or two percent down."
He said the refurbished pubs within the Whitbread Inn division -- like Brewers Fayre and Hogshead -- are performing very well.
"The returns that we are getting for the investment in new openings in the last six months are better than we have had historically."
The group is converting its refurbished sites into profit quicker because they are opening them more quickly, he said.
Whitbread will open another 50 Pelican restaurants -- either Cafe Rouge or Cafe Dome -- by the end of the 1997 financial year, with plans to expand the chain to 300-400.
"And I think it will be relatively more successful as it moves out of London. Where we have opened in the provinces the performances are extremely good."
Outside London there is less competition and customers view Cafe Rouge as a "much more serious restaurant," whereas in London people tend to have one drink and move on and the average spend per head is therefore lower.
"Across the group we have a pipeline of new sites to open in the next 12 months which is the strongest pipeline we have ever had for the company -- we have 47 for Pelican, 45 Travel Inns, 80 managed pubs and 40 Costa Coffees."
"It's a pipeline of at least 200 new outlets to be opened in the next year or so."
The trend for eating out in Britain is growing fast and there is futher to go over the next decade, said Jarvis.
"The thing about the marketplace in Britain is that the percentage of money that people spend on eating out as a percentage of food is only about one-fifth as against half in the United States." -- Tim Farrand, London Newsroom +44 171 542 6437.
