Anglo-Dutch food to detergent company Unilever Plc/NV is unlikely to bid for French food group Danone as it would clash with its strategy and come up against big regulatory hurdles, said analysts.
"I think it would be unlikely," Paribas analyst John Campbell said on Thursday.
Unilever earlier would not comment on the rumours.
Since Unilever announced the sale of its speciality chemicals division earlier this month, expected to fetch some 5 billion stg, Unilever's name has been linked with a host of potential takeover targets including Cadbury-Schweppes and Reckitt and Coleman, sending their shares higher, but few of them fit the Unilever strategy, said analysts.
Cadbury-Schweppes, is too big in Britain and Unilever is reluctant to enter the soft drinks market especially in view of stiff competition from Coca-Cola and PepsiCo, said analysts.
C-S would also bring with it relatively high debt levels -- net debt stood at 1.617 billion stg on June 15, 1996 and gearing at 121 percent, before the sale of its 51 percent stake in Coca Cola and Schweppes Beverages Ltd.
"I just don't think Danone is a runner. It's just idle chatter. Unilever just does not want to go down the beer route or the packaging route and it does not want to hold a raft of businesses in France, Italy and Spain," said one analyst who asked not to be named.
A more likely target for Unilever is CPC International, said analysts, the company has a large, fast moving, international consumer foods and baking business and some 60 percent of its sales outside the United States. CPC brands include Hellmann's Mayonnaise and Knor soups, Pot Noodles and Skippy peanut butter.
Unilever chairman Niall Fitzgerald said at the time of the company's full year results earlier this month he hopes to conclude a sale in the next three to six months. He also said the sale was designed to "de-clutter" the group's portfolio and concentrate on key brands which include Persil detergent, Solero and Magnum ice-cream and Flora margarine as well as free up funds for expansion in emerging markets like South America and Asia Pacific.
The European foods business remains depressed against a weak economic background, poor consumer demand and tough competition.
"I don't think Danone has got enough eastern promise about it," said Michael Landymore analyst at Henderson Crosthwaite. "It would put Unilever squarely back in Europe which it has said it trying to get out of in favour of developing markets," said Campbell.
Unilever would also have to break up Danone to get its hands on the right business lines -- grocery, biscuits and water, said analysts.
"Unilever would have to break the company up because it would not want to keep the glass containers division or the beer division," said Campbell. "It's also a flagship food company in France and it would be investigated under anti-trust legislation by the EC (European Commission)," he added.
The EU has to clear a merger or acquisition involving a world-wide turnover of at least five billion ECU and a European turnover threshold of 250 million ECUs.
Acquiring Danone would also stretch Unilever's resources, said analysts, who estimate the company has a warchest of about 10 billion stg after the sale of its speciality chemicals division. Danone, capitalised at about $10.8 billion, would probably fetch a price of about $15 billion, said analysts.
-- London newsroom + 44 171 542 6437
