London Clubs International, which runs the London Ritz and Les Ambassadeurs casinos, defended its hostile 181 million pound ($292.1 million) bid for Capital Corporation on Tuesday, describing it as "generous" and "appropriate".
"I think we have said it is a generous offer. There clearly maybe circumstances in which we would be prepared to reconsider our position but at this stage we clearly think we are coming forward with an appropriate offer," said LCI chief executive Alan Goodenough in an interview.
But takeover target Capital Corporation hit back swiftly, saying the offer from London Clubs failed to take account of its potential.
"As we have said already this offer takes no account of our potential now that we have two fully operational high roller clubs," said Capital Corp chief executive Alan Hearn in a statement.
"Given our experience of the business, we think we are in the best position to value it and on that basis we think it is a generous offer," said Goodenough.
"At this stage what we have got on the table is what we consider to be appropriate given the information that we have," he said.
He would not be drawn on how Capital Corp shareholders are responding to the offer. The decision rests with about just six institutions who own more than 50 percent of both companies.
Mercury Asset Management owns about 18 percent of shares in both companies, PDFM has some nine percent of Capital Corp and three percent of London Clubs, Schroders has nine percent in London Clubs and 3.5 percent in Capital.
Jupiter has some six percent in London Clubs and 10 percent in Capital. Morgan Grenfell Fund Managers owns about four percent in London Clubs and 12 percent in Capital.
"We have visited them (institutional shareholders) and presented our case and I would be very disappointed if they did not see the logic of what we are telling them," said Goodenough.
London Clubs unveiled its offer document for Capital Corp on Tuesday in which it set out its rationale for the bid, saying Capital has failed to deliver shareholder value.
London Clubs also argues that it has casinos overseas, whereas Capital Corp has only two London ones, which reduces volatility of earnings.
It also said it has an international profile that will lead to further expansion opportunities.
London Clubs International shares closed two pence up at 384-1/2p. Capital Corp shares were flat at 203p.
Under London stock exchange rules a bidder has 60 days in which to acquire its target or the bid lapses. ($ = 0.619 British Pounds)
