Tobacco to insurance group B.A.T Industries Plc on Wednesday posted a five percent rise in 1996 profits and signalled it would look at settling anti-tobacco lawsuits in the United States.
It also said it would take a closer look at its own corporate structure. The company said it was keeping an open mind about whether to demerge its tobacco and insurance arms but added it was interested in buying a British life insurer.
Profits before tax rose to 2.495 billion pounds ($4 billion) but were hit by a 160 million charge for U.S. environmental claims against its Eagle Star insurance unit. Excluding the charge, profit rose by seven percent, putting them at the lower end of stock market forecasts.
Chief executive Martin Broughton told reporters that while the company maintained its stance that it had no liability, it now considered it sensible to look at settling U.S. tobacco claims in the context of agreement with Congress.
"The on-going cost in legal terms, and the impact on the share price is such that we think it sensible and appropriate to evaluate a settlement," he said.
He put the legal costs at $100 million in 1996, which he expected to rise at least for the next two years.
A sensible settlement would be one that covered all current and future claims and was approved by Congress and the White House, he said.
So far B.A.T has not been approached by plaintiffs or the U.S. government with any sensible proposals, said Broughton.
"There ought to be a sensible figure which gets it sorted out," he said. He called plaintiffs' suggestions of $10 billion and $6 billion, which represents the profits of the entire U.S. tobacco industry, unacceptable.
He said the company remained confident it would ultimately win any cases against it.
B.A.T estimates it has spent 250 million pounds ($402.9 million) in legal costs fighting tobacco-related law suits.
About 500 cases have been filed since 1954, but only 19 have so far reached the courts across the industry.
As well as disappointment over the exceptional insurance charge some analysts had hoped B.A.T would say more about the possible demerger of its tobacco and insurance arms.
B.A.T shares, up 32 percent since November on promising perceptions about its legal battles in the U.S., tumbled 20 pence to close at 530 pence on Wednesday.
Chairman Lord Cairns told reporters the company kept an open mind on its corporate structure.
"We are not wedded to the structure that we have at the moment. It is a question over which we keep an open mind."
B.A.T's tobacco business turned in a seven percent overall improvement in local currency to 1.634 billion pounds with group volumes four percent ahead and world market share increasing to 12.8 percent from 12.4 percent.
Trading profit from financial services grew by an underlying eight percent to 1.2 billion with strong performances from two insurers -- Farmers in the U.S. and Allied Dunbar in Britain. ($ = 0.619 British Pounds)
