Tobacco to insurance group B.A.T Industries Plc reported a five percent rise in 1996 profits to 2.495 billion pounds ($4 billion) on Wednesday, hit by an exceptional charge of 160 million pounds for U.S. environmental claims against its Eagle Star insurance unit.
Excluding the charge, profit rose by seven percent.
Chairman Lord Cairns said in a statement B.A.T dismissed any liability for damages currently being claimed by smokers in a string of tobacco related lawsuits in the U.S.
The company also said it kept an open mind on its corporate structure, but gave no news of any concrete plans.
As well as disappointment over the exceptional insuarnce charge some analysts had hoped B.A.T would say more about the possible demerger of its tobacco and insurance arms.
B.A.T shares, up 32 percent since November as its legal battles in the U.S. looked more promising, tumbled 20 pence to 530 pence in early trade.
"We continue to believe that B.A.T Industries itself has no potential liability in any U.S. tobacco litigation," Cairns said, adding that the tobacco industry was confident of winning the cases and does not intend to offer a settlement.
However, Cairns said the company would be prepared to "evaluate proposals from third parties to provide relief from all current and future suits, provided that they were in shareholders' interests".
Cairns said, "Our twin goals are to improve the long term growth prospects of our business and to increase shareholder value. We continue to evaluate business oppurtunities and issues of corporate structure that will enable us to meet them."
B.A.T director of public affairs Michael Prideaux told Reuters the company was keeping an open mind. "We were surprised by media reports that we had ruled out a demerger," said Prideaux. "We are not convinced that simply doing the splits helps either business much, what we are saying however is we have an open mind."
The company has looked at several options for improving shareholder return over the last year, including merging its financial services arm, comprising mainly general and life insurance companies, with another insurer.
Prideaux dismissed the idea of floating off the company's U.S. cigarette arm Brown &amp; Williamson as a way of ringfencing the rest of B.A.T from any potential payments to smokers in the United States.
"Tobacco is strategically managed as world wide business so simply floating off B&amp;W would be a classic way of destroying shareholder value because B&amp;W plays an integral part in developing U.S. international brands around the world," said Prideaux.
"If it became independent you would probably end up with separate sales networks."
B.A.T's tobacco business turned in a 7 percent overall improvement in local currency to 1.634 billion pounds with group volumes four percent ahead and world market share increasing to 12.8 percent from 12.4 percent.
Trading profit from financial services grew by an underlying eight percent to 1.2 billion with strong performances from two insurers Farmers in the U.S. and Allied Dunbar in Britain.
The company recommended an eight percent increase in the base dividend to 26.0p, with a further 3.5 pence to be paid as a foreign income dividend.
($ = 0.619 British Pounds)
