Britain's largest brewer Scottish and Newcastle is prepared to stick with its Center Parcs holiday resorts through both good times and bad, chief executive Brian Stewart said.
"We do see leisure as offering very significant growth oppurtunities, we have to take the rough with the smooth and we have a period which is difficult but we will overcome that," he told Reuters late on Tuesday.
Profits from Center Parcs resorts were down 11 percent at 39 million pounds at the half-year stage due to weak economic conditions in mainland Europe and the cost of improving its facilities in the Netherlands.
The relatively poor performance of S&amp;N's leisure division has caused many analysts to question the wisdom of S&amp;N's move into leisure.
"We certainly hope the consumer gains a little bit of confidence in Europe but we are very positive about initiatives we are taking now to get Center Parcs back on track."
Bookings in UK Center Parcs were "very strong and well ahead of last year," said Stewart.
He said the planned opening of Rank -owned village holiday resort Oasis was no more serious a competitive a threat than any other leisure deveopment.
He said the company planned to concentrate on existing Center Parcs and no new Center Parcs would be built in the next year.
"We are very positive about our future prospects from our leisure division, where we see significant growth oppurtunities," said Stewart, adding that he expected to see some improvement in mainland Europe from Center Parcs in 1998.
"Whether the consumer recovers in terms of confidence, especially in Germany, I think is debatable because there will be political and economic uncertainty there this calendar year."
He said S&amp;N was unconcerned that it had lost some market share to Bass BASS.l in the beer market.
"I'm not worried about the competition, I'm worried that our brands continue to perform as well as they have done over the past twelve months."
"Our brands are performing better and people are more conscious about brands, consumer service and marketing support, so I see the recipe pretty much as we have experienced over the last 12 months."
Stewart said S&amp;N expected to continue to supply beer to most of Inntrepeneur's 3,000 tied pubs, despite the fact its exclusive beer supply contract with the company expires in March 1998.
Pub company Inntrepreneur is jointly owned by Grand Metropolitan and Australian brewer Foster's.
"We do anticipate we will hold the majority of the brands based on our brand performance through those outlets. You have got to remember that publicans have traded with these brands for many years and they will not wish to upset their customers, particularly when the brands are performing as well as they are."
- London Newroom +44 171 542 6437
