British household products group Reckitt and Colman Plc is expected to report a 15 percent increase in its full year profits on Thursday, as the benefits of its acquisition of L&amp;F Products feeds through.
Analysts forecasts for 1996 pretax profits range from 314 to 320 million stg, up from 285 million last time. Estimates of the total dividend range from 21.8 to 22.6 pence.
The group, known for brands ranging from Mr Sheen polish and Brasso, to Dettol disinfectant, acquired L&amp;F Products, maker of America's best-selling disinfectant Lysol, for one billion pounds in 1994.
"The real driver will come from the benefits of intergrating L&amp;F, which will bring substantial cost-savings," said one analyst who declined to be named.
At the half year stage, the company reported sales up 5.3 percent, although turnover in the United States grew more strongly at 7.0 percent. In Europe underlying sales were flat due to sluggish economic activity and stiffer competition.
"It's primarily from the U.S., where we expect growth. We have had encouraging signs from management in the last couple of months on that one," said an analyst.
At the half year stage, pretax profits grew to 165 million stg from 149.6 million. Turnover from continuing operations grew by just four percent during the period to 1.16 billion stg.
The company continues to face competition in Britain and mainland Europe from larger retail chains selling cheaper own-brand products.
Reckitt has targetted South America and Asia, where it believes consumers are more influenced by brand names. Last year sales in eastern Asia rose by 25 percent, while in Brazil turnover jumped 20 percent.
The company generates about 32 percent of revenue from Europe, a similar amount from North America and 18 percent from emerging markets.
Reckitt shares have risen sharply in recent weeks amid market rumout that it may fall victim to a takeover bid by Unilever.
But the investment community has now largely dismissed this, arguing that it does not fit the fast moving consumer goods sector that Unilever Plc has identified as one of its favourites, nor does it have enough of a presence in emerging markets.
The shares have risen more than a pound since the rumours emerged, to the current 805p level and many analysts think this sort of bid premium now makes it too expensive as a takeover candidate.
"Our view is that on balance Unilever probably have higher targets on their list as in some ways Reckitt replicates Unilever in terms of its geographic exposure and I think Unielver wants to expand more rapidly in emerging markets," said Carl Short, analyst at SocGen.
R&amp;C's stated aim is to become the world leader in household products and dominate over the counter pharmaceuticals.
The company's whose name used to be synonomous with Britain's favourite mustard Coleman's now generates only about five percent of its trading profit from food operations.
-- Tim Farrand, London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
