United Biscuits (Holdings) Plc more than doubled its profits in 1996 to 109 million pounds ($174 million) before tax and exceptional items, reflecting a simpler and slimmed-down portfolio of products.
United, which owns brands such as McVities biscuits and KP nuts but has exited from its U.S. Keebler subsidiary, said total exceptional charges, mainly from the loss on disposal of businesses, amounted to 84.7 million pounds in 1996 compared with 150.3 million in 1995.
Sales rose by three percent to 1.887 billion and trading profits grew four percent to 129.2 million.
Underlying profits growth was in line with stock brokers forecasts, but a presentation by management to analysts was greeted positively, sending the group's shares up 11 pence to 248-1/2p by 1415 gmt.
"It's all quite encouraging. The way they are analysing and managing the business is very much more in line with what the market demands," said Richard Workman, an analyst at ABN-AMRO Hoare Govett.
The company said its recovery was strongly led by its British operations, while in mainland Europe, it started to realise the potential of businesses acquired earlier in the 1990's.
UB's British business increased profits before exceptional items by 12 percent to 113.7 million pounds as renewed consumer confidence encouraged shoppers to step up brands.
In an interview UB's managing director Eric Nicoli said UB Has now entered a phase of consolidation after a hectic disposal programme.
"The emphasis is on organic growth as we are now in a consolidation phase," said Nicoli.
Over the last two years UB has sold its American snack operation Keebler, pulled out of Portugal and exited from Spanish snacks. It has also sold one of its Italian snack businesses, withdrawn from Turkey and Brazil and sold Ross Vegetables Products business in Britain.
UB expects its margins in Europe to remain firm and to move up over the next two to three years, said Nicoli.
"We expect margins to move to 10 percent in all our businesses over a two or three year period," he said.
(Corrects to make clear that company isn't expecting European markets alone to move by 10 percent.)
UB margins are currently at around 10 percent in Britain and four percent in mainland Europe.
In 1997 the company plans to build on the turnaround "all our markets continue to be very competitive but we expect another year of good progress," said Nicoli.
The total dividend payout was increased by 10 pence per share from 9.8p.
The company's leading biscuit brands include McVities in Britain, Verkade in Holland and Oxford in Denmark. Biscuit sales growth came from the launch of Go Ahead! a range of low fat products. UB also owns snacks KP Nuts, Skips and Hula Hoops.
