British household products group Reckitt and Colman Plc reported an 11 percent rise in 1996 pretax profits to 316.5 million pounds ($505.5 million) on Thursday, saying the underlying performance of the group remained solid.
In an interview, chief executive Vernon Sankey said the group expected to see similar growth rates in sales and earnings in 1997.
But the company's shares slipped 3p to 782p as the figures came in right in the middle of brokers' forecast range.
Household products, comprising 80 percent of group turnover, posted a nine percent increase in trading profit to 283.9 million. Earnings from the pharmaceutical division grew 12.2 percent to 67.2 million.
The company benefitted from 27 million of savings from its integration of L&amp;F Products in North America, which it acquired for one billion pounds in 1994. Lysol, America's best selling disinfectant, increased its market share across the range.
The lavatory care category grew by 18.1 percent in Africa and the Middle East, and most of the countries in Latin America showed double digit growth with Harpic. Floor care products in Latin America achieved record sales, driving the group's regional market share up to 49.5 percent.
But economic conditions in Europe continued to be tough and sales overall were flat although margins improved, said the company.
"Mainland Europe has been relatively flat for most of 1996 and I think it's too early to say Europe is turning around. There are some reasonable signs. France and germany are still very tough," said Sankey.
The strategy is working, he said, which remains to focus on number one and number two brands with global potential, use the group's wide geographic base and expand in developing markets.
About one third of Reckitt's business comes from North America, one third in Europe, a third from the the rest of the world. Some 26 percent of business comes from developing markets of Africa, Asia and Latin America.
If sterling remains at its current high levels on foreign exchange markets it would hit Reckitt by some 20 million on translation next year, Sankey said.
Reckitt shares have risen by 14 percent in recent weeks amid market rumours that the company may fall victim to a takeover bid by Anglo-Dutch giant Unilever.
But many analysts now think the bid premium makes the company too expensive as a takeover target.
Sankey dismissed speculation that Unilever Plc would bid for Reckitt as just rumour, saying the company has not been approached by Unilever.
"It's a rumour and we have had rumours for years. We get rumours everyday, now quite frankly that is it," said Sankey.
The company declared a total dividend payout of 21.97 pence per share up from 20.15 pence. Including the foreign income dividend it was increased to 23.37p.
($ = 0.626 British Pounds)
