Four days of savage combat around this mountain town some 30 miles (50 km) east of Bogota has exposed what military experts say is the fatal flaw in the Colombian army's new counterinsurgency strategy -- the belief that helicopters can win the war.
The battle raging against knife-edged precipices and deep gorges between leftist rebels and the army has shown the strategy for what it is, the experts said.
"There have been many examples where more material hasn't won the war. More helicopters are just not the solution. You simply can't fly a chopper into the combat zone and drop troops," a Western defence attache told Reuters.
The Colombian military is scheduled to take delivery of several U.S.-made Blackhawks and Russian-produced Mi-17 helicopters this year. But the defence attache said, "I personally wouldn't touch the Russian helicopters. I don't know what the military is thinking of."
Fighting began last Friday when two companies of heliborne troops were attacked as they put down near San Juanito searching for a rebel column in the area. So far, at least 19 soldiers are reported dead and dozens listed as wounded or missing. Details about rebel casualties have been sketchy.
Attempts to fly in reinforcements over the weekend were thwarted as Blackhawk helicopters came under repeated fire from Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) guerrillas. At least three helicopters were knocked temporarily out of commission, giving rebels time to take up strategic positions.
Just three weeks ago, in the face of a wave of guerrilla attacks across the country, armed forces chief Gen. Harold Bedoya announced a counterinsurgency emergency plan in which a sophisticated helicopter fleet was to play a key role and allow for surgical strikes against the rebels.
But experts say the strikes are being made with little more than a dull knife if the fighting around San Juanito is any example. It is one of the longest battles in recent memory and one of the worst to have erupted so close to Bogota.
The last humiliating blow dealt by the FARC was when they overran a jungle base in southern Colombia on Aug. 30, killing 27 soldiers and taking at least 60 prisoner. That defeat led military experts to suggest the army had lost control of Colombia's long-running guerrilla war and was setting itself up for seemingly irrevocable defeat.
In the battle that began on Friday, Defence Minister Guillermo Alberto Gonzalez stressed that the army had stepped intentionally into the lion's den with its helicopters. "This whole thing started as an army offensive. It wasn't an ambush, the army went in there," Gonzalez said.
According to reports so far, the army has definitely come come off as second best.
