The Colombian government said on Tuesday that 16 soldiers and as many as 15 leftist guerrillas were killed in a fierce four-day battle in a mountainous area near the capital city.
The fighting, in which the Defence Ministry said 13 to 15 Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) rebels were killed, began late on Friday when about 50 soldiers were airlifted into the area in pursuit of what was initially thought to be a small band of insurgents.
The battle was the worst and longest to erupt near Bogota in recent memory as what turned out to be hundreds of FARC rebels made their presence felt with a bang on the doorstep of the nation's capital.
Defence Minister Guillermo Alberto Gonzalez, who announced the army casualty figure with "deep regret" in a national radio interview, denied reports that dozens of soldiers were missing or unaccounted for in the rugged combat area around this mountain town just 30 miles (50 km) east of the capital.
"There are no missing soldiers," Gonzalez said.
He said 21 soldiers were stranded in the early stages of the firefight. But he said all had been plucked to safety by their fellow troops and most were rescued unharmed.
Army chief Gen. Manuel Jose Bonett told foreign journalists last week that Bogota was among the strategic targets of the FARC and National Liberation Army, Colombia's second-largest guerrilla group.
Earlier on Tuesday Colombia's army said it was pouring hundreds of reinforcements into the mountainous area.
Army sources in Villavicencio, capital of Meta province, told Reuters up to 1,000 troops were set to be ferried into the combat zone.
Military sources also confirmed that intense aerial bombardments of the area had been under way since Sunday in a bid to crush the rebels.
The latest bombardments came just after dawn on Tuesday and lasted nearly 90 minutes. Later in the day helicopter gunships buzzed an outlying settlement and strafed hillsides.
One chopper later touched down in an area known as El Tablon and picked up at least three bodies of dead soldiers, witnesses said. No further gunfire was heard from mid-afternoon but an army officer said combat could restart at any moment.
"I'm sure the FARC hasn't got away. We have the exit routes out of the area blocked, they're just lying low," he said.
At least 400 people have fled to San Juanito from outlying villages since late on Friday, pouring into the streets of the normally quiet farming town of about 1,200 people.
"I was about half a mile from the fighting, at night I saw the bullets flying past my door and windows," said Jose Angel Munoz, who said he fled his village on Sunday with his wife and seven children.
"I've never known such fear, the fighting has never been this bad," he said.
"It made me so sad to see the bombings this morning," added Litia Gutierrez, another displaced villager. "I just don't know when I can go home again or what I will find when I get there."
The combat zone was cordoned off by troops late on Tuesday. But there was no indication that FARC forces were fleeing in the face of the government's firepower.
Gonzalez said combat continued in the zone late on Tuesday and said "it will continue as long as necessary."
