Leftist guerrillas appeared on Wednesday to have eluded government troops and melted into the mountains after a four-day battle in which 16 soldiers and at least 13 rebels were killed.
Bombers flew over the combat zone 30 miles (50 km) east of Bogota late on Tuesday, but first light on Wednesday brought no repeat of the massive air strikes of the day before. The rattle of sporadic gunfire had died down and villagers displaced by the fighting were considering returning home.
The clash between the army and Revolutionary Armed Forces (FARC) rebels began late last Friday and ended in one of the worst defeats for the military since the FARC overran a military base in southern Colombia in August, killing 27 soldiers and taking 60 as prisoners.
The FARC, which was still holding the soldiers, sent the Caracol radio network proof of their survival on Wednesday, including recent photographs of each of the 60 soldiers and letters from 59 of them to their families.
The Defence Ministry on Tuesday said 16 soliders died in the San Juanito fighting and 13 to 15 rebels were killed. Most of the army casualties came as soldiers disembarked from two helicopters in an area known as El Tablon in search of a rebel column and were met by a hail of guerrilla gunfire.
Bogota's El Tiempo newspaper said the soliders quickly ran out of ammunition and some preferred committing suicide with hand grenades to being taken prisoner by the rebels.
There was no confirmation from the troops in and around San Juanito on Wednesday but many voiced discontent with their commanding officers and what they described as the unnecessary bloodshed in El Tablon.
"It was madness for our officers to fly helicopters into that area. The soldiers were hardly out of the door before they were gunned down," one soldier said.
Some of the 400 villagers displaced by the fighting were preparing to return home on Wednesday. Most were worried about feeding the chickens and guinea pigs they keep for food and some wondered if they would still have homes after recent heavy aerial bombardment.
Ligia Gutierrez, a mother of seven, was among the displaced villagers who said she feared reprisals by the military. "The army is bound to come looking and trying to find out which of us have been feeding the guerrillas."
