Fierce fighting for control of this mountain community outside the capital shows that Colombia's military appears to be losing the battle against Latin America's oldest guerrilla army, according to political analysts.
As four-days of fighting, in which 16 soldiers died, came to an end, army commander Gen. Manuel Jose Bonett flew in by helicopter on Wednesday to tell townspeople that Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) guerrillas had been driven out of the area and that the soldiers were the peasants' allies.
But given the military's record of human rights abuses and counterinsurgency tactics, few peasants believed his pledge that the army would not take reprisals against civilians. Most said that once the military pulled out, FARC would be back.
FARC was set up as a pro-Soviet guerrilla group in 1964. It seeks a Marxist revolution for greater social justice and land distribution and opposes what it sees as U.S. interference in Colombian affairs.
San Juanito, 6,000 feet (1,800 m) above sea-level, amid knife-edge precipes and cavernous gorges, 30 miles (50 km) east of Bogota, is a microcosm of the large areas Colombia that political analysts say are under the de facto political and economic control of the guerrillas.
"We're neither for nor against the guerrillas. But we have to learn to live with those around us," said San Juanito mayor Ramiro Jimenez, referring to a strong rebel presence around the town for the past four years.
"The army has complained of lack of support from the people but we're a long way from the provincial government and there's no permanent military post here. What are we supposed to do?" he added.
Even as Bonett gave a speech in the town square, a guerrilla source pointed out some of the FARC rebels who had taken part in the recent fighting mingling among the crowd.
Since 1993, when the FARC set up its 53rd Front in the area, as many as 50 rebels at a time have held regular, public meetings with San Juanito's inhabitants -- the last was just four weeks ago.
"The rebels hold frequent meetings and say they do not want anything (from the townspeople) and pay for the food they need. But they have made it clear that they will not tolerate informants," said the guerrilla source.
Bonett believed as many as 400 FARC rebels are based in the area because of San Juanito's location along part of a "strategic corridor" linking the eastern plains to Bogota.
Hundreds of troops have transformed San Juanito into a garrison town since fighting broke out last Saturday. But many local shopkeepers view the soldiers with distrust. Some even refuse to serve them and there is a feeling that the newly arrived force is an army of occupation not liberation.
"Guerrillas used to pass by my house and ask for food and drink. It makes me frightened to think that the army could start to take reprisals against those of us who have fed the rebels," said Ligia Gutierrez, of the nearby community of El Tablon, scene of the heaviest fighting.
"If I go to my fields on foot the army accuses me of being a subversive. If I go on a mule then they accuse me of running errands for the guerrilla," said another peasant.
Another woman complained directly to Bonett that an army officer had ordered more than $2,000 merchandise, destined for her small shop, to be confiscated on the grounds it was supplies for the guerrilla.
One soldier, on guard duty near the town's small airstrip, summed up the problem for the army. "We come here and don't know the lie of the land. The locals won't guide us along the paths used by the guerrillas for fear of being seen as collaborators. We might as well be blindfolded," he said.
