Oil giant British Petroleum Co Plc is involved in a "conspiracy of silence" over human rights abuses in eastern Colombia, European legislator Richard Howitt alleged on Friday.
But the British Labor Party representative to the Euro- Parliament admitted, after a week-long fact-finding mission to the country, that he had no evidence directly linking the multinational to the deaths of social leaders in Casanare province close to BP's operations.
BP's Colombian subsidiary, British Petroleum Exploration (BPX), has consistently denied charges of links to rights abuses committed by right-wing paramilitaries and the army. In a statement issued on Friday, it "energetically" condemned all violations carried out against civic leaders in the area.
"BP is involved in a conspiracy of silence and should take a more active stance in favor of human rights ... it may be that BP staff have a direct liability in these actions or it may not be the case," Howitt, a member of the Euro-Parliament South American affairs delegation, told a news conference.
"But I find it impossible to believe that BP managers are not aware of these human rights abuses committed in their name if not by them directly," he added.
The claims against BP were fueled by a series of articles in the British press in the last year based on a multi-agency report drawn up in 1995. That report documented the murders of seven peasant or social leaders, most of whom had protested against BP's operations in the area since they began in 1991.
BP is not mentioned by name in the report's conclusions, and the killings were attributed to paramilitaries and the army.
A statement issued by BP Thursday said: "BP rejects energetically human rights abuses from whatever quarter and has publicly condemned the deaths of civic leaders and others in Casanare."
"BP categorically rejects the accusations made by Howitt. He has a great responsibility to make sure that these claims are fully founded," it added.
BPX head John Doust asked Colombia's Chief Prosecutor Alfonso Valdivieso to investigate the claims fully to show it had nothing to hide. Valdivieso opened an inquiry last month but told Doust in a letter that he had no grounds to suspect any wrongdoing by the British company.
Howitt also accused BP of failing to spend enough on the local community in Casanare. BP figures show it spent more than $17 million between 1991 and 1996 on social, education, education, environmental and infrastructure programs.
