Colombia prepared on Sunday for the start of a nationwide strike on Tuesday that promises to be the largest in 20 years, according to labor leaders and the security forces.
Talks between union chiefs and government ministers aimed at averting the stoppage by more than 800,000 state workers broke down in the early hours on Sunday.
State workers were demanding a 21.5 percent pay hike, compared to the weighted 13.5 percent government pay offer, and were protesting at what they say are the whittling away of labor rights and government plans for the privatization of state-run industries.
The government issued a communique on Sunday saying: "The salary demands far exceed the government's current financial capacity ... The suspension of national and regional privatization processes would affect the improvement of efficiency of public services."
The unions began drawing up last minute plans for the nationwide shutdown that could paralyze all but essential public services.
The police and armed forces, meanwhile, announced beefed-up security measures to curb radical protest and what they say is the possibility of leftist guerrilla attacks, timed to coincide with the industrial action.
A police spokesman said roadside checkpoints would be set up across the country and at key entry points to the capital. In many cities, local authorities imposed blanket bans on carrying firearms and banned motorcyclists from carrying passengers.
Colombian contract killers sometimes gun down their victims from the back of a motorcycle.
"The government's lack of respect and claims of guerrilla infiltration show it is trying to discredit the labor movement," said Wilson Borja, head of the main public sector union FENALTRASE.
"Because of the arbitrary behavior of the police and the military, we believe the security forces will try and stir up trouble against the workers," he added.
A decision by the chief prosecutor's office to reopen investigations against 16 telephone workers for actions during a strike four years ago and the recent arrest of more than 10 oil workers, accused of links to the National Liberation Army (ELN), Colombia's second largest guerrilla force, further incensed union bosses.
Political analysts and newspaper columnists drew tentative parallels with Ecuador's reigning political crisis, which began with a 48-hour general strike and ended with the ouster of President Abdala Bucaram.
"I don't think anything similar to Ecuador will happen here. It would be strange that citizens who have not mobilized in two years of political crisis did so now ... but one cannot completely rule out the possibility that the union protest could be the detonator for the ill-feeling that has built up in many sectors of society," wrote Enrique Santos, one of the heads of Colombia's leading El Tiempo newspaper.
