The army began stationing troops in strategic areas of Colombia as union leaders warned that the state workers' strike due to begin at midnight on Monday could unleash a nationwide civic protest.
The indefinite work stoppage by about 800,000 state employees looked set to be the largest protest since 1977. The government feared leftist guerrilla movements were planning a wave of attacks to coincide with the strike and said rebels could try to infilitrate demonstrations.
Education Minister Jaime Nino cancelled all classes in state-run schools and universities to "prevent any risk" to teachers and students as unions continued to make last-minute plans for the nationwide shutdown.
State workers called the strike to press for a 21.5 percent wage hike, compared to the government's weighted 13.5 percent wage offer. They were also protesting the whittling away of labour rights and plans for the privatisation of national and regional industries.
"It has been a long time since the unions have really fought against the government and it's difficult to say how long this strike will last. The workers and the government are very far apart on their demands," said Gustavo Triana, one of the heads of the main oil workers' union USO, known for its combative, fiercely nationalistic stance.
"I think what we're building up to is a nationwide civic protest, which will involve not only state workers but also the private sector and social groups," he added.
Government ministers and defence chiefs spent much of Monday morning huddled in an emergency security summit to discuss measures to combat street protests and the possible blockade of major highways.
After the morning summit, Defence Minister Guillermo Alberto Gonzalez told reporters: "We will be stepping up airborne patrols over the major urban areas and along the nation's main highways. Urban intelligence gathering operations will be stepped up to detect terrorist acts.
"Orderly public demonstrations will be permitted but we will take firm measures to stop subversive elements taking part in the strike," he added.
The strike threatened to severely disrupt air traffic, oil production, at least by the state-run oil company Ecopetrol, and telecommunications, labour leaders said on Monday.
All members of the armed forces including police were ordered back to barracks on Sunday. Gonzalez said police and troops would be sent in to boost security at airports and to set up roadside checkpoints across the country, including at the main entry points to the capital.
A heavy military presence was also destined for the main oil production centre of Barrancabermeja -- the power centre of the USO, one of the most radical of Colombia's unions.
Political analysts said the public sector strike could spark a groundswell of social unrest from groups not directly involved in the action but ruled out any direct parallels with the political chaos in Ecuador, which began with a general strike and ended in the ouster of President Abdala Bucaram.
The opposition Conservative Party was backing the protest as was the Communist Party, which had strong ties to both the public and private sector labour movement.
The last major national strike in Colombia took place in September 1977. At least 20 workers died in a single day of protest in Bogota.
