Police and military forces were recalled to barracks on Sunday and all school and university classes canceled as Colombia prepared for a threatened national strike on Tuesday that promised to be the largest in 20 years, the authorities said.
Talks between union chiefs and government ministers aimed at averting the indefinite stoppage by more than 800,000 state workers broke down in the early hours on Sunday.
Armed forces chiefs issued repeated warnings that leftist guerrillas were trying to infiltrate the strike and planning a wave of attacks to coincide with the labor action. Labor leaders said they feared the government was using the claim of rebel assaults as a pretext for a violent crackdown on striking workers.
State workers declared the strike to press for a 21.5 percent pay hike, compared to the weighted 13.5 percent government pay offer, and are protesting at what they call the whittling away of labor rights and government plans for the privatization of state-run industries.
The government issued a communique on Sunday saying: "The salary demands far exceed the government's current financial capacity ... The suspension of national and regional privatization processes would affect the improvement of efficiency of public services."
The unions began drawing up last-minute plans for the nationwide shutdown that could paralyze all but essential public services.
As part of the beefed-up security measures to curb radical protest and what they say is the possibility of Marxist rebel action, army and police began roadside checkpoints across the country and at key entry points into the capital.
"All leave has been canceled and all forces have been ordered to report to barracks. This is a grade one alert," said a Bogota police spokesman.
Education Minister Jaime Nino, meanwhile, canceled all classes for one week to "prevent any risk that could face children or teachers." As state employees, most teachers may be out on strike.
Wilson Borja, head of the main public sector union FENALTRASE, warned the tough security measures could be the prelude to a clampdown on the protest.
"Because of the arbitrary behavior of the police and the military, we believe the security forces will try and stir up trouble against the workers," he said.
The last major national strike took place in September 1977. In that strike, 20 workers were killed in a single day of violent street protests in Bogota.
Newspaper columnists drew tentative parallels on Sunday between the Colombian strike call and Ecuador's political crisis, which began with a 48-hour general strike and ended with the ouster of President Abdala Bucaram.
"I don't think anything similar to Ecuador will happen here. It would be strange that citizens who have not mobilized in two years of political crisis did so now ... but one cannot completely rule out the possibility that the union protest could be the detonator for the ill-feeling that has built up in many sectors of society," wrote Enrique Santos in Colombia's leading El Tiempo newspaper.
