Protesters armed with rocks, sticks and bottles clashed with police at a demonstration in Bogota's main plaza on Tuesday on the first day of a massive nationwide strike by state workers.
Tensions heightened after leftist rebels announced their support for the indefinite work stoppage, vowing to back workers' demands with force and calling for violent action.
The Bogota-based 13th Army Brigade said at least 42 people were arrested in and around Bogota on "terrorist charges" and more than 50 guns were seized as part of the army's round-up of "agitators."
Union bosses said the strike, billed as the biggest in 20 years, had won the "total" support of an estimated 800,000 public sector employees and severely disrupted airports, telecommunications, oil production, government administration, and all but emergency health services. Coffee industry transport also broke down.
Running battles erupted in one corner of Bogota's historic Plaza Bolivar as 200 young protesters, with faces covered by scarves and bandanas, tore up chunks of pavement to hurl at police crouching behind plastic riot shields.
There were no immediate reports of injuries and the rioters dispersed after repeated baton charges by police. The rally of about 30,000 striking workers outside Congress broke up shortly after the violence flared.
State workers called the strike to press for a 21.5 percent wage hike and an end to what they said was repressive labour legislation. The government, struggling to slash its fiscal deficit, has vowed to hold workers' to a weighted 13.5 percent increase. The strike began at midnight on Monday (0500 GMT on Tuesday).
"The strike is total. Workers have observed the call en masse and some social sectors are also joining in," said Hernando Hernandez, head of the oil workers' union USO, known for its combative, fiercely nationalistic stance.
A communique issued by Cuban-inspired National Liberation Army (ELN) rebels heightened authorities' fears of imminent rebel attacks. "We support our union comrades. But simply making demands (through a strike) is not sufficient," it said.
"These actions must go hand-in-hand with effective pressure tactics and expressions of violence and grassroots disobedience as the only method to resolve the real problems of the nation," the communique added.
It said its backing for the strike was a preamble to what it termed a "national armed strike." In the past, the ELN has used so-called armed strikes to shut down vast regions of the country, blockading major highways, setting fire to vehicles and threatening people who show up for work.
Hernandez said state oil company Ecopetrol had been severely affected by the strike but a senior company official told Reuters it had no effect whatsoever since administrative employees were filling in as part of a contingency plan.
In the coffee industry, John Naranjo, commercial manager of the powerful National Coffee Growers' Federation, said truckers had refused to transport coffee for fear of guerrilla blockades. He said cargoes at dockside amounted to about 10 truckloads in each of the main ports -- well below average.
State-run schools and universities across the country were shut down by the government as a security measure.
Local radio reports said a walk-out by airport technicians had created a heavy backlog of flights into Bogota's El Dorado international airport. Some carriers, including Continental and American Airlines, suspended operations.
