The looming national strike, due to start in Colombia at midnight on Monday, may unleash political and social unrest, political analysts believe, but few predict it will shake the ruling order.
Government ministers have been at pains to reject any parallels with the reigning chaos in Ecuador which began with a general strike and ended in the ouster of President Abdala Bucaram.
Union leaders said on Monday that the indefinite stoppage by an estimated 800,000 state workers, pressing for higher wages and end to a repressive labour code, could develop into a civic protest.
But political commentators insist there is little threat to President Ernesto Samper, who has already battled through the thick of a political crisis fuelled by allegations that he funded his 1994 election campaign with drug money. They say Samper has retained much higher levels of support among the ruling classes and ordinary voters than Bucaram was able to do.
In an editorial Sunday, the respected political magazine Semana wrote: "Samper earned the condemnation of the political classes because of what happened in his campaign. But he has observed the needs of the country's other main power-brokers -- the economic elite, Congress, the Liberal Party, the military. His economic measures have never been as drastic nor as impopular as those of Bucaram."
In the latest opinion polls Samper's popularity rating among voters hovers around 40 percent. He did, however, make many enemies among the working classes, whom he tries to court with his populist discourse, when he decreed below-inflation hikes in public sector pay and in the minimum private sector wage at the start of this year.
The tough line on pay prompted both country's main unions to pull out of a wage-price control agreement known as the social pact.
The state workers are now pushing for a 21.5 percent pay increase and an end to the government's planned programme of national and regional privatisations -- a cornerstone of Samper's economic policy.
"This strike began for labour and wage reasons but it is beginning to take on a social aspect," said Eberto Lopez, head of the 8,300-strong Telecom workers' union.
"Depending on the extent to which other sectors of labour and society become involved this strike could take on a different character," he added.
Last week, Samper charged that the strike was being used to promote covert political aims and not straightforward wage demands. The opposition Conservative Party and the Communist Party have said they will back the strike.
The security forces, meanwhile, have warned that leftist guerrillas are looking to launch a wave of attacks across the country under cover of the protest.
Labour leader Wilson Borja, head of the main public sector union FENALTRASE, tried to calm rising passions on Monday, insisting the strike was being driven solely by labour demands and that the state workers were not looking to topple Samper.
Interior Minister Horacio Serpa, Samper's right-hand man, played down comparisons with Colombia's southern neighbour.
"This strike bears no relation to the actions of 20 years ago that left such a bad taste in Colombia's mouth. Nor is there any comparison with the situation that is occurring in other latitudes," he told reporters.
The last major labour protest took place in September 1977, with the mass backing of private and public sector unions and social groups. At least 20 demonstrators were killed in a single day of running street battles in Bogota.
