Colombian union leaders representing 800,000 state workers launched a nationwide strike on Tuesday but its impact on vital economic sectors was not immediately clear apart from disruption in public transport.
Labor leaders said the strike of 800,000 public sector workers, which could be the biggest in Colombia since September 1977, would disrupt air traffic, oil production, telecommunications and all non-emergency health services.  
But early morning reports on national radio said, that apart from dire shortages of public transportation, everything appeared to be running at or close to normal.
Apart from the pre-dawn torching of a bus outside the central city of Ibague there were no immediate reports of violence or serious acts of vandalism by "the dark forces of chaos" that President Ernesto Samper warned of in a national television and radio address on Monday night.  
Ismael Enrique Arenas, a senior official with the state oil company Ecopetrol, said there was no immediate effect on exploration or production activity since administrative employeees were filling in for union workers joining in the work stoppage.
Private oil companies working under association contracts with Ecopetrol were also unaffected, he told Reuters.
Francisco Hernandez, a spokesman for Bogota's El Dorado international airport, said operations were "more or less normal" early Tuesday. "I only hope we'll be able to say the same by this evening,"  he told Caracol news radio.  
Some carriers, including Continental Airlines Inc and AMR Corp's American Airlines, suspended all operations in and out of Colombia as a security precaution since firemen had threatened to disrupt operations at the airport. But Hernandez said most airlines were operating normally.
State workers called the strike, which began at midnight local time/0500 GMT Tuesday and is to last indefinitely, to press for a 21.5 percent wage hike.
The government, which is struggling to slash its burgeoning fiscal deficit, has vowed to hold workers' to a weighted 13.5 percent increase.  
Bogota police chief General Teodoro Campo stressed "absolute normalcy" in the capital in an interview with national radio.
But the city's streets, which were free of traffic, looked more like they do on a quiet Sunday afternoon than they do on a normal traffic-choked weekday. Buses were especially scarce.
Police helicopters clattered over the north end of Bogota, apparently on the lookout for urban rebel commandos, and a column of four light tanks and two armoured personnel carriers was spotted by a Reuter television cameraman heading for the southern gateway to the capital.  
Army officer Lieutenant Pedro Jimenez, in charge of the column, said he was under strict orders to prevent any strike-related violence.
"The aim of this operation is to prevent the outbreak of violence. We will ensure that this strike proceeds in a climate of complete calm," he said.
"All commanders have been given orders to make sure that there are no attempts to commit terrorist acts by subversive groups," said armed forces chief Gen. Harold Bedoya.  
Heavy detachments of riot police and army troops stood guard outside public offices in the city center -- where workers were to stage protest marches late Tuesday -- and police manned checkpoints along key roads in the capital.
All state-run universities and schools were closed and long lines of people could be seen stranded at bus stops in working- class districts on the south end of the capital.
"There's very little transportation this morning," said a woman waiting for a bus in the suburb of Soacha to take her to a cleaning job in the north end of the city.
"I've been waiting here for 1-1/2 hours and I'm afraid i'll lose my job over this. The bosses just don't understand," she said.
Elizabeth Fuentes, a union leader manning a picket line outside a Bogota adminsitrative building, said the strike would last indefinitely -- until the government bowed to demands for the 21.5 percent wage hike and cancelled plans for the privatization of national and regional industries.
"This strike is a protest against Samper's economic policy," she told Reuters. "Those policies are anti-popular, they're policies against workers and against the Colombian people."
