Colombia's state employees launched a nationwide strike on Tuesday and immediately drew support from the country's leftist rebels, who vowed to back workers' demands for higher pay with armed force.
Union bosses said the indefinite work stoppage -- billed as the biggest in 20 years -- had won the "total" support of an estimated 800,000 public sector employees and severely disrupted the nation's airports, telecommunications, oil production, government administration and all but emergency health services.
Government officials and spokesmen for the state oil company Ecopetrol played down the economic impact of the strike but admitted concern over threatened rebel attacks coinciding with the labour action.
"The strike is total. Workers have observed the call en masse and some social sectors are also joining in," said Hernando Hernandez, head of the oil workers' union USO, known for its combative, fiercely nationalistic stance.
"So far everything is passing off in a peaceful fashion. There are no reports of violence," he added.
Though Hernandez said Ecopetrol had been severely affected by the strike, a senior company official told Reuters there was no effect whatsoever. Administrative employees were filling in for union workers, as part of a strike contingency plan, and production and pumping operations were proceeding normally, the official said.
State workers called the strike to press for a 21.5 percent wage hike. The government, which is struggling to slash its burgeoning fiscal deficit, vowed to hold workers' to a weighted 13.5 percent increase. The strike began at midnight Monday (0500 GMT on Tuesday) and is to last indefinitely.
A communique issued by National Liberation Army (ELN) rebels, just hours after the strike began, underscored what authorities had already described as the threat of imminent rebel attacks.
"We support our union comrades. But simply making demands (through a strike) is not sufficient," the communique said. "These actions must go hand in hand with effective pressure tactics and expressions of violence and grassroots disobedience as the only method to resolve the real problems of the nation."
It said its backing of the strike was a preamble to what it termed a "national armed strike." In the past, the ELN has used so-called "armed strikes" to shut down vast regions of the country, blockading major highways, setting fire to vehicles and threatening people who show up for work.
The ELN, founded by radical Roman Catholic priests in the mid-1960s, specialises in economic sabotage and attacks on multinational companies.
Even before the ELN communique was made public, tight security was clamped on the capital of Bogota, where a ban on alcohol was declared late on Monday by Mayor Antanas Mockus and a lack of public transportation prevented thousands of people from getting to work on Tuesday morning.
State-run schools and universities across the country were shut down by the government as a security measure.
Heavy detachments of riot police and army troops stood guard outside public offices in the downtown area, and police helicopters hovered over Plaza de Bolivar, the city's main square, where an estimated 20,000 strikers gathered to protest outside Congress on Tuesday afternoon.
Francisco Hernandez, a spokesman for Bogota's El Dorado international airport, said operations were "more or less normal" early on Tuesday. Some carriers, including Continental and American Airlines, suspended all operations in and out of Colombia since airport firemen had threatened to disrupt operations.
A spokesman for the National Exporters Association said vast shipments of cut flowers to the United States, in preparation for this week's St. Valentine's Day holiday, had not been affected because they were flown out of Colombia on domestic carriers.
