Colombian public sector workers began a nationwide strike on Tuesday, disrupting air traffic, transportation, telecommunications and other services.
Security was tight in the capital Bogota in what union leaders said could be the country's biggest labour dispute in 20 years. About 800,000 public sector workers were expected to join the protest action, union leaders said.
The government warned that leftist guerrilla groups were planning a wave of attacks to coincide with the strike.
But apart from the pre-dawn torching of a bus outside the central city of Ibague, there were no immediate reports of violence or serious acts of vandalism.
National radio said that except for serious public transport shortages, services appeared to be functioning at or close to normal.
However, the traffic flow in the capital was light, resembling a quiet Sunday afternoon rather than the usual hectic pace of a weekday.
All state-run universities and schools were closed and long lines of people could be seen stranded at bus stops in working-class districts on the southern end of the capital.
"There's very little transportation this morning," said a woman waiting for a bus in the suburb of Soacha to take her to a cleaning job in the north of the city.
Heavy detachments of riot police and army troops guarded public offices in the city centre -- where workers were expected to stage protest marches late on Tuesday. Police manned checkpoints along key roads in the capital.
Ismael Enrique Arenas, a senior official with the state oil company Ecopetrol, said there was no immediate effect on exploration or production activity and administrative workers were filling in for trade unionists who joined the stoppage.
Private oil companies working under association contracts with Ecopetrol were also unaffected, he told Reuters.
State workers called the strike, which began at midnight Monday (0500 GMT on Tuesday) to press for a 21.5 percent wage hike. The government, struggling to cut its deficit, has vowed to hold workers' to a weighted 13.5 percent increase.
Bogota police chief Gen. Teodoro Campo stressed "absolute normalcy" in the capital in an interview with national radio.
Police helicopters clattered over the north end of Bogota, apparently on the lookout for urban rebel commandos, and a column of four light tanks and two armoured personnel carriers was spotted by a Reuters television cameraman heading for the southern gateway to the capital.
Francisco Hernandez, a spokesman for Bogota's El Dorado international airport, said operations were "more or less normal" early on Tuesday. "I only hope we'll be able to say the same by this evening," he told Caracol news radio.
But some carriers, including Continental and American Airlines, suspended flights to Colombia as a security precaution since firemen had threatened to disrupt operations at the airport.
Elizabeth Fuentes, a union leader heading a picket line outside a Bogota administrative building, said the strike would last indefinitely -- until the government bowed to demands for the wage hike and cancelled plans for the privatisation of national and regional industries.
"This strike is a protest against Samper's economic policy," she told Reuters. "Those policies are anti-popular, they're policies against workers and against the Colombian people."
