President Ernesto Samper appealed to Colombian workers on Monday evening not to support the "dark forces of chaos" as the countdown began to the start of a nationwide strike, which threatens to be the biggest in 20 years.
The last major national strike took place in Colombia in September 1977. At least 20 workers died in a single day of protest in Bogota.
The army spent the day stationing troops in strategic areas of the country as union leaders warned that the indefinite public sector work stoppage, due to begin midnight Monday (0500 GMT Tuesday), could unleash widespread civic protest.
The government warned that leftist guerrilla movements were planning a wave of attacks to coincide with the strike and said rebels could try to infilitrate demonstrations.
"I call on (state workers) not to join the dark forces which -- concealed behind a legitimate social protest -- aim to sow chaos and violence," Samper said in a televised broadcast to the nation.
"We will not permit the protest to affect the legitimate rights of citizens to peace, nor even less that it ends up in abuses or terrorist attacks," he added, repeating threats to declare the strike illegal if it paralysed basic services.
State workers called the strike to press for a 21.5 percent wage hike, compared to the government's weighted 13.5 percent wage offer. They are also protesting at what they say is the whittling away of labour rights and plans for the privatisation of national and regional industries.
Education Minister Jaime Nino cancelled all classes in state-run schools and universities to "prevent risk" to pupils and teachers. The strike threatens to disrupt air traffic, oil production, telecommunications and all non-emergency health services, labour leaders said on Monday.
"It has been a long time since the unions have really fought against the government and it's difficult to say how long this strike will last," said Gustavo Triana, one of the heads of the main oil workers' union USO, known for its combative, fiercely nationalistic stance.
"I think what we're building up to is a nationwide civic protest, which will involve not only state workers but also the private sector and social groups," he added.
Government ministers and defence chiefs spent much of Monday morning huddled in an emergency security summit to discuss measures to combat street protests and the possible blockade of major highways.
"Orderly public demonstrations will be permitted but we will take firm measures to stop subversive elements taking part in the strike," Defence Minister Guillermo Alberto Gonzalez told reporters.
All members of the armed forces, including police, were ordered back to barracks on Sunday. Gonzalez said police and troops would be sent in to boost security at airports and to set up roadside checkpoints across the country, including at the main entry points to the capital.
A heavy military presence was also planned for the main oil production centre of Barrancabermeja -- the power centre of the USO, one of the most radical of Colombia's unions.
Political analysts said the public sector strike could spark a groundswell of social unrest but ruled out direct parallels with the political chaos in Ecuador, which began with a general strike and ended in the ouster of President Abdala Bucaram.
