A new generation of drug lords is growing up in Colombia around the booming production and export of heroin, anti-narcotics chief Col. Leonardo Gallego said on Friday.
"There are indications of an emergent trend of new groups becoming involved in the heroin trade," Gallego told Reuters. But he said this did not rule out participation in the lucrative trade by "existing groups combining or switching the traffic of one substance with another."
Colombian and U.S. authorities, celebrating last weekend's surrender of the last Cali Cartel kingpin, were hit by figures this week showing that 62 percent of the heroin on U.S. streets comes from South America, much of it from Colombia.
That means that in addition to dominating the U.S. cocaine market, Colombia, and to a lesser extent Venezuela and Peru, have displaced southeast Asia as the major source of heroin.
Gallego, who has headed the anti-narcotics division of the National Police for two years, believes the new U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration estimates are high, but he conceded the emerging pattern is worrying and calculated Colombia could be producing as much as five tonnes of heroin a year.
About 12,000 acres (5,000 hectares) of Colombia's rural drug farms are now sown with opium poppies, anti-narcotics intelligence shows. Some of the crop is in the traditional coffee-producing province of Tolima in central Colombia and in neighbouring Huila and Cauca. Significant harvests are also expected in the northern provinces of Cesar and Guajira.
Poppy cultivation is a recent phenomenon in Colombia, where the export of heroin was unknown before 1991. Gallego said domestic social and economic conditions along with the success of the war on drugs in Southeast Asia had helped displace production to South America.
He said Pakistanis and Afghans had travelled to Colombia to teach cultivation and processing techniques but, judging by discoveries of two clandestine laboratories last month, he said methods did not yet appear too sophisticated.
But the report issued by the DEA in Washington Tuesday said South American heroin flooding the streets of cities across the northeastern United States was 30 percent more pure than the traditional Asian variety.
Colombian authorities have agreed to destroy 9,885 acres (4,000 hectares) of poppy and 44,500 acres (18,000 hectares) of coca leaf this year under a deal signed with the United States in July. Heavy rains and strong winds have hampered the spraying of illegal plantations in the south and east but Gallego said he was confident the target of Latin America's most ambitious eradication programme could be achieved.
Last weekend, tense U.S.-Colombian relations received a boost when Helmer Herrera, the only leader of the Cali-based cocaine cartel still at large, gave himself up. But Gallego warned against overoptimism, saying: "There must be a decrease in the operational capacity of the (Cali) network but results cannot be expected in the short term."
U.S. drug experts say Cali cartel kingpins continue to run much of their criminal empire from jail. Gallego said there were signs Colombian cartels were even diversifying supply routes away from the United States. Intelligence reports, as yet unconfirmed, say cocaine is being shipped from Colombia to Angola and then transferred to Europe and the Far East.
