A nationwide public workers' strike entered its second day in Colombia Wednesday, but it was soccer that brought the nation to a standstill.
Thousands of workers deserted picket lines to watch television coverage of a World Cup eliminator clash between Colombia and arch-rivals Argentina in the Caribbean port city of Barranquilla.
"There were meetings and pickets this morning but most people went home because the strike has more or less come to a halt because of the soccer," said Wilson Borja, leader of the public sector FENALTRASE union.
In a country full of soccer fanatics, a match featuring Colombia's undefeated World Cup contenders would understandably get a bigger draw than picket lines. But even the private sector ground to a halt as employees crowded around TV sets to watch the nail-biting match.
But some say the government has purposely used soccer in the past to deflect attention away from perceived or actual political crises.
"It goes back to the Roman times when emperors offered bread and circus to the people. The problem in Colombia is that there is circus but no bread for the masses," said Enrique Parejo, a former justice minister.
Few are better placed than Parejo to comment on the link between politics and sport.
He was justice minister, in November 1985, when leftist rebels of the now-defunct M-19 movement stormed the Palace of Justice in downtown Bogota, taking more than 300 hostages and prompting a violent counter-attack by the army.
At the height of the battle the government encouraged radio and TV stations to halt live broadcasts from the scene and transmit a series of soccer matches instead.
"I didn't take part in the decision but I think undoubtedly it was aimed at diverting attention from what was going on," Parejo said.
Likewise, on the first day of the nationwide strike by an estimated 800,000 state workers Tuesday -- which government officials predicted could spark widespread violence -- a state-run TV channel re-broadcast Colombia's 1993 5-0 soccer victory over Argentina in Buenos Aires.
"I think they did it deliberately to try and neutralise the strike and get people off the streets," Parejo said.
Underscoring the fanaticism surrounding soccer in Colombia, 120 people were murdered across the country in celebrations that followed that thrashing of Argentina four years ago.
