Tens of thousands of government workers took to the streets in Colombia's capital on Thursday on the third day of a nationwide strike to press demands for a sharp public sector wage hike.
At least 50,000 workers took part in the peaceful demonstration in Bogota, which involved a march down 7th Avenue, the city's main thoroughfare, to historic Plaza Bolivar in the city's colonial centre.
Similar demonstrations -- and the resulting traffic jams -- were planned in four other leading cities, as union leaders stepped up demands for the government to lift a ceiling on public sector pay rises that would hold most workers to a 13.5 percent increase -- despite inflation of more than 21.6 percent last year.
A demonstration in Bogota on Tuesday, on the first day of the strike, ended in running battles between riot police and a 200-strong group of protesters hurling bricks and bottles. But there was no immediate report of any strike-related violence on Thursday.
Mauricio Guzman, mayor of the southwest city of Cali, said several "agitators" planning to join in street protests there had been arrested for possession of explosives. A small bomb blast rocked the city, Colombia's second biggest, early on Thursday but there were no reports of injuries or serious damage.
Government officials restarted talks with union leaders on Thursday morning in a bid to end the strike by an estimated 800,000 workers nationwide.
But no progress was reported when the talks adjourned for two hours shortly before noon.
Before heading into the talks, Interior Minister Horacio Serpa said he hoped for "serene and sincere" negotiations. But he stressed that the government, which is battling to rein in a burgeoning fiscal deficit, did not have much room for manoeuvre.
Union representatives expressed mild optimism but insisted the strike would not be lifted until there was firm agreement on demands, including a 21.5 percent pay hike and an end to the planned privatisation of regional and national industries.
An earlier round of negotiations ended in deadlock on Sunday when the government stuck to its original weighted 13.5 percent pay offer and refused to budge on privatisation plans.
Unitary Workers' Confederation leader Luis Eduardo Garzon said state workers may bend on some of their demands if the government was prepared to compromise.
"I think there's a positive atmosphere. We're ready to look for alternatives if the government is prepared to do the same," he said.
There have been conflicting reports on the impact of the industrial action. President Ernesto Samper said just 10 percent of state workers had heeded the strike call while unions said they had severely disrupted key economic and social sectors, including oil, telecommunications, education and all but emergency health care and long-distance road freight.
Despite threats from National Liberation Army (ELN) rebels and government warnings that leftist guerrillas were trying to infiltrate the strike movement, no serious violence has been reported since the start of the work stoppage at midnight Monday.
