Union leaders restarted talks with government ministers on Thursday morning in a bid to end a strike by public sector workers, now in its third day.
Interior Minister Horacio Serpa said he hoped for "serene and sincere" negotiations but admitted the government, battling to rein in a burgeoning fiscal deficit, did not have much room for manoeuvre.
Union representatives expressed mild optimism but insisted the strike by an estimated 800,000 state workers would not be lifted until there was firm agreement on demands, including a 21.5 percent pay hike and an end to the planned privatisation of regional and national industries.
"We hope these talks will be serene and sincere. We will look into workers' demands in the broadest and most generous form but they must understand we have problems," Serpa tolds reporters.
The last round of negotiations broke up without agreement last Sunday when the government stuck to its original weighted 13.5 percent pay offer and refused to budge on privatisation plans.
Hernando Hernandez, leader of the main oil workers' union known for its combative and fiercely nationalistic stance, feared there was little chance of a rapid breakthrough.
Unitary Workers' Confederation leader, Luis Eduardo Garzon, meanwhiile, said state workers may bend on some of their demands if the government was prepared to compromise.
"I think there's a positive atmosphere. We're ready to look for alternatives if the government is prepared to do the same," he said.
There have been conflicting reports on the impact of the industrial action. President Ernesto Samper said just 10 percent of state workers had heeded the strike call while unions said they had severely disrupted key economic and social sectors, including oil, telecommunications, education and all but emergency health care and long-distance road freight.
In parallel with talks, unions are scheduled to stage the biggest protest marches of the strike so far in Colombia's five largest cities.
A demonstration on Tuesday ended in running battles between riot police and a 200-strong group of protesters hurling bricks and bottles.
About 40 buses bringing demonstrators from Colombia's eastern plains region to the capital were detained early on Tuesday morning at a military roadblock near Villavicencio, about 60 miles (100 km) east of Bogota. An army spokesman said the convoy was later allowed to continue.
The spokesman said a strong security presence would be maintained throughout the country as long as the labour action lasted.
Despite threats from National Liberation Army (ELN) rebels and government warnings that leftist guerrillas were trying to infiltrate the strike movement, no serious violence has been reported since the start of the work stoppage at midnight on Monday.
