In a last-ditch attempt to avoid threatened U.S. economic sanctions, the Colombian government railroaded legislation through Congress on Wednesday that will mete out dramatically stiffer jail terms for drug traffickers.
The law, which had been bogged down in Congress for six months, was pushed through both houses in back-to-back sessions on Tuesday and Wednesday. It increases the maximum penalty for drug-related offences to 60 years from the current maximum of 24.
President Ernesto Samper hailed the passage of the bill, which he will sign into law before the end of the week, as proof of Colombia's "resolute commitment to fight all aspects of the drug trade".
The vote came a week before the United States is due to announce whether to "certify" Colombia as a trustworthy ally in the global fight against drugs. So-called decertification for a second consecutive year could trigger economic sanctions for the country's perceived failure to crack down hard enough on the booming trade in cocaine and heroin.
"This is a historic step. Colombia may produce drugs, but we also produce strong laws to combat drug trafficking and crime," said Justice Minister Carlos Medellin.
U.S. Ambassador Myles Frechette -- a vocal critic of Colombian anti-drug policy and of Samper's alleged ties to drug kingpins -- said the new sentencing guidelines failed to meet U.S. standards, under which major traffickers such as Mexico's Juan Garcia Abrego have been convicted to up to 11 life terms.
But Frechette said the new penalities constituted a marked improvement over Colombia's lenient jail sentences in the past and raised the country's penal code to "an international level"
In another last-minute bid to escape possible sanctions, which some Colombian officials already believe are in the pipeline, Colombia is due to sign a maritime accord with the United States on Thursday that will facilitate the interdiction of drug shipments at sea.
The United States, which already has such an agreement with Venezuela and handful of Caribbean nations, has been pursuing a similar deal with Colombia for the last six years.
"This is a great agreement ... we're very pleased with it," Frechette said. When asked whether the accord would help avert the threat of U.S. sanctions against Colombia, he added: "We cannot ignore something as important as this."
Tough new jail sentences come too late, however, for Colombia's most notorious drug kingpins -- Gilberto and Miguel Rodriguez Orejuela, the billionaire chieftains of the Cali cartel. Both were sentenced to very light sentences in January that will see them walk free in as little as five years.
