The United States appears to be getting sucked ever deeper into Colombia's drug war, where the lines between counternarcotics and counterinsurgency are increasingly blurred, political analysts say.
U.S. officials, who will announce this week whether to "certify" Colombia as a trustworthy ally in the anti-drug fight, are publicly critical of its failure to crack down hard enough on the twin scourges of cocaine and heroin.
But Western diplomats and analysts say it is not Colombians but a "massive" contingent of U.S. advisers, both military and civilian, who have dictated counternarcotics strategy behind the scenes since the early 1970s.
Those advisers have long known they were battling an elusive enemy of peasant farmers who tend illicit plantations, money-laundering bankers and corrupt politicians as well as the drug kingpins themselves.
Now for the first time Washington appears to be taking seriously claims by Colombian authorities that leftist guerrillas have become major drug traffickers. The guerrillas deny the allegation and say it is being used as a pretext for increasingly direct U.S. intervention on Colombian soil.
"We must recognise the decisive role played by some elements of Colombia's insurgent guerrilla groups," Assistant Secretary of State Robert Gelbard told the U.S. Congress on Feb. 14. "Those groups constitute a real threat to Colombian anti-drug forces deployed to eradicate (drug) fields and the American personnel who support them."
Allegations of rebel ties to the drug trade date back to the late 1980s, when then U.S. envoy Lewis Tambs coined the phrase "narco-guerrillas." It may be no coincidence that U.S. officials are reviving the issue at a time when the Colombian military faces growing criticism over its human rights record.
In an annual report, U.S. President Bill Clinton will announce this week whether Colombia should remain on a list of countries subject to possible economic sanctions because of their perceived failure to fight drugs hard enough.
If Colombia is decertified again diplomats say the move will be directed more at President Ernesto Samper and his allegedly drug-financed election than at Colombia's police and military -- the natural U.S. allies on the frontlines of the drug war. And with or without certification, American counternarcotics aid will not be affected, U.S. officials say.
Gelbard's department has already doubled anti-drug funding for Colombia to $44 million for 1997 and another $37.5 million has been allocated from a separate discretionary fund. In addition Washington has pledged a multimillion-dollar package of material aid including upgraded cropduster aircraft and 24 UH-1 helicopters to spearhead the next phase of the drug war.
Some experts compare the situation in Colombia to Vietnam in the 1960s when the United States became progressively bogged down in a faraway conflict as it shifted from covert involvement to frontline operations.
"To insert the U.S. into this kind of complex conflict is like putting the U.S. into Vietnam. If the U.S. provides aid for the drug war then it is essentially for counterinsurgency purposes too," Florida-based analyst Eduardo Gamarra said.
U.S. officials refuse to say how many advisers and agents are now working in Colombia and are coy about revealing the exact nature of their involvement. But a Western diplomat said 44 U.S. military were stationed at one of three ground-based radar stations manned by U.S. personnel carrying out "essentially frontline intelligence gathering and monitoring."
It is also known that U.S. spy-in-the-sky satellites chart the spread of illicit coca leaf or opium poppy plantations and that shadowy U.S. reconnaissance planes buzz suspicious light aircraft in Colombian airspace. Just last month the first U.S. pilot died in action when his plane crashed during a crop eradication mission over guerrilla-infested jungles.
Bogota-based political analyst Juan Tokatlian believes the prospects of successful U.S. intervention in the drug war are bleak. "The idea of Vietnam creates the idea of a single territory and a single combat. This is much more complex since the drug war is being waged throughout the region. It could be much more dramatic in its effects in the long term than Vietnam," he said.
