Sergio Cabrera laid down his rebel's rifle years ago but he still draws on the lessons of guerrilla warfare to carve out his role as Colombia's premier movie director.
In the face of the big budget imperialism of Hollywood and the European film world's lingering cinematographic colonialism he is convinced that he and his Latin American counterparts can conquer audiences by launching surprise attacks consisting of modestly priced movies with a refreshingly new focus.
"We Latin American directors must be like guerrilla fighters -- striking with surprise films -- and find a different way of telling stories with different actors and in a different language," Cabrera told Reuters.
Few are better qualified than the director of "Estrategia Caracol (Snail Strategy)" and the recently released "Ilona Llega Con La Lluvia (Ilona Arrived In The Rain)" to talk of guerrilla tactics. At the age of 15, during a lengthy stay in China with his father Fausto, a Spanish Civil War refugee, Cabrera became one of Chairman Mao's Red Guards at the height of the Cultural Revolution. Three years later, back in his native Colombia, he took up arms with the Maoist-inspired People's Liberation Army (EPL) -- currently the third largest rebel group in Colombia.
During his four years battling government troops in the jungles and mountains around the northwestern city of Medellin, Cabrera followed Mao's dictum that "political power grows from the barrel of a gun." Now, at 46, he is becoming increasingly aware that a different sort of power is growing from the lens of his movie camera.
NOT WIDELY KNOWN OUTSIDE ART CINEMAS
Like many non-English language directors Cabrera is not widely known outside select art filmhouses in the United States and Britain. His first full-length feature "Snail Strategy" was released in the United States but no date has been set for the release of "Ilona" there.
"Ilona" did draw favourable reviews at the Toronto film festival last September and was warmly received at the Sundance film festival in Utah in January. The movie has also scored notable successes in festivals in Biarritz and Havana. In the next few weeks it will go on general release in much of mainland Europe, a spokeswoman at Cabrera's film company said.
Based on a novel by Colombian author Alvaro Mutis, "Ilona" is set mainly in Panama at the start of rainy season. It focuses on a three-way relationship, based on friendship, solidarity and sex, among Ilona (Margarita Rosa), an international wanderer named Maqroll (Humberto Dorado) and an Arab seaman, Abdul Bashur (Imanol Arias). Ilona and Maqroll set up a high-class brothel to raise funds, which they send to their absent friend Abdul to buy a cargo ship -- a symbol of their desire to sail the high seas unfettered by society's bonds.
Ilona never lives to see Abdul's arrival in Panama at the helm of the new ship. She develops a strong bond with one of her prostitute employees, who lives in the rusting hull of a tug boat, and the pair die when the ship's gas cooker explodes.
FILM A POLITICAL ACT
"In these times of violence and troubles this was a way of looking at our political problems. Colombia is built on hatred and rancour and so choosing to make a film like 'Ilona,' a film about love, is a political act,"  Cabrera explained.
"I fought with the EPL for four years. But my dream of changing the country collapsed when I realised we were destroying not creating. Now I see it is more important for me to influence people through smaller things."
"Ilona" cost $3.2 million to make. Cabrera is aware that a film about Colombia's armed guerrillas or its all-powerful drug cartels may have been a bigger box office smash in the U.S. and European marketplaces, but he has taken the decision not to foster the outside world's view of his homeland. He has already rejected two offers to work in Hollywood.
"I don't want Hollywood-style success, I'm looking to explore new frontiers of thought. Cinema must open the way to new experiences."
That is not to say that Cabrera, due to start filming his next movie in August, chooses to ignore the current crisis facing Colombia, torn apart by drug trafficking and endemic corruption and in the grip of one of the bloodiest guerrilla offensives in three decades of armed uprising.
"When we were filming the abandoned (tug) boat I thought that was like our country -- both were full of ghosts. Colombia is still fighting to free itself from the specters that haunt it -- violence, drugs, corruption -- and our struggle against them is much more difficult than we first thought," he said.
