Hefty budget cuts are sounding the death knell for Colombia's efforts to reverse social inequalities and undermine guerrilla movements in the poorest areas of the country, politicians and analysts say.
President Ernesto Samper announced in January that he would slash 1.3 trillion pesos (about $1 billion) from the 1997 budget to rein in a yawning fiscal deficit. He pledged that social spending and public works would not be affected.
But Finance Minister Jose Antonio Ocampo said earlier this week that more than two-thirds of the spending cuts would hit precisely those sectors the president said would be spared.
A central plank of his 1994 election platform was the so- called "social leap forward" that aimed to end the chronic isolation of many rural communities, virtually cut off from the rest of the country by poor access and communications.
"This is a significant step backwards for the social leap. The social programme has been failing for some time, and these cuts leave it virtually dead," said ruling Liberal Party Sen. Luis Guillermo Giraldo.
He accused Samper of taking the easy route by cutting funds for health, education, hygiene, drinking water and rural programmes instead of pruning government bureaucracy that soaks up three quarters of the cash destined for social spending.
Political analyst Eduardo Pisarro doubted that the reduction in social spending would spark protests among Colombia's poor, who stand to be most affected by the cuts.
But he said it would do little to loosen the grip of Marxist revolutionaries, already estimated by some analysts and defence officials to have de facto political and economic control over 40 percent of Colombia.
"Colombia has traditionally had a weak welfare state and so the impact (of these cuts) will be much less immediate. But one can forsee that the guerrilla and other groups will maintain their capacity to recruit followers in pockets of poverty," said Pisarro.
Armando Montenegro, head of the influential National Association of Financial Institutions (ANIF), welcomed the cuts and believed they would stem the fiscal deficit that ran at 4 percent of gross domestic product last year.
He argued that the social impact would be minimal, saying: "Social investment is so inefficient and there's so much waste that in any event the money would not have reached the poor people."
Montenegro hoped the budget reduction would open the way for wider private sector participation in infrastructure projects, such as road building. But he thought few private firms would be interested in building roads to remote areas needed by peasant farmers to take their produce to market.
Agriculture and defence are the other areas that will bear the brunt of the cutbacks, although the revised budget for military spending of about $350 billion pesos will be more than doubled thanks to a cash injection from the mandatory sale of so-called "war bonds" to rich Colombians.
Individuals or businesses with a net worth of more than $85,000 are required to spend 0.5 percent of their funds above $85,000 to purchase five-year bonds, which the government is using to finance the military.
