A German spoke on Wednesday of his kidnap ordeal in the jungles of Colombia and said he and his three companions, two of whom were killed, considered an escape on the day before the army stormed the guerrilla camp where they were held.
Mardean Muzinic, a construction worker from Munich, and Manfred Kehrer, of Linz, Austria, were freed on Tuesday, a month after being seized by a 20-strong group of Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) rebels as they crossed into the country on foot from Panama via the remote Darien Gap.
But Kehrer's brother Johann and friend Alexander Scheurer, also from Munich, were killed -- by guerrillas according to the military -- moments after army special forces attacked the insurgents' hilltop base in northwest Choco province.
"We talked about the choice of escape Monday but there were two different opinions," Muzinic told Reuters in a phone interview from a military base in Carepa, in Choco.
"I was for taking the risk because I thought only half of the guerrillas knew how to fight," he added. Like his companions, Muzinic received weapons training during military service at home and said he was convinced he would have been able to handle a rebel rifle.
At least half the revolutionaries were less than 15 years old and had little idea of what they were doing, Muzinic said. But the four friends had been split into two groups after the 10th day of their ordeal -- making it almost impossible to time a joint escape attempt. They were only briefly reunited Monday to celebrate Manfred Kehrer's birthday.
The guerrillas told them they were demanding a $15 million ransom. But German embassy officials and Austrian ambassador Franz Irbinger said they had no idea the men had been snatched until after they were released and had received no demands.
"I was sure the kidnap would last for months or years because we didn't have any money to pay for a ransom ... We were never sure they (the rebels) were telling us the truth. We know they told us a lot of bullshit," Muzinic said.
The four backpackers, all between 25 and 30, finally opted to wait, fearing they could perish in the jungle if they made a dash for freedom through rebel-infested territory. "The area around was full of guerrillas. The problem was where to run and which direction to take," Muzinic said.
The four were abducted on Feb. 7 at the entrance to the Los Katios nature reserve, just a short distance from Colombia's border with Panama.
Muzinic said they were forced to march about seven miles (10 km) a day along muddy jungle tracks on basic rations of rice and meat. At night a rebel leader known as "Saul" would read tracts of Marxist-Leninist literature to his comrades.
"It was not like a real kidnap. At times it was more like a guided tour. Some of the rebels were just playing with their weapons like in a cowboy movie. It was ridiculous," Muzinic said.
But that sense of make-believe turned to tragic reality shortly after midday on Tuesday. Muzinic and Manfred Kehrer had gone under guard to bathe in a river near the rebel camp. The next thing they knew, the bullets started to fly and their captors fled. Minutes later a small group of army troops appeared further down the river.
The firefight continued on the other side of the hill, however. In the hail of gunfire, Kehrer's brother and Scheurer died and four FARC fighters were also killed.
Regional army chief Gen. Ivan Ramirez blamed the deaths of the two tourists on the FARC. Muzinic said he had not seen or spoken with the pair since the previous day but added: "When the army came down from the hill they said the others had been shot by the rebels. I believe Saul gave the orders. He was a real fanatic ... a hardliner."
