A fresh wave of political violence swept across Colombia leaving at least 24 people dead and dozens injured in massacres and guerrilla raids within a 48-hour period, authorities said on Monday.
One of the bloodiest incidents occurred in the notoriously violent northwest banana-growing region of Uraba, where suspected leftist guerrillas massacred nine civilians late on Sunday in what a local police chief called "acts of desperation."
Marxist rebels also launched bloody attacks in central Cundinamarca and eastern Meta provinces in what army commanders said was a bid to relieve pressure on other fronts, particularly a "strategic corridor" from the eastern plains to the capital.
"This massacre was a terrorist act. The guerrillas are carrying out these acts of desperation because they know they haven't got the support of the local community," Uraba police chief Col. Anatolio Correa told Reuters.
He said a 20-strong gang of Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) rebels stormed into Currulao, near the port of Turbo on the Gulf of Uraba, and opened fire on villagers on the main street, in an ice-cream parlour and in a bar.
The dead included a 14-year-old student, a local funeral parlour owner, a butcher and peasant farmers. Six people were wounded. Two weeks ago a massive car bomb ripped through nearby Apartado, killing 11 people and injuring more than 50 in an attack that also was blamed on FARC guerrillas.
Rebels and right-wing paramilitaries have killed with impunity in Uraba for a decade. Some political analysts attribute the violence to a struggle for control of lucrative arms and drug smuggling routes, while others say it surged after right-wing death squads and the military struck a covert pact to drive rebels and leftist sympathisers out of the area.
Heavy fighting flared earlier on Sunday around the town of Uribe in Meta, formerly the site of the FARC's national headquarters. Five soldiers were killed and 12 wounded in a day-long battle. In Puerto Gaitan in the same province, two soldiers were killed in separate clashes with the FARC.
The fighting in Meta was preceded by two guerrilla raids on Saturday night on the mountain towns of Une, 15 miles (25 km) south of Bogota, and Gutierrez, 25 miles (40 km) from the capital. One policeman died in Gutierrez as more than 200 FARC fighters stormed the town.
"There was heavy fog but I could see the guerrillas running all through the town," said parish priest Victor Moreno. "One even climbed into the bell tower of the church to fire at the police post."
"These attacks are part of a tactic to get publicity and to relieve pressure on other fronts," regional army commander Gen. Euclides Sanchez told Reuters. The army has been carrying out operations in the area since 16 soldiers were killed in five days of fighting in San Juanito, Meta, in February.
Unidentified gunmen killed four people in San Pedro de los Milagros, in Antioquia province, late on Sunday, and a bomb exploded early on Monday in Monteria, the capital of Cordoba province, injuring five people, police said.
Three soldiers died over the weekend when National Liberation Army (ELN) rebels ambushed a light tank near the town of Saravena in northeast Arauca province.
Government estimates put the combined strength of the FARC and ELN at about 12,000, but analysts say the real figure may be much higher. The FARC was formed as a pro-Soviet guerrilla force in 1964 while the Cuban-inspired ELN was set up shortly afterward by radical Roman Catholic priests.
