News that Colombia's largest truck drivers' association is preparing its second nationwide stoppage in five months has set alarm bells ringing among private coffee exporters.
The Colombian Truckers' Association (ACC), which comprises 5,000 owner-operators and at least 180,000 drivers -- an estimated 80 percent of all truck drivers in the country -- will set the start date for the strike at a meeting on March 22, one of the organization's senior officials told Reuters this week.
One private exporter said he feared the action could delay 250,000 60-kg bags of coffee scheduled for April shipment if the stoppage begins as predicted after Easter week.
Another described the strike threat as "very serious" and said it may also delay the tail end of March exports if these are held up by the Easter bank holiday.
A fax sent to ACC members this week stated: "In the meeting of the association's national directorate to be held March 22 we will definitely be setting the zero hour for the start of a new stoppage by all our members and affiliates at national level with the aim of demanding the fulfillment (of the earlier accord)."
National directorate member Mario Quiroga told Reuters that initial plans were to begin the strike before Easter. He said, however, that realistically it would probably start later but was unable to give an exact date.
The ACC staged a crippling 11-day strike last October which paralyzed virtually all road freight across the country and delayed the shipment of at least 250,000 60-kg bags of key coffee exports, according to a statement by the National Coffee Growers' Federation at the time.
One private exporter predicted the impact of a new stoppage would be similar.
"If this strike starts in the last week of March I believe it could delay 200,000 bags and if it doesn't begin until April then we would be talking about 250,000 bags of export commitments in the first two weeks," the exporter, who did not wish to be named, said.
The truckers have renewed their strike call, arguing that transport companies and cargo owners have not fulfilled the 19-point deal which was hammered out to end the October stoppage.
The accord, underwritten by the government, included an agreement for an immediate 16 percent hike in freight rates with a further 14 percent rise at the start of this year. It also included provisions for cuts in the cost of highway tolls, operating licenses and other associated taxes as well as a pledge to review maximum load restrictions.
"There has been a lack of seriousness on the part of the government. There has been a total lack of commitment. None of the points have been fulfilled,' said Quiroga.
If there is no 11th-hour deal to avert the stoppage it will be the fourth strike to hit the coffee sector in five months.
In addition to the first truckers' strike in October, industrial action by dock workers in the main Pacific coast port of Buenaventura paralyzed an estimated 300,000 60-kg bags of export coffee for nine days in January and a week-long national strike by public sector workers in February interrupted road freight -- including coffee -- in the first few days.
"It's difficult to put a figure on how much coffee would be delayed by a new truckers' strike but this is very serious. It could delay March and April commitments," another private exporter said.
Fabio Trujillo, chairman of the National Coffee Growers' Unit, which represents coffee growers in 100 towns across nine provinces, branded the strike threat "irresponsible".
"This is an irresponsible attitude, especially on the part of those who have not fulfilled the previous agreement. Last time this type of strike paralyzed exports and cost the nation such a great amount," he said.
"What we really have to do now is to be exporting all we can to take advantage of the high international prices," he added.
Trujillo, however, doubted the strike would have an impact on the so-called Mitaca harvest which provides about 40 percent of Colombia's total production. He said the harvest was late and would likely begin toward the end of April.
The National Coffee Growers' Unit has been at the forefront of the fight to win debt relief for coffee growers.
Finance Minister Jose Antonio Ocampo announced Monday that those growers who had contracted less than 5 million pesos debt before December 1994 would be excused. Trujillo welcomed the move but called for a debt moratorium for medium-sized growers with larger debts.
((--Bogota newsroom, 571 610 7944))
