Colombian Finance Minister Jose Antonio Ocampo termed "bizarre" and "prejudicial" a court decision on Wednesday overturning the government's state of economic emergency, but pledged to respect the ruling.
However, he said the government would go ahead with plans to submit bills to Congress as early as next Tuesday covering measures in emergency decrees issued by President Ernesto Samper in mid-January to rein in the country's yawning fiscal deficit.
Opposition politicians and business leaders welcomed the ruling by the Constitutional Court, which hours earlier declared the economic emergency unconstitutional, and said the verdict would discourage the government from abusing special powers.
"We will respect this ruling even though it is bizarre and prejudicial...the government has no other way of quickly making up the shortfall in income," Ocampo told a news conference shortly after a closed-door meeting with Samper and government ministers.
"What happens now will depend on how fast Congress considers new legislation that we will submit," he said.  
Samper declared a state of economic emergency on Jan. 13 against the backdrop of a sharp economic slowdown in 1996 coupled with huge inflows of dollars that strengthened Colombia's peso but severely undermined export income.
The fiscal deficit also burgeoned to 4 percent of gross domestic product (GDP) last year compared to just 0.2 percent in 1995.
The emergency plan aimed to shore up tax revenues and combat tax evasion, estimated to deprive the government of $2 billion per year.
It also clamped a 16 percent sales tax on previously exempt services provided in Colombia by foreign-based companies, slashed the government's planned debt program and introduced a 6 percent tax on all new loans contracted abroad by private and public-sector companies.
The government had hoped the measures would save about 800 billion pesos. But economic analysts say the government has spent at least half that on a February public-sector pay rise.
State workers staged a seven-day strike and won increases well above the weighted 13.5 percent first offered by Ocampo.  
Private-sector industrialists bridled at the emergency program, claiming that such measures were usually only applied in the case of natural disasters. They argued that the tax on foreign loans would drive up import prices and feul inflation.
After Wednesday's court ruling, Luis Carlos Villegas, head of the influential National Industrialists' Association, said: "This ruling fills us full of confidence because it will indicate to the government what measures it can reasonably use and what it cannot do."
In announcing the ruling, Vladimiro Naranjo, a Constitutional Court judge, said the decision was based on the perception that the economic problems were not the result of abrupt and unforeseen circumstances -- the requirement needed to declare an emergency.
"This decision gives us great satisfaction. It re-establishes the rule of law," said Sen. Juan Camilo Restrepo of the opposition Conservative Party.
Samper was to give a televised speech on Thursday concerning the court decision, local media said. Both houses of Congress voted to support the economic emergency measures in sessions Tuesday and Wednesday.
--Bogota newsroom, 571 610 7944
