San Jose was a bustling mountain village in this northwest region of Colombia until a dreaded right-wing death squad passed through a few weeks ago and ordered everyone to leave.
The 40-strong paramilitary gang shut down the weekly market and forbade shopkeepers from selling all but small quantities of food, fearing the village was a supply post for leftist guerrillas.
Just to push the point home they dragged off four villagers, riddled them with bullets and threw their corpses into a shallow grave.
Today, San Jose is a virtual ghost town. Only 11 families defied the marching order while most gathered up what few belongings they could carry and fled.
"They told us to leave but maybe it's better to wait to die here in our homes and not go elsewhere and die of hunger," said peasant farmer Dario Alvarez.
The tragedy of San Jose is mirrored in scores of other remote villages and communities in the central region of Uraba -- the so-called banana belt -- which has been thrust into the eye of a hurricane as right-wing paramilitaries seek to destroy pockets of suspected rebel activity.
FOUR-WAY BATTLE FOR CONTROL
For the last decade, guerrillas, paramilitaries, the army and banana companies have been battling for political and economic control of Uraba, a region with huge natural wealth strategically located around an enormous natural bay close to Colombia's border with Panama.
The Saturday market in San Jose, 7 miles (12 km) from the regional centre of Apartado, was traditionally a magnet for hundreds of peasants from the surrounding Serrania de Abibe mountains seeking to sell avocados, cocoa and plantains.
Now the village square is deserted and 76-year-old Jose Joaquin Barrera sits at a stall unable to sell his wares to the few people that remain.
"The men that came were very heavily armed. They took off friends and people we knew well. By the time I got to the square they were just dragging them off. But what can you do? It's sad, very sad and leaves you with a lot of pain," he said.
Police believe the murders and threats carried out by the paramilitary gang in San Jose were in retailation for a massive car bomb attack in Apartado which killed 11 people and injured at least 60 others two days earlier. The blast was blamed on the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC), Colombia's oldest and largest rebel group set up as a pro-Soviet force in 1964.
The army, which some critics accuse of backing the paramilitaries, describes San Jose as a village "under the total control of the FARC" and claims uniformed rebels openly patrol the central square.
EVEN A PRIEST IS SUSPECTED
Anybody spotted making the journey along a rough dirt road is suspected of ties to the guerrillas -- even the parish priest.
"The priest has an excellent excuse -- that he's a priest and must attend to the faithful," said Col. Mario Correa, of the 17th Brigade based in nearby Carepa.
There is no apparent sign of rebel activity in San Jose, although a church worker, who did not wish to be named, said both guerrillas and paramilitaries regularly set up road blocks on the outskirts of the village.
Peasants say the sight of armed groups criss-crossing the hillsides is common. But giving out a glass of water or a handful of beans is considered more a means of survival than collaboration with the enemy.
"The person who has the gun is the law for the poor peasant. A lot of people pass through -- we just don't ask where they've come from nor where they're going ... this is a very dirty thing," said a 60-year-old peasant, who did not wish to be named.
More than 110 families have abandoned San Jose since the first paramilitary group appeared there six months ago. Some moved to Apartado, others used their scant funds to get as far away as they could.
In one of the newest squatter colonies in Apartado, called 20 De Enero, dozens of children play amid the wood shacks and hastily dug open drains.
"When I left I just took what I could carry. I don't really spend anything on food, just what I find. A plantain, a bit of yucca. Beans are too expensive at 1,000 pesos ($1) a pound. I don't see any hope," said a mother of two who fled six months ago after an army helicopter strafed her home in a community a day's walk away.
"Somebody once came and gave us a sheet of zinc for the roof but we haven't really had what you can call government help," said neighbour Nicolasa Goez, 72, who lives with her blind grandson.
Local authorities estimate at least 7,000 people have been displaced by violence throughout the region. Government organisations calculate some 920,000 people have been displaced by the long-running guerrilla war across Colombia.
"The problem of the displaced will cause us huge problems of crime, prostitution and social breakdown in the medium term. It makes me shudder," said Maria Girlesa Villegas of the human rights ombudsmen's office in Apartado.
