Gloria Cuartas is still haunted by the image of two gunmen who beheaded a child as she watched from the gates of a school in this troubled northwestern town.
The men tossed the severed head toward her as she shepherded young pupils back into the classroom seconds before a rival gang arrived and a shootout erupted. That experience is at the heart of why Cuartas, the mayor of Apartado, is raising a rare voice for peace amid the drums of war that thunder across the killing fields of Uraba -- one of the most violent regions of Colombia.
Since she took office in January 1995 Cuartas has battled to build an oasis of neutrality to shelter the civilian population from the crossfire of a savage war between leftist guerrillas, right-wing paramilitaries and the army.
"I was visiting a school last August when two men grabbed a child behind the school. They punched him in the stomach and then cut his head off and threw it toward me," Cuartas told Reuters. "There was a shootout and I took refuge with the children in the classroom and then in a nearby house."
She believes the attack was an attempt by paramilitaries to frighten her into quitting her post. But like most crimes in the area, the child's killers were never brought to justice.
CONSENSUS CANDIDATE
The gutsy, pint-sized mayor was elected as the consensus candidate of political forces ranging from the traditional Liberal and Conservative Parties to the left-wing Patriotic Union, seen as the political wing of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC), the country's largest guerrilla army.
She realised that in the short term it was impossible to take the guns out of local politics in this strategically located region where left and right have killed with impunity for more than a decade. But she has made repeated calls for townspeople to declare "active neutrality" and not take sides in the sectarian violence.
"You can't issue a decree about that because there's pain, suffering, refugees, resentment and people buried in shallow graves. But I do know the people of Apartado are tired of suffering," Cuartas said.
Apartado, with a population of 80,000, is the regional centre of this banana-growing region, which spreads across the provinces of Antioquia, Choco and Cordoba.
There were three massacres in and around the town last year, contributing to a death toll of more than 350 -- more than four times the national per capita average. Peasants are gunned down on a daily basis as they walk along dirt tracks that wind through lush banana plantations. And last month 11 civilians were killed and 60 others injured when FARC rebels detonated a massive car bomb in the town centre.
LIBERATION THEOLOGY A HELP
Cuartas, 36, a trained social worker, grew up near Medellin, Colombia's third largest city, and was educated by Carmelite nuns. "I always read a lot about liberation theology -- that has been my guide. I was educated not just to talk of Jesus and justice but to construct it," Cuartas explained.
Her work has received wide international recognition and last year she won the United Nations UNESCO Mayors for Peace award. But with less than a year before her mandate ends many at home are sceptical of her project for peace.
"Gloria Cuartas' neutrality is in question. She's more a friend of the guerrillas than of the other political actors," said Hernan Correa, one of the leaders of the banana workers' union Sintrainagro.
Townspeople frequently complain about a lack of progress on public works projects and most adopt their own strategy of "seeing but not looking and hearing but not listening" to stay on the sidelines of the dirty war raging around them.
Other critics believe Cuartas has gone too far for a supposedly neutral mayor in voicing claims of a secret pact between the army, the banana companies and right-wing death squads. The fact that those views feature on an Internet page (http://www.igc.apc.org/csn/gloria.html/) set up by the Colombia Support Network rights group based in Apartado's sister town of Madison, Wisconsin, has further raised hackles in the military.
"She uses the image of violence to sell her political ideas ... and gives a distorted view of what's going on and gets a page on the Internet. What does she want? She will be a tireless champion of the violations against the Patriotic Union," said Col. Mario Correa.
But Cuartas, who shuns police protection and private bodyguards, continues to speak out regardless of the clamour of verbal attacks and a daily diet of death threats.
"I ask you who is killing the people. It's not peasant against peasant, are you blind? The whole world must speak out about this -- there's no room for another single body in this cemetery," she said.
