Colombia's main truck drivers' union has voted to stage a nationwide strike from April 20 but the move has failed to unnerve the country's normally jumpy private coffee exporters.
The Colombian Truck Drivers' Association (ACC), which represents about 80 percent of the nation's truckers, has called the stoppage to protest transport companies' failure to fulfill an agreement to raise freight rates, which was hammered out at the end of a crippling 11-day strike last October.
That strike paralyzed all the country's road freight including 200,000 60-kg bags of coffee.
But one private coffee exporter, who did not wish to be named, said he was confident his firm would be able to fulfill its April export schedule before the latest strike hit.
"Most people will try and move their coffee quickly so that we don't have problems with the truckers," he said.
He estimated Colombia's total export commitments for April, including private and National Coffee Growers' Federation exports, amounted to about 520,000 60-kg bags.
Another private exporter, who declined to be named, even doubted the ACC strike would materialize. He believed it had been set a month in advance as a means of pressuring the transport companies and the government into seeking a negotiated solution.
"This is a joke, setting a strike one month in advance. If they were going to strike I think they would have gone out straight away," he said.
"Even if there is a strike then we're already preparing April shipments, the coffee is currently being processed and it should all be shipped by April 20," he added.
The exporter calculated that a strike starting April 20 could last for at least 10 days before it began to have the slightest impact on coffee export schedules.
On voting the strike last weekend, one of the ACC leaders Mario Quiroga said it had been necessary to set the strike date a month in advance in order to inform members and prepare the action.
When asked about the possible impact of the stoppage on coffee, he said: "Of course it will have an impact on coffee and everything else because we will not be moving a single kilo of freight along Colombia's roads."
In addition to higher freight rates, the October deal, which the ACC says was not fulfilled by transport companies, included extra payments to truckers waiting to on- and off-load goods and a pledge from the government to revise vehicle licensing fees and highway tolls.
In further strike news, Colombia's main dock workers' union SINTRAMARITIMO is threatening to call a fresh stoppage at the main pacific coast port of Buenaventura. In similar circumstances to the truck drivers, the dockers say that cargo operators never fulfilled the deal hammered out to end their January strike, which would have granted them an increase in wages and sickness, injury and social security entitlements.
The nine-day strike by dockers in January wreaked havoc with coffee exports -- about 60 percent of Colombia's coffee is shipped out through Buenaventura. More than 300,000 60-kg bags were locked in port.
In a fresh twist, Nelson Amaya, the regional head of the Unitary Workers' Confederation (CUT), to which SINTRAMARITIMO is affiliated, warned a new port strike could have more serious consequences than that in January.
In a whirlwind recruitment drive last week, Amaya signed up an additional 5,000 hitherto non-unionized members in the Atlantic coast ports of Cartagena, Barranquilla and Santa Marta, and said they too would heed any strike call.
Dock workers are scheduled to meet on April 1 to vote on whether to call a new strike. Amaya said the atmosphere in Buenaventura was "healthy" but said the dockgo operators' failure to keep their side of the bargain.
((--Bogota newsroom, 571 610 7944))
