Manuel de Jesus Pena does not want to know who blew his legs off in an indiscriminate grenade attack last year -- he just wants the dirty war to stop.
Like thousands of other civilians in this northwest region of Uraba -- the most violent corner of Colombia -- Pena is caught in the crossfire of a bitter conflict between Marxist rebels, right-wing death squads and the army.
"I don't know if it was the guerrillas, the army or the paramilitaries. The important thing is that I survived and that I carry on living," Pena told Reuters as he sat in his one-room home in the regional center of Apartado. "I would just tell the men of violence to stop this madness because those who are suffering are not directly involved in the war."
In the last year alone, more than 2,000 people were killed in tit-for-tat political violence across Uraba. At least 350 of those deaths were in Apartado.
Of the dead, 51 were slain by gunmen of the left and right in seven cold-blooded massacres last year, according to figures compiled by Maria Girlesa Villegas, head of the Human Rights Ombudsman's office in Apartado.
Foreigners have not completely escaped the violence. A Russian cyclist was killed last year and a German and an Austrian tourist were kidnapped this year and later killed by guerrillas in the western part of the region.
PARAMILITARIES WAGE SCORCHED EARTH OFFENSIVE
The upsurge in violence in Uraba coincided with the political rise of the leftwing Patriotic Union (UP) party a decade ago, culminating in its victory in mayoral elections in the region's main towns in 1992.
Spawned from a failed government peace process, the UP was seen by detractors on the right as the political wing of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC), the country's largest rebel army, formed as a pro-Soviet force in 1964.
In a "fire and blood" offensive, paramilitaries drove the UP and what they saw as other potential rebel sympathizers from the north and south of Uraba. For the past year they have focused on the central zone, known as the "banana belt."
Jose Herman, a UP leader who fled Apartado last October, is convinced the paramilitaries have forged a covert pact with the army and the banana companies to spearhead a scorched earth policy aimed at annihilating leftists in the region.
"There's strong links between the banana companies and the paramilitaries. Their theory was to take the water away from the fish and they began to kill us, calling us guerrilla collaborators," he said, adding that although UP and the FARC shared many ideals their command structures were separate.
REBELS IN IDEOLOGICAL ABOUT-FACE
In a confusing ideological about-face, the FARC's former allies, the Maoist-inspired People's Liberation Army (EPL), are now their bitter enemies. Most EPL fighters laid down their arms in 1991 and went on to form the Hope, Peace and Liberty political movement, which now dominates the main banana workers' union Sintrainagro.
But some former EPL rebels joined the ranks of the paramilitary death squads, sparking reprisals by the FARC against all Hope, Peace and Liberty members. "The abuses were committed by the FARC and now they're paying the price," said Hernan Correa, a Sintrainagro leader and former EPL insurgent.
Underlying the bitter sectarian rivalry is the battle for economic control of this strategic region nestled between the Pacific and Atlantic oceans near the border with Panama. The military say it is a key transit route for drugs and arms.
Some local experts believe the only real hope for an end to the killing is for one side or the other to drive its rival out of the area. But for the moment none of the armed actors has the firepower to fight a classic war of positions and hold on to the territory it gains -- not even the army.
"We lack mobility. We need more budget for arms, ammunition and helicopters. We only have three helicopters here. If they just gave me 10 more then I'm sure that within less than six months we would finish this problem," regional army commander Gen. Rito Alejo del Rio said.
But no argument will convince one 18-year-old police rookie, who arrived in the town the day before the FARC killed 11 people with a massive car-bomb in February, that this is a war worth fighting and even less one that can be won.
"This is war of the mad, the demented and the psychopaths," he said.
