The explosion that killed an inmate in Bogota's top-security La Picota prison points to a brewing internecine war between jailed members of the notorious Medellin drug cartel, a prison source said on Monday.
William Infante, a convicted contract killer formerly in the pay of the now-defunct Medellin mob, died late on Saturday when a bomb he was making in his cell exploded.
A source in the National Prison Institute (INPEC) said investigators believe Infante, who was serving a 25-year term for the murder of a leftist politician, was preparing an attack on fellow prisoner Leonidas Vargas, an ally of the late head of the Medellin cartel's "military wing."
"We are investigating the possibility of vendettas between former members of the Medellin cartel jailed in La Picota. It seems the bomb may have been intended for Leonidas Vargas," the source said. He ruled out press speculation the bomb may have been destined for the Rodriguez Orejuela brothers and other capos of the Cali cartel jailed in an adjoining wing of La Picota.
"There is no way this device could have been used against Cali cartel members because there is no way the Medellin convicts can get through to where the Cali cartel chiefs are held. The two wings are completely separate," he said.
Investigations are under way to find out what type of explosive was used and how it was smuggled into the jail, supposedly the most secure in Colombia.
The prison source said the reason for the dispute between Infante and Vargas was not yet clear. Both had once been close to Gonzalo Rodriguez Gacha, alias The Mexican, the strategist behind a bloody campaign of bombings and killings that infamous cartel chief Pablo Escobar waged against his rivals and the state.
Rodriguez Gacha died in a shootout with police in 1989. The Medellin cartel was effectively destroyed with the death of Escobar in a roof-top shootout four years later.
In a radio interview on Monday, Justice Minister Carlos Medellin warned that chronic overcrowding in Colombia's jails had created a "seedbed" for corruption and disorder. Last week, 2,000 inmates led by convicted leftist rebels rioted in La Modelo prison, Bogota's other top-security jail, and there have been at least three other serious riots in provincal prisons this year.
"The National Prisons Institute's inability to control the situation has created a seedbed for corruption and disorder ... it would not be surprising to see problems flaring in other jails," Medellin told the Caracol radio network.
He said President Ernesto Samper may declare a state of internal emergency, which would allow the government to push through new laws to beef up prison security and cut overcrowding.
In addition to the lack of security in Colombian prisons, as evidenced by the recent riots, U.S. anti-drug officials allege that corruption among prison guards is rife. They say Colombia's jailed drug lords continue to run their multibillion-dollar criminal empires from behind bars.
