Hundreds more families are continuing to flee violence through the jungles of northwest Colombia, adding to a burgeoning refugee crisis in the town of Mutata, its mayor said on Tuesday.
At least 2,500 people arrived in a village close to Mutata in the violence-torn Uraba region over Easter, and Mayor Luis Renteria said another 1,500 mostly women and children were expected to arrive in the next few days.
In the first international response to the drama, a British embassy official said on Tuesday that Britain's Overseas Development Agency had approved an $80,000 emergency aid package of tents and food supplies, due to be sent to the region before the weekend.
The army has accused Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) guerrillas of ordering the peasants to abandon their homes in the Rio Salaqui basin of neighbouring Choco province in order to create "social disorder" in the main towns of Uraba.
But a FARC spokeswoman said the people had fled in the face of "indiscriminate" aerial bombardments by the army and threats from right-wing paramilitary groups.
"These people say they will not return home until they have guarantees from the government that paramilitary groups will be forced out of their communities," Renteria said.
He said one-third of the refugees in Pavarando, in the municipality of Mutata, were children, and that more than 80 women who spent up to four weeks walking from their homes along treacherous jungle tracks were pregnant.
A British embassy official said tents and food would be purchased locally and channelled to the refugees via the International Committee of the Red Cross.
The human tide of refugees has drawn an angry response from army commander Gen. Manuel Jose Bonett, who said: "The guerrilla strategy is to force these people to move out and occupy towns to create a huge social problem."
But a FARC spokeswoman told Reuters: "We have been in contact with our people in the area and they say there has been intense fighting with the army. Because the army has not been able to wipe out the guerrilla it has staged indiscriminate aerial bombardments of the area."
Interior Minister Horacio Serpa and provincial governor Alvaro Uribe are scheduled to visit the refugees in Mutata on Wednesday.
Uraba, which covers parts of Choco, Antioquia and Cordoba provinces, is the scene of bitter conflict between the army and the guerrillas. The army says it is a key arms and drug smuggling route for the rebels, while the guerrillas say right-wing forces are trying to force peasants out of the strategically important, resource-rich region close to the border with Panama.
There are an estimated 7,000 internal refugees spread across Uraba and more than 900,000 people have been displaced in the last decade by Colombia's long-running guerrilla war.
