Foreign and Colombian journalists have received death threats from suspected drug gangsters claiming to be "extraditables," a source at Colombia's national intelligence service said on Tuesday.
Extraditables was a name used by the late cocaine kingpin Pablo Escobar and members of his now-defunct Medellin cartel as they waged a campaign of bombings and kidnappings in the late 1980s and early 1990s in a successful bid to force the government to ban the extradition of drug traffickers.
In letters sent to some newspaper editors and foreign press agencies in the last week, the group pledged to kill journalists who backed renewed government efforts to overturn Colombia's 6-year-old ban on sending its citizens abroad to stand trial.
"With your 'yes' to extradition you have signed the death penalty. Because from today, you, your families and your companies have been declared military targets," said the letter, a copy of which was obtained by Reuters. "Now you will feel the meaning of power ... Remember this sentence has no time limit."
The document ended with "We prefer a tomb in Colombia than a jail in the United States," a phrase coined by Escobar's extraditables at the height of their war, which ended with the government banning the extradition of all Colombians in 1991.
Intelligence officials are investigating the threats and do not yet know if surviving members of the Medellin mob or other drug traffickers such as the rival Cali cartel may be involved.
"We're analysing these letters sent to newspaper editors and foreign journalists but at the moment we have not been able to determine how serious the risk is," an intelligence service spokesman said. He declined to name the journalists who received the threats.
The threats come after Justice Minister Carlos Medellin said he would press to lift the ban on extradition with retroactive effect. If he succeeds it would raise the possibility that the Rodriguez Orejuela brothers, the jailed capos of the Cali drug cartel, could eventually face trial in the United States.
Washington has been pressing Colombia to restore extradition, saying Colombian anti-drug laws are too lax and traffickers continue running their criminal empires from behind bars.
The new threats also follow recent attacks against journalists. In December, a car bomb exploded near the home of a regional newspaper editor in Medellin and last month gunmen murdered Gerardo Bedoya, a leading journalist with El Pais newspaper in Cali, home to the drug mob that replaced the Medellin cartel as the world's leading cocaine supplier.
