Thousands of people who fled violence and were camped out in the jungles of northwest Colombia may soon run out of food and the risk of epidemics was on the rise, a Red Cross aid worker said on Wednesday.
More than 3,000 people, mostly women and children, were sleeping under hastily constructed shelters or in the open air in a village close to the town of Mutata, in the violence-torn Uraba region.
Many worried about the fate of as many as 1,500 relatives believed to making their way along treacherous jungle tracks, fleeing the fighting between leftist guerrillas, right-wing paramilitaries and the army in the Rio Salaqui basin of neighbouring Choco province, the aide said.
"We are rationing food for these displaced people because of the lack of supplies. We just don't know how long the food we have will last," said Adalberto Arrieta, of the Red Cross in the regional centre of Apartado.
"We're carrying out preventative work but in these kinds of conditions of poor hygiene, epidemics inevitably follow. There are just too many people in one place," he said.
Multiple cases of diarrhoea and fever were reported and Arrieta said the refugees also risked malaria and cholera.
The British government was sending $80,000 in emergency aid, including food and tents, to Uraba, which covers parts of Choco, Antioquia and Cordoba provinces. But Colombian officials admitted they were ill-prepared to deal with the human tide.
Interior Minister Horacio Serpa and provincial governors travelled to Mutata on Wednesday to plan government relief aid.
The army, meanwhile, was trying to persuade the people to return home or at least prevent them from moving from the village of Pavorando to the main town of Mutata.
Army commander Gen. Manuel Jose Bonett accused the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) guerrillas of ordering the mass mobilisation of peasants to create "social chaos" in the main towns of the area.
A FARC spokeswoman said this week that the peasants were fleeing in the face of indiscriminate aerial bombardments by the army coupled with threats from right-wing death squads.
"We want everything back to normal but we cannot go home until all those paramilitary groups leave," Robinson Polo, one of the displaced, told the NTC TV news programme.
Across the Uraba region, some 7,000 people have been displaced by fighting. In the last decade, the government said more than 900,000 people were forced to abandon their homes as a result of the country's long-running guerrilla war.
The army has waged an offensive against the guerrillas in Uraba in a bid to disrupt what it claims are key arms and drug trafficking routes in and out of nearby Panama.
The guerrillas, however, say the army and the paramilitaries are waging a joint scorched earth policy to force peasants out of the strategic, resource-rich region.
