Pools of blood stain a dirt track that winds through the lush banana plantations of this central region, Uraba.
The bodies of two slain workers are unceremoniously dumped in the back of a truck and shipped off to the morgue, leaving heavily armed police to search for the killers amid trees laden with fruit destined for the United States and Europe.
For the last decade the banana has been synonymous with the bullet as rightwing paramilitaries and leftist guerrillas vie for the shifting allegiance of the people of this violence-torn corner of northwest Colombia. The dirty war now in full swing is just the latest chapter in the history of an industry which, for the last 30 years, has shaped politics, the economy and society in the four municipalities that make up Colombia's "banana belt."
"When people enjoy a banana in Europe, remember there's the pain of a whole people behind it," said Gloria Cuartas, mayor of the regional center of Apartado.
In the past banana workers' unions were inextricably tied to two guerrilla groups, the Maoist People's Liberation Army (EPL) and pro-Soviet Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC), creating open conflict with plantation bosses.
But most EPL fighters laid down their arms under a government-backed peace initiative in 1991 and went on to form a political movement called Esperanza, Paz y Libertad (Hope, Peace and Liberty). That movement now controls the union Sintrainagro with 13,000 members, an estimated 95 percent of banana workers in the area.
RELATIONS WITH BOSSES RARELY BETTER
Relations between the bosses of the 380 plantations spread across more than 69,000 acres (28,000 hectares) and their workers have rarely been better. Labor protest has been muted and the workers have won vastly improved contract terms enabling them to earn up to $300 per month, almost twice the minimum wage, as they harvest the more than 1 million tonnes of bananas exported annually from the region.
But the FARC's power in the plantations has plummeted with the demise of the union it once sponsored and in the face of the burgeoning influence of Hope, Peace and Liberty. In a bid to regain a foothold, the rebels have targeted banana workers and Hope, Peace and Liberty members in particular.
"Now instead of having the support of the guerrillas we're their target," said Hernan Correa, a Sintrainagro leader whose brother was assassinated by suspected FARC gunmen last year. Correa, a former EPL guerrilla, has himself been the target of at least one assassination attempt and now rides around in an armor-plated pickup truck.
But the movement has not stood by and watched its members die. "Some members of Hope, Peace and Liberty took the personal decision to take up arms to defend themselves ... the guerrillas committed the abuses and now they're paying the price," Correa said.
MORE THAN 3,000 DEAD SINCE 1989
Since 1989, 20 Sintrainagro leaders and more than 3,000 rank and file party members have been killed, Correa said. The names of banana estates Bajo El Oso, Osaka, Los Cunas and Mapana toll like a church bell in the minds of many residents of the banana belt. Almost everyone had a relative or friend among the 51 people slaughtered in a string of massacres on those estates between August 1995 and February 1996.
Critics say Hope, Peace and Liberty has gone beyond self-defense and forged a pact with the army and banana growers, specifically the region's seven main banana exporters including Banadex, a subsidiary of the multinational Standard Fruit, to create right-wing death squads.
"In Apartado they want us to end up in the hands of the multinationals and they want the peasants out (to gain access to) the oil, coal and bananas and the right to the humble peasants' land," Cuartas said.
Regional army commander Gen. Rito Alejo del Rio rejects claims of any such covert plot. "Hope, Peace and Liberty has strengthened the banana industry and the regional economy through excellent labor and business relations. With the links between the union, the growers and the army there is no interest apart from the stability of the zone," he said.
He accuses Cuartas of being an ally of the FARC and the Patriotic Union (UP), widely seen as the rebels' political wing. He believes that while the rebels wage a military campaign Apartado's mayor is waging a potentially disastrous war of economic attrition aimed at encouraging banana importing nations to clamp sanctions on Uraba.
"In 1997 NGOs (non-government organizations) will try to convince importing countries not to buy Colombian bananas on the grounds that they're financing paramilitary groups. Cutting down the sale of bananas will lead the community to the border of chaos," Del Rio said.
