Convicts leading a riot, in which at least five guards died, demanded on Friday to be flown out of a jail in northern Colombia by helicopter to an undisclosed location, the regional human rights ombudsman said.
The inmates, some convicted leftist guerrillas and others former police officers, requested 10 parachutes, while one man, a jailed leader of the now defunct M-19 rebel group, demanded political exile in Cuba, ombudsman Carmen Quintero said.
About 550 prisoners seized control of the jail compound in Valledupar, in Cesar province, after taking weapons from prison guards on Thursday evening.
A National Prison Institute (INPEC) spokeswoman said the prisoners had taken 16 hostages, including the jail's deputy director and a 14-year-old girl.
"The prisoners are demanding vehicles to leave the jail and two helicopters with 10 parachutes. They have not said where they want to fly to but said they would take the hostages with them as a guarantee," Quintero told reporters outside the jail.
Provincial governor Mauricio Pimiento, part of the delegation trying to mediate the crisis, said he would not discuss the inmates' demands until they had freed their hostages and allowed all the dead and injured to be removed from the compound.
"A prisoner has reported that five guards are dead...," a spokeswoman for the prison said.
The inmates allowed an ambulance into the prison for some of the five inmates and jail guards injured in the initial shootout.
Police and soldiers surrounded the prison and fired bullets and tear gas over the walls but were ordered not to enter for fear of inflaming the situation, the spokeswoman said.
"We are holding our fire and have merely formed three security cordons around the jail," a police spokesman later told Reuters by phone from Valledupar.
Col. Rafael Pardo, head of national prisons, said there was no independent confirmation of the number of dead and injured because inmates had barred the security forces from entering the jail.
In addition to the small group of prisoners looking to break out of the jail, other inmates are demanding an end to prison overcrowding and improved living conditions.
The Valledupar prison is designed to house 200 convicts but more than 550 are imprisoned there. Earlier this week, Justice Minister Carlos Medellin admitted chronic overcrowding had turned Colombia's jails into a "seedbed for corruption and violence."
Across Colombia, 40,000 inmates are housed in facilities designed for 30,000 prisoners.
If news of the deaths was confirmed, it would be the worst in a string of prison disturbances this year. Last week, more than 2,000 inmates, led by leftist guerrillas, rioted and started fires in Bogota's La Modelo jail in protest at prison overcrowding.
Another convict died in the top-security wing of Bogota's La Picota jail when a bomb he was making in his cell exploded. Prisoners have rioted in at least three provincial jails so far this year.
