Government officials flew to northern Colombia on Friday in a bid to persuade prisoners to lay down their weapons and release hostages seized in a bloody jail riot, which left four guards confirmed dead.
A crack anti-kidnap force, meanwhile, took up positions around the jail and a local police chief raised the possibility of launching a lightning operation to rescue the hostages.
A group of 10 hardened convicts heading the revolt refused to budge on earlier demands for two helicopters to airlift them out of the jail in Valledupar, in Cesar province, and take them to an undisclosed location, the city mayor said.
At least one of the men, a former leader of the now-defunct M-19 leftist rebel movement, called for political asylum in Cuba.
"I would urge the prisoners to be patient and avoid any further bloodshed. We are on our way to the jail (from Bogota) and want to look for a peaceful solution to this grave problem," said government human rights ombudsman Jose Fernando Castro, who is heading the mediation team.
About 550 inmates went on a rampage on Thursday evening and seized control of the jail after overpowering 18 guards and confiscating their pistols and nightsticks. Police said leftist guerrillas and four former policemen jailed for kidnapping and extortion are heading the disturbance.
A spokeswoman for the National Prisons Institute originally said five guards were reported killed in the shoot-out and a handful of convicts had been injured. By Friday morning, Valledupar mayor Tito Pumarejo confirmed that four bodies, all prison guards, had been ferried out of the jail compound by Red Cross workers.
The INPEC spokeswoman said the final death toll may be higher, adding that security forces were still unable to enter the jail.
A Valledupar police commander, Col. Alvaro Becerra, said about 100 police and troops had formed three security cordons around the jail and said there was a "tense but calm stand-off."
"It would be difficult to mount an operation to rescue the hostages. It would require a great deal of planning. But an elite GAULA (anti-kidnap) squad is in place and a combined police and army strike is a possibility," he told Reuters by phone.
"But the inmates' demands are absolutely absurd and I don't think they will be granted," he added.
The inmates are holding at least 15 hostages, including a 14-year-old girl who was visiting the jail when the riot erupted, and the prison's deputy director. The majority of the prisoners restricted their demands to an end to overcrowding and better conditions.
The riot in Valledupar jail, built for 200 inmates and not the current 550 it houses, is the latest in a series of disturbances in Colombian jails.
Three provincial prisons were rocked by riots earlier this year. In the last 10 days, 2,000 inmates, led by convicted guerrillas, smashed part of Bogota's La Modelo jail while an inmate died in Bogota's top-security La Picota facility when a bomb he was making in his cell accidentally exploded.
Chronic overcrowding is broadly considered to be the main cause of the riots. More than 40,000 prisoners are crammed into facilities designed for 30,000 people, the INPEC spokeswoman said.
