President Ernesto Samper on Friday called on prisoners who seized a jail in northern Colombia to lay down their weapons and release their hostages following a bloody riot that left four guards dead.
He warned that negotiations to end the prison siege in Valledupar in northern Cesar province could not begin until a group of 10 hardened convicts heading the revolt by 550 prisoners, surrendered.
A crack anti-kidnap force was in place near the jail and a local police chief did not rule out the possibility of launching a lightning operation to rescue the hostages.
"The national government will not begin to look for the solution to this situation until the hostages are released and the inmates lay down their arms," Samper told reporters after an official event in the industrial city of Medellin.
"I call on the prisoners not to make the situation more difficult and to contribute to a rapid end to this conflict with the guarantee that their lives will be respected," he said.
The prisoners released a 14-year-old girl and a prison administrator earlier on Friday, but were still holding 13 hostages by nightfall.
The inmates went on a rampage on Thursday evening and took control of the jail after overpowering 18 guards, confiscating their pistols and nightsticks. Police said leftist guerrillas and four former policemen, jailed for kidnapping and extortion, were leading the disturbance.
Four prison guards were confirmed dead. A national Prisons' Institute official said the death toll could be higher but security forces had been unable to enter the compound to check.
The ringleaders refused to budge on demands for two helicopters to airlift them out of the jail to an undisclosed location, city mayor Tito Pumarejo said. At least one of the men has called for political asylum in Cuba. The majority of the prisoners restricted their demands to an end to overcrowding and better conditions.
Valledupar police commander Col. Alvaro Becerra said 100 police and troops had formed three security cordons around the jail and said there was a "tense, but calm stand-off."
The riot in Valledupar jail, built for 200 inmates, not the 550 it houses, comes against the backdrop of a string of disturbances in Colombian jails. Three provincial prisons have been rocked by riots this year.
