A judge who ordered the arrest of Colombia's army chief was criticised on Thursday for giving in to pressure from leftist guerrillas mounting their most serious offensive in decades.
The judge in southern Caqueta province served the warrant against Gen. Harold Bedoya after the army refused to lift barricades blocking a demonstration by thousands of peasants opposed to the compulsory eradication of coca plantations.
Colombian landowners and political commentators said leftist rebels linked to cocaine traffickers had leaned on the judge to order the general's arrest.
"Who was behind the warrant? It's not difficult to guess because it's no secret that these are regions where the local authorities and the peasants are operating under pressure from the narcoguerrillas," the influential Colombian Cattlemen's Federation said in a statement.
Alejandro Ramirez, the local judge in the town of Albania, issued the arrest warrant against Bedoya last week. The general faces 30 days in prison for defying an earlier order to remove the barricades.
President Ernesto Samper ordered an inquiry on Wednesday into the judge's decision, which was under review by a higher court.
The government said the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC), the country's largest left-wing guerrilla organisation, was behind the peasant demonstration.
The legal controversy came in the middle of one of the bloodiest offensives since the FARC and another rebel group, the National Liberation Army, were founded in the mid-1960s.
In two weeks of rebel attacks more than 120 people were killed, most of them soldiers. More than 60 soldiers were being held as "prisoners of war" by the FARC.
El Tiempo, Colombia's leading daily, attacked the judge decision as absurd.
"What could be more inconceivable and absurd than jailing the commander of the army in the middle of this war?" the newspaper's deputy director Enrique Santos said in a column.
"... of all the Machiavellian plots by drug traffickers and guerrillas, the sanction ordered by the judge of Albania beats all previous records by far," he wrote on Thursday.
The Colombian Cattlemen's Federation said the country's economy and legal system should be put on a war footing to meet the demands of an effective counterinsurgency campaign.
The government, buffeted by the wave of leftist guerrilla violence, has called for a hefty increase in defence spending in its 1997 budget, government sources said on Thursday.
They said most of the increase would go toward military spending, with more than $420 million coming from a proposed sale of war bonds to rich Colombians next year.
