BOGOTA, April 23 Reuter - Colombia will draw heavily on its coffee stockpiles to meet export commitments, given that the 1996/97 harvest seems set to come in lower than previous estimates of 10.4 million 60-kg bags, the country's coffee czar Jorge Cardenas said this week.
Many private exporters and independent analysts, however, believe that much of the powerful National Coffee Growers' Federation's stocks are old crop or even beans that have been damaged by the so-called "broca" or berry borer - thereby making much of it unfit for export.
Gloomy harvest predictions by federation head Cardenas coincided with a report in Colombia's leading political magazine Semana that said serious underlying structural problems were the prime cause behind falling production levels.
In an impromptu press conference after the weekly federation meeting Monday, Cardenas said the 1996/97 harvest would come in at little over 10 million 60-kg bags. He predicted coffee inventories would drop to 3.5 million bags from current levels of about five million bags by the end of September this year as Colombia sought to meet export schedules.
He declined to comment on independent sources' claims that much of the stocks were old.
Quoting a range of experts, Semana magazine said the gradual fall in coffee output was due to the progressive aging of coffee plantations or because growers were abandoning them altogether.
A separate report in the respected El Espectador daily newspaper cited National Statistics Department figures saying that the dismal 0.21 percent growth rate of the agricultural sector in 1996 was largely due to the poor performance of coffee, with an 18.5 percent drop in production.
Also at Monday's federation meeting, the organization's technical director Antonio Herron, warned that "broca" was continuing to spread and could affect all Colombia's 900,000 hectares of coffee by 1999. At present about 680,000 hectares are affected by broca, about 75 percent of the country's plantations.
Federation officials previously said growers were managing to keep broca in check thanks to a vigorous TV advertising campaign. Growers themselves complain that the fight against broca has pushed up production costs.
The federation estimates that about five percent of the 1996/97 coffee crop will be damaged by broca -- a little more than 500,000 60-kg sacks -- further forcing down the amount of excelso coffee available for export.
The prevailing gloom was partially lifted by predictions by U.S. brokerage Merrill Lynch that international coffee prices could stay high until September.
Cardenas predicted July-September coffee prices would rise to somewhere around current spot May levels because of continuing supply jitters in the international markets.
A second bright point came at the end of last week with the negotiated end to a five-day truck drivers' strike, which Cardenas said had done "a lot of damage to coffee flows" and delayed shipment of 200,000 70-kg bags.
((--Bogota newsroom, 571 610 7944))
