Moves to secure the release of about 60 Colombian soldiers held by leftist guerrillas could be hampered by failure to agree on the international character of a team to mediate the handover, a Red Cross spokesman said on Monday.
"Perhaps the most complicated element (of creating a mediation commission) is whether to view it as a national or an international issue," a spokesman for the International Committee of the Red Cross said.
"The important thing for us is that these people are released as quickly as possible and in good health."
Just one day before the deadline set by the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) for creation of the commission, the guerrillas have still not nominated their own delegates to oversee the release of the prisoners, captured during a raid in southern Putumayo province on Aug. 30.
In a telephone interview on Monday, Marco Leon Calarca, part of the FARC's general secretariat based in Mexico, said they would propose Guatemalan Nobel prize winner Rigoberta Menchu.
But it was uncertain how far the government would allow the FARC to use the release of the prisoners as a chance to publicise its guerrilla war to an international audience. Some analysts believe the FARC wants to use the release to show it is a genuine guerrilla army, not terrorists and drug traffickers as charged by Colombia's government and military.
But the government is keen to treat its fight against left-wing guerrillas as a largely domestic affair and it has insisted there is nothing to negotiate when it comes to the prisoners' release.
"We want to set up a commission that carries real weight so that the government is forced to create the right conditions for the handover," Leon Calarca said. "We want both an international and national presence."
Once the commission is formed it will negotiate the timetable for the soldiers' release and witness the handover.
The troops were seized in an attack on a jungle camp in Las Delicias in which 27 soldiers were killed. It marked the start of one of the bloodiest guerrilla offensives in decades.
The government has nominated three people to the panel, Bishop of Bogota Monsignor Pedro Rubiano, former Foreign Minister Augusto Ramirez Ocampo and ex-Sen. Alvaro Leyva.
