A former justice minister said on Monday that Colombia's moves to lift a six-year extradition ban were a smokescreen designed to appease the United States while protecting the country's drug barons.
"This government has no real desire to push extradition through but it wants to give the impression that it does ... We must not underestimate (President Ernesto) Samper's bad faith and capacity for trickery," former justice minister Enrique Parejo told Reuters.
Samper reiterated on Monday his commitment to seeing an end to the constitutional ban on sending Colombians to stand trial abroad, saying "it forms part of our policies in the international struggle against drugs".
But Parejo believes Samper is merely paying lip service to the idea of extradition to placate the United States, which blacklisted Colombia for a second consecutive year for its perceived failure to crack down on drug trafficking.
A Senate committee is due to re-open a government- sponsored debate on extradition on Tuesday following a confusing session last week, which ended in a hung vote and left legislators and ministers arguing over congressional rules.
Even if one of three extradition proposals due for debate clears all congressional hurdles and makes it onto the statute books, Parejo believes it would be so complex as to be unworkable.
The alternatives range from the simple abrogation of Article 35 from the constitution -- the one banning extradition of Colombian nationals -- to one that includes widespread restrictions on when extradition could be applied.
"This is all part of a manoeuvre by the government. Even if some form of extradition is passed then it will really amount to nothing because there will be so many regulations that these would frustrate the whole process," Parejo said.
Extradition was banned in 1991 after Pablo Escobar, the late head of the notorious Medellin drug cartel, launched a spate of bombings and kidnappings against the state.
When Samper took office in August 1994, amid allegations that he financed his election campaign with donations from the Cali drug mob, he said restoration of extradition was not on his political agenda.
Samper and his top ministers have reversed that position in the face of increasing pressure from the United States, which has consistently pressed for extradition of the jailed Rodriguez Orejuela brothers, former chiefs of the notorious Cali cartel.
But Parejo believes Samper is now giving verbal backing to the restoration of extradition safe in the knowledge that Colombian law makes it virtually impossible to apply new legislation retroactively.
