President Ernesto Samper, moving to reverse Colombia's status as an international drug pariah, urged Congress on Tuesday to quickly approve tougher anti-narcotics laws.
Samper submitted legislation in mid-July to stiffen sentences for drug trafficking and to permit the confiscation of drug barons' property, but the measures are still tied up in Congress.
"I ask Congress to give urgent consideration to this (anti-drug) proposal," Samper said in a letter to lawmakers.
He said the judicial reforms "reflect the government's unequivocal commitment to end drug trafficking and organised crime" and would "bring national laws into line with international parameters on drug trafficking and money laundering as laid down by the United Nations."
By speeding up the measures, government officials say Samper has his eye on restoring Washington's faith in Colombia's anti-narcotics efforts.
Washington decertified Colombia as a partner in the global struggle against drugs in March, branding it a virtual outcast state. The government hopes to regain U.S. certification in March 1997, a government source said.
Political analysts have noted that no country decertified by Washington has ever had the measure lifted, however, and Samper's alleged ties to drug lords weigh strongly against any move by the Clinton administration to let Colombia off the hook.
Fabio Ochoa, the youngest of a drug trafficking family linked to the once-powerful Medellin cartel, was released from prison on Monday after less than six years behind bars.
U.S. drug experts have criticised the light sentences imposed on Colombian drug barons and say they continue to run their illicit activities from jail.
Samper initially said the tougher sentencing could mean convicted drug traffickers spending up to 60 years in prison. But in the bill presented to Congress, the maximum sentence envisaged adds up to little more than one-third of that term.
Despite Samper's push to regain U.S. certification, he has not yet submitted any bill that would reestablish extradition for drug traffickers. An extradition treaty with the United States was suspended with a constitutional reform in 1991, introduced against the background of a campaign of terror waged by major drug barons in the late 1980s and early 1990s.
