BOGOTA, May 14 Reuter - Colombia's coffee czar finally admitted this week what private exporters have been saying for months -- that the country will have "enormous difficulties" meeting export schedules.
Jorge Cardenas, head of the powerful National Coffee Growers' Federation, blamed the situation on supply worries caused by a best-case forecast of a 10.2 million 60-kg bag crop for the 1996/97 coffee year -- compared to 12.9 million bags last year.
Implicit in his admission was that the federation's inventories, currently at 4.8 million bags according to latest federation figures, contain insufficient fresh coffee to meet this year's 11 million bags of export commitments.
The situation has left the federation battling with private exporters at home in a bid to cash in on booming international prices.
"There's very strong competition for fresh coffee," Cardenas said. He added that in some areas, 125-kg loads of coffee were being sold for more than $400 compared to the benchmark domestic price of 388,375 pesos (about $360), set each week by the federation.
As early as February, some private exporters said the federation's crop estimate of 10.4 million bags was overblown.
Expert analysts at Merill Lynch issued a forecast of about 9.5 million bags and one private exporter consulted over the weekend said it could even come in as low as 9.3 million bags based on an April crop of about 824,000 bags compared to the 1 million bags initially forecast.
The exporter added that figures obtained from federation sources showed federation stocks of fresh coffee amounted to just 800,000 bags, with the remainder affected by the berry borer, or "broca", or old crop coffee dating from between 1991 and 1995.
"We've known about this situation for a long time. The only thing that was left was for Jorge Cardenas to say it," the private exporter told Reuters.
He stopped short of accusing the federation of lying about its stocks to avoid panicking the markets. Instead, he argued that the federation had played down the magnitude of the shortfall in the hope of lulling Colombia's exporters into a false sense of security while frantically trying to snap up all the available fresh crop.
"The federation hoped that by restricting us it would be able to buy more coffee but it hasn't been able to do that," the exporter said.
Until this week Cardenas said the federation would be fully able to meet its commitments by drawing on its stockpile. But at the end of the federation's weekly meeting Cardenas said the shipment of about 100,000 bags of April exports alone had been delayed because of supply shortfalls.
Worries about short coffee supplies are prompting speculation that major coffee producers may delay a decision over tighter export quotas at an Association of Coffee Producing Countries ACPC meeting in London next week.
The export program currently in force is aimed at capping the 14 member nations' exports at 25.48 million bags in the first half of 1997. But Cardenas hinted this week that he would be ready to put any fresh decision on hold.
"The producers' desire is to send a signal to the markets and there's no question of having prices at a certain level just for the sake of it or of creating artificial conditions," Cardenas said.
Smaller than expected crops in many Latin American countries -- most notably second-largest producer Colombia, the onset of winter in Brazil and low inventory levels in consumer countries have all contributed to fuel a five-month upswing in coffee futures.
	 (--Bogota newsroom, 571 610 7944)
