Former Colombian president Virgilio Barco Vargas died on Tuesday in a Bogota clinic after a yearlong battle with stomach cancer and Alzheimer's disease, hospital officials said. He was 75.
Barco, a shy public figure but a tough politician and a skilled administrator, emerged from relative political obscurity to lead Colombia from 1986 to 1990.
"I share the sense of loss that all Colombians are feeling. Barco was a man of few but firm convictions and very dedicated to certain principles," President Ernesto Samper said in a radio broadcast tribute to Barco.
"I think he really was an example for the new generation," Samper, a Liberal Party member like Barco, added.
Barco's body was due to lie in state at the national Congress building. The government of his home province of Norte de Santander declared three days of mourning.
Barco was born in 1921 in the northeast town of Cucuta, on the border with Venezuela. He graduated from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology with a degree in civil engineering and later a doctorate in economic science.
Married to an American, Barco had a perfect command of English and is popularly remembered as one of Bogota's best- ever mayors between 1966 and 1969 when he promoted a series of major public works and urban renovation programmes.
He also served as Minister of Public Works and Minister of Agriculture in the late 1950s and early 1960s.
He was, however, ill-at-ease with the press and seen as a poor orator. Shortly after his election as president the Colombian media described him as resembling a "disheveled, absent-minded and stuttering professor."
Barco swept to power in the elections of May 1986 with more than 58 percent of the votes, one of the largest margins in Colombian history. He was committed to fighting poverty and promoting indigenous and children's rights.
But his administration saw drug-related violence soar to bloody heights. In the build-up to the 1990 presidential elections three candidates were shot to death, including presidential front-runner Carlos Galan -- gunned down by a drug cartel assassin at a rally just outside Bogota.
The president responded by restoring the extradition of Colombians to the United States, which had effectively been suspended by Supreme Court rulings in 1986 and 1987.
His a frontal challenge to the drug traffickers led Pablo Escobar, head of the Medellin cartel, to dub him "Mr. Shit," according to journalist Simon Strong's book Whitewash.
Barco partly succeeded in his efforts to defuse Colombia's long-running guerrilla war. He negotiated a peace treaty with the leftist M-19 guerrilla group and opened the way for former guerrillas to return to civilian life.
But a tentative peace accord with the country's largest guerrilla army, the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) was short-lived.
