Colombia's Senate approved on Thursday a controversial bill that would partially lift the country's six-year-old ban on the extradition of drug traffickers and other criminals.
A plenary session voted 53-14 in favour of the bill, which still faces more congressional hurdles and if successful would only become a statute toward the end of the year.
"I'm very satisfied because we had a big vote in favour of the motion," Justice Minister Almabeatriz Rengifo said after the session. "This will be the last step to removing a constitutional ban (on extradition) which is what we have been fighting to do."
Critics, however, say the original government-sponsored bill has been so watered down that it is virtually useless and is unlikely to impress U.S. anti-drug officials who have been pushing the Colombian government to push through an unconditional extradition law.
The bill must still be submitted to two more debates in the Lower House of Congress before June 20 and four more after mid-July.
If it survives intact it would forbid extradition if alleged criminals surrender to the Colombian authorities or if they face tougher penalties abroad than they would under the notoriously lenient Colombian justice system.
There are clear signs the proposal faces a rough passage in the Lower House where a similar bill foundered late last year.
"We're not in favour of a totally free or licentious extradition law. Nobody believes in the Gringos indictments with their false witnesses and everything else," said Giovanni Lamboglia, Liberal Party member and chairman of the Chamber of Representatives. He said he would be pressing for the bill to be watered down even further.
Foreign Minister Maria Emma Mejia, a respected member of President Ernesto Samper's cabinet remained optimistic and said the government would likely press to toughen the proposal after July 20 and even consider whether it could be applied retroactively.
The vote came on the day Virgilio Barco, former president who led his country through one of the most violent periods of drug-related violence in the nation's troubled history, was buried in Bogota. The 75-year-old statesman died on Tuesday after a year-long battle with stomach cancer.
As president between 1986 and 1990, Barco is the only Colombian leader to have ordered the extradition of one of the country's top drug lords to the United States.
He bundled Carlos Lehder, one of the masterminds of the infamous Medellin drug mob, off to a U.S. court in 1987 where a judge sentenced him to life without parole plus 135 years.
The move was one of the catalysts that led Pablo Escobar, the late Medellin cartel kingpin, to unleash a savage war against the state and forced a constitutional ban on extradition in 1991.
