Throngs of people flocked on Wednesday to a trade fare unveiling the latest personal security gadgets in a country where kidnapping and drug gangs are rampant.
The entry fee for the two-day Expo Seguridad fair was $285. But there was no shortage of takers in Colombia, which has the highest kidnap rate in the world, three guerrilla forces specialising in extortion and attacks on multinationals and drug gangs armed to the teeth.
Industrialists, government officials, defence experts and the worried wealthy were among those who descended on a downtown Bogota convention centre for the thrill of meeting shadowy people like an ex-spy from Israel offering the Sting-2, a $7 million dollar, remote-controlled plane able to start a one-man war or just monitor traffic.
Many hi-tech security gadgets like the Sting-2 are so secret that they are only be sold to hand-picked clients.
William Silva, a saleman with A1A Security, a Colombian firm headquartered in Miami, was offering a $600 wristwatch that is really a camera, or a video camera so small that it can be concealed in the end of a neck tie.
"My speciality is espionage and counter-espionage. I have given advice and provided equipment for the Colombian army and the security services," Silva said. "I look on myself as a Colombian James Bond or a character from Mission Impossible."
Another popular service for those with a bunker mentality is armour-plating. The price tag for fitting a Range Rover with sophisticated alloys, tough enough to resist a bazooka, missile or bomb attack, was around $150,000.
"Colombia is certainly the market leader in Latin America and probably in the world for sales of armour-plated vehicles. There's such a huge problem of terrorism against the government and of kidnap by the guerrilla," Silva said.
For those more interested in surrounding themselves with a human shield rather than a ring of steel, Luis Enrique La Rotta, director of Sicurex, boasted he can provide bodyguards trained in methods learned from the Chinese, Incas and Aztecs.
"Becoming a bodyguard is like entering a religion. Once you're in you must keep practicing the faith," he said. "We don't want Rambos, our escorts are intelligent, intuitive and astute. They smell danger but don't look for a fight. They only use guns as a last resort."
The Israeli connection at the fair is strong. One company is offering two-week training sessions in the Middle East. Another specialist Benny Manel, a former adviser to the Israeli government, gives a conference on industrial espionage and sabotage.
