Horacio Serpa, Colombia's Interior Minister and the strongman of President Ernesto Samper's administration, resigned on Tuesday to prepare his bid for the presidency.
In accepting Serpa's public letter of resignation, Samper wished his right-hand man "every success in your new activities" in a laudatory reply made available to the media.
"Long ago, I took the commitment to serve the country in public office and I wish to continue that task ... I present my resignation from my current post," Serpa said in his letter to Samper that revealed the pair's close political and personal friendship.
The move comes less than a week before the May 31 deadline by which prospective candidates must step down from public office if they wish to run in the May 1998 elections to choose Samper's successor.
Serpa, 53, a ruling Liberal Party member, has been at the helm of the Interior Ministry since Samper took office in August 1994. An able politician and fiery public speaker, Serpa earned himself a reputation as the president's staunchest ally, defending him against accusations that he financed his 1994 election campaign with drug money from the infamous Cali cartel.
Samper was cleared of wrongdoing in a congressional inquiry last year. But Serpa, one of the campaign organisers, is still under investigation on suspicion of knowingly accepting illicit donations.
"These years have been a great and difficult experience. There has never been so much controversy or such acute confrontations," Serpa said in his letter, in reference to the drug-funding scandal that has dogged most of Samper's rule.
In addition to rounding on Samper's opponents at home, Serpa launched outspoken attacks against the president's fiercest international critic -- the United States.
He recently dubbed U.S. Ambassador Myles Frechette, a "sick gringo" for what he claimed was the envoy's constant meddling in Colombia's internal affairs, especially those relating to anti-drug policy.
In the letter accepting his minister's resignation, Samper wrote: "In these times devoid of values and ideals, your brave attitudes against violence, corruption ... or in defence of sovereignty are refreshing examples of a clean career."
Recent opinions polls show Serpa lagging behind the former Chief Prosecutor turned presidential candidate Alfonso Valdivieso, a thorn in the side of Samper's administration for his pursuit of political corruption.
But Valdivieso, also a Liberal, shunned his party's backing and announced that he would run as an independent. Serpa, meanwhile, is likely to be able to count on the full political and financial support of the well-greased party machinery, which political analysts believe will greatly strengthen his hand as the presidential campaign gets into full swing.
