The promised release of 70 captured troops this weekend could be the first step to ending Latin America's longest guerrilla insurgency -- or the start of an all-out war -- political analysts say.
Sixty soldiers have been held by the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) for more than nine months in the jungle of southern Colombia, along with 10 marines captured in combat in January. They are scheduled to be released on Sunday in the town of Cartagena del Chaira at the heart of a 5,000 square mile (13,000 sq km) demilitarized zone in Caqueta province.
President Ernesto Samper, ignoring hawks in the military who want tough action against the rebels, bowed to the FARC's demands and ordered 5,000 troops to pull out of the area for 32 days. The accord on releasing the troops has the rebels and the government talking for the first time in six years and could jumpstart broader peace talks, the head of the International Committee of the Red Cross in Colombia said.
"This is the first time that government and guerrilla representatives have sat down face to face since 1991. They didn't talk about peace but the fact they've sat down at the same table is very positive," ICRC official Pierre Gassmann told Reuters on Thursday.
But other analysts say the army is thirsty for revenge against the FARC, a Cuban-inspired rural guerrilla force that took up arms against the state in 1964.
Capturing the troops was the most important political and military victory the FARC has had in many years, Eduardo Pizarro, a political violence expert at Bogota's National University, said. "This defeat forced the army to carry out a deep self-examination and in the coming months the conflict will become much more bitter; the army has been humiliated."
The FARC forced the government to order the military out of a huge swathe of Caqueta, the first time the army has ceded so much to the rebels. But government officials say the release of the troops is a victory for democracy and peace.
The 60 soldiers were captured and 27 of their colleagues were killed when the FARC overran an army base at Las Delicias in southern Putumayo province last Aug. 30. The marines were captured in a separate fight in northwest Choco province.
The FARC commander who led the attack on the Las Delicias base, Joaquin Gomez, will preside over the handover ceremony on Sunday. Gomez, magnamimous in victory, told reporters: "We cannot speak of victors and the vanquished. But the whole world has at last realised the magnitude of this conflict."
Army commander Gen. Manuel Jose Bonett has hidden his anger at having to cede territory, albeit temporarily, calling it a "political not a military decision." But Pizarro believes Bonett will fight hard to dent the FARC's mushrooming military ego when the demilitarization accord ends on June 23.
Other experts agree Colombia's guerrilla war will drag on.
"These soldiers are the forgotten ones that nobody outside Colombia remembers," said Eduardo Gamarra, an academic at Florida International University. "This is just another episode in a long war."
