British supermarket group J. Sainsbury aims to regain the lead position it lost to Tesco by emphasising traditional strengths of choice, quality and value, deputy chief executive Dino Adriano said.
"The aim will be to have got (the supermarket business) back to its rightful position," Adriano, who is set to take over running the group's supermarket operation next year, said.
"The emphasis is very much -- going forward -- going to be on our traditional strengths of...choice, quality and therefore better value," he said in an interview.
Sainsbury was toppled from its pre-eminent position among British supermarkets last year as the launch of a loyalty card helped boost arch-rival Tesco's sales.
Sainsbury turned in its first drop in profits for 22 years in May, with pre-tax profits for the year ending March 9 touching 764 million pounds ($1.19 billion) from 808 million pounds previously.
It has undertaken a comprehensive strategy review and Adriano admitted the group had failed to communicate its message to customers. "We are sorry we have not actually shouted louder about it in the past," he said.
In June, Sainsbury bowed reluctantly to pressure from Tesco's success and launched its own loyalty card.
Adriano said sales had seen a two to three percent uplift from the Reward card, covering its costs, although assessments were approximate at this early stage.
"It's having the necessary impact at this point," he said.
He said Reward was an important factor in future strategy. "We have always had strong customer loyalty at Sainsbury and we are now seeking to reward that and build on it," Adriano said.
Sainsbury said it had around six million customers signed up to Reward with around 4.75 million using it regularly.
Adriano said the retail environment remained very competitive and that Sainsbury would try not to be beaten on price for key items. But he added that the group felt its offer of choice and quality could not always mean lowest prices.
"We do not feel it is possible to offer great quality and at very low prices," he said.
"Quality improved, price maintained will be one of our strap lines" particularly for own-brand product, he said.
He said own-brand goods were very important and would be "an area of great innovation and development...in years to come."
Own-brand goods traditionally give retailers a better margin than branded products.
Adriano said petrol retailing remained very tough for supermarkets as a result of price wars triggered by oil major Esso's launch of its PriceWatch campaign earlier this year.
"Most (supermarkets) are into petrol stations and no one's making any money on this at present," he said.
He said some companies were losing money but added that "hopefully, the situation will stabilise before long."
Adriano added that the group would be looking to increase square footage, both through new stores and refurbishments of existing premises.
"In retailing, the key thing is adding new square footage," he said, adding that there was still scope to develop sales per square foot in much of the chain.
Sainsbury is also eyeing expansion overseas, particularly in the U.S., Adriano said, and would be happy to clinch a deal currently under discussion to acquire 12 stores there from Royal Ahold of the Netherlands.
Industry sources suggest a $50 million price tag for the stores if the deal is secured.
Adriano said the size of the U.S. market meant that "the opportunity for getting a formula right and then rolling it out...is quite significant." ($1=.6412 Pound)
