Britain's Northern Electric challenged predator CE Electric on Friday to raise its 630 pence per share bid as it paraded results and forecasts which it claimed proved it was worth more.
"They need to get their cheque book out if they are going to further this bid at all," Northern chairman David Morris told a news conference.
But CE Electric, the British bid vehicle for U.S. energy group CalEnergy, said in a statement that Northern's results were "lacklustre" and below its expectations.
The regional electricity company, or Rec, said pretax profits for the six months ending September 30 slipped to 50.7 million pounds ($85.12 million) from 58.7 million pounds and an interim dividend of 12.85 pence was paid out, up from 12 pence.
Full year pretax profits would be more than 112 million pounds, the company said, with a final dividend forecast of 29.85 pence.
Northern, which last year fended off a bid from Trafalgar House, now part of Kvaerner, with a 560 million pound shareholder benefit package, said gearing should fall to 95 percent by March 31 compared with forecasts last year of 175 percent.
Morris said CE Electric "is clearly going to have to pay a great deal more than 630 pence per share" to win control.
He said the company would be willing to talk with CE Electric "on the basis of more than 700 pence", but executives said at 630 pence there was nothing to discuss.
Northern has claimed that CE Electric, which is 70 percent owned by CalEnergy of the U.S., had indicated a price of 700 pence before it launched its hostile bid in October.
CE Electric denied that claim and went on to snap up nearly 30 percent of Northern as its shares languished, weighed by concerns that the U.K. government might block the bid.
"I do not think they (Northern) have announced anything that is going to make CE Electric put its price up," said one sector analyst.
But a second analyst said he thought there was "clearly value there in excess of 630 pence," and suggested the two sides might be able to come to an agreed bid at a higher level.
Shares in the Rec fell one penny to 589 pence by 1415 GMT.
Northern said gearing, without payment of a special dividend of 56.5 pence due in February under last year's defence package, would be roughly in line with other electricity companies.
It argued that, based on the forecast cash flow for 1997, it should be valued at 745 pence a share to balance the current agreed bid for a fellow Rec, East Midlands Electricity, from Dominion Resources of the U.S.
That bid valued East Midlands at 670 pence per share but its stock was also dampened by government approval worries and was trading at 609 pence, up 1.5 pence.
"We are simply pointing out the value of Northern Electric," Morris said, adding that if the government approved the bid, the figures would be more fully appreciated.
Northern has said it felt the government should approve the bid but maintained that 630 pence did not represent its true value.
"These results and forecasts help to demonstrate that there is significant further value within Northern Electric, value which CE Electric's offer fails to reflect," Morris said.
Some analysts said the results and forecasts underlined the judgement that CE Electric's bid undervalued the company.
"The company is worth something around 670 pence, if you exclude the bid premium and shareholders should hold out for something nearer 700 pence," said one analyst, anonymously. ($1=.5956 Pound)
