British electricity company Northern Electric brought forward half year results and gave year forecasts on Friday in a bid to prove it is undervalued by CE Electric's 630 pence a share bid.
The regional electricity company, or Rec, said pretax profits for the six months ending September 30 slipped to 50.7 million pounds ($85.12 million) from 58.7 million pounds and an interim dividend of 12.85 pence was paid out, up from 12 pence.
Full year pretax profits would be above 112 million pounds, the company said, with a final dividend forecast of 29.85 pence.
Northern, which last year fended off a bid from Trafalgar House, now part of Kvaerner, with a 560 million pound benefit package, said gearing should fall to 95 percent by March 31 compared with forecasts last year of 175 percent.
"Gearing is falling and that is good news...today's results were not about profits but about the financial state of Northern Electric," said one trader.
Northern's chairman David Morris told Reuters there would be more information to come, pointing out prospects and highlighting areas of value.
He said talks with CE Electric, which is 70 percent owned by CalEnergy of the U.S., would be based on a share price of around 700 pence, a level it claims the American company indicated before the bid was launched in October.
CE Electric denied that claim and went on to snap up nearly 30 percent of Northern as its shares languished, weighed by concerns that the U.K. government will block the bid.
A spokesman for CE Electric described Northern's results as "lacklustre."
"I do not think they have announced anything that is going to make CE Electric put its price up," said one sector analyst who asked not to be identified. Shares in the Rec slipped one penny to 589 pence by 1100 GMT.
Northern said gearing, without payment of a special dividend of 56.5 pence due in February under last year's defence package, would be roughly in line with other electricity companies.
It argued that based on the forecast cash flow for 1997, it should be valued at 745 pence a share to balance the current agreed bid for Rec East Midlands Electricity from Dominion Resources of the U.S.
That bid valued East Midlands at 670 pence per share but its stock was also dampened by government approval worries and was trading at 609 pence, up 1.5 pence.
"We are simply pointing out the value of Northern Electric," Morris said, adding that if the government approved the bid, the figures would be more fully appreciated.
"You will see a vast change then," Morris said.
Northern has said it felt the government should approve the bid but maintained that 630 pence did not represent its true value.
"These results and forecasts help to demonstrate that there is significant further value within Northern Electric, value which CE Electric's offer fails to reflect," Morris said.
Some analysts said the results and forecasts underlined the judgement that CE Electric's bid undervalued the company.
"The company is worth something around 670 pence, if you exclude the bid premium and shareholders should hold out for something nearer 700 pence," said one analyst, anonymously.
($1=.5956 Pound)
