British water company Wessex Water turned in a 10 percent rise in half year pretax profits on Tuesday and raised its dividend by 14 percent.
"We are actively pursuing other options that will deliver higher returns to our shareholders," the company said in a statement.
Wessex said pretax profits for the six months ending September 30 rose to 75.5 million pounds ($127.2 million) from 68.4 million previously.
The company declared a dividend of 5.7 pence a share, but Wessex stock slipped three pence to 351 pence as the market registered its disappointment that the company had not handed out the promised extra benefits immediately.
"The shares have fallen on the lack of any shareholder benefits," said one analyst who asked not to be named.
Wessex' balance sheet has net cash of 75 million pounds and analysts had looked for greater shareholder benefits after a planned bid for South West Water was blocked by the government in October along with a rival proposal from Severn Trent.
"We are not going to sit with that ungeared balance sheet," chief executive Colin Skellett said in an interview.
He said Wessex would announce its plans, which could range from an acquisition to a share buyback or a mix of moves in the the next six months.
Skellet said any potential acquisitions would be "relevant to our business...we are not going to go into anything that we do not understand."
He said Wessex was doing two things well -- its regulated water supply business and its non-regulated waste management firm UK Waste, a joint venture with Waste Management International.
Skellett said some 20-30 jobs would be cut at a senior level, with a knock-on effect for the rest of the company, as a result of the aborted bid for South West Water helping to cut operational costs.
These costs were cut four percent at the water business in the first six months and should maintain that momentum for the second half, Wessex said.
Lower waste paper and cardboard prices in the first half bit into UK Waste's turnover to the tune of three million pounds. But Wessex said the unit continued to make a growing contribution to its overall results, with profits of 12.4 million pounds.
Skellett said the fall in prices appeared to be halting and the underlying business was growing well.
Wessex said it would be consulting with customers in order to direct investment in line with their choices.
One of the first findings was that 90 percent of customers wanted service improvements rather than short-term price cuts. $1=.5936 Pound)
