British super-utility Scottish Power surprised investors on Wednesday by promising a 19 percent jump in its final dividend after strong half year results and savings from its takeover of Southern Water.
Scotish Power's reported first half pretax profits rose 47 percent before 21.2 million pounds in exceptional charges for restructuring Southern Water.
Its shares jumped to a high of 350 pence before edging back to 345 for a net gain of 3.5 pence after its earnings of 188 million pounds ($310.5 million), up from 127.7 million pounds a year ago, came in above forecast.
"Clearly the most impressive feature is the dividend forecast...it is promising more in the future than was expected," said Marshall Whiting, analyst at Societe Generale Strauss Turnbull.
The company, which serves one in five British households across its three strong regional bases, paid out an interim dividend of 6.17 pence a share compared with 5.17 pence previously and said the final dividend would be 18.5 pence.
"That was well above the trend," said Andy Stone, utilities analyst at brokers Daiwa.
Scottish Power said it expected to be able to boost pretax profits at Southern Water, the water and sewerage utility it bought for 1.68 billion pounds in August, by 52 million pounds a year. Total job losses are expected to be 2,050.
It said some 100 million pounds of cash should be released, with 70 million from disposals of businesses such as vehicle leasing and landfill sites and 30 million from property sales.
"We are very pleased with what we have found (at Southern Water)...we are now focusing back on the core business," chief executive Ian Robinson said in a telephone interview.
Scottish Power, which became the only British utility to span electricity generation and supply when it bought regional electricity company Manweb last year, also has interests in gas and telecommunications.
Later bids for similar power utilities from generators National Power and PowerGen were blocked by the government on anti-competitive grounds.
Scottish Power said it aimed to provide customers with quality service at a competitive rate as electricity and gas markets head for liberalisation in 1998.
Robinson said the purchase of Southern Water after a battle with rivals Southern Electric would benefit both shareholders and customers.
"We would expect to improve customer service...Scottish Power shareholders will strongly benefit as well," he said.
Scottish Power gained government approval for its takeover of Southern by promising cuts in prices to water customers by one percent next year and then by three percent for two years.
Robinson said that between 200 and 300 jobs could be created over a couple of years as Scottish Power expands its retail business and positions itself to compete in the gas and electricity markets.
"It is our view that successful utility companies of the future will be those able to provide a high level of customer service while, at the same time, enhancing cost efficiency," the company said in a statement. ($1=.6054 Pound)
