U.S. utility group CE Electric upped the stakes in its hostile bid for British power company Northern Electric on Friday, raising its offer to a final 650 pence a share and setting a December 20 deadline.
But CE's hopes that Northern would recommend the raised 782 million pound ($1.29 billion) bid were dashed as Northern rejected the offer after carefull consideration.
CE Electric chairman David Sokol's said earlier he hoped Northern would recommend the bid after it was raised from 759 million pounds.
CE Electric, the bid vehicle for CalEnergy of the United States, said the new offer represented "compelling value."
"This is an overwhelmingly strong offer," Sokol said in an interview.
But Northern Electric chairman David Morris responded with a statement saying: "CE Electric has failed to recognise Northern Electric's true value in its revised offer."
"It (CE) has ignored the new information provided and it is still looking to buy Northern Electric too cheaply. Shareholders should reject this revised offer."
CE Electric has already snapped up nearly 30 percent of its target as Northern's share price has languished under concerns that the British government would block the bid.
Trade and Industry Secretary Ian Lang is expected to decide by December 16 whether or not to refer the takeover to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission (MMC) for review.
Northern's shares lost 1p to 600 pence by the close as the overall market slid by more than two percent.
"The latest offer probably still undervalues Northern but I think it will succeed...I think shareholders will (accept)," said one analyst who asked not to be identified.
Northern rushed out half year results last week as part of its efforts to push up CE Electric's offer and said gearing should have fallen to 95 percent by March 1997 against earlier forecasts of 175 percent.
Northern has claimed that talks between the two companies before CE Electric launched its bid indicated a price of 700 pence per share but the Americans have consistently denied this.
Sokol said Northern had not produced any new information in its defence documents but added CE Electric had been holding back "a certain amount of dollars" in hopes of a recommendation.
"But given that Northern's board has not wanted to talk, we felt it was not fair to withhold the cash from shareholders," Sokol said.
He said the final deadline had been brought forward to December 20 from early January because it would give certainty to employees and shareholders ahead of the holiday season.
Northern, one of only a handful of independent power companies remaining, has called on the government to let the bid go ahead and made clear its only dispute with CE Electric is on price. ($1=.6082 Pound)
