CalEnergy Inc. upped the ante in its hostile pursuit of British power company Northern Electric Plc Friday, raising its offer to 782 million pounds ($1.29 billion) and setting a Dec. 20 deadline.
Northern Electric said it rejected the offer, formally being made by Omaha-based CalEnergy's British subsidiary, CE Electric UK Plc, after carefull consideration.
CE Electric Chairman David Sokol said earlier he hoped Northern would endorse the bid after it was raised to 782 million pounds ($1.29 billion), or 650 pence ($10.55) a share, from 759 million pounds ($1.23 billion), or 630 pence ($10.23) a share.
"This is an overwhelmingly strong offer," Sokol said in an interview.
But Northern Electric Chairman David Morris responded with a statement saying, "CE Electric has failed to recognise Northern Electric's true value in its revised offer.
"It has ignored the new information provided and it is still looking to buy Northern Electric too cheaply. Shareholders should reject this revised offer."
CE Electric has already snapped up nearly 30 percent of its target as Northern's share price has languished amid concerns that the British government would block the bid.
Trade and Industry Secretary Ian Lang is expected to decide by Dec. 16 whether to refer the takeover to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission for review.
Northern Electric's shares closed at 600 pence ($9.87) as the overall London stock market slid by more than 2 percent.
"The latest offer probably still undervalues Northern but I think it will succeed ... I think shareholders will (accept)," said one analyst who asked not to be identified.
Northern Electric has claimed that talks between the two companies before CE Electric launched its bid indicated a price of 700 pence ($11.36) a share but CalEnergy has consistently denied this.
Sokol said Northern had not produced any new information in its defence documents but added CE Electric had been holding back "a certain amount of dollars" in hopes of a recommendation.
"But given that Northern's board has not wanted to talk, we felt it was not fair to withhold the cash from shareholders," Sokol said.
He said the final deadline had been brought forward to Dec. 20 from early January because it would give certainty to employees and shareholders ahead of the holiday season.
Northern, one of only a handful of independent power companies remaining in Britain, has called on the government to let the bid go ahead and made clear its only dispute with CE Electric is on price.
