British utility Northern Electric pumped up its defence against a takeover bid by Omaha, Neb.-based CalEnergy Inc. Tuesday with promises of higher dividends and unit mergers.
Last week, CalEnergy raised its bid to 782 million British pounds ($1.29 billion) or 650 pence ($10.55) a share, from 759 million pounds ($1.23 billion), or 630 pence ($10.23) a share.
Northern Electric rejected the offer, formally being made by CalEnergy's 70-percent owned British subsidiary, CE Electric UK Plc, after carefull consideration.
CE Electric has also set a deadline of Dec. 20, just four days after Trade Secretary Ian Lang is expected to decide whether the bid may proceed.
Northern Electric said in a statement Monday that it expected a 17 percent rise in its annual dividend to 50 pence (82 cents) per share next year with growth of more than 7 percent from then to the year 2000.
Northern Electric added that it planned to merge its electricity supply business with another regional electricity company for cost savings of more than 28 million pounds ($46 million) a year.
"It's a fairly aggressive statement from Northern Electric," said Yamaichi utilities analyst Nigel Hawkins.
The utility, based in Newcastle-upon-Tyne, England, spent 560 million pounds ($920 million) a year ago on a package of shareholder benefits to fight off a takeover bid by construction company Trafalgar House, and has strived to reduce its debt since.
"We are saying the company is worth at least as much as we said before ... and clearly it is worth more than 650 pence per share," Northern Electric Chairman David Morris said in an interview.
Morris said Northern Electric would have a "broadly equal partnership" in its plans for merging its electricity supply business with another firm. He declined to name the utility involved in talks but said it "may well not be a nearby one."
Neighbouring Yorkshire Electricity earlier Tuesday said in an interview that it had not held talks with Northern on the issue.
Northern Electric has said a price of 700 pence ($11.50) was indicated before CE Electric launched its bid, a claim which the Americans have consistently denied.
Northern Electric rushed out half-year results at the end of November and said its debt position should ease to around half previous expectations by March 1997 as it pushed for an increase in CE Electric's bid price.
"This is an exercise in re-arranging the deckchairs on the good ship 'Scorched Earth,'" said a spokesman for CE Electric, which has already secured 33.27 percent of its target.
Northern Electric is just the latest British regional electric company to become a takeover target.
Seven of the original 12 cash-rich regional electricity companies set up in a 1990 privatisation have already been snapped up by predators, three going to U.S. companies.
Of the remaining five, East Midlands Electricity has agreed to a $2.15 billion takeover by Dominion Resources Inc. of Richmond, Va., while talks between U.S.-based Entergy Corp. of New Orleans and London Electric were called off last month.
