British regional electricity company (Rec) Northern Electric pumped up its defence against a 650 pence per share bid from CE Electric of the U.S. on Tuesday with promises of higher dividends and unit mergers.
The company expected a 17 percent rise in its year dividend to 50 pence per share with growth over seven percent from then to the end of the century, it said in a statement, adding it planned to merge its supply business with another Rec to find cost savings of over 28 million pounds ($46 million) a year.
"It's a fairly aggressive statement from Northern Electric showing they're preparing yet again to gear up to the gunwales," said Yamaichi utilities analyst Nigel Hawkins.
Northern spent 560 million pounds a year ago on a package of shareholder benefits to fight off Trafalgar House, now part of Kvaerner, and has strived to reduce its debt since.
"We are saying the company is worth at least as much as we said before...and clearly it is worth more than 650 pence per share," Northern chairman David Morris told Reuters.
CE Electric, which is 70 percent-owned by CalEnergy, decided to raise its bid from 630 pence per share on Friday and drew a deadline of December 20, just four days after UK Trade Secretary Ian Lang is expected to decide whether the bid may proceed.
Morris said Northern Electric would have a "broadly equal partnership" in its plans for merging its electricity supply business with another firm. He declined to name the Rec involved in talks but said it "may well not be a nearby one."
Neighbouring Yorkshire Electricity earlier on Tuesday told Reuters it had not held talks with Northern on the issue.
Northern has said a price of 700 pence was indicated before CE Electric launched its bid, a claim which the Americans have consistently denied.
The Rec rushed out half year results at the end of November and said its debt position should ease to around half previous expectations by March 1997 as it pushed for an increase in CE Electric's bid price.
"This is an exercise in re-arranging the deckchairs on the good ship scorched earth," said a spokesman for CE Electric, which has already secured 33.27 percent of its target.
Northern had also said it was in talks with a possible partner in its Sovereign upstream gas business, after it bought out its previous colleague Neste Oy last year.
Morris said this deal would be "imminent were there not a bid," but declined to name the company.
Shares in Northern struggled higher, up 8.5 pence to 614 pence by 0934 GMT, after touching a peak of 620 pence, as concerns the government might block the bid continued to weigh.
Seven of the original 12 cash-rich Recs set up at privatisation in 1990 have already been snapped up by predators, three to U.S. firms.
Of the remaining five, East Midlands Electricity has agreed to a $2.15 billion takeover by Dominion Resources of the U.S. while talks between U.S.-based Entergy and London Electric were called off last month.
Only two bids for Recs have so far been blocked by the UK. Generators National Power and PowerGen were banned from buying into the supply and distribution business through Southern Electric and Midlands Electricity respectively.
But there are concerns that the ruling pro-privatisation Conservative party might turn about face on current bids and block them in a bid for popularity. It trails the opposition Labour party in polls with a general election due by May 1997.
Privatised electricity companies have come under heavy criticism from lobby groups and politicians for hefty handouts to shareholders, bulging pay packets for executives and spiralling takeovers.
($1=.6087 Pound)
