British regional electricity company (Rec) Yorkshire Electricity Group Plc saw half year profits hit on Tuesday by a pricing review, but hiked its dividend by 33 percent as expected.
Yorkshire turned in pretax profits for the six months ending September 30 of 80.8 million pounds ($132.7 million), down from 110.6 million pounds previously. It paid out a dividend of 15.8 pence.
Yorkshire also promised to give out further benefits to shareholders despite recent tax changes to capital allowances and plans by the opposition Labour party to introduce a one-off "windfall" levy if it wins power at the next election.
Taking those scenarios into account, Yorkshire said, "we have the financial capability to grow our competitive energy supply and generation businesses and to return further value to shareholders, and we intend to do both."
Chief executive Malcolm Chatwin said the group expected to implement a return of value to shareholders by the end of the current financial year but declined to speficy what move would be made.
Shares in the company slipped three pence to 758.5 pence by 1054 GMT, off a high of 766 pence.
"The results were exactly what we were expecting. There was a faint disappointment that the company did not do more for shareholders now, but we will just wait," said one analyst who asked not to be identified.
Chatwin said half year profits were "generally speaking indicative" of the likely full year performance with a couple of upsides such as property disposals.
Costs were likely to be "level pegging," he said, with investment in information technology and staff training ahead of liberalisation of the market in 1998 offsetting any savings.
Chatwin said Yorkshire, one of only three remaining Recs which have not been taken over or attracted bids, is "happy being independent," and has had no serious bid approaches.
He said there were no plans to further cooperation with its counterpart in the water sector, Yorkshire Water.
"At the current time there are no plans to do anything further," he said.
Yorkshire's chairman Christopher Hampson said in a statement that company strategy was to be "highly competitive in our core energy businesses whilst continuing to provide value for all of our stakeholders."
($1=.6087 Pound)
