The British government is unlikely to block U.S. group CE Electric's 650 pence per share bid for regional electricity company Northern Electric on competition grounds, industry sources said on Thursday.
But this view has not stopped concern that Trade Secretary Ian Lang might block the takeover for political reasons, dampening Northern's share price, they added.
Lang is widely expected to announce his decision by next Monday, December 16, and CE Electric has put a self-imposed deadline of December 20 on acceptances for its bid.
Northern's shares were down 3.5 pence at 598 pence by 1400 GMT, well below the 650 pence level to which CE Electric, which has already snapped up just under 30 percent of its target on the market, raised its original 630 pence offer on December 6.
"Logically, the bid should be cleared. If it does not go through, it will be for entirely political reasons," said one analyst who asked not to be identified.
Utilities have come under heavy public criticism over hefty executive pay packets, large shareholder dividends and spiralling takeover prices.
Approval of the Northern bid and for the less contentious agreed $2.15 billion offer by U.S. group Dominion Resources for East Midlands Electricity would leave just three independent regional electricity companies (Recs) out of an original 12.
East Midlands was due to report half-year results on Monday, but has postponed them until after the decision on Northern.
With the ruling Conservatives lagging the opposition Labour Party in polls and an election looming within five months, Lang might defer a potentially unpopular decision by a referral to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission (MMC), analysts said.
"A referral to the MMC would delay a decision, possibly until after the next election, and if Lang thinks it is enough of a hot potato, he might do that," one analyst said.
CE Electric, 70 percent owned by CalEnergy, has said it is confident the bid "has nothing but pro-competitive aspects."
Northern's chairman David Morris, fighting for a higher bid, is also keen to see the offer approved as he felt the regulatory uncertainty was keeping the company's share price down.
Northern, which last year spent 560 million pounds ($924.7 million) to fight off a hostile bid from Trafalgar House, now part of Kvaerner, has consistently said the bid undervalues.
It has claimed a price of 700 pence per share was indicated in talks between the two firms before the bid was launched on October 28, but the Americans have denied such a price was discussed and analysts said although approval would see shares rising, it was unlikely Northern could secure a higher price.
"I would not think it will go much above 650 pence. Northern has promised dividend increases but investors may well opt for jam today instead of jam tomorrow," said one sector analyst.
Britain has already nodded through sales of seven of the 12 cash-rich Recs originally privatised, with three going to U.S. companies in a flurry of takeovers in the last two years.
But Lang shocked the market in April when he blocked bids by generators National Power and PowerGen for Recs Southern Electric and Midlands Electricity respectively, saying they might pose detriments to competition.
Analysts said Lang might opt to approve the bids with conditions, possibly calling for financial guarantees to assuage concerns over CE Electric's debt position, or he might call for ring-fencing of the regulated electricity supply business.
Analysts said approval for the current bids could open the floodgates for bids on the remaining Recs -- Southern, Yorkshire and London, which dropped talks with U.S. group Entergy only last month.
"Although there is not a clear, tight policy on these bids, I feel Lang will work more on logic than politics," the sector analyst said. ($1=.6056 Pound)
