Electricity generator Scottish Hydro-Electric Plc turned in lower than expected half year profits on Thursday but hiked its dividend by 11 percent.
"We aim to keep on delivering dividend improvement...doing it by expanding the business," chief executive Roger Young told Reuters in an interview.
Pretax profits edged down to 61.3 million pounds ($101.6 million) from 61.7 million previously, below expectations of 63 to 70.7 million. The dividend was 5.28 pence per share.
The shares were down 1-1/2 pence at 316.5p at 1145 GMT.
Scottish Hydro said low rainfall had hit profits, as hydro-electric generation had been replaced in part by coal at a cost of 6.3 million pounds.
But chairman Lord Wilson (corrects name of chairman from Bob Reid) said in a statement that the second half had started well and he was confident of "an encouraging result for the full 12 month period."
Scottish Hydro said it was preferred bidder for the 50 percent stake in Keadby power station, northeast England, owned by United Utilities, its joint venture partner there, and aimed to complete the deal by the end of the current financial year.
Young said the plan would "increase costs but also increase profits", adding an extra 340 megaWatt of generation capacity to the company's existing portfolio.
Scottish Hydro said the deal should increase gearing to around 50 percent if it went ahead and added that together with existing expenditure commitments, gearing should peak at 65 percent in 1998-99.
"We are confident of the prospects for Keadby and look forward to the opportunity to exploit its capabilities in the market place," the company said in a statement.
Young said the company aimed to boost market share to seven percent from a current four percent by 1999 with a total investment in combined heat and power (CHP) plant for commercial customers of over 150 million pounds.
The company said that action taken to raise output and cut costs would improve performance over the next two to three years and added that raising standards was a key aim.
Scottish Hydro said that changes proposed to capital allowances in the British budget in November were expected to reverse a trend of falling tax rates but added it would not be possible to predict the impact accurately until full details were known.
The company will be looking to expand its domestic business, Young said, but a resumption of talks with British Gas on the sale of the latter's supply interests was unlikely, he added.
"I would not be optimistic of a resumption," he said.
British Gas announced in September that talks on the sale of its domestic gas supply business in England and Scotland to Scottish Hydro had been called off, scotching newspaper reports that the sale would bring in around 250 million pounds.
Young said the breakdown was for administrative rather than commerical reasons.
"There was no serious commercial difficulty that caused the project to be dropped...British Gas had a lot of competition for its (administrative) resources," he said.
But he said the moment for the deal might now have passed. "Deals tend to have their day," he said, adding that there . were other discussions around, "but nothing that we can talk about."
($1=.6034 Pound)
