British regional electricity company (Rec) London Electricity, recently a focus of bid speculation, turned in a dip in half year profits on Thursday but hiked its dividend spurring its shares.
London, which supplies power to the capital, saw pretax profits for the six months to September 30 dip to 69.3 million pounds ($114.4 million), down from 84.5 million a year ago, hit by a pricing review which came into effect earlier this year.
It paid out an interim dividend of 14.3 pence per share, up from 11.5 pence previously and towards the top end of expectations.
"That was better than we expected for the dividend rise and that seems to have boosted shares," said one analyst who asked not to be identified. Shares had jumped 15 pence to 655 pence by 1315 GMT.
Chairman Sir Bob Reid said in the statement that "looking ahead, our priority remains our distribution network."
London said both regulated and private networks would see investment with an emphasis on cost efficiency aimed at maximising shareholder value.
But it warned that recent tax changes on capital allowances proposed in the British budget in November would necessitate a re-examination of long-term investment strategy.
"We would hope that elements within our programmes...which provide environmental and social benefits to London are excluded from the (budget) proposals and that long-term investment is not discouraged," the company said in a statement.
London said it "remained committed to seeking profitable and mutually beneficial alliances in supply as a means of improving long-term returns through economies of scale."
Newspaper reports earlier this week had suggested London was the Rec cited by Northern Electric as a potential partner for merging its supply business as part of its defence against a 650 pence per share bid from U.S. group CE Electric.
Northern said the proposed move could mean joint cost savings of over 28 million pounds a year.
Neither Northern nor London would comment on the newspaper reports, but in its statement on Thursday, London said its approach to supply was "pragmatic."
London, one of three remaining Recs which are independent and without a pending bid, saw talks with U.S. energy group Entergy called off last month.
It made no reference to those discussions in its results statement but is still considered a potential bid target although any offers are likely to wait until the British government decides whether two pending bids can go ahead, analysts said.
Trade Secretary Ian Lang is expected to decide by December 16 whether to allow the bid for Northern by CE Electric, which is 70 percent owned by CalEnergy of the U.S., should go ahead. A decision is also awaited for an agreed $2.15 billion bid for East Midlands Electricity from U.S. group Dominion Resources. ($1=.6056 Pound)
