The remaining independent British regional electricity companies (Recs) could become fair game for predators as the British government approved on Friday a hostile bid for Northern Electric from U.S.-based CE Electric.
Shares in the only three remaining Recs which are not currently subject to bids -- Southern, London and Yorkshire -- gained strongly as the market speculated further offers would emerge.
The government cleared CE Electric's 650 pence per share bid earlier on Friday with some conditions aimed at clearing up financial queries, lifting a cloud of uncertainty which had kept Northern's shares languishing around 600 pence.
"This is the green light for other bids to emerge," said Fraser McLaren, analyst at Greig Middleton.
Northern shares closed 42-1/2p higher at 641p after peaking at 650 pence and analysts said the 782 million pound ($1.3 billion) bid from CE, which is 70 percent-owned by CalEnergy, was likely to be successful.
London rose 28-1/2 pence to 680 and Southern gained 25-1/2 pence to 778 with Yorkshire putting on 17-1/2 pence to 760.
East Midlands Electricity, which has agreed to a $2.15 billion takeover by Dominion Resources of the U.S. at 670 pence per share, strode 28-1/2 pence higher to 655 as the market assumed approval for this less contentious bid.
Seven of the original 12 cash-rich Recs have fallen to predators since they came up for grabs in March 1995 when the government's protective golden share expired, five years after privatisation in 1990.
Three of these -- South Western, Seeboard and Midlands -- have already been sold to U.S. companies and American firms are hotly tipped to be potential buyers of other Recs as they are attracted by easier regulation and expertise in supply.
"The regulator has acknowledged there is not a problem in terms of loss of yardsticks by virtue of it being an outside takeover," said McLaren, adding that a takeover from inside the industry might still find obstacles.
Of the three remaining Recs, London and Yorkshire are considered the most likely takeover targets as they are smaller and less expensive to swallow than Southern, which analysts said could carry a price tag of over two billion pounds.
Southern, which had an agreed takeover by generator National Power blocked by the government and then failed to win a bid battle for Southern Water with Scottish Power, appears to be aiming to stay independent.
It has a strong balance sheet and could mount a hefty defence against any hostile advance, they added.
"Southern has formidable firepower and so any bid would probably have to be agreed and could be a joint effort by two companies," said Nigel Hawkins of Yamaichi.
London and Yorkshire would cost a predator up to around 1.5 billion pounds each, analysts added, at levels of above 700 pence and 830 pence per share respectively.
"That's a price which could be contemplated by a company if it were to want a foothold in the UK supply market," said one analyst who asked not to be named. London has already had discussions with U.S. group Entergy, which called off talks in November but said it still considered Britain an "attractive market."
Houston Industries of the United States, which tried but failed to secure control of Rec Norweb with Central &amp; South West Corp in October 1995.
Central &amp; South West eventually bought Seeboard but speculation continues that Houston might still be interested in a British Rec.
($1=.6043 Pound)
