U.S. group Entergy finally agreed a 1.267 billion pound ($2.11 billion) takeover of British regional electricity company (Rec) London Electricity on Wednesday, after talks between them were called off in November.
London's chairman Sir Bob Reid "did an excellent job of extracting a generous price out of us," Entergy chairman and chief executive officer Ed Lupberger told Reuters.
Entergy and London, which supplies power to the capital and the City financial district, said in a joint statement that the bid valued London shares at 705 pence each and that shareholders would retain the right to receive a 14.3 pence interim dividend.
Reid said the offer "represents fair value for London Electricity and is in the best interests of London Electricity's shareholders, customers and employees."
London's shares leapt to a high of 690 pence but later eased back to be up three pence at 685 pence by 1135 GMT.
Lupberger declined to comment on the process leading up to the bid.
The two companies conceded in a statement in November that talks between them had broken down after the Wall Street Journal Europe reported that Entergy was considering a 1.2 billion pound bid at around 700 pence per share.
Entergy said Wednesday's offer, made through bid vehicle Entergy Power UK Plc, would "create a partnership through which both companies can pool expertise and working practices to further improve operating efficiencies."
Entergy joins two other U.S. companies which are currently pursuing Recs. Dominion Resources has agreed a $2.15 billion takeover of East Midlands Electricity and CalEnergy's CE Electric unit has made a hostile 650 pence per share bid for Northern which closes on Friday.
The floodgates for further bids in the sector were opened last Friday when the British government decided CalEnergy's bid, which the market had seen as more contentious than the agreed offer, could go ahead with some conditions.
Dominion's bid still awaits UK approval but analysts said there were no immediate reasons why this offer or Entergy's bid should be blocked after approval of CalEnergy's offer.
Entergy's bid sparked gains in shares of Yorkshire and Southern, the only two Recs which remain independent and currently unsolicited of the original 12 cash-rich Recs created at privatisation in 1990.
Yorkshire was up six pence to 765 pence on Wednesday morning while Southern gained four pence to 768.
Entergy's Lupberger said taking over London Electricity would enable the U.S. firm to "build a new opportunity in the European marketplace."
Reid said Entergy's plans to use London as a platform for expansion into Europe were particularly exciting, adding that the deal would offer opportunities all round.
Entergy said the bid would also enable it to "gain experience for the development of its U.S. business after deregulation."
Entergy, like many U.S. companies, sees the UK electricity supply sector as an attractive area to gain experience of deregulation and supply markets.
Entergy is based in New Orleans and has interests there in both generation and supply of electricity.
($1=.6003 Pound)
