The British supermarket group ASDA racked up a gain in first half results and sales on Thursday and analysts said there were signs of more to come.
"We thought this recovery story would come to an end sooner but there is still more upside, it seems," said one analyst who asked not to be identified.
ASDA, known for innovation and cheeky marketing initiatives, said pretax profits before exceptionals were 160.1 million pounds ($267 million), up from 138.3 million pounds ($230 million) a year ago, and paid out a dividend of 0.81 pence per share, up from 0.72 pence.
Sales from existing stores in the first half were 10.2 percent up on a year ago and ASDA edged up its market share by 0.5 points to 10.6 percent.
"Keeping it simple has been the key to our success. These results show we are on course to deliver...our (strategy) programme for 1998," chairman Archie Norman said in a statement.
ASDA's shares touched a high of 125 pence before edging back to be down 1/2 pence at 123.1/4 pence by 1103 GMT.
ASDA's sales gain is the highest in the industry for the period and comes on top of a strong rise a year ago.
"That is an extraordinary performance, double digit on double digit," said the analyst.
"One thing the market seems to have underestimated is how low the point was that ASDA recovered from," he added.
ASDA implemented a three-year "Renewal" strategy in the early 1990s aimed at turning the group round from huge debts and slow sales, which was followed this year by the start of a three-year "Breakout" strategy.
"I think the market thought Renewal was the recovery and it was over but that is not the case at all, they are carrying on the gains into Breakout," the analyst said.
ASDA said its aim to be the lowest on price had been achieved "with only a modest investment in our gross margn," as it moved to cut operating and distribution costs.
Leighton, who took over as chief executive from the entrepeneurial Norman in August, said second half margins were likely to be similar to those in the first six months, "down a bit, a smidgeon."
He said much of the impact in the first half had come from petrol, where a fierce price war has raged between supermarkets and oil companies, but pressures now seem to be easing.
ASDA is also trying to push its total sales to include more own-brand products where margins are generally higher.
It said own-brand goods now accounted for 35 percent of total sales, adding it was "well on our way to achieving our...objective of 40 percent ASDA brand penetration by 1998."
The company aims to open seven stores in the second half, which will all be large, "market hall" style, Leighton said, with similar opening levels on the cards for a couple of years..
Leighton said the company wanted the "critical mass" to drive growth markets of fresh food, entertainment, clothing and healthcare.
But he said the group was "under no pressure" to launch a loyalty card throughout the country, even though the other three major supermarkets -- J. Sainsbury, Tesco and Safeway -- have all started schemes nationwide.
ASDA is testing a card in several stores but Leighton said ASDA customers tended to focus on price, quality and service. ($1=.6003 Pound)
