If British regional electricity company (Rec) Northern Electric succumbs to a hostile 782 million pounds ($1.3 billion) bid from U.S. group CE Electric, it will be the tenth Rec of the 12 privatised in 1990 to be taken over.
Northern is the only Rec to have fought off a takeover, thwarting a bid from Trafalgar House, now part of Norway's Kvaerner, with a 560 million pound defence last year.
The bid from CE Electric, controlled by CalEnergy, has been vigorously opposed by Northern and closes at 1300 GMT on Friday. If the bid succeeds, it would take to six the number of Recs already in or due to move into U.S. hands.
Only two independent Recs would remain if Northern fell -- Southern and Yorkshire, which is the only one never to have attracted a firm bid.
Southern agreed to a takeover by generator National Power but this was blocked by the British government in April, along with fellow generator PowerGen's planned bid for Midlands.
Two Recs -- Norweb and South Wales Electricity (Swalec) -- were swallowed by their local water and sewerage firms to form multi-utilities while Manweb was taken over by generator Scottish Power, which later added Southern Water to its fold.
Eastern Electricity was bought by conglomerate Hanson, which intends to spin it off as part of its energy group.
Three Recs -- South Western, Seeboard and Midlands -- have already been bought by American firms and two more, London and East Midlands, have agreed to bids from U.S. companies.
The following table details bids in the electricity sector so far:
 Rec		   Bidder		 Value (stg)   Status
 Eastern	     Hanson		 2.4 bln	Completed
 Manweb		Scottish Power     1.1 bln	Completed
 South Western     Southern Co	  1.1 bln	Completed
 Norweb		North West Water   1.8 bln	Completed
 Seeboard	    Central and South  1.6 bln	Completed
			 West Corp
 Midlands	    PowerGen	     1.95 bln     Blocked
 Southern Elec     National Power     2.8 bln	Blocked
 SWALEC		Welsh Water	  872 mln	Completed
 Midlands Elec     General Public     1.73 bln     Completed
			 Utilities/CINergy
 Northern Elec     CE Electric	  782 mln	Contested but
								   Cleared
 East Midlands     Dominion	    $2.15 bln     Agreed and
								   Cleared
 London Elec	 Entergy		1.27 bln     Agreed,
								   awaiting
								   clearance
($1=.5982 Pound)
