CE Electric claimed 50.03 percent of British target Northern Electric in a fiercely fought bid on Saturday but, in an unusual twist, needs takeover panel approval on crucial extra acceptances to declare victory.
A spokesman for the U.S. company said additional acceptances were still being counted. CE Electric held 49.77 percent of the regional electricity company (Rec) by its own 1300 GMT deadline on December 20, just short of control, but in an unprecedented move the British takeover panel stepped in to extend final deadlines.  
The panel said late on Friday that the deadline for the 782 million pound ($1.30 billion) contentious offer had been extended to 1300 GMT on Christmas Eve and said any acceptances arriving after CE's Friday deadline must have its consent.
No one at the takeover panel was immediately available for comment, nor was Northern Electric.
The Financial Times newspaper said on Saturday that the extension of the deadlines suggested the panel felt shareholders had not been treated fairly in the last days of the 650 pence per share bid.
CE Electric said in a statement earlier on Saturday that the panel had "prohibited Northern's advisers from purchasing Northern Electric shares at anytime prior to the close of CE Electric's final offers."
The American energy group had complained to the takeover panel earlier this week over share buying by Northern's advisers, brokers BZW and Schroders, which it claimed was "frustrating action".
But the panel cleared the purchases, which amounted to 2.32 percent of Northern, late on Thursday.
It said in a statement then that at a hearing of the panel BZW and Schroders had "accepted that there was no doubt about their intention -- it was to defeat the bid. However, they denied that there had been any breach of the code."
The panel said such purchases have "long been accepted."
The bid, which was raised from an original 630 pence per share offer on December 6, has been hotly contested by Northern, which claims the price undervalues it.
Northern had claimed it had the backing of its largest institutional investor, the Prudential, which holds around 11 percent, as well as other funds including M&amp;G and Foreign &amp; Colonial.
But prior to Friday's deadline, CE Electric already held 30 percent of Northern, bought on the open market, and had previously declared acceptances which brought its holding up to around 34 percent.
Northern is the only one of the original 12 cash-rich Recs to have successfully fought off a takeover bid, spending 560 million pounds on shareholder benefits to fend off Trafalgar House, now part of Norway's Kvaerner, last year.
Nine of the 12 Recs have been sold or agreed to takeovers since they came up for grabs when the government's protective golden share expired in March 1995, just five years after privatisation.
If CE Electric wins control of Northern, only two of the original 12 Recs will remain independent -- Yorkshire and Southern.
Analysts see Yorkshire, which could carry a price tag of around 1.4 billion pounds, as the more vulnerable of the two, as Southern could cost a predator over two billion pounds and has firepower to mount a fierce defence.
American companies already own three Recs with two others in agreed takeovers, Dominion Resources with East Midlands and Entergy with London Electricity.
U.S. companies are hotly tipped as potential buyers for remaining Recs as they are attracted to the UK's friendly regulatory environment and see the country as a good English-speaking springboard into continental Europe.
