The fate of an acrimonious battle for British utility Northern Electric was still in the balance on Saturday after the panel supervising a bid by U.S. predator CE Electric extended its offer until Tuesday.
The outcome of the bitterly fought two-month contest had been expected by midnight on Friday, eleven hours after CE's deadline for investors to accept its 782 million pound ($1.30 billion) offer.
But a brief statement by CE's advisors said that following a full hearing of Britain's takover panel the 650 pence a share offer was being extended until 1300 GMT on Christmas Eve.
Officials at the Takeover Panel declined to comment, but the Financial Times reported in its Saturday editions that the watchdog had effectively stopped the clock amid allegations of irregularities in the conduct of the bid.
The paper said it was beleived CE Electric, which is 70 percent owned by CalEnergy of the United States, had been close to declaring victory when the takeover panel launched a late-night inquiry into the allegations.
The nail-biting bid has sparked furious arguments, with both companies protesting to the panel about each other's tactics.
Prior to Friday's deadline, CE Electric already held nearly 30 percent of Northern, bought on the open market, and had previously declared acceptances that brought its holding up to around 34 percent.
Northern has claimed it has the backing of its largest institutional investor, the Prudential, which holds around 11 percent, as well as other funds including M&amp;G and Foreign &amp; Colonial.
The bid is the second hostile takeover that Northern has faced -- it spent 560 million pounds fending off Trafalgar House, now owned by Norway's Kvaerner, last year.
Northern has consistently claimed the CE bid undervalued it and called for a higher price.
It said 700 pence per share was indicated in talks before CE Electric launched the offer on October 28, a claim that the U.S. bidder denied. It says it is offering a fair price.
If Northern falls to CE, it would be the tenth of the 12 cash-rich Regional Electricity Companies (Recs) set up at privatisation in 1990 to be taken over since the government's protective golden share expired in March 1995.
It would also be the fourth to be taken over by an American company with two further agreed bids from U.S. firms Dominion Resources and Entergy for East Midlands and London respectively currently under way.
American companies are hotly tipped as the most likely buyers for the remaining Recs as they find the British regulatory environment more relaxed and see them as a useful English-speaking springboard for expansion into Europe.
