Confusion mounted on Monday as British regional electricity company Northern Electric's fight against a hostile takeover from the U.S. prompted the Takeover Panel watchdog to launch a probe into the bid.
Just one day before a new bid deadline, the Takeover Panel said it was investigating the circumstances in which it had received information from Northern's advisers during the 782 million pound ($1.3 billion) bid by CE Electric.
"Following the investigation, the executive will consider what, if any, further action is appropriate," it said in a brief statement.
The role of Northern's adviser, investment bank BZW, has been under scrutiny since it failed to disclose until last Friday a 250,000 pound payment from Northern for its services in addition to its 1.5 million pound fixed fee.
BZW has denied any wrongdoing. A spokesman told Reuters: "It was put to Northern at the outset that we could earn a discretionary fee relating to the quality of our advice."
The Panel noted that it may also look into the acquisition by BZW and investment bank Schroders of 2.32 percent of Northern Electric's shares last week.
Although U.S. energy group CE Electric complained about the share purchases, the Panel cleared the deals last week. Advisers are allowed to buy shares under British takeover rules despite the move being aimed at defeating takeover bids.
Newcastle-based Northern Electric's independence has been on a knife-edge since last Friday, when the 60-day bid timetable ticked to a close and CE Electric, which is controlled by energy utility CalElergy, fell fractionally short of winning control.
But in an unusual twist, the Takeover Panel, ruled that it would extend the bid until 1300 GMT on Tuesday.
Gallingly for Northern Electric, CE Electric had by Monday boosted shareholder acceptances for its bid to just over the 50 percent mark needed for victory from 49.77 percent on Friday.
Consequently, Northern Electric on Monday launched an appeal into the decision to extend the bid deadline and requested that its shares be temporarily suspended.
Immediate details were unavailable about whether the Takeover Panel's decision to investigate the bid indicated that it was willing to reconsider its decision to extend the offer. "We are not able to clarify anything at the moment," a spokeswoman said, adding that comments would be available "in due course".
London officials for CE Electric declined to comment.
Northern, which says institutional investors including the Prudential, Foreign &amp; Colonial and M&amp;G support the board, was not immediately available for comment.
Meanwhile, Northern's shares have stopped trading at 638 pence, 12 pence short of the 650-pence-per-share that CE Electric is offering for control of the electricity company.
It is the second time that Northern's fate hangs in the balance since it was privatised along with its 11 regional electricity company (REC) peers in 1990.
It was the first of the cash-rich RECs to face a takeover in 1994 and became the only one to successfully fight off, partly with the help of an extraordinary 560 million pound defence package, a bid by conglomerate Trafalgar House, now owned by Norway's Kvaerner.
Three U.S. utilities, attracted by Britain's regulatory regime that curbs prices rather than profits, have already snapped up RECs. Two other bids have yet to be completed.
If CE Electric wins control of Northern, only two of the 12 original RECs will remain independent -- Yorkshire Electricity Group and Southern Electric. ($1=.5973 Pound)
