Confusion mounted on Monday when British electricity company Northern Electric's fight against a hostile takeover from the U.S. prompted the Takeover Panel watchdog to launch an inquiry into the bid.
Just one day before a new bid deadline, the Takeover Panel said it was investigating the circumstances in which it had received information from Northern's advisers during the 782 million pound ($1.3 billion) bid by America's CE Electric.
"Following the investigation, the executive will consider what, if any, further action is appropriate," it stated.
The role of Northern's adviser, investment bank BZW, has been under scrutiny since it failed to disclose until last Friday a 250,000 pound payment from Northern for its services in addition to its 1.5 million pound fixed fee.
BZW has denied any wrongdoing. A spokesman told Reuters: "We have absolutely nothing to hide from an investigation and we expect to be fully exonerated."
But asked whether the investigation may last into the New Year, the spokesman added: "I would think so, yes."
The Panel noted that it may also look into the acquisition by BZW and investment bank Schroders of 2.32 percent of Northern Electric's shares last week.
Although U.S. energy group CE Electric complained about the share purchases, the Panel cleared the deals last week. Advisers are allowed to buy shares under British takeover rules despite the move being aimed at defeating takeover bids.
Newcastle-based Northern Electric's independence has been on a knife-edge since last Friday, when the bid timetable ticked to a close and CE Electric, which is controlled by energy utility CalElergy, fell fractionally short of winning control.
But in an unusual twist, the Takeover Panel decided to extend the bid until 1300 GMT Tuesday for unspecified reasons.
Gallingly for Northern Electric, CE Electric had by Monday boosted shareholder acceptances for its bid to just over the 50 percent mark needed for victory from 49.77 percent on Friday.
Consequently, Northern Electric launched an appeal on Monday into the decision to extend the bid deadline and requested that its shares be temporarily suspended.
Immediate details were unavailable about whether the Takeover Panel's decision to investigate the bid indicated that it was willing to reconsider its decision to extend the offer -- or may allow late bid acceptances.
"We are not able to clarify anything at the moment," a spokeswoman said, adding that comments would be available "in due course."
CE Electric officials declined to comment. Northern, which says institutional investors including the Prudential, Foreign &amp; Colonial and M&amp;G support the board, said it was awaiting the Panel ruling more "in ignorance" rather than "in confusion."
"We are in uncharted territory," a spokesman told Reuters, adding that it remained unclear whether the Panel had decided to allow Northern's appeal or not.
Meanwhile, Northern's shares have stopped trading at 638 pence, 12 pence short of the 650-pence-per-share that CE Electric is offering for control of the electricity company.
It is the second time that Northern's fate hangs in the balance since it was privatised along with its 11 regional electricity company (REC) peers in 1990.
It was the first of the cash-rich RECs to face a takeover in 1994 and became the only one to successfully fight off, partly with the help of an extraordinary 560 million pound defence package, a bid by conglomerate Trafalgar House, now owned by Norway's Kvaerner.
Three U.S. utilities, attracted by Britain's regulatory regime that curbs prices rather than profits, have already snapped up RECs. Two other bids have yet to be completed.
If CE Electric wins control of Northern, only two of the 12 original RECs will remain independent -- Yorkshire Electricity Group and Southern Electric. ($1=.5973 Pound)
