Northern Electric Plc on Tuesday lost its bitterly-fought battle to stay independent when it finally fell victim to a 782 million pound ($1.31 billion) hostile bid from U.S. utility CalEnergy Co Inc.
CalEnergy's CE Electric won control of the privatised British regional electricity company (REC) with a wafer-thin majority, gaining the support of only 50.3 percent of the votes. The margin was a mere 300,000 shares.
The bid was so closely fought it ran over its original deadline and the outcome was in doubt right down to the wire.
Insurer Prudential Corp stepped in at the eleventh hour to try and thwart CE's efforts, by buying up nearly one million Northern shares from investors who had previously accepted CE's bid.
CE Electric's chairman and chief executive David Sokol said, "We look forward to working with Northern Electric's management to put in place a smooth transition."
"We are delighted by the outcome of the final offers for Northern Electric's shareholders," he said in a statement.
Northern Electric had no comment to make immediately after the result was published.
Last Friday's original bid deadline was extended to 1300 GMT on Tuesday after CE protested about share buys by Northern's advisers Schroders and BZW and a 250,000 pound fee to BZW not disclosed until Friday.
On Monday an appeal by Northern to reverse the deadline extension was rejected by the Takeover Panel, which polices mergers and acquisitions in the City of London.
Analysts said the takeover battle will leave a number of questions to be answered over the role of advisors.
The bid was the second hostile takeover that Northern had faced -- it spent 560 million pounds fending off Trafalgar House, now owned by Norway's Kvaerner.
Northern, the first privatised power company to become a takeover target, initially received a billion pound bid from Trafalgar House at the end of 1994.
But the offer was scuppered when industry regulator, Professor Stephen Littlechild, announced plans for more stringent price controls, sending electricity share prices tumbling.
Northern's demise marks the tenth of the 12 cash-rich RECS privatised in 1990 to be taken over since they became available when the government's golden share expired in March 1995.
It is also the fourth to be taken over by an American company with two further agreed bids from U.S. firms Dominion Resources and Entergy for East Midlands and London respectively currently underway.
American companies are hotly tipped as the most likely buyers for the remaining RECs as they find the British regulatory environment more relaxed and see them as a useful springboard for expansion into Europe.
Among potential bidders, analysts named Houston Industries, which failed in its attempt to secure control of Norweb with Central &amp; South West Corp in October 1995.
Florida Power &amp; Light and Pacific Gas &amp; Electric, which have both been rumoured previously to be interested in Recs, are again being eyed as possible buyers.
Entergy of the U.S. has just clinched an agreed 1.267 billion pound deal to take over London Electricity, which provides power to the capital and its financial heart, the City.
The electricity companies have attracted harsh criticism from lobby groups and the British media over fat executive pay packets, shareholder payouts and spiralling takeover prices.
Lang's decision to clear CE Electric's bid on December 6 lifted a cloud from Northern's shares, which had been languishing around 600 pence. It also indicated that other bids might not face any regulatory hurdles.
($1=.5977 Pound)
