Northern Electric Plc Tuesday lost its bitterly fought battle to stay independent, finally falling victim to a 782 million British pound ($1.31 billion) hostile bid from Omaha, Neb.-based CalEnergy Co. Inc.
CalEnergy's CE Electric won control of the privatised British regional electricity company with a wafer-thin majority, gaining the support of only 50.3 percent of shareholder votes. The margin was a mere 300,000 shares.
The bid was so closely fought it ran over its original deadline, and the outcome was in doubt right down to the wire.
Insurer Prudential Corp. stepped in at the 11th hour to try to thwart CE's efforts by buying up nearly 1 million Northern shares from investors who had previously accepted CE's bid.
CE Electric Chairman David Sokol said, "We look forward to working with Northern Electric's management to put in place a smooth transition.
"We are delighted by the outcome of the final offers for Northern Electric's shareholders," he said in a statement.
Northern said it would not make an immediate statement.
"We will give a recommendation to shareholders after Christmas," a Northern spokesman said.
CalEnergy stock rose 37.5 cents to $30.125 in abbreviated trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
Last Friday's original bid deadline was extended to 8 a.m. EST Tuesday after CE protested about stock purchases by Northern's advisers, merchant bank Schroders and Barclays Plc's BZW, and a 250,000 pound ($417,000) fee to BZW not disclosed until Friday.
On Monday, an appeal by Northern to reverse the deadline extension was rejected by Britian's Takeover Panel, which polices mergers and acquisitions in London's financial district.
Analysts said the takeover battle will leave a number of questions to be answered over the role of advisers.
The bid was the second hostile takeover that Northern had faced -- it spent 560 million pounds ($937 billion) fending off Trafalgar House, now owned by Norway's Kvaerner.
Northern, the first privatised power company to become a takeover target, initially received a billion-pound ($1.67 billion) bid from Trafalgar House at the end of 1994.
But the offer was scuttled when an industry regulator, Professor Stephen Littlechild, announced plans for more stringent price controls, sending electricity stock prices tumbling.
Northern's demise was the 10th takeover of one of the 12 cash-rich regional electric companies that were privatised in 1990 and became available when the government's "golden share" expired in March 1995.
It is also the fourth to be taken over by an American company. Two more bids -- by Richmond, Va.-based Dominion Resources Inc. for East Midlands Electricity and by Entergy Corp. of New Orleans for London Electricity -- are under way.
American companies are heavily favoured as the most likely buyers for the remaining regional electric companies as they find the British regulatory environment more relaxed and see them as a useful springboard for expansion into Europe.
Among potential bidders, analysts named Houston Industries Inc., which failed in its attempt to secure control of Norweb with Central &amp; South West Corp. in October 1995.
Florida Power &amp; Light Co. and Pacific Gas &amp; Electric Co., which have both been rumoured previously to be interested in regional electricity companies, are again being eyed as possible buyers.
Entergy has just clinched an agreed 1.267 billion-pound ($2.12 billion) deal to take over London Electricity, which provides power to the capital and its financial heart, the City.
The electricity companies have attracted harsh criticism from lobbying groups and the British media over fat executive pay packages, shareholder payouts and spiraling takeover prices.
