British electronics retailer Dixons Group Plc on Wednesday said strong personal computer sales helped profits jump 53 percent and sales rise eight percent in the first half.
But profit taking and concern over the impact of planned tax increases affecting extended warranties took the shine off its shares, which fell 27 pence to close at 511 pence.
"Bearing in mind the sort of out-performance we have seen lately (in the shares), the shares are running into some profit-taking," said one analyst who asked not to be named.
The group said pretax profits in the six months to November 9, 1996, soared to 57.5 million pounds ($97.4 million), at the top end of expectations, from 37.5 million pounds previously, and paid out a dividend of 2.4 pence, up from 2.05 pence.
On the turnover front, Dixons said sales from existing stores were up eight percent in the first half, a figure maintained in the first eight weeks of the second half which covers the key Christmas period.
"Christmas trading was highly satisfactory," chairman Sir Stanley Kalms said in a statement.
Managing director John Clare told Reuters that consumer spending was growing but there was no boom, adding that if the economy was managed well, "we can't see any reason why it should not continue."
PCs and accessories including software accounted for around 26 percent of the group's total sales in the first half, inching towards 30 percent over the Christmas period, he added.
"I expect personal computer sales to grow...household penetration is still very low in the UK," Clare added.
Dixons said its PC World division, which specialises in PC sales in out-of-town superstores, saw total sales rocket 96 percent higher in the first half, or 21 percent stripping out the effect of new selling space.
Dixons opens around ten PC World superstores each year and Clare said that expansion rate was expected to continue.
Gross margins in the early weeks of the second half were "at similar levels year on year," Kalms said in the statement, after increasing "slightly" in the first half.
Dixons said that it could not predict the full effect of the government's plans to raise insurance premium tax to 17.5 percent from a previous 2.5 percent on its extended warranty business.
"There is a bit of worry over what the impact might be," one share trader said.
Kalms, however, told Reuters Financial Television, "I don't expect it (the tax change) to be of much consequence to our overall profitability."
Clare said future margins were also hard to predict, with a "swings and roundabouts" pull between lower margins on PC hardware and the benefits of reduced credit promotion competition.
"There are two contrary forces at work...PCs are taking a higher share of the product mix...(but) there are benefits from reduced competitive activity, particularly in credit promotions," he said.
Retail outlets of regional electricity companies have been trimmed, for example, as a result of takeovers and consolidation in the sector.
Clare said digital technology was likely to provide another growth market for the company with wide-screen digital television likely to debut in 1998.
"Digital technology is generally coming in in a big way...(but) I don't think it will replace PCs, because PCs will continue to grow," he said.
Capital investment during the current financial year is expected to be over 100 million pounds and at similar levels for the year after. ($1=.5904 Pound)
