Dixons Group Plc became the latest British retailer to report a boost in Christmas sales on Wednesday but market watchers said there was no 1980s-style boom as discriminating buyers kept shops competitive.
"There isn't a big consumer boom but there is growth in the consumer economy," Dixons managing director John Clare told Reuters as the electronic goods firm reported sales up eight percent in the period over Christmas.
"There is certainly a return to the "feel good' factor, but it isn't a return to the spend, spend, spend culture of the eighties," said Clive Vaughan, retail consultant at research group Verdict.
Analysts pointed out that as Christmas fell on a Wednesday in 1996, many shoppers left purchases to the last minute and retailers were likely to have seen a late flurry of buying.
At the same time, consumers are more discerning than in past years, preferring to pay for quality and investing in durables, which has favoured the higher end of the retail sector.
"Consumers are more discerning, so the high street is still very competitive on price and quality," said Hugh Clark of the British Retail Consortium, which represents over 90 percent of retailers and will release its December sales figures next week.
British money supply data released on Monday showed a higher than expected increase in December month-on-month figures, suggesting continuing buoyancy on the high street, analysts said.
Leading British department store Harrods, kicking off its January sale, said on Wednesday sales during the Christmas period were up 10 percent and two percent ahead of budget.
"It was a very strong, very consistent Christmas," said Michael Cole, Harrods director of public affairs.
On the Monday before Christmas, Harrods had sales of three million pounds ($5 million), compared with average daily intake of 1.2 to 1.5 million, he said, record Monday takings for the group.
Meanwhile, Merchant Retail Group said on Wednesday its specialist Perfume Shop chain saw same store sales soar 18.6 percent in the Christmas period.
Department store chain John Lewis said last week that sales in the week ending December 28 were up 8.8 percent on a year ago, while jewellers Goldsmiths said sales from existing stores jumped 9.8 percent in the Christmas period.
Aspreys, jewellers to the Royal Family, told a newspaper last week that Christmas sales had been "substantially better than last year, a double-digit increase."
Clothing retailer Next Plc is expected to report Christmas sales by mid-January but analysts pointed out that its strong brand image should bolster performance.
"Indications are that the polarisation of stronger versus weaker retailers continues," said Roy Maconochie, analyst at Henderson Crosthwaite. "The consumer is more discriminating so stronger brands win out,"
Verdict's Vaughan said consumer demographics were also influencing product sales as the youthful buyers of the eighties become the more cautious over-30-year-old consumers of the nineties and have more disposable income. ($1=.5922 Pound)
