British electronics retailer Dixons Group Plc showed the benefit of strong personal computer (PC) sales on Wednesday with a 53 percent jump in first half profits and an eight percent increase in sales.
But profit taking and concern over the impact of planned tax increases affecting extended warranties took the shine off its shares, which fell 20 pence to 518 pence by 1130 GMT.
"Bearing in mind the sort of out-performance we have seen lately (in Dixons shares), the shares are running into some profit-taking," said one analyst who asked not to be named.
Pretax profits in the six months to November 9, 1996 soared to 57.5 million pounds ($97.4 million), at the top end of expectations, from 37.5 million pounds previously. The company paid out a dividend of 2.4 pence, up from 2.05 pence.
Dixons said sales from existing stores were up eight percent in the first half, a figure maintained in the first eight weeks of the second half which covers the key Christmas period.
"Christmas trading was highly satisfactory," chairman Sir Stanley Kalms said in a statement.
Managing director John Clare told Reuters that consumer spending was growing but there was no boom, adding that if the economy was managed well, "we can't see any reason why it should not continue".
PCs and accessories including software accounted for around 26 percent of the group's total sales in the first half, inching towards 30 percent over the Christmas period, he added.
"I expect personal computer sales to grow...household penetration is still very low in the UK," Clare said.
The PC World division, which specialises in PC sales in out-of-town superstores, saw total sales rocket 96 percent in the first half, or by 21 percent when the effect of new selling space is stripped out.
Dixons opens around 10 PC World superstores each year and Clare said this expansion rate was expected to continue.
Gross margins in the early weeks of the second half were "at similar levels year-on-year," Kalms said in the statement, after increasing slightly in the first half.
Dixons said it could not predict the full effect of the government's plans to raise insurance premium tax to 17.5 percent from 2.5 percent on its extended warranty business.
"There is a bit of worry over what the impact might be," one share trader said.
Kalms, however, told Reuters Financial Television, "I don't expect it (the tax change) to be of much consequence to our overall profitability."
Clare said future margins were hard to predict, with a "swings and roundabouts" pull between lower margins on PC hardware and the benefits of less competition in promoting credit.
Shops belonging to regional electricity companies have been trimmed, for example, as a result of takeovers and consolidation in the sector.
Clare said digital technology was likely to provide another growth market for the company with wide-screen digital television likely to debut in 1998. "Digital technology is generally coming in in a big way...(but) I don't think it will replace PCs, because PCs will continue to grow," he said.
Capital investment in the current financial year is expected to be over 100 million pounds and at similar levels the year after.
($1=.5904 Pound)
