Troubled British stores group Sears Plc warned on Thursday that annual profits would fall below last year's levels and reported disappointing Christmas trading.
The news hit Sears shares and prompted analysts to say the group should be broken up.
"The corpse has clearly not responded to treatment and now they should do the decent thing, which is to break it up," said one analyst who asked not to be named.
Sears said in a statement that full-year pretax profits before exceptional items would be significantly below last year's 100.1 million pounds ($169 million) and added that Christmas same store sales slipped 0.5 percent from a year ago.
Shares, which had already fallen after The Guardian newspaper had said that profits would fall, closed down 4p, or 4.4 percent, at 87-1/2p after a low of 83.
Analysts said annual profit forecasts could now be trimmed back to around 80-90 million pounds from previous levels of around 110-120 million pounds.
But Sears's flagship London department store Selfridges performed well, with sales in the second half to January 6 up 8.6 percent, comparable with other retailers who have reported trading over the key Christmas period so far.
Clothing sales were also up, by eight percent in the period, with womenswear, which includes high street chains Wallis, Warehouse and Miss Selfridge, boosting sales by 14.3 percent.
But childrenswear saw turnover down four percent and footwear, Sears's persistent problem area, fell 2.8 percent at the start of the second half.
Sales at Sears's home shopping business Freemans slid 6.5 percent early in the second half and it said it expected to make an announcement soon on talks about selling the business to the privately-owned mail order-to-pools group Littlewoods.
Analysts have suggested that Freemans could be worth around 350 million pounds in such a deal, with some looking for a price of as much as 500 million.
"It is now all about the break-up value," said the analyst.
The company tried to ditch part of its British Shoe business last year but this was scuppered when the stores had to be taken back from retailer Facia after Facia's collapse in June 1996.
Analysts said Selfridges could be worth over 500 million pounds while a conservative valuation of one times turnover for the clothing business would mean a price of 600 million pounds.
"That means that the British Shoe business is seen by the market as a liability to the tune of around 200-300 million pounds," the analyst said.
He put a valuation of around 101-102 pence per share on Selfridges, the clothing business and the revenue from any sale of Freemans, around 19 percent above current share levels.
"I would hope they are going to do something radical, getting rid of British Shoe, even for a nominal sum, would free the company of that liability," the analyst said.
A flotation or sale of Selfridges is also seen as an option, or potentially a bid for the company although analysts said there were few likely buyers.
The company's poor performance could increase pressure for chief executive Liam Strong to quit, analysts said, after some five years at the helm trying to mend the group's fortunes.
Strong faced calls for his resignation in June from shareholders angry at the lack of progress in turning the sprawling retail business around. ($1=.5922 Pound)
