British supermarket retailer J. Sainsbury Plc tried to steal a march on its competitors on Friday by launching insurance products through its Homebase do-it-yourself subsidiary.
The deal, which sees Sainsbury teaming up with brokers Willis Corroon, will offer home and contents insurance, garden insurance and personal accident insurance with details to be released to the public in early February.
Sainsbury became the first supermarket to announce plans to break into banking in October when it teamed up with Bank of Scotland to set up Sainsbury's Bank, which awaits a licence from UK authorities.
The insurance service will be offered to all Homebase customers which are thought to total around 12 million, with initial marketing aimed at the unit's two million loyalty card holders.
The service will be provided by a panel made up of Royal &amp; Sun Alliance, Guardian Royal Exchange, Norwich Union, Eagle Star and Lloyds of London.
"We believe that the Homebase brand values can make a real difference in the home insurance market," Mike Samuel, Homebase head of marketing, said in a statement.
Sainsbury said the major features of the products would be 250 pounds ($420.2) emergency cover, cover for home removal, Christmas, birthdays and accidental damage to televisions and satellites.
In addition, discounts of over 50 pounds would be offered on Homebase security products when a policy is taken out.
"The product chosen by Sainsbury's Homebase encompasses all the expected features of home insurance but with a safety net of cover not usually available with standard market products," said Richard Fry, head of business development at Willis Corroon.
Sainsbury shares had closed down five pence at 387.5 pence before the announcement was made.
Analysts said they were encouraged when Sainsbury moved into banking as there had been concerns that it was losing more and more ground to arch-rival Tesco.
Tesco was the first of the big four supermarket groups to launch a loyalty card and its success forced Sainsbury to bring out its own version around a year later in June 1996.
Safeway also has a loyalty card while ASDA is now testing its own version in selected stores.
Meanwhile Tesco has added a ClubCard Plus credit account for customers while Safeway teamed up with high-street bank Abbey National in November to offer banking services through its ABC loyalty card. ($1=.5950 Pound)
