British regional power company Yorkshire Electricity is still a hot favourite for a bid after a rash of takeovers at the end of 1996 left just two independent firms in the sector.
But every day that passes without an offer emerging dampens expectations of a possible takeover, analysts said on Friday.
"Over the next three to four weeks is really a final window before a general election," said Nigel Hawkins, analyst with Yamaichi.
The Conservative government, which must call an election by May, has nodded through bids for 10 regional electricity companies (Recs) so far of the original 12 set up at privatisation in 1990.
But there are concerns that the centre-left Labour party, ahead in current opinion polls, might be less amenable to takeovers in a sector which has been fiercely criticised for fat executive pay packets and hefty shareholder payouts.
"Labour would not necessarily wave any bids through in the way the current government has," said one analyst who asked not to be named. Yorkshire, which could carry a price of around 1.4 billion pounds ($2.35 billion), is seen as a more likely target for any bid than its colleague Southern.
Southern is the only other independent Rec left after a flurry of bids late last year mopped up three more Recs.
Southern, which could cost up to 2.4 billion pounds or around 9.50 pounds per share, the analyst said, could prove too expensive for a predator on its own.
"It is less digestible (than Yorkshire) but not impossible," he said. As a result, a takeover of Southern might involve more than one company working in collaboration.
Yorkshire was trading at 795 pence, up 6.5 pence, in a lower overall market on Friday, compared with expectations of a takeover price around nine pounds. Southern gained five to 779.
Potential buyers are seen as U.S. firms, with six of the original 12 firms now in American hands. The three Recs which succumbed late last year all fell to American buyers.
London and East Midlands agreed to takeovers from Entergy and Dominion Resources respectively, while Northern lost by a whisker its hotly contested battle against CalEnergy.
London's takeover still awaits approval from the British government but analysts expect a go-ahead now that Dominion and CE Electric, CalEnergy's bid vehicle, have had a green light.
American companies are seen as eager to gain the expertise of working in a competitive market with a relatively friendly regulatory environment and see Britain as a useful springboard for expansion into continental Europe, analysts said.
Among rumoured potential predators are Houston Industries, which failed to secure control of Rec Norweb with Central &amp; South West Corp in October 1995.
Central &amp; South West eventually bought Rec Seeboard but speculation continues that Houston might still be interested in the sector.
Florida Power &amp; Light and Pacific Gas &amp; Electric also appear in speculation on potential buyers.
But the failure of any bids to emerge is gradually sapping confidence that the sector will see any more takeover activity among some analysts.
"I would now be surprised if there is a bid. Many predators have now been satisfied and the longer we wait the less likely a bid seems," said one analyst who asked not to be named. ($1=.5950 pound)
