Britain's Chemical Industries Association (CIA) added its voice on Monday to growing criticism of the electricity wholesale market or "pool," calling for urgent reforms.
"Electricity prices for industrial consumers should have fallen much further...The answer is reform of the pool and urgently," the CIA told Reuters.
The association's members account for around 20 percent of Britain's industrial electricity use.
Industry observers said pressure could be mounting for an investigation of the way the pool operates by the Monopolies and Mergers Commission (MMC).
"Our view is that the pool is not structured to deliver competitive pricing," a CIA spokesman said.
The pool is a complex system used to set electricity wholesale prices which many users say gives unfair market control to big generators such as National Power and PowerGen.
Many large industrial users buy electricity directly from the pool rather than through regional electricity companies (Recs).
Criticisms of the system have come from a variety of sources over the past year including the British Retail Consortium (BRC), consumer watchdog the Electricity Consumers Committee and one of Britain's largest electricity users, RJB Mining Plc.
A year ago, the Energy Intensive Users Group (EIUG), which includes members of the CIA, called for an MMC inquiry into the pool during a review which eventually decided to ban planned takeovers of Recs by National Power and PowerGen.
The CIA claimed that prices paid for energy through the pool were 10 percent higher in the first half of the current financial year over the same period a year ago while delivered electricity prices were trending down.
The group said cost savings made by generators should be passed on to downstream customers.
"Despite falling raw material costs, and improvements in efficiency, generators have been able to manipulate the price of electricity and avoid passing a fair share of these gains on to customers," the CIA said.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
