British retail chain Kingfisher Plc said on Friday it would axe 1,200 jobs from the Norweb retail chain it bought in November 1996 and shut stores to integrate the purchase with its Comet electrical chain.
In a statement, Kingfisher said it would close 28 Norweb retail stores, which also sell electrical goods, along with 26 Comet stores and upgrade Comet out-of-town stores to raise the total number nationwide to 250 from a current 225 sites.
A further 26 Norweb retail stores in locations new to Comet would become Comet stores, Kingfisher said in a statement.
It added that Comet would go ahead with plans announced by Norweb retail last year before it was taken over to close all the chain's 57 high street sites at the beginning of March.
A further 26 Norweb retail stores in locations new to Comet will become Comet stores, Kingfisher said in a statement.
Norweb's total workforce before the job cuts numbers about 2,800.
"This acquisition is a good strategic move and will provide Comet with a significant number of first class retail locations and experienced people," said Kingfisher chief executive Sir Geoffrey Mulcahy.
Kingfisher bought Norweb retail for 51 million pounds ($85.30 million) from United Utilities, which had taken over regional electricity company Norweb around a year ago.
Kingfisher also announced on Friday that it had issued a 200 million pound bond, which analysts said was likely to be used for restructuring debt.
But some said the issue could focus attention again on reports earlier this week Kingfisher might increase its stake in French electrical retailer BUT, although BUT described an article in Thursday's Financial Times as "unfounded."
"The bond issue doesn't surprise me as it will help to restructure debt. But it will certainly focus attention on the BUT stake again," said one analyst who declined to be named.
Kingfisher declined to comment on the report on Thursday and there was no-one available to comment on Friday.
Kingfisher already holds a 26 percent stake in BUT and the Financial Times said on Thursday it was planning to mount a takeover offer, which the newspaper estimated could cost up to 300 million pounds.
Kingfisher bought the stake in BUT, which is France's second biggest furniture chain and fourth largest electricals group last year for 59 million pounds.
Under the deal, it should have to wait until 1998 before making any offer but analysts suggested this might be adjusted if Kingfisher were interested in raising its stake.
Analysts said such a move would be beneficial to Kingfisher.
"It would certainly be earnings enhancing in the first year," the analyst said.
He said Kingfisher would reap benefits from integrating BUT stores with its French electrical retailer Darty, which is the market leader. "Darty is star quality on electricals with higher returns on sales than Dixons," the British electrical retail chain, said the analyst.
"Combining the two could boost returns on BUT's electricals, which has turnover of around 500 million pounds but makes little profit," he added.
But analysts remained cautious that such a deal might be in the offing. "I don't think it will happen this year, I think they might have to wait until 1998," said one sector analyst.
($1=.5979 Pound)
