British supermarkets will be looking for ways to improve profitability in 1997.
Price will remain an important factor, analysts say, but the year will be dominated by a hunt for higher margins.
"We are keen to see whether supermarkets are planning to drive sales further or improve margins," said Dave Stoddart, analyst at Henderson Crosthwaite.
"Any fool can get sales growth, getting profitable sales growth is the trick," said one analyst who asked not to be named.
Analysts said ASDA, which prides itself on being the cheapest against major chains Tesco, J. Sainsbury and Safeway, could set a trend if it moves to underpin sales growth outperformance by raising margins.
An ASDA spokesman told Reuters that "margins are obviously important but there's no way our focus will move away from price."
In 1996, supermarkets entered a fierce petrol price war with oil majors which saw margins squeezed and some chains selling at a loss, but there are indications that this might have abated and margins might recover, analysts said.
ASDA's 10.2 percent sales growth from existing stores in the first half is the strongest of the big four and latest figures from research group Taylor Nelson/AGB suggest its market share was 14.8 percent at the end of 1996, putting it in third place.
"ASDA needs to start consolidating on good profits and that could make it less inclined to slash profits," the analyst said.
LOOKING AT DIVERSIFICATION
That could ease competitive pressures for the other three majors, analysts said, allowing them to look increasingly at diversification, such as financial services and loyalty cards.
Sainsbury chairman David Sainsbury said in October 1996 that he thought the current year was about getting the basics right while next year would be about improving profits.
Tesco's ClubCard loyalty scheme rocketed the group into the lead on market share a year ago and prompted arch-rival Sainsbury to change its mind and launch its own card in 1996.
In October 1996, Sainsbury went a step further to team up with Bank of Scotland to set up a bank and has also launched insurance services through its Homebase do-it-yourself subsidiary in partnership with brokers Willis Corroon.
FINANCIAL SERVICES ADD VALUE
"Financial services is an example of an area where supermarkets can add value for existing customers," said Clive Vaughan of Verdict Research.
ASDA is the only one of the big four which does not have a nationwide loyalty card, seeing little need for one while sales remain strong, but it is testing a scheme in selected stores.
Analysts say there could be a marked increase in the sophisticated use of the database provided by loyalty cards this year, allowing better targeting of product offers at specific customer groups.
Supermarkets are also expected to explore the possibilities of home shopping, including via the Internet, although a spokeswoman for Sainsbury said the group was concerned about the network's slow speed.
Sainsbury is also looking at other home shopping ideas such as "Order and Collect," where shoppers telephone or fax an order to the store and collect the whole package at an appointed time.
This is currently being being tested at its Watford branch, just north of London, and is likely to be rolled out to more stores in March, the spokeswoman said.
EXPANDING INTO NON-FOOD RANGES
Supermarkets are also expected to diversify their product range, both in food where the search will be on for added value products which bring higher margins, and non-food products such as clothing and home entertainment, analysts said.
"The larger supermarkets will have the advantages here," Vaughan said, such as ASDA which mostly has out-of-town hypermarkets where it offers its "George" own-brand clothing range alongside produce, videos, televisions and a wide range of non-food items.
ASDA's chief executive Allan Leighton has said he would like to boost clothing sales to around 10 percent of total or some 600 million pounds ($1 billion) of sales per year.
OPPORTUNITIES ABROAD
Diversification could also mean eyeing opportunities overseas, where both Sainsbury and Tesco already have interests.
Sainsbury could look to expand in the U.S., analysts said, where it already holds a 20 percent stake in Giant, while its U.S. unit Shaw's bought 12 stores and two sites from Royal Ahold for 52 million pounds in September, 1996.
Tesco has said it is interested in expanding in France after its 1993 purchase of the Catteau chain but ruled itself out of the bidding last year for Docks de France, which was taken over by the private retailer Auchan.
Tesco increased its stake in the Hungarian retail chain Global TH Rt to 95 percent last week.
Analysts said supermarkets could be looking at takeovers and store purchases domestically as well, as the sector looks ripe for some consolidation.
William Morrison, the regional chain based in northern England, was cited as a potential bid target but analysts said there could be competition problems in such an acquisition for any of the big four store groups. ($1=.5979 Pound)
