Britain's United Utilities may wait two to three years before it earns profits from a contract it won as part of a consortium for water and sewerage services in Manila on Thursday, analysts said.
They said it was difficult to assess likely profits until further details of the deal were released, although one who asked not to be named said they could be around five million pounds ($8.17 million) a year.
The Manila Water Company (MWC), which comprises United Utilities, Bechtel Corp of the U.S. and local conglomerate Ayala Corp won a contract on Thursday for water supply and sewerage in Manila's east zone. The Philippines government awarded the deal after MWC submitted the lowest water tariff of 2.32 pesos per litre, or 26.3886 percent of the existing fee of 8.78 pesos.
Analysts said other groups had bid upwards of 60 percent of the existing tariff in the contract.
MWC also posted the lowest bid in the west zone, but that contract was awarded to France's Lyonnaise des Eaux SA and Benpres Holdings Corp, another leading Philippines business group, as the contracts must go to different bidders.
United Utilities said in a statement that capital expenditure on the project was expected to be $1.7 billion, while Manila officials are expecting both groups to invest a total of around $7 billion.
The concession runs for 25 years and calls on MWC to serve 4.6 million of Manila's population of some 12 million through operating, upgrading and extending the city's water and wastewater systems, United Utilities said.
The current clean water system suffers nearly 50 percent losses, United Utilities said.
Analysts said the MWC group might be aiming to make cost reductions through staff cuts in order to make the concession profitable, as well as squeezing the amount of water lost.
Antonino Aquino, a senior official at Ayala, said the key to making the project economically viable would be to reduce the portion of non-revenue water, caused by leaks or pilfering, which is currently estimated at 58 percent.
But analysts said that as United Utilities would focus on running the system once it was upgraded and extended, any benefits would have to wait for a few years.
"United will probably see the benefits after the investment has been made...it could be three to four years before there is any significant contribution," said one sector analyst.
Shares were down 6-1/2 pence at 671.25 pence by 1441 GMT, while shares in Anglian, which was in a consortium that failed to win either contract were up 7.5 pence at 622 pence.
Analysts said that cost cutting and reducing leakage and stolen water could help MWC to wring increasing profits from the deal, even though price tariffs are reportedly fixed for 10 years.
"There are huge savings to be made...the numbers don't look that attractive but the cost savings could help the revenue stream," the sector analyst said.
The move also fits with UU's aim of developing its non-core businesses, analysts said, where the company hopes international projects could boost profits by 40 million pounds in 2000.
But UBS analyst Lakis Athanasiou said on Wednesday that the company could struggle to find extra profits needed to fulfill its promise of 11 percent real dividend growth per year to 2000.
"We think the targets are ambitious," he said, adding that UBS expects dividend growth of around six percent per year.
($1=.6119 Pound)
