British supermarket group J. Sainsbury Plc dropped a profits warning bombshell into the market on Friday, sending its own shares plummeting by 13 percent and bringing other stocks under pressure.
Sainsbury said pretax profits for the current year before a provision of 50 million pounds ($81.7 million) would be 640-650 million pounds, well below consensus forecasts of over 700 million, as it admitted the cost of improving sales would hurt.
It said sales from existing supermarket stores rose 4.4 percent in the eight weeks to January 11, an improvement on the three percent gain seen in October but still behind market leader Tesco's 7.5 percent jump, reported on Monday.
Sainsbury shares slumped 53 pence to 339 pence by 1600 GMT, falling below arch-rival Tesco's share price for the first time. Tesco shares shed eight to 360 pence.
"Sainsbury's fall has destabilised the whole sector and there are worries margins will be under pressure if competition hots up," said one analyst who asked not to be identified.
ASDA, which prides itself on being the cheapest of the big four supermarkets, eased 2.75 pence to 121-1/2 pence while Safeway dropped 13 to 389-1/2.
"I'm amazed that (Sainsbury's) price hasn't fallen further," said Nick Bubb, analyst at Mees Pierson, adding that Sainsbury still looked overpriced compared with the rest of the sector.
Before profit downgrades, Sainsbury was on a forecast price to earnings ratio of 14, according to Reuters 3000 data from Edinburgh Financial, towards the top end of the food retailing sector, ahead of Safeway and ASDA.
"The shares have quite rightly been marked down to a market rating but a discount rating would be more appropriate," said one sector analyst who asked not to be identified.
Some observers suggested Sainsbury might be prompted to cut prices in an effort to move sales ahead, but analysts said it was more likely to look at boosting offers and advertising.
"Price is not in vogue at the moment," added one analyst who asked not to be named.
But Dave Stoddart at Henderson Crosthwaite pointed out that "any cost-additive or gross margin-reducing activity will worry the market and pressure other shares."
Analysts downgraded Sainsbury profit forecasts for 1997/98 as well, with Bubb looking for pretax profits of 673 million pounds from a previous forecast of 780 million pounds.
"I had no idea (sales growth) would have cost them so much...the cost benefit of the sales improvement is way out of line," Bubb said.
Sainsbury chairman David Sainsbury said in a statement that he was "disappointed that the costs of building sales across the businesses have impacted group profit."
Sainsbury's chief executive of Homebase do-it-yourself and U.S. businesses David Bremner said the company's Reward loyalty card accounted for "probably the majority of the impact" on sales growth but admitted there was a short-term cost.
He told Reuters the task facing management next year was "to improve profits," adding that "obviously, we would always like to improve sales." Sainsbury was forced to launch Reward after the success of ClubCard helped Tesco to boost sales and leap ahead of Sainsbury as market leader.
($1=.6119 Pound)
