British supermarket group J. Sainsbury stunned markets on Friday and sent its shares reeling as it admitted the cost of improving sales will hit profits, wiping some 60 million pounds ($98 million) off forecasts.
Sainsbury said in a statement that pretax profits for the year were expected to be 640-650 million pounds excluding a 50 million pound provision on its Texas do-it-yourself business, compared with analysts' forecasts of over 700 million.
Shares tumbled as analysts raced to downgrade forecasts, losing 43 pence, or almost 11 percent, to 349 pence.
"I had no idea (sales growth) would have cost them so much...the cost benefit of the sales improvement is way out of line," said Nick Bubb, analyst at Mees Pierson.
Sainsbury said sales from existing supermarkets rose 4.4 percent in the eight weeks ending January 11 and that trend has continued, compared with a three percent rise in October 1996.
Arch-rival Tesco, which pushed Sainsbury off the market leader slot over a year ago, earlier this week reported sales growth of 7.5 percent over the key Christmas period.
"We are disappointed that the costs of building sales across the businesses have impacted group profit," chairman David Sainsbury said in a statement.
Bubb said he was "amazed that the share price has not fallen further," adding that Sainsbury still looked overpriced compared to the rest of the supermarket sector.
Before profit downgrades, Sainsbury was on a forecast price to earnings ratio of 14, according to Reuters 3000 data from Edinburgh Financial, towards the top end of the food retailing sector, ahead of Safeway and ASDA.
"The shares have quite rightly been marked down to a market rating but a discount rating would be more appropriate," said one sector analyst who asked not to be identified.
Sainsbury's chief executive of Homebase do-it-yourself and U.S. businesses David Bremner said the company's Reward loyalty card accounted for "probably the majority of the impact" on sales growth but admitted there was a short-term cost.
He told Reuters the task facing management next year was "to improve profits," adding that "obviously, we would always like to improve sales."
Sainsbury was forced to launch Reward after the success of ClubCard helped Tesco to boost sales and leap ahead of Sainsbury as market leader at the end of 1995.
Reward's costs have edged up to around 0.75 percent of sales compared with 0.4 percent in the first half, the analyst said, which could imply a need for sales growth nearer five percent.
"The costs of loyalty are clearly greater than they thought," he said.
Analysts were concerned that Sainsbury might have to sink more investment to improve sales and profits and forecasts for 1997/98 were also cut, with Bubb slashing estimates to 673 million pounds from 780 million previously.
Sainsbury said that management was now focused "on turning increased sales into profit growth," but analysts questioned how this could be achieved.
"What do they have to do next, what more costs need to go in?" asked one sector analyst.
Bubb added that despite Homebase's strong sales, which bounced 7.8 percent from existing stores in the 16 weeks to January 11, the 50 million pound provision was a concern.
Sainsbury said it aimed to convert an extra 25 Texas stores, which it bought from Ladbroke in 1995, to its Homebase format, which has given an uplift of 40 percent in sales at stores already given the new format.
"The full store conversion process remains the key to unlocking the potential of the Texas acquisition," Sainsbury said. ($1=.6119 Pound)
