Shares in British supermarkets fell on Monday after a study said they were closer to a price war than they have been for 15 years.
But analysts remain sceptical that stores will risk such a move, and supermarkets themselves appeared reluctant to sacrifice their profit margins.
The study by research group Verdict adding to market worries after J. Sainsbury Plc, now replaced as Britain's favourite supermarket chain by Tesco Plc, warned last Friday that its profits would be hit by efforts to boost sales.
Verdict said in a report prepared before Sainsbury's warning that profits would be 50 million pounds ($81.2 million) below expectations that risks of a price war were greater than at any time since 1982.
Verdict analyst Clive Vaughan said Sainsbury's comments increased the probability to "closer to 50 percent."
But Sainsbury "is not planning to start a price war," a spokeswoman for the company said, adding that "we are already very competitive."
Market leader Tesco "continues to offer unbeatable value," the campaign which it launched in September 1996, a Tesco spokesman said.
Analysts said the big four supermarkets, which also include Safeway and ASDA, were unlikely to want to risk the damage to margins which cutting prices would entail.
"A price war remains on the horizon rather than imminent," said one analyst who asked not to be named.
Sainsbury is struggling to gain the initiative snatched by arch-rival Tesco which leapt into the market lead just over a year ago and is seeing sales growth of 7.5 percent.
Sainsbury's sales were up 4.4 percent over the key Christmas trading period, an improvement over three percent gains seen in October 1996 but still not enough to threaten Tesco.
Shares in the company, which is 40 percent owned by the Sainsbury family, fell 10 pence on Monday to trade at 331 pence after plunging more than 10 percent on Friday.
Tesco saw its shares slip 5-1/2 to 354-1/2 pence while Safeway, the fourth largest store group, was down 12 pence at 377 pence and ASDA, which prides itself on being the cheapest of the big four, eased 1-1/2 to 120 pence.
"The market is right to mark shares down as a precaution...(but) no-one would ever dream" of launching a full-scale price war, said Nick Bubb of Mees Pierson.
British supermarkets generally obtain gross margins of 20-26 percent, analysts said, giving them flexibility to battle on price but with the leading four holding a majority of the market, there is little inclination to give up healthy profits.
"The supermarkets are in a state of relative equilibrium and Sainsbury is the last one to offer more margin at this stage," said the analyst.
Tesco is in a stronger position "and could be tempted to enforce that," he added, but suggested any move would fall short of a full price war where retailers might make hefty cuts on several thousand items, costing a couple of points on margins.
"Tesco might be tempted to stick the boot in, but...the more (it) forces Sainsbury into further problems, the more it would have to face retaliation," Bubb said.
Analysts said supermarkets were more likely to push ahead with initiatives such as loyalty cards, improved customer services and marketing in order to increase sales and profits.
"I think at this stage a price war is unlikely, but if sales fall substantially for any of the big four, that situation could change," the analyst said. ($1=.6161 Pound)
