British supermarket group Tesco Plc has put price back on top of the agenda with a new campaign and, although analysts played down fears of a price war on Thursday, loyalty cards could take a back seat to value for money.
"Loyalty is a factor but price is the most important factor," said analyst Richard Perks of Verdict Research.
After markets had closed on Wednesday, Tesco said it would invest 30 million pounds ($47 million) in its "Unbeatable Value" campaign, promising to offer the lowest prices on 600 items in addition to regular monthly offers on 2,000 lines.
It said customers who found the items cheaper at other stores would be refunded twice the difference and Tesco would lower its own prices immediately.
Its shares, which had fallen earlier this week on worries of an aggressive campaign, rebounded on Thursday to be up seven pence to 298 by 1445 GMT. Arch-rival J. Sainsbury was down 3-1/2 at 373.
"These are budgeted cuts, not panic price-cutting, there's no reason to reduce forecasts," said one sector analyst who declined to be named.
Sainsbury launched its own autumn campaign, targeting 700 items in a continuation of regular monthly moves, on September 1. A spokeswoman declined to comment on Tesco's move.
"A war has to have two sides. We are not fighting anyone. We are here for our customers," a Tesco spokesman said.
Analysts questioned why the market leader would want to prompt a price war, particularly as there are glimmering signs that the economy might be improving.
The Confederation of British Industry (CBI) on Thursday said retail sales volume was up again in August and the balance of firms reporting an increase in business was the largest since November 1988.
In addition, latest market share figures for supermarkets from AGB research suggest Tesco turned in a creditable performance in August after seeing its slice of the cake dip marginally in July.
"I am not particularly concerned...you always get autumn promotional campaigns of some sort and (Tesco's) may be just a bit more aggressive than we have seen in the past," said Dave Stoddart, sector analyst at Henderson Crosthwaite.
But BZW was reported to be concerned that Tesco's move could precipitate cuts elsewhere.
Supermarkets are largely keen to avoid a full-blown price war which would shrink margins and eat into profits. The focus recently has been on loyalty cards to boost sales.
The latest launch was the Reward card from Sainsbury, which capitulated in June after the success of Tesco's ClubCard had helped to tip it off the market leader slot last year.
It now has six million subscribers and has generated a boost of around two to three percent in sales, deputy chief executive Dino Adriano said last week.
"Clearly we needed to launch a Reward card. It's become a way of doing business within this marketplace," Adriano said.
Among the big four British supermarket groups, only ASDA has so far held back from launching a loyalty card. It is running trials in 18 stores and has not ruled it out.
But the indications are that loyalty cards are largely just breaking even for supermarkets and providing a means of retaining customers rather than adding extra shoppers, analysts said.
If Tesco, which leads the market and has 8.5 million subscribers to its ClubCard, feels the need to focus on price, other supermarkets may find it hard not to follow. ($1=.6373 Pound)
