British utility stocks rose on Friday on hopes for shareholder benefits after Southern Electric said it would make a complicated share buy back worth up to 156 million pounds ($252.8 million).
Analysts said Southern's move, which followed a similar Yorkshire Water plan announced on Thursday, could provide tax benefits and might bolster arguments against the opposition Labour Party's plans for a one-off levy on utilities.
Southern followed a trail blazed on Thursday by Yorkshire Water by offering a share consolidation which will give all holders free B shares.
It will then offer to buy back these shares at a fixed price, in Southern's case 60 pence per existing ordinary share.
Southern's shares were up 13 pence to 800-1/2 pence by early afternoon and other shares in the water and electricity sectors followed their lead, with South West gaining 10 pence to 672-1/2 pence and Anglian up 11-1/2 pence to 637 pence.
"All the utilities are up on the back of this, everyone is talking about buy-backs," said one trader.
Analysts said the moves by Southern and Yorkshire Water would decrease reserve capital and help the companies to avoid paying excess interest on Advanced Corporation Tax (ACT), which they can claim back from the government in two years' time.
The proposals are open to all shareholders and were seen by analysts as a tax-efficient way of returning value. At the same time, the measures will increase the level of debt for companies, which could provide a bolster to arguments against a one-off "windfall" tax proposed by Labour, analysts said.
Labour, which is ahead of the ruling Conservatives in polls before a general election due by May, has said it will impose a windfall levy on excess profits of utilities but has given no details of the tax's size or scope.
"Southern is gearing up ahead of an election, which might reduce its exposure to a windfall tax," the analyst said.
"A Labour government would find it hard to press them if they claimed there was no spare cash to pay the tax. I'm just surprised Southern has got rid of so little cash," the analyst added.
Other companies seen likely to pursue similar moves include Severn Trent, which is waiting to complete a 10 percent share repurchase after picking up 4.9 percent on the market and a small stake from the government in December last year.
South West has a mandate to buy back up to 10 percent of shares and finance director Ken Hill said when half year results were announced in November that the balance sheet was strong enough to handle such a move if appropriate.
Wessex Water announced a 10 percent buyback in December which attracted responses for around 3.2 percent and has also said it will buy around 87 percent of a 19.5 percent stake held by Waste Management International.
Analysts have also suggested Yorkshire Electricity, one of two independent regional electricity companies (Recs) along with Southern left after a spate of takeovers, might have funds for a buyback. ($1=.6172 Pound)
