British paper and packaging group Arjo Wiggins Appleton Plc saw half-year profits crumple on Thursday and said although there was some pick-up in demand and margins, prospects for the second half remained fragile.
Arjo's first half pre-tax profits slid to 32.3 million pounds ($50.6 million) from 135.3 million pounds a year ago but maintained its interim dividend at 2.9 pence per share.
The company said in a statement the first half of 1996 and the second half of 1995 was "the worst period the group has experienced since its flotation", because of adverse market conditions. Arjo was demerged from B.A.T Industries in 1990.
Speaking of prospects for the second half, finance director Andrew Shaw told Reuters in an interview: "It is fragile, but there should be better volumes and a bit more stability in margins."
Arjo's shares were down 4-1/2 pence by 1000 GMT to 181-1/2 pence having touched a low of 180 pence earlier in the day.
"There were weak volumes and pressure on margins" in the first half, Shaw said.
Pulp prices, the raw material for paper, collapsed from the end of 1995, after nearly two years of steady rises, dragging paper levels down with them, he said.
In Europe particularly, for carbonless and coated paper, margins were squeezed, he said, "but it looks as if that is over and that could make a big difference," he added.
In the U.S., the group's business "should see quite a pick-up," Shaw said.
But he warned that any improvement "will be driven by economic growth and the prospects in Europe are not very exciting."
Shaw said it was too early to say if the second half would really see an upturn, but added that the company would like to see "a nice gentle rise in prices and some steady volumes."
He said the group should also start to get some benefit from its restructuring in the second half and that savings were likely to be "more than expected rather than less."
The group embarked on its restructuring last year, taking an exceptional charge of 120.6 million pounds, and Shaw said the timeframe was 18 months to two years for results to show.
The company expects costs of carbonless paper production to fall by around 100 pounds a tonne as a result of restructuring, Shaw said, while coated paper productivity should gain 25 percent.
Though the outlook for the second half remained fragile, the company was more upbeat about longer term prospects. "Longer term, however, we are confident in the consolidation of our strong position in European merchanting, the development of our North American businesses and the benefits of the restructuring programme in European manufacturing," the company said in a statement.
($1=.6382 Pound)
