British supermarket group Safeway said on Friday that sales growth had slowed since early January and inflation was around zero, prompting fears that consumer belt-tightening could hit the sector, analysts said.
"What has spooked the sector is the comment that things have slowed since the start of the new year," said one trader as supermarket shares dived after the Safeway comments.
Safeway said in a statement that same store sales were up 5.2 percent in the five weeks to January 4 but over the first 16 weeks of the second half of the financial year, growth slowed to a 4.5 percent rise.
Deputy chairman David Webster told Reuters that inflation, excluding petrol, was currently running around zero after a modest 0.3 percent rise over the key Christmas period, and the company said lower inflation and slower sales could hit profits.
Safeway, seen as the most technologically innovative of the supermarkets with electronic scanners and automated checkouts, said its experience was "in common with the sector".
The company, which has some 7.8 percent of Britain's grocery market, saw its shares slump 25-1/2 pence by 1052 GMT to 363-1/2 pence, making it the third largest loser on the London exchange.
Market leader Tesco, which last month said Christmas sales rose 7.5 percent, fell 16-1/2 pence to 347-1/2.
"What Safeway is saying is that there is a lack of food price inflation and it does not look as if any is on the way," said one analyst who asked not to be identified.
"In the last four weeks the sector and Safeway have come off quite sharply in terms of overall sales performance," Webster said. It was hard to judge whether the slowdown in sales would continue but he added that the company was still seeing "significant deflation in produce, which is 10 percent of sales".
Profit forecasts for Safeway had been shaved by 10 million pounds ($16.40 million) to 430 million pounds, the trader said, compared with pretax profits of 401 million pounds (corrects from 429.4 million pounds) a year ago.
The analyst suggested year profit forecasts for Safeway, Tesco and the two other majors J. Sainsbury and ASDA could be marked down 2-5 percent.
Shares in Sainsbury, which has its own problems -- last week it admitted its profits would be hit by investment in boosting sales as it promotes its loyalty card, dropped seven pence to 321-1/2 pence while ASDA, keeping silent on trading, fell 5-1/2 pence to 115-1/2 pence.
But analysts ruled out a price war among the big four despite the squeeze on profits, as companies are expected to focus on improving margins. "The last thing you want to do if sales are slowing and inflation is flat is to give away margins," the analyst said.
Webster said a price war was very unlikely, adding that if any of the majors launched such an initiative, there would be swift reactions from competitors.
"This is not about price, it is about brand quality," the analyst said, adding that Safeway's statement was particularly disappointing after its efforts to restructure and refresh its image over the last two or three years.
Safeway's warning on sales and prices comes hot on the heels of an upbeat report on retailers from the Confederation of British Industry (CBI), which said high street sales picked up in January and exceeded expectations.
But the CBI added that retailers in its survey expected sales to moderate in February.
Britain's overall inflation rate has slowed to a 2.5 percent rise year-on-year in December, according to latest official figures, while food prices were up a restrained 0.8 percent. ($1=.6097 Pound)
