Tesco became the latest British supermarket to put banking on its shopping list on Thursday with plans for a venture with Royal Bank of Scotland, shifting the focus further from price, analysts said.
"With more supermarkets investing in financial services, there is less likelihood of a price war," said one analyst who asked not to be named.
Tesco said it will set up a joint venture in financial services with Royal Bank which will take over Tesco's interest-paying ClubCard Plus account and launch a credit card as a first move over the summer.
The two companies, which will be equal partners in the venture, said the link-up would stretch over Direct Line telephone banking and Scottish Widows fund and life assurance group, which already has a strategic alliance with Royal Bank.
Tesco expects the two companies to invest around 40 million pounds ($65 million) during the first year in the venture, which does not need a banking licence.
The new venture could make a loss of between five and 10 million pounds in the first year, marketing director Tim Mason told Reuters, but should move to profits in the second or third.
Mason said Tesco hoped to see similar profits eventually to those gained by retailer Marks &amp; Spencer from its financial services, which have been running for some 15 years and brought in around 61 million pounds last year.
"If we didn't feel we could do that sort of level medium term, then we would not be as interested as we are," Mason said.
"Tesco views it as its chance to make Marks &amp; Spencer style financial services profits...the worry I have is that everybody is dashing in to this and as competition increases, prices could fall," said Dave Stoddart of Henderson Crosthwaite.
Tesco, which tipped rival J. Sainsbury off the market leader perch in late 1995, helped by the launch of its ClubCard loyalty scheme, is the third of the big four supermarkets to commit to financial services.
Tesco's partner in ClubCard Plus, National Westminster Bank, declined a further link-up because it did not need Tesco's distribution given its strong presence in Britain and wanted to keep a clear separate identity, a spokesman said.
Tesco's chairman Sir Ian MacLaurin resigned his place on NatWest's board on Thursday after over 15 years of tenure.
Sainsbury, which was forced to launch its own loyalty card last year after the success of ClubCard, surprised the market by becoming the first of the big four supermarkets to plunge into banking when it announced plans for Sainsbury's Bank last year.
Sainsbury holds 55 percent in the bank while partner Bank of Scotland has 45 percent.
Safeway, the third largest grocery group, teamed up with high street bank Abbey National in November to launch banking services through its ABC loyalty card.
But the intensifying battle on services and loyalty has triggered profits warnings at both Sainsbury and Safeway in the last month, as loyalty offers to attract more customers hurt margins while inflation and sales growth remain slow.
Shares in Tesco, whose 7.5 percent sales growth over the key Christmas period was ahead of both Sainsbury and Safeway, gained two pence to 340 pence by 1154 GMT while Sainsbury nosed up half a penny to 314-1/2 pence and Safeway rose 3-1/2 pence to 360.
ASDA, which prides itself on being the cheapest of the big four and has no nationwide loyalty card nor financial services link, saw shares slip a penny to 114 pence.
ASDA's strong sales growth has kept management reassured the company does not need to plunge into financial services while it focuses on price, but analysts said the shift in focus by its rivals could add pressure for ASDA to join in.
"It certainly seems to throw the ball into ASDA's court. They pride themselves on a simple price message but I think they will have to offer similar service extras at some time," the analyst said. ($1=.6128 Pound)
