Calendar third quarter returns for hotly-competitive Internet stocks will reflect the sacrifice of near-term profits for longer-term growth, analysts said.
Many Internet startups are still fighting to build market share and are expected to continue posting quarterly losses.
"Everything's moving quickly, but people still have to digest the technology, and pay for it...sorting out the winners from the losers and the also rans," said Steve Harmon, senior investement analyst at Mecklermedia's iWORLD.  
Typical of the scurry to capture market share by making targeted investments early is Yahoo! Inc.
Yahoo!, started by two venture-backed Stanford University students two years ago to help people navigate the far-flung World Wide Web, has been building on its branded media model during its second full quarter after its initial offering.
The search engine pioneer is due to report after the market close today on its results for the third quarter, and analysts expect a $0.07 a share loss, according to First Call.  
Yahoo! has begun opening metropolitan services in U.S. cities and internationally in Japan and Britain; subject-area services such as quotes and map or individual lookup pages; and demographic offerings like Yahooligans for kids.
Yahoo! has already supplied clues to its quarterly performance potential.  Last week it released traffic figures showing it had one billion full-page "hits" in the quarter.
Also expanding internationally, in league with overseas media firms such as Bertelsmann AG, is navigator firm Lycos Inc, which last month reported a loss of $0.16 a share for its fourth fiscal quarter ended in July.  
Infoseek Corp, which has tuned its speedy search technology to target business users in particular, is due to report a third quarter loss of $0.18 a share on October 21.
And on the same day, Excite Inc, which bought out rival McKinley Group this summer and which like Yahoo! and Infoseek has been expanding personalized searching, is expected to post a $0.35 a share loss for the quarter.
Like other subgroups of the Internet sector, financial analysts expect further consolidation in the sector over time.
Netscape Communications Corp is prominent among the handful of Internet-linked shares seen reporting profits.  
By shifting from browsers to tools, Spyglass has racked up steady profits.
Among Internet service providers, First call consensus estimates for Netcom On-Line Communications Inc are for a loss of $1.25 in its third quarter, wider than $0.49 a year ago, while PSINet Inc is expected to narrow its loss to $0.29 from $0.40 in the year-earlier third quarter.
Open Market Inc, which Tuesday unveiled a deal with AT&amp;T Corp, is seen posting a $0.23 a share third quarter loss.  
"This convergence of capital, creativity and opportunity is unprecedented in at least 15 or 20 years and that makes for some hot growth, top and bottom line, but it still takes time to build that bottom line," said Harmon.
    COMPANY    QTR    FIRST CALL CONSENSUS EPS  YEAR-AGO
    Yahoo! Corp	   Q3 $0.07 loss    n/a
Netscape Comms Corp Q3 $0.08 profit $0.02 profit
    Spyglass Inc	  Q4 $0.08 profit $0.06 profit
    NETCOM On-Line	Q3 $1.25 loss   $0.49 loss
    PSINet Inc	    Q3 $0.29 loss   $0.40 loss
    Open Market	   Q3 $0.23 loss    n/a
Raptor Systems Inc  Q3 $0.03 profit $0.10 loss
    Check Point	  Q3 $0.09 profit $0.05 profit
    America Online Inc   Q1 $0.18 profit $0.08 profit
*consensus estimates/comparables calculated by First Call
NOTE: Check Point Software Technologies Ltd.
Having completed its initial public offering in August 1995, six months before the search engine firms, Netscape had just emerged as a winner from the first round of battles for browser market dominance only to find software giant Microsoft Corp muscling into the market this year.
Netscape, which is expected to unveil new alliances and technology at its developers' conference next week, is seen on October 22 reporting a third quarter profit of $0.08 a share.
Also according to First Call, Spyglass Inc is on November 1 expected to report a per-share profit of $0.08 for its fourth fiscal quarter to the end of September. -sam.perry@reuters.com, Palo Alto Bureau, +1 415 846 5400
