The Silicon Valley entrepreneur who founded Atari Corp. and created Chuck E. Cheese restaurants wants to put high-tech jukeboxes and video games linked to the Internet in bars, hotels and other public places -- and eventually make billions of dollars.
"Do you think 'Bubba' can surf the Net? I do," Nolan Bushnell told reporters at a news briefing Thursday in a wood-paneled room of his Woodside, Calif., mansion about 30 miles south of San Francisco.
Reporters got a look at three devices that will enable people to play video games with opponents in another location, order music as well as hear it and access the Internet with the drop of a coin or the swipe of a credit card.
Aristo International Corp. plans to roll the machines out worldwide early next month.
Bushnell, who is director of strategic planning for Aristo and has a minority stake in the New York-based company, said he and Aristo have invested more than $10 million to develop the machines, dubbed TeamNet, MusicNet Plus and TouchNet.
The company has gathered about 75 of the approximately 100 distributors of coin-operated games this week to unveil the machines and generate orders. Aristo wants to put the devices in sports bars, hotels, restaurants, airports and other public locations.
The TeamNet machine, which is the size of a small billiard table, allows two teams of up to eight players each to compete against each other or against teams elsewhere through an Internet connection.
Aristo said it is already seeking corporate sponsors for its tournament games.
Another product, TouchNet, allows people to use a compact, coin-operated countertop touch-screen computer to play games and send messages via the Net.
The U.S. market for coin-operated games alone has reached $6.8 billion a year, and studies for Aristo indicate this could grow to $20 billion, said Bushnell.
Bushnell, 53, is no stranger to video games. He founded the Atari video game company in 1972 and sold it in 1976. A year later, he opened the first of a chain of Chuck E. Cheese restaurants, which combine pizza with video games.
The MusicNet Plus product plays high-quality digital music and enables customers to buy recordings and merchandise from bands as well as tickets to events.
Aristo Chief Executive Mouli Cohen declined to say how much the machines would cost, but said hotel and club proprieters should expect a price that is competitive with current coin-operated vending machines, which generally sell for a few thousand dollars.
Company officials also declined to make sales projections.
The products are based on computers using high-speed Intel Corp. Pentium processors and use Microsoft Corp.'s Windows NT operating system.
The machines are being manufactured by vending machine maker Streak Technology Inc. and other California manufacturers. Cohen said Aristo was also in talks with Taiwanese computer maker Acer on manufacturing.
Cohen said in an interview at Bushnell's estate that Aristo has a development lead of at least six to eight months over would-be rivals.
He said the company has invested $15 million in cash and stock worth $10 million to build the company. The stock was unchanged at $7.50 Friday afternoon on Nasdaq.
With 13.5 million shares outstanding, Aristo is gearing up for a secondary offering of up to 2 million shares around October.
Cohen and Bushnell declined to discuss individual shareholder stakes, adding that Aristo has been working with investment bankers Allen &amp; Co. to evaluate potential strategic partners and investors.
