Sun Microsystems Inc. stock took a beating Wednesday despite reporting a sharp rise in earnings that topped Wall Street's average forecasts and set milestones for its typically weak first fiscal quarter.
The Mountain View, Calif.-based computer maker said late Tuesday that its profits jumped 45 percent in its fiscal first quarter to $123.4 million, or 63 cents a share, from $84.7 million, or 42 cents a share, in the 1995 quarter. It cited continued strong sales of its computer workstations.
The profits were a shade above Wall Street analysts' average forecast of 61 cents a share as compiled by First Call, which tracks earnings estimates, but investors started taking profits in after-hours trading Tuesday.
Traders noted the stock had run up ahead of the report, and that while Sun's numbers were strong, they were not as strong as had some on Wall Street had been expecting.
Furthermore, some analysts expressed concerns over whether Sun will be able to match the performance in the future in an increasingly competitive market for workstations as rivals introduce new models of their own.
The stock of the Mountain View, Calif.-based computer maker touched its all-time high of $70.25 Tuesday before the earnings report and ended regular trading at $70. But it fell $4 in after-hours trading following the report.
The freefall continued Wednesday, with the shares off as much as $7.625 at one point at a session low of $62.375 and closing the day at $63.125, down $6.875 on Nasdaq trading volume of nearly 18 million shares. It was the most actively traded stock on the exchange.
"We've got to believe there's some profit-taking going on," Sun Chairman Scott McNealy told reporters in a conference call Tuesday when informed of the after-hours decline.
A number of analysts trimmed their ratings on the 14-year-old computer maker, mostly saying the stock's price had already soared to near their 12-month trading targets and that the downgrades were based on valuation rather than fndamentals.
Morgan Stanley analyst Steve Mulunovich, for example, cut his rating to "outperform" from a "strong buy", with a price target of $75 on the stock. However, he also raised his fiscal 1997 earnings estimate to $3.35 a share from $3.30.
The company reported record earnings per share of $2.42 in its 1996 fiscal year, which ended in June.
Alex. Brown analyst Phil Rueppel also cut his rating, to a "buy" from a "strong buy" and Ferman Selz removed the stock from its recommended list after it hit its $70 price target.
A few analysts also expressed concern that although Sun has received a great deal of publicity over its Java technology, it also will face stiff competition from rivals Hewlett-Packard Co. and Silicon Graphics Inc., which have just introduced speedy new computer models.
Other competitors, like personal computer maker Compaq Computer Corp., are also expected to jump into the market with workstations to compete in the high-end market for machines which has long been dominated by a handful of firms.
"His new competitors are Compaq and Dell Computer. The enemy isn't the traditional competitor but a new class of people that can compete in this space," said David Wu, an analyst at Chicago Corp.
Sun scored a small coup Wednesday by hiring Mark Canepa -- a Hewlett-Packard veteran who was just named by Compaq last month to head up its newly formed workstation division -- to instead be vice president of Sun's Workgroup Server Products Group.
Stock in Compaq, whose third quarter earnings also surpassed Wall Street estimates, also fell, closing down $1.50 ato $73.625 in New York Stock Exchange trading.
Some analysts said they saw the weakness in Sun's stock as a buying opportunity.
Dean Witter analyst Jay Stevens said he raised his earnings estimates for Sun and reiterated a buy rating.
"They delivered a very fine quarter," Stevens said.
