Wired magazine remains one of the publishing world's hottest 1990s startups, but on the brink of its parent's initial stock offering some analysts are warning the chronicle of the digerati of the Internet age may prove a better read than investment.
"It's a great read, off Wall Street, but the balance sheet is not quite as neo-designed as the magazine," said Steve Harmon, senior investment analyst at Mecklermedia's iWORLD.
The initial public offering of Wired Ventures Inc., the publisher of the magazine, were due to be priced late on Thursday, according to lead underwriter Goldman Sachs.
The offering had been initially due in July but was pulled at the last minute as the market for technology and Internet stocks was tumbling.
Now Internet stocks, most of which have only gone public since the Netscape Communication Corp.'s milestone offering in August 1995, have rebounded nearly 10 percent from their July lows.
Wired Ventures' revised offering has reduced the company's projected market capitalisation by some $200 million, or 42 percent, from its initial plan, according to Harmon, who calculated the company's new market capitalisation at some $300 million based on an IPO price of $13 a share.
Wired intends to sell up to 4.75 million shares at a range of $12 to $14 a share to raise gross proceeds of $61.75 million. This compares with its earlier plan to raise $76 million from sale of 6.3 million shares.
IPO analysts said the company was wise to hold off on its initial offering, enabling it to take advantage of the current pickup in new share offerings coming to market.
Some Internet analysts also said the offering faces a market that is becoming more discerning than in the past, when investors snapped up shares of companies which had minimal operating history and little promise of near-term profits.
"I think they're going to have a little bit of a challenge with this one. It's just fundamentals," said one analyst. "A couple of years ago, when the Internet was just starting, you could have taken your dog named 'Net' public."
Many investors and analysts compare Wired with traditional print media, since some 90 percent of its revenues are still derived from its high-tech monthly, which since 1993 has been promoted as the magazine of the digital revolution.
Early investors in Wired have included high tech guru Nicholas Negroponte, who heads the Massachusetts Institute of Technology's Media Labs, and publisher S.I. Newhouse.
Wired continues to be among the fastest-growing publishing properties, growing in circulation from 90,000 at the end of 1993, its first year of publication, to an estimated 325,000 in August, according to the company's offering documents.
The company also runs HotWired, a hip Web site geared for those who want to keep on the leading edge of digital developments, and the search engine HotBot.
But IPO experts note the business plan for the Internet operations was still in early development and the company continues to post heavy losses, with a net loss for the first six months of 1996 of $34.7 million, including a $20.5 million writeoff, more than double its revenues of $15.63 million.
At an expected price of some 7.3 times estimated 1996 revenues, the valuation would be cheaper than recent Internet content companies like CNET Inc., which has traded at 20 times 1996 revenues, or Yahoo! Inc., which has been trading at more than 40 times estimated 1996 revenues.
But this is pricey compared to more conventional print media valuations, where two times revenues is often the norm, and four to five times for properties exhibiting strong growth in an otherwise maturing sector, analysts said.
"Wired changed journalism, especially high-tech journalism, and made it cool," said Harmon, adding that investors may have difficulty valuing this in financial terms.
"I think Wired expected everybody to just assume it was the emperor emeritus of the digital world and that everything they did turned to gold," he said.
