Sun Microsystems Inc. on Tuesday will unveil the long-awaiting stripped-down network computer it claims will cost companies up to 80 percent less to own and operate than a personal computer connected to a network.
Sun's Java Computing initiative, including the JavaStation network computer that Sun plans to sell for as little as $750, is the company's challenge to the PC market dominance of Microsoft Corp. and Intel Corp.
The formal unveiling at a New York City news conference is the culmination of months of preparation, and the fruition of a strategy that investors consider sufficiently risky to have prompted a sell-off in the company's stock earlier this month.
Microsoft and Intel announced plans Monday to develop a competing product.
Scott McNealy, chairman and chief executive of Sun, recently told analysts he believed Sun's recent strong financial results were related to its focus on network computing.
Sun Microsystems' approach to the Network Computer -- in contrast to those of allies Oracle Corp. and International Business Machines Corp. -- is to target major corporate customers for fixed-function applications.
Early applications will include such tasks as airline and hotel reservations, kiosks, health care systems and stock trading, and Sun expects to highlight a dozen corporate allies, including British Telecommunications Plc, CSX Corp., Federal Express Corp., and FTD Inc.
Sun also is expected to announce support of top systems integrators, including Andersen Consulting and EDS, and nearly 450 independent software developers.
The basic JavaStation itself, which had been code-named "Mr. Coffee," will have the dimensions of an 8.5 by 11 inch piece of paper, weigh four pounds and have no slots, no hard disk, no CD-ROM and no floppy disk drive.
"A fully-configured system, with keyboard mouse and good resolution display will be under $1,000 dollars," said Ed Zander, president of Sun Microsystems Computer Co. He said an under-desk machine and a desktop model will be sold.
Sun estimates the machines may cost as little as $2,500 per year to own and administer, or $7,500 over three years, compared with independent estimates of PC costs of up to $11,900, or $35,700 over three years.
The JavaStation family will begins shipping in late December to developers and large customers, with volume shipments beginning in 1997.
Sun is also shipping the Netra j server line, with prices ranging from a U.S. list of $7,695 to more than $200,000. Servers are computers that link personal computers in a network.
Sun's JavaSoft unit, which is charged with expanding use of the company's Java technology, also will demonstrate HotJava Views, a method of viewing electronic mail, World Wide Web pages and scheduling software.
Executives declined to say how much HotJava Views will cost, but added it will be priced similar to other software packages on the market, with volume discounts for large sales.
Separately in Washington, D.C. on Tuesday, the company's SunSoft unit is due to provide details of its next-generation Java Workshop system.
These include Project Studio, which enables users to create interactive content without writing code, Project Speedway, which speeds up Java applications, and Project ICE-T, which helps connect Java machines to other computer architectures.
