For managers at the trendy specialty juicer Odwalla Inc., the revelation that their apple juice products were associated with a potentially deadly outbreak of E. coli food poisoning has come as a shock.
The company, headquartered in the easy-going coast community of Half Moon Bay, was founded 16 years ago on the premise that fresh, natural fruit juices nourish the spirit.
Company executives were morose as they met reporters for the first time on Thursday in the parking lot of the company's modest building, across a creek from the town center.
"It is very tough, to be honest, to be focused on health and nutrition all of your life and have this incident happen," Greg Steltenpohl said. He founded the business with a childhood friend in Santa Cruz in 1980, using a used juicing machine in a shed behind their house.
Odwalla has grown by more than 40 percent a year, with annual sales in its fiscal year to Aug. 31, 1996, surging 65 percent to $59.2 million. It is now estimated to account for more than 70 percent of the fresh-juice market in the seven Western states it serves, together with Vancouver, British Columbia.
The company prides itself on using cold processing, which it says leaves vegetable and other biological nutrients intact, and on a rapid store distribution system. Its marketing emphasizes freshness and the absence of pasteurization and artificial additives or preservatives.
Even its name, from a song poem by the Art Ensemble of Chicago jazz group, displays a sense of mission. The Odwalla is a leader who guided the "lost people of the sun" out of the "gray haze" -- of "overprocessed foods" in this case.
Steltenpohl and Chief Executive Officer Stephen Williamson said Odwalla had mobilized its 175 trucks and drivers, armed with hand-held computers, to recover recalled bottles from the shelves of more than 4,600 outlets in California, Washington, Oregon, Colorado, New Mexico, Nevada, Texas and Vancouver.
Executives immediately offered to refund the purchase price of any of the company's drinks, even those not among the 16 out of 23 fruit varieties recalled. They also said the company would pay for medical treatment for anyone found to have become ill through drinking an Odwalla product.
Although Williamson said the company had product liability insurance that he believed would cover the incident, the executives declined to answer questions about the financial impact of the recall and any subsequent actions.
Odwalla shares were up $1.13 at $13.25 by Friday afternoon after shedding roughly a third of their value on Thursday.
Jean-Michel Valette, an analyst at Hambrecht &amp; Quist, said publicity surrounding the recall would hurt sales but with insurance and $14 million in cash, "Odwalla has the resources to weather the storm."
Odwalla, which takes the precaution of keeping samples of each batch of juice it produces, is working with the Food and Drug Administration and Washington state authorities to determine how contamination might have occurred and how widespread it was.
But company officials said it was too soon to question their philosophy.
