Stocks of high-tech companies soared Wednesday after a potentially costly ballot proposal was voted down in California, and top executives found themselves relishing their roles as political activists.
A group of top-level entrepreneurs and executives met behind closed doors Wednesday to work on a broader political alliance after the ballot measure, which would have made it easier for shareholders to file lawsuits, was defeated by a 3-1 margin.
"A year ago, this (Silicon) valley politically was naive, not involved, not organized and not effective," said John Doerr, the partner at venture capital firm Kleiner Perkins Caufield &amp; Byers who led opposition to the ballot measure, known as Proposition 211.
The measure was promoted by a group of securities lawyers including San Diego attorney William Lerach, whose lawsuits brought on behalf of shareholders after a company's stock plunges irritate corporate executives.
But California's high-tech firms jumped into action, raising an estimated $38 million and mobilizing 5 million employees, shareholders and customers in a major grass-roots campaign in the months before election day.
That amount, coupled with $13 million spent by proponents of 211, rivaled the money spent by labor groups nationwide as they sought to put friendly legislators, mostly Democrats, in Congress.
It was also more than was needed to start up Sun Microsystems Inc., Cisco Systems Inc., and Intel Corp. combined.
Final returns show the measure lost by a 3-1 margin, which brought relief to Wall Street investors who were nervous that passage would bring a raft of shareholder lawsuits to California.
Shares of high-tech companies surged on the news, with Intel soaring $4.75 to an all-time high of $118.75 on Nasdaq. After the market closed, the company released bullish news on its fourth quarter business trends.
Texas Instruments jumped $4.25 to $53 on the New York Stock Exchange and Microsoft added $3 to $144.50 on Nasdaq.
"We defeated the jackals of Proposition 211, the carrion feeders who take away our profits," James Cramer, principal of money management firm Cramer Partners in New York, said of the stock rally.
Silicon Valley executives, who had warned of wide-scale resignations of officers and directors in California if the measure had passed, applauded its defeat and said they would support continued political activism.
John Young, acting chairman of Novell Inc., said the campaign was unprecedented among high tech firms, and could be the start of a multi-year corporate commitment.
Cisco Systems Chief Executive John Chambers said his company and others had been so focused on fast-changing high-tech markets that they had neglected politics.
"We were concerned with just doing our business and we were letting other people fight our fights for us, which is wrong," he said.
While political activism could be a distraction, it was also important to address political issues before they got out of control, he said.
"It's 'pay me now or pay me later,'" he said in an interview, predicting continued political engagement.
Doerr told chief executives, corporate lawyers and venture capitalists gathered at a celebration late on Tuesday that he expected executives now to focus on issues of fostering growth, education, legal reform and economic opportunity.
He said the anti-211 effort demonstrated Silicon Valley to be "a state of mind, not a place," which due to the spread of high-tech businesses, in effect, extends from Massachusetts to California and from Florida to Washington state.
Executives here are already talking about the prospect of another battle with plaintiff's lawyers, who are rumored to be mulling new ballot initiatives in other states, or the possibility of targeting high tech firms more narrowly.
