Hewlett-Packard Co. is expected to extend its role as a leading supplier of computer printers next week by unveiling the first of a family of devices designed to allow people to bypass the copy machine.
Industry sources familiar with details of the new models said they can be used instead of a copier to make multiple printouts of a document, posing a threaten to copy machine makers such as Xerox Corp. and Canon Inc.
"This is the first direct attack at the copier market," said one of the sources, who declined to be identified. "This is the announcement that is going to make Xerox begin to sweat."
Another of the sources said the initial adaption of the technology will likely be targeted for relatively modest printing jobs, three or four copies of a document, for example, rather than for dozens of hundred-page documents.
A spokesman for Hewlett-Packard was not immediately available for comment on the new product, which one of the sources said could be unveiled as early as Monday.
The new "Mopier" machine, as Hewlett-Packard has dubbed it internally, is expected to be based on the LaserJet 5Si family and to come with a stapler, a multiple-slot stacker and secure, password-protected "mailboxes" into which printouts of confidential documents can be placed.
In a related announcement Wednesday, Hewlett-Packard said it planned to triple production of toner cartridges used in its LaserJet 5Si family of network printers "to alleviate a temporary shortage of the cartridges in the United States."
Analysts said the move may have been partly motivated by the company's new multiple copy initiative, as cartridges for printers are an extremely profitable area of HP's printer strategy, and will be needed to supply the new machines.
In fact, Hewlett-Packard said Wednesday its own research shows that pages formerly duplicated on copiers are increasingly being printed on HP printers already, resulting in a greater demand for the cartridges.
The mopier can be expected to have similar performance to the LaserJet 5Si printers, which can print 24 pages a minute and cycle up to 100,000 pages a month, the sources said.
"With these new methods of business printing, HP estimates that customers are printing about 24 percent more pages a month than with previous printers in the same class," said Doug Johnson, marketing manager of HP's LaserJet Supplies Operation, in a statement.
Computer Reseller News in September reported that the new HP "mopier" would be priced somewhere above $5,000.
