Some of the Internet startups due to make their debut at next week's Comdex computer industry show have little more to their name than a few ambitious entrepreneurs, business cards and a Web site.
But the 60 or so companies scheduled to make presentations to prospective investors at the first Comdex Venture Outlook represent the cutting edge of high-technology investment in the mushrooming Internet market.
"There are dozens, maybe a few hundred, new companies that are being created every day that have to do with the Internet," said Richard Shaffer, principal of New York-based Technologic Partners, who assembled the executives.
"It's the biggest thing to hit computing in at least 20 years," he said, which is why Comdex organisers Softbank Corp. engaged Shaffer's group to bring young private companies at the centre of Web innovation to the largest U.S. trade show.
Included in the presentations will be the heads of some of the hottest Internet companies, including Kim Polese, the chief executive of Palo Alto-based Marimba Inc., who by some accounts is credited with naming Sun Microsystems Inc.'s hot new Java computer programming platform.
Formed in February by four members of Sun's original Java team, Marimba a month ago unveiled its Castanet package of software development tools for sending out applications and content over the Internet.
Other speakers include NetAngels Chief Executive Mark Goldstein, whose company is backed by such high-profile investors as high-tech guru Esther Dyson and former Time Warner Inc. chief executive Nicholas Nicholas.
Also speaking is David Arnold, head of InterMind, a Seattle-area startup backed by mobile phone pioneer Craig McCaw, which recently launched its InterMind Communicator linking people anonymously to Web sites of their choice.
Shaffer said the list includes access, content and tools companies which are primarily looking at ways to apply Internet technologies to the internal corporate networks known as intranets.
Some companies have no more than five or 10 people at the moment, and most have received some venture capital. Many, though, are at such an early stage of financing that the $50,000 fee for a booth at Comdex would have been too costly.
Although there was an abrupt slowdown in Internet initial public offerings over the summer, analysts and investors expect the market to heat up again.
The pace of venture investment may not continue at its red-hot rate of the second quarter, when Price Waterhouse LLP reported 556 firms received $2.8 billion in venture capital, up 32 percent from a year earlier. But new investment appears poised to top the 1995 record of $7.5 billion.
"Judging by preliminary numbers, it is virtually assured that 1996 is going to be a record year," said Kirk Walden, who is compiling the firm's third-quarter venture capital survey.
Walden said venture capital funds invested $5.2 billion in the first nine months of 1995.
"The technology category continues to be what's driving overall investment," he added.
Technologic Partners' Shaffer admits it remains a difficult task for investors to sort out which companies will be a success in markets that may take years to develop despite the intense interest and hype surrounding the Internet.
Furthermore, many startup companies have been forced to reinvent themselves with frequently updated business plans as the fast-paced Internet market evolves.
"It's initially going to be a very big market for a lot of players, and it will be quite some time before we know what the best business models are," Shaffer said. "Developing the Internet and electronic commerce ... is going to be a decades-long process. We're just at the beginning."
