Even before the personal computer era's foremost figures donned togas and circus suits for the traditional extravaganzas of the industry's annual gala summit, industry titans were jockeying for the limelight.
Although the 25th anniversary of the microprocessor is among the high points of this year's show, the next 25 years of the industry are likely to prove even more fast-paced, and bitterly competitive, according to senior executives.
The week promises a flurry of new products -- and whole new categories of products ranging from hand-held Windows PCs to new species of the controversial new Network Computer to fast new computer modems and the launch of DVD, digital video disk.
The latter technology holds many times the amount of data available on the conventional CD-ROM devices which now come as standard on many desktops, and is likely to appear next year on machines ranging from laptops to home theatre televisions.
Not only will people be able to play full-length movies on their laptop devices, but the new medium is expected to unleash a whole new genre of computer games using sophisticated three dimensional animation and hot new 3-D computer chips.
Although the annual event is prone to hyperbole -- and it is expected to draw nearly a quarter of a million executives, analysts, customers and media people this year -- some high- profile executives believe the time has finally arrived for the long-heralded convergence of television, computers and telecommunications into one vast, interconnected business.
"I think this convergence is starting to redefine itself as collision," Carl Wankowski, president and chief operating officer of Sony Electronics Inc., the U.S. operating unit of Sony Corp. told Reuters on the eve of the show.
Sony expects to showcase a variety of products, including DVD technologies and its WebTV set-top box, which turns a television into a simplified Internet browsing device.
The opening keynote of the week-long event will be Intel Corp. Chief Executive Andy Grove, who under the theme "A Revolution in Progress," will trace the history of the microprocessor which turned Intel from a fledgling chip company into the world's largest semiconductor company.
Grove will also provide live demonstrations of how personal computers can already be used for sophisticated applications today for complex graphics displays. He will outline goals and challenges facing the PC industry over the next 15 years, with projections for the next quarter century.
On Tuesday, Microsoft Chairman and Chief Executive Bill Gates promises to issue a challenge to the industry in a keynote speech whose title harkens back to Gates' "Information at Your Fingertips" address here six years ago.
Gates, who recently republished his book, "The Road Ahead," in paperback, has said the industry is too optimistic about what it can produce within a short, two-year time frame, but far too pessimistic about what can be achieved in a decade.
Netscape Communications Corp. Chief Executive Officer Jim Barkesdale on Wednesday will make the third of a trio of keynotes that day, providing insight on how the pioneer of Web browsers sees competition moving to internal corporate networks based on Internet technology, known as intranets.
But the celebrations begin already on Sunday night, as International Business Machines Corp.'s Lotus Development Corp. officially launches its SmartSuite 97 for Windows 95 and Windows NT at a lavish gathering to be followed by IBM's famous Toga Party.
Microsoft Corp. is due to unveil the Handheld PC (HPC) devices running its Windows CE consumer electronics version of its system at a Treasure Island Hotel bash complete with a Cirque du Soleil performance.
A handful of major computer companies, including Compaq Computer Corp., NEC Corp. and Hitachi Ltd., are due to unveil mobile Windows CE-based handheld devices.
On Monday, Microsoft is due to show off the master version of its lastest productivity suite Office 97, enabling a direct comparison between its offering and Smartsuite 97.
Apple Computer Inc., still seeking to recover from huge losses over the last year, is expected to counter the Windows CE launch with more industry-focused adaptations of its three-year-old Newton handheld technology.
The company may also seize the opportunity to provide more details of its future technology plans, as rumours continue to swirl over discussions it has had with startup Be Inc., which has been working on a speedy new operating system.
