Microsoft Corp. Chairman Bill Gates on Tuesday swept aside doubts about the future of the personal computer, saying this type of computer system was going to be in the forefront for many years to come.
The Microsoft co-founder used his keynote address at the annual Comdex industry trade show in Las Vegas to illustrate how the PC had survived criticisms over its shortcomings and will continue to be used in a wide range of devices, from home computers to cellular phones.
Microsoft earlier this week unveiled the first line of handheld PC devices running on its new Windows CE operating system. Gates said Microsoft is working on advances that in 1997 should give its new high-end Windows NT programme the same sort of scalability -- the ability to add vast numbers of computing configurations -- as Windows CE.
These technologies, designed for high-end computers, are able to store terabytes, or 1 trillion bytes, of data to eventually process billions of transactions a day.
Gates said only around 15 companies now store terabytes of data and the billion-transaction level is more than phone companies, credit card firms or airlines currently process on such systems.
But, with transactions and communications using World Wide Web technology, the tetrabyte level is not far off, he said.
Touting the virtues of the PC, Gates said, "The strength of the PC is what you take for granted," he said. In recent years, for example, Microsoft and the industry have introduced features that allow PC users to easily plug in new devices and multimedia features such as video and audio.
The personal computer industry has grown dramatically, he said, with more than 200 million PC users worldwide. Although sales volume is approaching 70 million units a year, it will be hard to keep unit sales growth worldwide above the 10 percent figure in future years, Gates said.
"It's hard to grow at greater than 10 percent. There will probably be some years where you won't see any growth at all," he said, adding that, nonetheless, "people are doing more and more with the PC."
Gates outlined an array of pending technologies, including three-dimensional graphics, and sophisticated methods of transmitting information to computers such as speech recognition and visual clues such as gestures or expressions.
At some point, he said, recipients of intelligent "junk mail" may actually be able to transmit their facial expressions upon reading it back to the organisation that sent the mail.
In future operating systems, Gates predicted that "90 percent of the code will relate to these new input systems."
Gates, using videos to illustrate his point, poked fun at the Silicon Valley adversaries who are increasingly touting a new, low-price network computer, or NC, as the solution to escalating computing costs.
One of the videos depicted a variety of individuals being interviewed in New York City streets on their thoughts on a series of complex computer terms in a mock survey illustrating how little the public knows about computer technology.
One features Scott McNealy, the chief executive of Sun Microsystems Inc., who has been thumbing his nose at Microsoft and touting his Java technology and NCs as a means to eliminate Microsoft's lock on the industry.
Without being aware of what may have been asked, McNealy stares into the camera, and says, "I'm not sure. I'm not a computer scientist. I majored in golf."
In a briefing following the speech, Gates and other Microsoft executives repeated that Microsoft was spending over $2 billion on research and development in fiscal 1997, and has budgeted $600 million in product support and $400 million toward partnerships.
Microsoft on Monday introduced the new Office 97 applications, which include word processing and spreadsheets, and said Tuesday that 1 million desktops users have signed up to receive it.
Office 97 software will cost around $199 for the standard edition and $299 for the professional product, similar to the prices of Microsoft's Office 95 versions.
