Softbank Chief Executive Officer Masahoshi Son said the company will focus over the next year or two on growing its businesses organically and on preparing for the launch of JSkyB.  
"For the next couple of years -- a year or two -- we will focus more on growing what we have already acquired and also prepare for JSkyB launch. That's my focus," he told Reuters in an interview at the Comdex industry trade show here.
Son also said the company has completed commitments to 51 Internet startup companies from its venture capital fund which totalled $350 million, including some $170 million from investment partners and the remainder from Softbank itself.
Softbank in the summer launched a 50-50 joint venture with Rupert Murdoch's News Corp in a digital satellite system known as Japan Sky Broadcasting, or JSkyB. The two in June acquired 21.4 percent of Asahi National Broadcasting of Japan.  
Through a string of bold investments, Softbank has become the world's largest computer-related magazine and book publisher and the largest producer of high tech exhibitions and trade shows. It is also Japan's largest computer software, peripherals and systems distributor.
Son's comments mark at least a temporary halt to a buying spree which culminated in the purchase in September of an 80 percent stake in Kingston Technology Corp, a leading supplier of memory modules, for cash and stock worth some $1.5 billion.
Within the past year, Softbank closed on the $2.1 billion acquisition of Ziff-Davis Publishing, and last year it spent some $800 million for the Interface Group, whose trade show portfolio includes Comdex, the largest U.S. trade show.
"After the launch of JSkyB, and after we have good enough management infrastructure for the synergy that we create in the U.S., then we would do a lot more things," he said of the prospects for further major acquisitions.
On the venture funding front, Son said the 51 venture investments his company has led over the past nine months put it at the top ranks of recent Internet venture investment.  
"We became very quickly an important player in the venture capital market," he told Reuters, adding that Softbank was able to rely on assistance from its various operating firms.
"They helped in identifying the startup companies on the Internet, and identifying which one is the good one and the winning horses," he said.
Furthermore he said startup companies, such as the branded Internet media company Yahoo! Inc, have been able to benefit operationally from Softbank as well as financially.
Softbank took a 35 percent stake in Yahoo! and established Yahoo! Japan, in which Softbank retained a 65 percent stake. This is just one of a series of rapid moves by Yahoo! which has extended its brand from its original role as a search engine to find information on the Internet.
"Yahoo Japan was established in February this year and started service April 1," Son said. "Only two months, from scratch, and it has been profitable from the first month of operations and every month it is profitable."
In the Internet area, where many startups produce steady streams of red ink as they attempt to grow their business as rapidly as possible, Son said he considers the joint venture's profits to be somewhat of a record-breaking achievement.  
Yahoo Inc went public on the Nasdaq market in April.
A little more than a dozen of the investments by the $350 million venture fund have yet to be completed, he said, and Softbank is likely to form an additional investment fund as early as next year. Son, however, declined to elaborate.
Internet service companies, such as Yahoo!, and Internet content companies are likely to be the smallest but fastest growing opportunities for investment, he added.
Softbank recently reported first half pre-tax profit for the six months to the end of September rose 77 percent to $78.1 million as revenue grew 46.1 percent to $804.3 million, against a pre-tax profit of $43.9 million on $550.4 million of revenues for the year-earlier period.
Son spoke after he and other senior Softbank executives made a presentation to media and industry analysts at a briefing at the annual Comdex show.
-- sam.perry@reuters.com, Palo Alto Bureau +1415 846 5400
