Seasoned computer industry executive John Young on Friday begins the search for a strong manager to take the helm of Novell Inc who can drive the company back to growth at the speed of the Internet.
Young, 64, was selected by Novell's board of directors on Tuesday to recruit fresh leadership for the struggling maker of computer network software after the board decided it should set a different course than that taken by Robert Frankenberg, its well-liked chairman and CEO of two years.  
"The board has asked me to be chairman, and to work with the management team and recruit a new CEO," said Young, who had himself served as chief executive of Palo Alto-based Hewlett- Packard Co for 15 years through 1992.
No quick fixes are expected, and Young made clear in an interview with Reuters at Novell's offices here late Thursday that he has no intention of serving in the role of chairman once he has completed the search for a chief executive.
"My experience with an executive search of this type is that four to six months is (a realistic time frame) when everything goes right, longer when it doesn't," he said.  
"That's as close to a time frame as I can give you and I do not expect to be involved other than as a director at the end of that period."
Nevertheless, the company already has an ambitious plan to revamp its corporate image, with a $20 million worldwide brand and product advertising campaign due to start next week, and to unveil a string of updated products.
Young and other top Novell executives believe the company now needs a hard-driving top executive who can operate on "Internet time" -- pushing the company to develop products more swiftly and better pinpoint customers' needs.  
Although the company aims to build the near-mania zeal around Internet technologies into its own business plans, it is looking more for a "street savvy" executive who can speed the pace of business than a self-annoited Web hound, he said.
In fact, he said, while the executive must be able to act extremely quickly and turn technologies into products, he said he was "not fond of the idea of regularly turning around product after product after product" with the rapidity that Microsoft Corp and Netscape Communications Corp are launching new browsers, every few months.  
Ironically, Young is charged with replacing the man who had come to him 18 months ago, based on their two decades as business associates at Hewlett-Packard, and recruited him to joint Novell's board of directors.
"He asked me to join the board," Young said. "He thought I would add some management expertise and perspective to the directors. So, yes, he recruited me."
Young and other executives said the departure was agreed on amicable terms, and had been subject of board-level discussion prior to Tuesday, so it had not been a hasty act.  
"These discussions had been under way. They were mutually agreed," one board member said. Young said the board had decided it needed to take "a different way."
"It was quite amicable," he added. "This wasn't some screaming match ... Bob is an enormously talented guy."
In fact, Frankenberg was credited with others in the industry for having taken difficult decisions in disposing of many assets his predecessor, patriarch Ray Noorda, had acquired in a virtually singular fixation that he was going to use Novell as a vehicle to outdo Microsoft chief Bill Gates.  
Noorda had bought a string of operating systems and PC applications businesses, and was rumored in the industry to have funded additional secret development projects, as part of what was broadly viewed as an anti-Microsoft agenda.
Assets were sold at fire sale prices. For example, WordPerfect Corp., purchased in 1994 for $1.4 billion in stock, was sold to Corel Corp  .TO early this year for stock worth about $130 million.  
As one example of new Internet prospects, Novell executive vice president Steve Markman said the company may work with Corel on technologies related to Corel's efforts to break its massive suite of products, many obtained from Novell, to create smaller Java language applications, or "applets".
"It's a tremendous opportunity to move the installed base to the Intranet space," he said, noting that Novell still enjoys a 63 percent share of the worldwide Network market, despite recent inroads by fiercely competitive Microsoft.
Novell also will begin shipping three major product upgrades -- IntraNetWare, which includes the next version of its flagship NetWare product, Managewise 2.1 network management software, and its Groupwise 5 groupware applications -- within about a month.
Nevertheless, analysts said a real test for Novell would be whether it will be able to motivate its own employees, after years of transitions, and generate the excitement in the marketplace over its products which many rivals have created.
