Netcom On-Line Communication Services Inc has decided to shift its focus to higher-value business services in search of profits, leaving the consumer sector to others.
"We've been growing at dizzying rates, what we're saying is we're going to focus more on quality here -- quality of earnings, quality of service to subscribers," Netcom Chairman and Chief Executive David Garrison said in an interview.
Despite the San Jose, Calif. company's blistering pace -- it has grown some sixfold in three years -- the sharper focus will allow it to target annualized growth in the 40-50 perent range and seek to attract customers to higher-value services.
Netcom executives said they will release further details of their new pricing plans in February, but levels will be above its current $19.95 access fee, which it is scrapping.
"We are discontinuing a line we don't think is a good deal for our customer or a good deal for our shareholders and we will replace it with other products we will announce in February. They will be at higher price points," Garrison said.  
The new services may be aimed at providing higher quality access, which Garrison noted was a source of customer concern throughout the industry, and may also include offerings which bundle software tools or online Web-hosting services.
Most consumer-oriented Internet access providers offer unlimited access to the global network for $19.95 a month -- a price that analysts say leaves little room to generate profits -- or to help offer differentiated products.
"There's so much attention around a service (at $19.95) that's getting more and more marginalized," Garrison said, adding he will leave Microsoft Corp America Online Inc and AT&amp;T Corp to wage battle over consumers.
"Seventy-five percent of our business is from people who say I want to use this as a productivity tool to help my business learn more, be faster, be more competitive," he said. "I'm going to focus on that segment instead of the consumer."
Netcom also said it expects to gain 20,000 to 30,000 new paying customers in the fourth quarter, bringing its total to about 580,000, a slower pace of growth than in the past.  
Netcom On-Line Communication Services Inc earlier said it expects to report an unspecified profit in its current, fourth quarter domestic earnings before deducting interest expense, taxes and depreciation (EBITDA).
The figure tops what Wall Street analysts had projected. Netcom Chief Financial Officer Thomas Weatherford said the year-ago fourth quarter results for the company as a whole, including overseas operations, was an EBITDA loss of $2.4 million, the majority of which was domestic.
Netcom has focussed on bringing its domestic business to profitability, while timing and extent of overseas investments make profitability of those regions hard to predict.
Wall Street consensus fourth quarter estimates had been for EBITDA for the whole company of negative $6.4 million, or an EBITDA loss of 55 cents a share, the company said.
"We have been told by analysts that they would expect that we would beat that, based on today's announcement," Garrison said. Analysts had previously expected EBITDA to turn positive in the first or second quarter of 1997.
According to First Call, analysts' mean estimate for per share final results for the fourth quarter was $1.18 prior to Wednesdays announcement, which came after the market close.  
Netcom had said after reporting third quarter results two months ago that it saw "a great opportunity" to sell to its customer base by enticing them by higher levels of service.
