A senior executive of Netscape Communications Corp said the company sees no sign of any reduction in the dramatic growth in the market for Internet and intranet, and expects to hold onto a good share of the market.
Mike Homer, vice president of marketing, also said in an interview the company currently has around 50 million users of its Netscape Navigator software for browsing the Internet, comprising roughly 75 percent of the total browser market.
Critical approval for its new Communicator software now being publicly previewed has topped expectations, he added.  
"We're holding market share. The market's growing very dramatically, we see no signs of that abating," Homer said in a telephone interview. "We have a great new product coming, so it gives us every reason to believe that we're going to continue to do really well."
Homer declined to comment on the company's expected results for the fourth quarter, ending December 31, or on the current quarter, citing the quiet period ahead of the earnings report that is expected to be released on January 28.
Shares of Netscape tumbled 10-7/8 earlier to close at 47-7/8 following an analyst's downgrade of the stock.  
The analyst, Deutsche Morgan Grenfell's William Gurley, said in a research report he trimmed his rating to accumulate from a buy due partly to the stock's proximity to his target of $60 and partly to concern over its major product transition, and its shift to a new pricing model and a longer sales cycle.
Homer declined to talk about revenue expectations, but said that of the reviews to date for the Communicator product first shown on December 23, "95 percent are incredibly positive."  
"It's a better reception than any product we've ever done so far. It's going to be a smash hit product," he predicted.
Homer also projected the electronic mail component of the product will overtake rival e-mail products this year.
He said around 90 percent of Netscape's enterprise customers are on a yearly subscription basis.
"There's really no delaying (of revenue) based on these product cycles," he said. "It may be the case that a new product will bring in new users because customers get excited about it, so there's definitely upside."  
The Communicator is expected to undergo substantial preview testing, before being finalized in the second quarter.
"The most important indicator of our success is our new product acceptance, and Communicator has exceeded all of our best expectations, so I think that's all a good picture for the next couple of quarters," he added.
Homer said he expects SweetSpot server products to continue growing rapidly and repeated he sees no price pressure on the browser product despite Microsoft Corp's free distribution of its Internet Explorer browser software.
Goldman Sachs analyst Michael Parekh said the consensus revenue estimate for the fourth 1996 quarter is around $115 million, with his own estimate slightly below that at $114.5 million, rising slightly to $115.8 million in the March quarter.
"The fundamentals continue to be intact," he said.
Gurley warned he did not see the upside surprise in the December quarter that Netscape has shown in recent quarters.
((-- Palo Alto Bureau +1 415 846 5400))
