KLA Instruments Corp. and Tencor Instruments said Tuesday they will merge in a stock deal that would create a semiconductor capital equipment powerhouse with combined revenue exceeding $1 billion.
Analysts said the deal creates a powerhouse in the critical market for semiconductor capital equipment that can be used to closely monitor production and improve yields. This capability has become ever more important as the cost of computer chip-making plants soars into billions of dollars.
"This company in their particular segment of the equipment market is just invincible," said Gus Richard, Hambrecht and Quist semiconductor capital equipment analyst. "KLA's been the dominant player and Tencor's been a very, very strong second."
The new company will be able to provide essentially one-stop shopping for chip process and diagnostics equipment.
Richard said the combined product offerings will enable semiconductor manufacturers to augment incremental capacity by identifying and eliminating scrap earlier in the process.
At current prices, with a total of 85.6 million shares outstanding after the stock swap transaction, the deal is worth roughly $3.4 billion, or nearly 3.5 times revenues, which analysts said was a reasonable valuation.
The companies said the deal, subject to regulatory and shareholder approval, will be accounted for as a pooling of interests and set up to qualify as a tax-free reorganization.
Under terms of the merger agreement, the companies said shares and options for KLA Instruments common stock will be exchanged for outstanding shares and options of Tencor on the basis of one KLA share for each Tencor share.
The combined company, which aims to provide the most comprehensive measurement and analysis systems for yield management available to the semiconductor industry, will employ more than 3,900 people worldwide.
The companies said the deal was expected to close during the quarter ending June 30, 1997.
The new company, to be called KLA-Tencor,  aims to combine complementary product lines to create a full-line supplier of yield management products and services. KLA is based in San Jose and Tencor in nearby Milpitas, Calif.
The merger comes as semiconductor equipment stocks have been rebounding from a cyclical downturn in mid-1996, when tumbling prices for memory chips due to sharply increased capacity and insufficient demand chilled the sector.
KLA's stock hit a 52-week intraday high of $41.625 before closing at $40.875, up 87.5 cents on the day. Tencor also hit a year intraday high of $31.25 before before closing at $30.50, up 43.75 cents.
The merger was announced after the close of trading in the Nasdaq market.
After hours, shares of Tencor were reported soaring as high as $37, while KLA fell as low as $39 on the news.
"It's one of the most rapidly-growing segments of the equipment market," Richard said. "These two players are the dominant players in the market and what's amazing is their product offerings are almost completely complementary."
Analysts said executives of the companies told them in a conference call that their lawyers anticipate no regulatory obstacles, although the analysts said in some areas the companies control some 60 percent to 70 percent of certain markets.
KLA Chairman Kenneth Levy will become chairman of KLA-Tencor, while Tencor Instruments Chairman, President and Chief Executive Jon Tompkins will be Chief Executive of the new combination, the companies said.
