Netscape Communications Corp. stock was battered for the second time in less than a week on Tuesday following cautionary comments by a Wall Street analyst regarding the Internet software company.
Merrill Lynch analyst Bruce Smith said in a research note that Netscape had scrambled to make its fourth-quarter goals in a way that could hurt its current first quarter and the outlook for all of 1997.
Netscape stock tumbled more than 10 percent, dropping $4.50 to $42.25 on the Nasdaq market on volume of more than 6.5 million shares. The stock was one of the most actively traded on the exchange.
The stock of the Mountain View, Calif.-based company has lost more than a quarter of its value since the end of 1996, including a drop of around 19 percent after another analysts' warning last Wednesday.
Smith said he remained neutral on the stock but cited industry sources as saying Netscape had scrambled to meet its fourth-quarter numbers at the end of 1996, which he said did not bode well for its current quarter and all of 1997.
"They closed a significant amount of business on Dec. 31 just to make the quarter, which they've never had to do before," he said. In his research note, Smith wrote, "We have heard of two major deals that were closed on Dec. 31, one of which apparently closed late in the evening."
But a spokeswoman for Netscape rebutted this.
Speaking after the market closed, she said the company did complete some of its deals toward the end of the quarter, but she denied it was pushing down to the wire to lock up deals that would make a major impact on its financial results.
"We did no deals that were of materially significance on Dec. 31," she said.
"Sure, we did deals towards the end of the quarter, like everyone does," the spokeswoman added.
Last Wednesday, the stock tumbled after Deutsche Morgan Grenfell analyst William Gurley cut his rating on the stock to "accumulate" from "buy" and cited risks from its transition to a new business plan and new pricing.
Several other analysts, including Goldman Sachs's Michael Parekh and Morgan Stanley &amp; Co.'s Mary Meeker, have put "buy" or "strong buy" ratings on the stock, recognising near-term risks but remaining upbeat on the stock in the longer term.
