Profits were up at McDonnell Douglas Corp in 1996, but the results and the 1997 outlook it reported Thursday were just the sort it likely anticipated months ago in deciding to merge with Boeing Co.
"McDonnell Douglas entered into this deal because they knew this sort of thing was on the horizon in 1997," said Ken Herbert, aerospace research director at the consulting firm of Frost and Sullivan.
Revenues slipped to $13.83 billion in 1996 from $14.33 billion in 1995, said the St. Louis-based aerospace firm.  
Profits for the year were $788 million, up from $707 million in 1995. Fourth-quarter profits were up, as well, to $207 million from $187 million a year ago before a one-time charge. But the fourth-quarter earnings per share figure of $0.98 came in below Wall Street's expectations, which ranged from $0.99 to $1.06, according to First Call.
Military aircraft margins were below expectations, said A.G. Edwards aerospace analyst Kent Newcomb.
In a conference call, McDonnell chief financial officer James Powell said military aircraft margins were about 11.7 percent in the fourth quarter, below the third quarter level.  
"It was largely down as a result of an award fee on the C-17 program that was in the third quarter. We didn't have an award period in the fourth quarter on the C-17 program. We also had some impact from the strike in St. Louis coming through in the fourth quarter," Powell said.
Margins in the missiles business were also down, Powell said. "That is largely accounted for by R&amp;D costs on the Delta III (launch vehicle) program," which are peaking, he said.
This year is expected to be a good one, Powell said. "We look for 1997 to be another record year in terms of earnings. We expect cash flow to be strong, as well," he said.  
The company expects 1997 revenues to be boosted by expanded production of C-17 cargo planes and F-15 fighter jets, both of which will help boost 1997 profit margins in the military business, he said.
But he also said 1997 deliveries of commercial aircraft are expected to be flat. "Basically, they're about the same as those for 1995 and 1996," he said.
Analysts said the 1996 results were only mildly disappointing. But, added A.G. Edwards aerospace analyst Kent Newcomb, "I'm not sure it matters anymore."
What does matter is the long-term outlook for McDonnell, which would be shaky without Boeing, analysts said.
Virtually pushed out of the fighter aircraft business and increasingly a bit player in commerical airliners, McDonnell had little future as a stand-alone concern, which its managers had in mind when deciding to proceed with Boeing, said S&amp;P Equity Group analyst Joseph Harari.
"More than just whatever poor result they may have had for this quarter, they were looking even further out into the future," Harari said.
On the proposed $15-billion Boeing merger, Palmer said McDonnell is working on getting its U.S. Federal Trade Commission and other regulatory filings in order. "We're intending to file very shortly," he said.
Regarding the explosion last week of a Delta II rocket made by the company, he said, "At this point in time, it's really premature to comment. We don't have a whole lot of information. We're unable to ... even venture a guess as to what impact it may have."
((--Chicago Newsdesk 312-408-8787))
