A halt in shipments of generic blood glucose test strips distributed by Chronimed Inc could reduce the company's fiscal third-quarter earnings by as much as $0.06 per share if they are not resumed during the quarter, said chief financial officer Norman Cocke.
"If we ship none of (the strips) in the quarter, we're forecasting it could be up to $0.06 per share adverse impact," Cocke said in an interview with Reuters. "If the thing is resolved very soon, and it could be, then there is no impact."
Shares in Chronimed were off 2-7/8 to 12-1/8.  
The consensus of analysts' estimates for Chronimed earnings for the quarter ending in late March is $0.14 per share, he said. The company earned $0.11 per share in the three-month period ended March 29, 1996.
Quik Check strips are manufactured by privately held Diagnostic Solutions Inc, of Irvine, Calif., and designed for use with the popular OneTouch blood glucose monitor for diabetics manufactured by Johnson &amp; Johnson.
The strips are the only generic option to J&amp;J's branded OneTouch strips. Minneapolis-based Chronimed is the exclusive distributor of Quick Check strips.  
Shipments of the strips were voluntarily halted by Diagnostic and Chronimed in December after the U.S. Food and Drug Administration raised questions about the consistency of the blood test results they render, Cocke said.
"Diagnostic Solutions is working with (the FDA) actively to reach resolution, but we have gotten no signal, if you will, as to when that would occur," Cocke said.
Chronimed is uncertain as to what led the FDA to question and test the Quik Check strips, but added the agency routinely monitors the product quality in blood glucose test markets.  
"We are investigating this company," said an FDA spokeswoman, regarding Diagnostic Solutions. She declined further comment.
In fiscal 1996, Chronimed realized slightly less than 10 percent of its revenues on Quik Check strip sales, Cocke said.
In early 1995, Quik Check strip production was put on hold for six months by Diagnostic as the company worked on improving its manufacturing efficiency and quality. Output resumed in August 1995. "Their volume of shipment and their general consistency of quality has been very good and quite to our satisfaction since then," Cocke said.  
Volpe Welty industry analyst Ann Logue said the Quik Check business is very profitable when it is active. But she questioned why Chronimed, which has several other growing lines of business, chooses to stay with it. "There's evidence that this supplier is somewhat unreliable," she said.
Chronimed is committed to the product, Cocke said. "We've had our difficulties with it, but we think we can work through them," he said, adding that Chronimed's independent testing of the strips shows they comply with industry standards.
The generic Quik Check sells for about 20 percent less than J&amp;J's branded strip in the drugstore, Cocke said.
Diabetics must check their blood glucose levels several times daily. Most do so by pricking a finger and dabbing the drop of blood onto a paper strip that is then inserted into a machine that tests it for glucose level.
Diagnostic Solutions could not be reached for comment.
((--Chicago Newsdesk 312-408-8787))
