St. Jude Medical Inc said Thursday it will do more analysis of its proposed purchase of Ventritex Inc because of the deaths of three recipients of heartbeat-regulating devices made by Ventritex.
"With a product quality issue like this, obviously it causes additional analysis to be done and we're involved in doing that," St. Jude spokesman Peter Gove told Reuters.
"Based on what we know today, we are moving forward" with the acquisition," Gove said. "But we are going to do, as you might expect, additional due diligence."  
At the same time, Ventritex general counsel Mark Meltzer confirmed that a third patient implanted with a Ventritex implantable defibrillator died on January 22.
The company was notified a day or two later and it promptly advised the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, he said. The identity of the patient is not being disclosed.
"I can say that it's not a different kind of problem. It is the problem which is being addressed by reprogramming. Unfortunately this death occured before the patient could be reprogrammed," Meltzer said.  
An FDA spokeswoman said the agency is investigating.
On January 16, Ventritex said it had been authorized by the FDA to begin reprogramming 5,605 implantable defibrillators implanted in living patients. The company said then that component failures in the devices were believed to be associated with the deaths of two patients.
Shares in Ventritex fell 1-1/4 to 18-1/8 in heavy trading Thursday on speculation about the death and its possible impact on the proposed $505-million St. Jude-Ventritex deal.
"The market is speculating that St. Jude might attempt to reprice the transaction," said Piper Jaffray medical technology analyst Arch Smith.
St. Jude was advised by Ventritex of the third death, Gove said. "We've kept in very close contact with them through this whole thing," he said.
Meltzer said substantial progress has been made in Ventritex's efforts to find the patients who carry the 5,605 implantable defibrillators that need to be reprogrammed. He said he was unaware of any change in the St. Jude deal.
"We are basically where we were when the first two indicents were exposed," Gove said.
"We are working very closely with Ventritex. We think they're handling this as responsibly as they can ... We certainly wouldn't rule out continued discussion with them. We'll have an opportunity to sit down with them once they've determined the extent of the situation," Gove said.
((--Chicago Newsdesk 312-408-8787))
