Market confidence that St. Jude Medical Inc will proceed with its proposed acquisition of Ventritex Inc supported both stocks Friday, although analysts debated whether the deal might be repriced.
Shares in Ventritex were up 1/4 to 18-3/8, even though the company confirmed Thursday that a third patient implanted with one of its heartbeat-regulating devices died January 22.
"The fact that this stock has not moved much on the news of the third death indicates the market thinks this deal is going to go ahead," said Needham &amp; Co analyst Jeffrey Barnes.  
Shares in St. Jude were up 5/8 to 37-3/4. The company has said it is going forward with the Ventritex deal, but will do more analysis due to the deaths of the three patients.
"I still feel the transaction is going to go through. The issue is terms," said UBS Securities analyst Samuel Navarro.
Analysts were focused on assessing the scope and cost to Ventritex of finding and fixing technical problems with 5,605 implantable defibrillators of the sort tied to the deaths.
Ventritex could not be reached for comment.
The company has likely found and reprogrammed about half of the defibrillators that could malfunction, analysts said.  
Estimates of the cost to Ventritex of finding and fixing the rest of the devices, plus any potential legal liability that could result, varied widely. One analyst put it at $4 million, another at $10 million. Even at the higher figure, Barnes said, "It's hardly a deal-buster."
Whether it is a deal-bender remains to be seen. "These two companies definitely need each other. The big question mark is to what extent is the problem wih Ventritex's Cadence product a limited problem or a widespread problem ... The pricing will really depend on how bad the problem is," said Prudential Securities analyst Charlene Lu.  
St. Jude has agreed to buy Ventritex in a stock swap valued back in October at about $22.50 per Ventritex share, or $505 million altogether.
"You're looking at a $4 discount today because everyone's nervous that St. Jude is going to cut the deal or walk away ... But there's no indication that St. Jude would walk away or cut the price," said Dillon Read analyst Matthew Dodds.
With Ventritex trading at such a sizable discount to the offer price, analysts said, arbitrageurs were stepping in to buy the shares and assume the risk of more surprises between now and the expected closing of the deal in March or April.
((--Chicago Newsdesk 312-408-8787))
