The Food and Drug Administration said Thursday it was investigating the death of a third recipient of a heartbeat-regulating electrical device called an implantable defibrillator made by Ventritex Inc.
"We have received a report of a third death of a patient with one of the Ventritex defibrillators. We are investigating," FDA spokeswoman Sharon Schneider said.
"We do not know exactly the nature of the problem. We don't know whether this third death was caused by this same problem that appears to have caused the other two deaths," Schneider said in a telephone interview.
The stock of Sunnyvale, Calif.-based Ventritex fell $1.25 to $18.125 Thursday on market rumours about the death and its possible impact on a proposed $505 million stock purchase of Ventritex by St. Jude Medical Inc.
A spokesman for St. Jude, of St. Paul, Minn., said the company planned to take a closer look at the deal because of the three deaths believed to be associated with Ventritex devices.
"Based on what we know today, we are moving forward" with the acquisition, said St. Jude spokesman Peter Gove. "But we are going to do, as you might expect, additional due diligence ... With a product quality issue like this, obviously it causes additional analysis to be done."
Ventritex general counsel Mark Meltzer said a patient implanted with a Ventritex implantable defibrillator died on Jan. 22. He said the company was notified a day or two later and it promptly advised the FDA and St. Jude.
The identity of the patient is not being disclosed.
On Jan. 16, Ventritex said it had been authorised by the FDA to begin reprogramming 5,605 implantable defibrillators in patients. The company said then that component failures in the devices were believed to be associated with the deaths of two patients.
An implantable defibrillator, or ICD, is a device about the size of a pocket pager that is implanted in the chest or abdomen and connected to the heart by internal wires. Like a pacemaker, the ICD regularly sends small electrical shocks to the heart. But where a pacemaker keeps the heart from slowing down, an ICD keeps it from beating too rapidly.
Meltzer said substantial progress has been made in Ventritex's efforts to find the patients who carry the 5,605 implantable defibrillators that need to be reprogrammed. He said he was unaware of any change in the St. Jude deal.
