Allegiance Corp chief financial officer Peter McKee said the company is comfortable with a Wall Street consensus 1997 earnings estimate of $1.55 per share, compared to 1996 operating earnings of $1.15 per share.
The consensus estimate that's out on the street at the present time is about $1.55 ... That would be consistent with the long-term goal," McKee said in a Reuters interview.  
Gross profit margin for Allegiance was 20.4 pct for the fourth quarter. "There's continued pressure on it. We don't know exactly where it's going to fall, but we feel that it will be in that twenty range," McKee said.
In the same interview, Allegiance chief executive Lester Knight said the company is seeing some price increases on the distribution side of its business. But, he added, "Some of the manufactured products have continued to have a lot of competitive pressure and we've seen some prices decline."
Sales for 1996 were about $4.38 billion. "Our sales for 1997 will be roughly flat," McKee said.  
In 1998 and beyond, Allegiance expects to match or slightly exceed the market growth rate of two to three percent, McKee said. Flat 1997 sales were expected as part of a plan to shift into more profitable businesses, Knight said.
The company's effective income tax rate was 35 percent in the fourth quarter, McKee said. "We had 35 percent in the fourth quarter and we would anticipate having a tax rate in that magnitude going forward," he said.
The net debt-to-capital ratio was about 57 percent in the fourth quarter. "We still want to get it down into the mid-40s over time," McKee said, declining to give a deadline.  
While still a small expense for Allegiance, research and development was $8.1 million in 1996, up from $6.6 million in 1995.
"We anticipate increasing that by roughly 25 percent to close to $10 million in '97. Over the next few years, you will see us putting a little more emphasis on R&amp;D," McKee said.
Knight said Allegiance expects soon to announce another Best Value Product distribution program with the Kendall International Inc unit of Tyco International Ltd.
"You're going to see a deal with Kendall announced very shortly," Knight said.  
He said a price war in the hospital supply distribution industry involving Allegiance, spun off in September from Baxter International Inc, and competitors has wound down.
"The whole industry has come to the bottom of that price war and has started to expand those distribution margins ... I would say that price war is over," Knight said.
Allegiance is eyeing some possible acquisitions to expand its self-manufactured products business, he said.
McKee said, "We plan as we go forward in our free cash flow to use roughly half of it for paying down debt, and half of it for cash acquisitions.... We've committed that we have free cash flow averaging about $100 million per year for the next five years."
((--Chicago Newsdesk 312-408-8787))
