St. Jude Medical Inc's proposed $505 million stock acquisition of Ventritex Inc will likely proceed, said chief financial officer Stephen Wilson.
In an interview Thursday with Reuters, Wilson discussed the company's duty to look into the three recent deaths of patients implanted with Ventritex medical devices.
But he said that, as serious as the deaths are, "It's not the kind of thing that results in St. Jude Medical not wanting to move forward with the transaction."
Shares in St. Jude were up 3/8 to 36-7/8.  
"So many good things have been put in place and we did work very hard and very long to make that happen. It really would be, in my view, very unfortunate if this transaction didn't move forward," he said.
Ventritex last week confirmed the death of a third recipient of one of its implantable defibrillators, devices that regulate heartbeat. Wilson gave Ventritex high marks on handling the problem so far and said St. Jude intends to get a full understanding of the situation.
"What we don't think makes any sense is for us to be breathing over their backs," Wilson said.  
He declined to comment on Wall Street speculation that the transaction price might be renegotiated down.
"Clearly, we do need to go in and do some due diligence so that we understand whether or not there has been any impact on the franchise value," he said.
He estimated that federal regulatory review of the deal may take another three to four weeks.
"In the best set of circumstances, at this point, we might get a first-quarter closing. If not, then hopefully we get an early second-quarter closing," he said.
Shares in Ventritex were up one to 19.  
Concerning St. Jude's additional analysis of the impact on the deal of the deaths, Wilson said: "One of the things that we'll do is talk to some of the physician customers out there to see how they feel about the way it was handled. Then, most importantly, how they feel about Ventritex and its products moving forward. That's the real key question."
He said St. Jude has not set a date to start additional due diligence, but is in close contact with Ventritex. He added that St. Jude expects to see sales of more than $1 billion in 1997.
"Even without Ventritex, we will exceed $1 billion," Wilson said.
((--Chicago Newsdesk 312-408-8787))
