Vencor Inc moved Monday to broaden its services by agreeing to buy TheraTx Inc in a nearly $550 million deal that analysts said signals more consolidation in the nursing homes and services industry.
"The nursing home industry, in general, is ripe for consolidation. It wouldn't surprise me if there were more of these types of transactions," said Donaldson Lufkin &amp; Jenrette healthcare industry analyst John Hindelong.
Shares in TheraTx closed up 3-1/2 to 16-5/8, below the $17.10 per share cash offer from Louisville, Ky.-based Vencor.  
Analysts said shares in Alpharetta, Ga.-based Vencor failed to trade up to the offer on unjustified worries about the 60- to 90-day projected wait until closing.
"The deal is basically done. There's not a lot of risk here. It's a great arbitrage play," said Dean Witter analyst Scott Mackesy.
Vencor and TheraTx said jointly Monday that their merger was approved by both boards of directors. Vencor said it expects to begin its tender offer on February 14. The deal is expected to close within 90 days, the companies said.
Vencor shares closed unchanged at 32-1/2.  
Buying TheraTx -- for $354 million in cash, about $100 million for outstanding convertible securities and debt assumption -- will add a key element to Vencor's line.
"This will make Vencor the only company out there that can offer the long-term care hospital, the nursing home and the contract services," said D.A. Davidson analyst Robert Thornburg.
Vencor is the largest U.S. long-term care hospital company. It also has sub-acute care units, nursing homes and specialty care centers for respiratory therapy.  
Last spring, Vencor served notice of its intentions to be a major player by acquiring Hillhaven Corp HIL.N for $1.9 billion.
"Vencor wants very much to be big and this makes them bigger," Hindelong said of the TheraTx deal. "It's probably not the last major acquisition that they'll make."
Analysts said Vencor expects the deal to be accretive to earnings in the second half of 1997.
Public since 1994, TheraTx operates 29 nursing homes and sells rehabilitation services under contract to dozens of other nursing home companies.  
Like others in the field, its stock for months has been weighed down by uncertainty about the U.S. Health Care Financing Administration's rewrite of Medicare reimbursement rules for such services.
"It was just a cloud hanging over their heads. So there was a lot of incentive on the part of (TheraTx chief executive) John Bardis to go out and do something like this," said Arneson Kercheville analyst Jay Somaney.
Given its recent history of market perception problems, TheraTx is getting a good price at $17.10, analysts said.
"I think it's a pretty good valuation," said Robertson Stephens analyst Sheryl Skolnick. "Truth be told, earnings estimates have been drifting downward and analyst support for the stock has been drifting away."
She added that one potential winner in the deal could be NovaCare Inc, of King of Prussia, Pa.
"Novacare will be the only one left that will be seen as independent of a competitor by the free-standing nursing home or small chains out there...It leaves you with one independent player who will gain market share," Skolnick said.
((--Chicago Newsdesk 312-408-8787))
