Vencor Inc. has a definitive agreement to acquire Theratx Inc., another health care service provider, for $354 million, or $17.10 per share, in cash, the companies said Monday.
Vencor said it expected to begin a tender offer for all of Theratx's roughly 20.7 million shares on Feb. 14.
Theratx's stock shot up $3.50 to $16.625 on Nasdaq. Vencor was unchanged at $32.50 on the New York Stock Exchange.
"This will make Vencor the only company out there that can offer the long-term care hospital, the nursing home and the contract services," said D.A. Davidson analyst Robert Thornburg.
Vencor is the nation's largest long-term care hospital company. It also has sub-acute care units, nursing homes and speciality care centres for respiratory therapy. Last spring, Vencor acquired Hillhaven Corp. for $1.9 billion.
"Vencor wants very much to be big and this makes them bigger," Hindelong said of the Theratx deal. "It's probably not the last major acquisition that they'll make."
Analysts said Vencor expected the deal to boost earnings in the second half of 1997.
Vencor said it expected to close the deal within 90 days.
Vencor, based in Louisville, Ky., said the acquisition would broaden its menu of contract services, which includes subacute, rehabilitation and respiratory therapy services to nursing and subacute centres.
Vencor operates an integrated, long-term healthcare network with 38 long-term acute care hospitals, 279 nursing centres, 41 institutional pharmacies and, through its Atria Communities affiliate, 23 independent and assisted living communities.
Theratx, which went public in 1994, operates 29 nursing homes and sells rehabilitation services under contract to dozens of other nursing home companies.
Like others in the field, its stock for months has been weighed down by uncertainty about the U.S. Health Care Financing Administration's rewrite of Medicare reimbursement rules for such services.
"It was just a cloud hanging over their heads. So there was a lot of incentive on the part of (Theratx CEO) John Bardis to go out and do something like this," said Arneson Kercheville analyst Jay Somaney.
