Humana Inc. reported lower quarterly profits Tuesday, mainly due to charges for restructuring, but the stock in the big health maintenance organization rose on optimism over its new president's ambitious turnaround plan.
The 4.9-million member HMO -- fifth largest in the United States among for-profit HMOs -- posted fourth-quarter net income of $22 million, or 13 cents a share, after charges, down from $49 million, or 30 cents a share, in the 1995 quarter.
Quarterly premium revenues were $1.81 billion, up from $1.49 billion in the year-ago period.
For the full year, Humana said net income plunged 94 percent to $12 million, or 7 cents a share, from $190 million, or $1.17 a share. The company reported revenues of $6.7 billion, up from $4.6 billion in 1995.
The stock of the Louisville, Ky.-based Humana rose 37.5 cents to $18.75 on the New York Stock Exchange after rising as high as $19.25.
"What the stock is responding to is Humana's outlining a pretty aggressive action plan. ... They're making the organization more lean and mean," said Gary Frazier, a health care industry analyst with the Bear Sterns brokerage.
When Gregory Wolf became president of Humana in September, he took over a company that once had led the managed health care industry, but had more recently seen its star fade as it expanded into unprofitable areas.
Wolf had previously been president of Emphesys Financial Group Inc., which Humana acquired in October 1995.
With the help of a new executive staff, Wolf is pushing through a tough plan to cut costs and withdraw Humana from money-losing markets.
"He's made some very intelligent moves," said Ed Keaney, health-care industry analyst with the Volpe Welty brokerage.
In the fourth quarter, Humana took a special charge against earnings of $10 million after taxes related mainly to severance costs for elimination of 700 to 900 jobs this year from its roughly 18,000-member work force.
The company has sold or is selling money-losing operations in Alabama, Washington, D.C., and other markets.
In the second quarter, Humana took a special charge against earnings of $130 million after taxes to restructure the Washington health plan, provide for expected insurance losses, close 13 service areas and discontinue unprofitable products in three markets.
As a result, the company said total enrollment in its commercial health care plans fell by 69,100 members last year, by 87,500 members in January alone and is expected to decline by 115,000 members this quarter.
"Our plans to withdraw from certain markets and price business commensurate with the underlying risk are proceeding on schedule," Wolf said.
The company's medical-loss ratio -- a key measure of profitability -- improved to 82.8 percent in the fourth quarter from 83.1 percent in the third quarter, but was up from 81.5 percent in the year-ago period.
Analysts said they were impressed with Wolf's plan for reversing Humana's fortunes but noted the company unveiled a turnaround plan once before that was never fully achieved.
"I want to see a little more of a turn in earnings before I'm sure this action plan is taking hold," Frazier said.
