The board of directors of WMX Technologies Inc. Wednesday rallied around its Chief Executive Phillip Rooney following a direct attack on his leadership by a major stockholder.
An investment group led by financier George Soros called Tuesday for Rooney's ouster and proposed a slate of nominees for the board of the largest U.S. garbage-hauling company.
In response, the WMX board said it "unanimously reaffirmed its support for Phillip B. Rooney and his leadership of the company during his seven months as chief executive officer."
The exchange did little but aggravate the acrimonious struggle involving WMX, Soros and other large shareholders.
"I don't think they could really escalate the animosity any higher than it already is," said James Kelleher, industry analyst at the Argus Research firm in New York.
The New York-based Soros group and other investors, including the Lens Fund in Washington, D.C., have been pressuring WMX to improve its performance for months.
WMX, based in Oak Brook, Ill., said last week that it was cutting 3,000 jobs and shedding $1.5 billion in assets in a broad effort to refocus on its core waste management business.
On Tuesday, the Soros group expressed dissatisfaction with the restructuring plan, proposed removing Rooney and named four individuals to its alternate slate of board nominees.
Even with a 5.2-percent stake in WMX, the Soros group cannot dictate the company's future, especially in the face of widespread small shareholder scepticism about the large shareholders' motives.
"They can make a lot of noise and smoke, but when everything is done, their effectiveness is limited ... This thing is far from over," Kelleher said.
WMX last week reported a fourth-quarter loss of $461 million after charges, vs. a profit in the year-ago period of $49.6 million. It  reported revenues for all of 1996 of $9.18 billion, compared with $9.05 billion in 1995.
WMX said Wednesday that the board nominees do not qualify for consideration at the company's annual meeting this year.
"The documents we received from the Soros group attempting to nominate four individuals for election as directors of the company arrived after the filing deadline and contained incomplete information," WMX said in a statement.
WMX added that its board was committed to search for the best possible candidates and its nominating committee had agreed to consider the Soros nominees later this year.
"Our board is absolutely committed to attracting the best directors possible. We want to make sure we are serving the interests of all of our stockholders," WMX said.
If Soros does not prevail before or during the WMX annual meeting scheduled for early May, time may be on his side.
"WMX is far from out of the woods and is likely going to have a few more painful quarters, which will strengthen Soros' hand so that he might succeed next time," Kelleher said.
The WMX board said that Rooney, a long-time manager of the company's waste management business, was the right leader for the company as it concentrates on that industry.
WMX also said an important component of its restructuring plan was adding new, independent perspectives to its board and reiterated it had hired an executive recruiting firm to find appropriate candidates.
WMX's stock, which fell 9 percent last week, was up 50 cents at $32.75 in heavy volume on the New York Stock Exchange.
