Merger and acquisition activity is expected to pick up this year in the beleaguered U.S. nursing homes and sub-acute care facilities industry.
After miserably under-performing the market over the past two years, stocks of nursing home companies have bifurcated into "haves and have-nots," analysts said.
A few top companies are at the point where they have worked through some problems. Their stock values have absorbed market uncertainties about Medicare and Medicaid reform, and the next year or two look uncustomarily predictable, analysts said.  
At the same time, the have-nots of the business continue to be dogged by company-specific difficulties that have held down their values, presenting possible bargains.
"There is a divergence in valuations and the industry is in the process of changing ... it is perhaps on the verge of an urge to merge," said Donaldson Lufkin &amp; Jenrette healthcare industry analyst John Hindelong.
Talk of more rapid consolidation was fueled Monday by Louisville, Ky.-based Vencor Inc's agreement to acquire TheraTx Inc, of Alpharetta, Ga., for $550 million in cash, convertible securities and debt assumption.  
"There seem to be a lot of companies or pieces of companies that are sort of being walked about...There's just a lot of activity," said National Securities healthcare industry analyst Michael LeConey.
"Sentiment is improving among the companies in the better half of the industry. You may see some consolidation," said ABN AMRO Chicago Corp healthcare industry analyst Gregory Moerschel.
The U.S. nursing home and sub-acute care industry -- comprising about 15,000 facilities nationwide -- enjoys a compelling demographic and structural profile, analysts said.  
As baby-boomers age and managed care drives more medical procedures and patients out of high-cost acute-care hospitals, owners of facilities that can look after the aged and the chronically or mildly ill would seem to stand to benefit.
"Just looking at the numbers, this industry should be booming, but it isn't," said John Cumming, chief executive of WDI Capital Markets Inc, a healthcare investment banking firm.
Growth by acquisition has been the rule in the highly fragmented industry and few firms have shown themselves able to manage it well. The result often has been over-expansion, disarray and restructuring, analysts said.  
After a bumpy two years, top-tier players -- such as Vencor and Manor Care Inc -- are in a position to snap up smaller firms, analysts said. Also seen as likely acquirers are Genesis Health Ventures Inc and Integrated Health Services Inc in the home healthcare market.
Identified by some analysts as possible targets were Burbank, Calif.-based Summit Care Corp and Retirement Care Associates Inc, of Atlanta.
Retirement Care said Thursday it purchased 1.95 million more shares of Contour Medical Inc, a manufacturer of orthopedic and rehabilitative products. The transaction boosted Retirement Care's stake in Florida-based Contour to about 65.3 percent of total outstanding common stock.  
Neither Retirement Care nor Summit could be reached for further comment.
Sun Healthcare Group Inc was seen as likely doing a major deal soon, although some analysts said it would be a buyer and others said it would be a seller.
Albuquerque, N.M.-based Sun announced Thursday it acquired nine nursing home and assisted living facilities from  Clipper Affiliates in New Hampshire for $12 million plus assumption of leases at $6 million per year. A spokeswoman for Sun declined to comment on speculation of the possibility of a larger transaction.
Companies seen as pressured to make strategic moves of some sort were industry giant Beverly Enterprises Inc, Living Centers of America Inc, GranCare Inc and Horizon/CMS Healthcare Corp.
((--Chicago Newsdesk 312-408-8787))
