WMX Technologies Inc chairman and acting chief executive Dean Buntrock should stay on the job long enough to find a new CEO, then step down, said Nell Minow, a principal at Lens Inc, a major WMX stockholder.
In an interview with Reuters, Minow said, "Any successor worth his salt is not going to want the job if (Buntrock) is going to be too involved ... It doesn't have to be right away, but I think (Buntrock) should recognize that."
Buntrock, 65, founded Oak Brook, Ill.-based WMX and was chief executive from 1968 until June 1996.  
At that time, Buntrock was replaced as chief executive by Phillip Rooney, formerly WMX chief operating officer. On Tuesday, Rooney resigned, just a week after his ouster was demanded by an investment group controlled by financier George Soros, another major shareholder of WMX.
Earlier this month, under shareholder presssue, WMX named John Sanford as its new chief financial officer. Formerly WMX treasurer, he replaced James Koenig, who became executive vice president. Minow said Lens is dissatisfied with Sanford.
"The new one I would like to see reassigned, as well, or gone," Minow said. "They need to bring in an outsider."  
Lens and other shareholders are unhappy with the WMX CFO's office, according to Minow. "It's their inability to meet their projections, their inability to let a year go by without some special charge, that I think speaks very badly for the credibility of that office, to say nothing of (WMX's) muddled, overall structure," she said.
Regarding the search for a new CEO, Minow said, "We'd like to see someone who's got a proven track record in a turnaround situation. We want to see someone who's willing to put his money where his mouth is by being willing accept most of his pay in options."  
Shares in WMX were down 3/4 to 34 at midday following its announcement that it agreed to sell its entire 19-percent stake in ServiceMaster LP for $626 million in cash.
WMX is undertaking a broad restructuring meant to appease shareholders and refocus the company on its core business, but its efforts so far have done little to silence its critics. The continuing battle between the company and the closely allied Soros and Lens groups is centering on board control.
WMX spokesman William Plunkett said four of 12 board seats will come open at the May 9 annual meeting. The Soros group has named a slate of four individuals it would like to see elected. Minow said Lens supports the Soros slate.
Plunkett said WMX expects Buntrock and director Peer Pedersen to stand for reelection, leaving two seats up for grabs. "The nominating committee is actively reviewing candidates now ... They welcome suggestions from all our shareholders," Plunkett said.
Regarding Minow's comments on the CFO, Plunkett said, "John Sanford has been in this job very briefly and he is an experienced financial executive. He is well regarded among our investors and is actively engaged in the process of enhancing shareholder value."
He declined further comment.
((--Chicago Newsdesk 312-408-8787))
