Polaris Industries Inc., best known for its snowmobiles, said Wednesday it will begin building motorcycles, riding its small-engine expertise into a market no major U.S. company other than Harley-Davidson Inc. has dared test in 40 years.
Minneapolis-based Polaris said it is developing a highway cruiser motorcycle that will be named Victory and be available to consumers in the spring of 1998.
"We've built pretty much all of it from scratch. The engine was designed in the USA and it's going to be made in the USA," said Matt Parks, who will be general manager of the new Polaris motorcycles unit.
Polaris is the world's largest maker of snowmobiles and is among the world's top three makers of all-terrain vehicles, or ATVs, and personal watercraft.
"We've competed successfully against Honda, Yamaha, Kawasaki and Suzuki in our other businesses. ... Entering the motorcycle market is a logical extension of our diversification strategy," said Polaris Chief Executive Officer Hall Wendel.
Shares in Polaris rose 37.5 cents to $26.25 on the New York Stock Exchange trading.
Besides the legendary Harley-Davidson, there are only two other, much smaller U.S. motorcycle makers -- Salt Lake City-based ATK America Inc., a maker of specialised off-road machines, and Buell Motorcycle Co., which is 49 percent owned by Milwaukee-based Harley and also located in Wisconsin.
Polaris said its new cruiser will compete with Harley's machines, as well as similar bikes from Honda and others. The company declined to disclose price or design specifications.
"It seems there is a market opportunity," said Beth Burnson, an industry analyst at the ABN-AMRO Chicago Corp brokerage and investment bank here.
In recent years, Harley has been unable to make enough cruiser motorcycles to meet booming demand, leaving a hole in the market, Burnson said.
"Japanese companies have been able come up with Harley copycats that people will buy off the showroom floor if they don't want to wait two years for a Harley. That's the part of the market that Polaris can target," Burnson said.
Polaris said it expects its existing customers -- an estimated 30 percent of whom are motorcyclists already -- will be among early buyers. The worldwide market for cruiser motorcycles is estimated at over 200,000 units annually, and sales of cruiser motorcycles have nearly doubled in the last five years, Polaris said.
With personal watercraft sales expected to slump this year due to overstocking in 1996, and snowmobile sales flat, Polaris has relied for growth recently on strong ATV sales, said Scott Ciccarelli, an analyst at the Gerard Klauer Mattison brokerage and investment bank in New York.
Challenging Harley, against which it has never competed, may be tough for Polaris, but moving into motorcycles is a logical next step for the company, he said.
"They've been hinting toward this for the last two years or so," Ciccarelli said.
Engines for Polaris products are presently built in-house or by Japan's Fuji Heavy Industries Ltd., which makes Subaru-brand cars, or by a Fuji-Polaris joint venture, Robin Manufacturing, in Hudson, Wis.
Engines for the new motorcycles will be built at the Polaris engine plant in Osceola, Wis., and the motorcycles will be manufactured at the company's Spirit Lake, Iowa, plant, the company said.
On Feb. 4, Polaris reported 1996 sales of $1.19 billion, up 7 percent from $1.11 billion in 1995. Annual profits were $62.3 million, up 2 percent over the previous year. Polaris said it expected 1997 sales to decline from the 1996 level but still show another year of record-setting profits.
"Expenses related to the development of the company's motorcycles are reflected in its expectations for 1997 net income in excess of 1996's record level," Polaris said.
