WMX Technologies Inc. Chief Executive Officer Phillip Rooney has resigned, the company said Tuesday, just a week after his ouster was demanded by an investment group controlled by financier George Soros.
Under severe pressure from Soros and other WMX investors, Rooney said he quit to save WMX, the nation's largest garbage hauling company, from "being distracted by the current public debate over the leadership of the company."
WMX Chairman Dean Buntrock will be acting chief executive while the board of directors searches for a new chief to come from outside the Oak Brook, Ill.-based firm, WMX said.
WMX's stock rose $1.875 to $34.75 on the New York Stock Exchange, as Wall Street took the news as a sign that the company hopes to accelerate its restructuring.
"Rooney's departure signals that WMX may pick up the pace a little bit," said Richard Sporrer, an industry analyst at the Parker/Hunter investment bank and brokerage in Pittsburgh.
WMX on Feb. 4 unveiled plans to divest $1.5 billion in assets, cut 3,000 jobs and buy back 50 million shares of stock in an effort to appease shareholders and refocus the business. Market reaction to the sweeping plan was lukewarm, however, and major shareholders have continued pressuring the company.
Rooney's resignation may further signal WMX's determination to meet its critics head-on at the upcoming early May annual shareholders meeting, where some analysts expect a heated battle for control of the company.
"WMX put up Phil Rooney as their sacrifical child to get Soros off their back. ... The board will now be able to point to some substantive changes that it's made," said James Kelleher, an industry analyst with Argus Research in New York.
"It's going to very much blunt the message that Soros and Lens can bring to shareholders," Kelleher said.
He was referring to Lens Fund, a Washington, D.C.-based investment group that also owns a large block of WMX shares.
Soros and Lens were not immediately available for comment.
Rooney, 52, had been chief executive only since June 1996. Previously, he was WMX chief operating officer from 1984 to 1996. Buntrock, 65, founded the company and was chief executive from 1968 until 1996.
