Pharmacia &amp; Upjohn Inc reinforced Wall Street pessimism about its short-term outlook Wednesday with comments that showed it will not meet profit margin and cost-savings targets set under former leadership.
On a punishing day generally for drug stocks, shares in London-based Pharmacia were off only 7/8 to 36-7/8, however, indicating the stock may already be near a low, analysts said.
"In terms of the stock really turning around, you've got possibly another six months of dead money," said Smith Barney pharmaceutical industry analyst Jane Kearns.  
Several analysts cut their profit estimates for the drugmaker after it said it would likely have to postpone its goal of a 25-percent operating profit margin by 1998.
The company also said its objective of $500 million in cost savings to be achieved through the merger that created Pharmacia &amp; Upjohn has changed. Some portion of those savings will no longer flow to the bottom line, but will be put into investments in new product development and marketing, it said.
Both the margin and cost savings goals were set under the leadership of John Zabriskie, who unexpectedly resigned last month as chief executive of the Swedish-American concern.  
"What they acknowledged today is that ... with the departure of John Zabriskie, they are a little less focused on strictly meeting the goals that he set out," said Cowen &amp; Co drug industry analyst Ian Sanderson.
"Part of the reason that Zabriskie was forced out was there was disagreement between him and the Pharmacia management over just how aggressivley to move on these things," Sanderson said.
Pharmacia &amp; Upjohn is signalling a new direction for the company that is focused less on meeting investor expectations and more on building its long-term sales base, analysts said.  
"The Zabriskie strategy was 'deliver expected numbers at any cost,' whereas the new management is saying they don't want to sacrifice long-term growth for short-term gains," said independent drug industry analyst Hemant Shah.
Some analysts said they doubted all along that the company could hit the targets it set out in the merger that created it 16 months ago from the combination of Upjohn Co, of Kalamazoo, Mich., and Sweden's Pharmacia AB.
"I don't think there was anybody at the company willing to make the tough cuts," said Oppenheimer &amp; Co drug industry analyst Steven Gerber.  
"Our vantage point on this merger from a couple years ago has been that it was a combination of two companies that should have been bought out and that were both afraid to make the necessary cuts ... We think there's a common management goal on both sides of the Atlantic, which is primarily job preservation. So nothing's changed," Gerber said.
The company said it continues its search for a new CEO.
The naming of a new chief will be a key event in the company's short history, as will presentation in mid-April of data on Detrusitol, a urinary incontinence treatment, at the American Urological Association meeting in New Orleans. "This is one of P&amp;U's biggest potential new drugs," Kearns said.
If the data look good, Wall Street expectations will be met. "If the data are not positive, the stock is really going to take a tough hit," Kearns said.
The company Wednesday reported 1996 operating-basis profits of $998 million on sales of $7.2 billion, up from $940 million in profits on 1995 sales of $6.9 billion. Operating margin in 1996 was 19.8 percent, up from 18.3 percent in 1995.
((--Chicago Newsdesk 312-408-8787))
