Four companies have approached Angeion Corp about becoming distribution partners with the Plymouth, Minn.-based medical devices maker, chief executive Whitney McFarlin said.
In an interview with Reuters on Monday, McFarlin said. "We have four very real potential partners, two domestic and two international. We believe there will be an investment made in our company by one or more of these companies."  
Angeion shares have slumped since last spring on a series of events that analysts say have left it looking like an also-ran in the fast-growing, $500 million market for implantable defibrillators, or ICDs -- small electronic devices placed in the body and wired to the heart to keep it from beating too fast.
"This whole issue of uncertainty has clearly impacted our stock.... But we're positioned to be a fourth player in this market," McFarlin said, speaking at a Raymond James investors conference here. "Don't count Angeion out."  
The ICD market is dominated by Guidant Corp, Medtronic Inc and Ventritex Inc, which has agreed to be acquired by St. Jude Medical Inc.
St. Jude had been Angeion's distribution partner, but the two companies are in the process of separating. Medtronic in November won an arbitration decision awarding it access to certain Angeion patents.
McFarlin said Angeion and St. Jude are still in negotiations, but he expects to complete the divorce this month. "We're going to come out of it very reasonably," he said.  
Angeion, which is selling ICDs in Europe, had revenues of $3 million in its fiscal year ended July 31. McFarlin said the company expects revenues in its current fiscal year in the area of $8 million.
"I don't see a lot of impact from a strategic partner this fiscal year," McFarlin said.
The company expects to file a product marketing application this summer with the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for its Sentinel 2000 and Sentinel 2010 and related lead systems, McFarlin said.  
A supplemental application for its Sentinel 2020 is expected to follow shortly later, he said.
Angeion's stock has also been weighed down by a securities fraud case stemming from 1991 and involving a group of stockbrokers who manipulated Angeion's share price.
"That was done by a group of outside brokers and has nothing to do with the company.... There is no exposure, but every time another story comes out, it says 'Angeion.' It drives me to distraction," McFarlin said.
