North American garbage companies can be expected to continue picking over each others' assets as big firms sell off money-losers and small players consolidate, the top executives of the biggest haulers and handlers of waste said on Monday.
At a conference held by the Raymond James brokerage and investment bank, a half dozen trash hauling companies made presentations to investors. In all the talks, asset strategy figured prominently.  
In the top tier of the industry, the two biggest U.S. firms -- WMX Technologies Inc and Browning Ferris Industries Inc -- control about a quarter of the $35 billion solid waste market.
Both WMX and BFI are fast shedding non-core and unprofitable operations as they reposition and rationalize after years of undisciplined acquisitions, analysts said. At the same time, Canadian giant Laidlaw Inc is transforming itself into a transportation company and leaving the solid waste market, as well as the $3.5 billion hazardous waste market, in which it had dominated in North America.  
At the lower levels, fast-growing mid-sized companies -- such as USA Waste Services Inc, United Waste Systems Inc and Superior Services Inc -- are playing the consolidation game. By sifting through the giants' dross and snapping up deals from among dozens of small, private firms, the mid-cap players are growing rapidly.
"At the end of the day, you'll have an industry that has sorted through its asset base so that several companies will be better positioned," said Todd Holmes, vice president at Browing Ferris, based in Houston.  
Trash hauling and handling turned into a hot business in North America in the 1970s with the rise of environmentalism and stricter government regulation of polluters. Riding a wave of rapid consolidation in a highly fragmented industry, innovators like WMX and BFI experienced explosive growth. In its first 20 years, industry leader WMX made 2,000 acquisitions.
But the boom years ended in the 1990s with a levelling of environmental regulation, greater market concentration among companies and a surplus of supply in several key markets.  
In addition, added Laidlaw chief executive James Bullock, "The focus of solid waste handling is migrating away from landfill to recycling, which has lower (profit) margins and suffers from the vagaries of commodity prices."
For WMX and BFI, too, growth by acquisition hit an inevitable ceiling as the pool of affordable targets dried up.
"The consolidation strategy was unsustainable for us," said WMX chief financial officer John Sanford.
Oak Brook, Ill.-based WMX reacted to these changes by diversifying in the 1990s into related businesses, but the strategy failed, leading to shareholder disappointment.  
Laidlaw, based in Burlington, Ont., has separated itself from its solid and hazardous waste operations. It still owns sizable stakes in the successor companies -- Laidlaw Environmental Services and Allied Waste Industries Inc -- but expects to sell its interests, valued at a combined $1.2 billion.
"Over time, you will see us exit our investments in both of those," Bullock said in an interview with Reuters.
At the next level down, growth by acquisition continues. The business has virtually no barriers to entry -- any outfit with a half-dozen garbage trucks can get a route and make itself a takeover target.
As a result, Bullock said, "The little guys are still playing the consolidation game...They can be successful at that for a while."
