In reply to a report issued last week by two Wall Street drug industry analysts, Eli Lilly and Co said it is unaware of physicians having problems switching schizophrenia patients from older treatments to Lilly's new antipsychotic drug, Zyprexa.
"We are not hearing anything from our prescribing physicians, sales representatives or clinical investigators that would indicate a problem upgrading patients to Zyprexa," said Lilly vice president Gary Tollefson. "On the contrary, Zyprexa prescriptions, including refills, continue to grow."  
Shares in the Indianapolis-based drug manufacturing giant closed down 2-1/2 to 86-5/8 Thursday, extending a week of choppy declines from a 52-week high of 95 on February 24.
Fahnestock &amp; Co analysts Louis Webb and Irena Djurovich issued a report February 26 that said physicians are having trouble switching patients to Zyprexa and that expectations for the drug's sales potential may be inflated.
A follow-up report on February 28, issued after the analysts talked with Lilly, said the Zyprexa switching problems persisted. Contacted Thursday, Webb said, "We stand by our original report."  
The February 26 report said, "The Director of Ambulatory Services for Outpatient Psychiatry for Bellevue Hospital in New York City expressed to us that about a third of his patients that were switched to Zyprexa from Risperdal and other antipsychotics had experienced a return of psychotic symptoms." Risperdal is a competing anti-schizophrenia drug made by New Jersey-based Johnson &amp; Johnson.
The March 3 Lilly rebuttal quoted Dr. David Nardacci, Director of Ambulatory Services for Outpatient Psychiatry at Bellevue, saying, "As a practicing clinician, it is not customary for me to communicate with the analyst community."  
He said, "I was never told the results of my conversations were to be for publication. I take exception to the one-third figure italicized in the report and would like to state that for patients with prominent negative symptoms or severe EPS (extrapyramidal symptom) histories, Zyprexa should be considered alongside Risperdal as a first-line agent."
Nardacci could not immediately be reached.
Zyprexa was approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for U.S. sale in October, setting off a contest for market share between Lilly and Johnson &amp; Johnson. Abbott Laboratories Inc, Zeneca Group Plc and Pfizer Inc are expected to join the fray soon with new drugs.
Estimates of the size of the U.S. schizophrenia drug market vary widely, ranging from $1 billion to $4.5 billion, with about 2.5 million Americans suffering from the disorder.
Risperdal and Zyprexa, both fairly new, are already competing against older medications, including generically available haloperidol and Sandoz AG's Clozaril.
((--Chicago Newsdesk 312-408-8787))
