Option Care Inc is comfortable with a Wall Street 1997 earnings estimate of $0.41 per share, compared to $0.33 per share before a one-time charge in 1996, said chief executive Erick Hanson.
In an interview with Reuters, Hanson said the Bannockburn, Ill.-based home healthcare company is targeting annual revenue growth of 25 to 30 percent. "We have a pretty good pipeline and a plan to be able to achieve that," he said.
The company's thinly traded shares were unchanged at 5-5/8 late Wednesday. Management owns 70 percent of the stock.  
Started in California as a home infusion services franchiser, Option Care was bought in 1991 by healthcare entrepreneur and venture capitalist John Kapoor, who took it public the following year. Kapoor remains chairman and owns 60 percent of the company. Hanson came aboard two years ago.
Option Care and its franchisees operate 190 facilities in 39 states, with heavy concentrations in California, Georgia, Ohio, Illinois and Pennsylvania.
Home healthcare firms sell services and products to people with cancer, AIDS and other medical disorders requiring intravenous drug treatment or other relatively complex care.  
As the managed care revolution has driven more patients out of expensive hospital beds, home healthcare has emerged as a hot industry. Nursing home companies, hospitals, HMOs and others are rushing to get into it, chiefly by acquiring home healthcare specialty firms such as Option Care.
Amidst this rapid consolidation, Option Care stands out as the largest remaining pure play in the market for home infusion therapy, or intravenous medication administration.
The company is diversifying into related home healthcare businesses, however, so that it will eventually resemble more broadly based home healthcare firms, Hanson said.  
Large, diversified competitors include Apria Healthcare Group Inc and Olsten Corp, Hanson said.
Option Care is going about its transition by acquiring its better home infusion franchises and smaller independent firms, as well as home nursing agencies, medical equipment sellers and respiratory therapy service providers. Option Care did 12 acquisitions in 1996 -- five franchises, seven independents.
"Our strategy is to buy strong franchises in targeted regions, then surround them with complementary services through acquisitions," Hanson said. "Our objective is to be fully integrated by the end of 1999 in at least seven states."  
"What we're saying is that with one phone call, one stop, we can provide any type of home care," Hanson said.
Option Care recently received a $30 million credit line from a group of banks. "We're investigating during the next 12 to 18 months the possibility of putting more equity in play," Hanson said, adding that Kapoor is "very much open to reducing his position, but he also doesn't want to walk away from it because he thinks it's a good place for his money."
((--Chicago Newsdesk 312-408-8787))
