The boards of RightChoice Managed Care Inc and parent Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Missouri are moving to calm relations with regulators, return to profitability and ensure company control is firmly in the hands of chief executive John O'Rourke.
The three-pronged strategy was highlighted Tuesday when the boards said talks about a possible combination of RightChoice and BJC Health Systems had been halted, putting an end to a project conceived and launched last year by two top executives who were fired on Wednesday.  
In an interview with Reuters, O'Rourke said the talks with BJC -- a St. Louis hospital organization -- were called off primarily for business reasons.
"It was clear as we proceeded in the discussion with BJC that the kind of deal that was being considered...would not be acceptable to the national Blue Cross association," he said.
But he added that the boards of RightChoice and the Missouri Blues meant to show their support for him as well.
"The other part of the decision was...a vote of confidence in the company and in the management team that had just been hired to direct the company," he said.  
RightChoice expects to return to profitability later this year.
"We're really projecting, at least at this point in time, that we will return to profitability by the third or fourth quarter," he said.
The St. Louis-based company lost $3.7 million on revenues of $170.2 million in the fourth quarter, compared with a profit of $4.9 million on revenues of $154.6 million a year earlier. Wall Street registered its disapproval of the announcement of the halted BJC talks by driving shares in RightChoice down 3-1/2 to close Tuesday at 13-3/8.  
On the day of the management shake-up, O'Rourke was in the office of Missouri Department of Insurance director Jay Angoff with an offer to make peace, he said.
In May 1996, the Missouri Blues sued Angoff seeking a declaratory judgment that all applicable laws had been followed in the 1994 restructuring creating RightChoice.
The Blues also sought a permanent injunction barring the department from taking certain actions against the company.
In August, the department blocked a proposed share transaction in which RightChoice would have purchased 1.5 to 2.0 million of its own shares from the Blues.  
Then on December 31, a Missouri judge ruled the Blues had "abused or exceeded their legal authority" in undertaking the reorganization that created RightChoice three years earlier.
Heimburger vowed to fight the court ruling. Meanwhile, under his watch, RightChoice lost money in its third and fourth fiscal quarters.
In February, O'Rourke was named chairman and chief executive of RightChoice, replacing Heimburger. O'Rourke had previously been president and chief executive of HealthLink Inc, which RightChoice acquired in 1995.
"I have a mandate from the board to...improve the profitability of the company, to improve the public image and to address our regulatory issues," O'Rourke said.
The Missouri Blues' appeal of the December 31 court ruling is still pending and the share transaction proposal remains on hold, O'Rourke said.
((--Chicago Newsdesk 312-408-8787))
