Troubled auto lender Mercury Finance Co. said Thursday it won an extension of its short-term credit line with Bank of America, but analysts said permanent refinancing remains Mercury's most critical need.
"The trick will be to get some permanent financing in place and then get the thing up and running again," said James Inglis, financial services analyst at Philo Smith &amp; Co.
Extension of the $50 million, short-term loan is still a major advance, said Mercury Chief Executive William Brandt.
Mercury's creditors granted waivers allowing extension of its credit line with Bank of America to June 10. The waivers permit Mercury to continue to pledge assets as collateral on the $50 million credit facility. The previous waiver period had been for only 30 days, Chicago-based Mercury said.
"This 90 day extension is a tangible demonstration of confidence in Mercury," Brandt said in a statement. "The expanded waiver period gives the company breathing room to focus on operations and on the exploration of long-term financing alternatives."
The company said it is talking with holders of $22 million of subordinated debt about their interest payments.
Mercury faces a federal investigation and several shareholder lawsuits after its January announcement that it had to restate financial results to show lower profits due to accounting irregularities.
The company lost more than $2 billion in market capitalisation after its stock price plunged on the news of the restatement. The stock fell in January from $14 to less than $2 per share. It rose 25 cents to $2.875 in mid-day trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
Under the terms of the waivers, during the 90-day period, Mercury will resume interest payments on nearly all of its roughly $1 billion in debt and will pay any past-due interest.
Mercury received the $50 million in short-term financing from Bank of America a month ago. It is being used to meet daily operating expenses and interest payments.
The 90-day extension is "certainly a good sign," said Katrina Blecher, financial analyst at Gruntal &amp; Co. "I don't think it was unexpected," she said. "But they have to get permanent financing. My gut says they'll probably be able to do it. I would certainly would not write the company off."
