CardioThoracic Systems Inc is exceeding its internal targets for increasing the number of cardiac surgeries done worldwide using equipment for operating on a beating heart without cracking the chest.
At each of 12 centers around the world, surgeons are doing about 11 surgeries per month with the company's new devices, up from none a year ago, said chief executive Richard Ferrari.
"We're above our target" for procedure rates, he said on Monday in an interview with Reuters prior to a presentation to investors here at a Dain Bosworth conference.  
To date, more than 200 minimally invasive direct coronary artery bypass, or MIDCAB, surgeries using the company's equipment have been performed. Three-quarters of the surgeries have been single blood-vessel grafts, with one-quarter involving multiple-vessel bypasses. The complication rate of one percent is lower than traditional procedures, Ferrari said.  
The Cupertino, Calif.-based company is gearing up to train more surgeons to use its equipment. "If we're doing everything perfectly, we'll graduate 80 surgical teams per quarter," Ferrari said, adding he is confident that some Wall Street expectations for CardioThoracic may be met.
The company is comfortable with analysts' estimates of 1997 sales reaching about $11 million, versus no revenue this year. "That is a fair number," Ferrari said.
Piper Jaffray projects sales rising to $50.5 million in 1998 and $108.9 million in 1999.  
CardioThoracic also is comfortable with analysts' projections of a loss of $1.48 per share this year and a loss of $1.38 per share next year, Ferrari said.
Chief financial officer Steve Van Dick said, "We'll reach breakeven in mid- to early-1998, with just a slight profit. I don't expect we will end 1997 in the black."  
Capturing even a small part of the 1.9 million heart revascularizations done annually in the United States would make its revenue projections achievable, Ferrari said. Each single-use MIDCAB toolkit is priced at about $2,500. "For 1997, CTS' projection is 4,000 procedures. In 1998, it's 17,000 and in 1999, it's 50,000," he said.
The total cost of a MIDCAB procedure is about $15,000 -- less than an open-heart coronary artery bypass graft and equal to or more expensive than some other alternatives.  
MIDCAB is performed using devices allowing the surgeon to work on a beating heart through small holes in the chest, eliminating the need for the huge incision and cardio-pulmonary bypass circuit that are standard in open-heart surgery.
Larger companies, such as Medtronic Inc and Genzyme Corp, are moving into the young market for MIDCAB equipment. "It legitimizes a lot of things we've been saying for a while," Ferrari said.  
While larger competitors may pose a competitive threat, Ferrari said CardioThoracic feels secure in its lead in research and development, patent protections and regulatory filings. "We have much more knowledge about this than they do. We have a huge start ... It's a couple of years," he said.
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration in May gave marketing clearance to two of CardioThoracic's five MIDCAB tools -- the access platform and the stabilizer.
A 510k application for marketing clearance has been filed with the FDA for a distal perfusion device. The company expects to file 510k's for a stitcher and an artery harvester this month, Ferrari said.
The company continues to expect to have the entire tool kit approved for more active marketing by early 1997, he said.
The company wants to do its own marketing and distribution in the United States, but will seek partners for non-U.S. markets. "There have been some people who have expressed some preliminary interest in what we're doing," he said.
The company is seeking European Union marketing approvals. "We've not focused on the Japanese market yet," Ferrari said.
