Wheelabrator Technologies Inc indefinitely deferred a $350-million Dutch auction stock buyback because its parent company -- WMX Technologies Inc -- has no chief executive, said Wheelabrator chief financial officer Robert Gagalis on Tuesday.
In an interview with Reuters, Gagalis said, "We wanted to maintain some flexibility to get a new CEO up to speed on Wheelabrator's business and how it fits into WMX and all those kinds of things."
Shares in Wheelabrator were off one to 12-7/8.  
Wall Street analysts said the Dutch auction deferral was a surprise that stirred new doubts about WMX and its majority owned Wheelabrator subsidiary.
"Whenever you put off something like this, it's just going to create uncertainty in investors' minds," said A.G. Edwards industry analyst Tore Stole.
Wheelabrator, based in Hampton, N.H., had announced in February that it would increase its stock repurchase program to 30 million shares, including a Dutch auction to take place in the second quarter of this year. In a Dutch auction, a price is set, then lowered until a responsive bid comes in.  
Analysts speculated that Wheelabrator may have been displeased with initial indications of prices likely to be paid in such an auction. But that was not the case, Gagalis said. "The rationale for the change in strategy was tied to WMX's search for a new CEO," he said.
The Wheelabrator auction was to have been just one part of a massive restructuring of WMX and affiliates that otherwise is progressing. The Waste Management Inc unit of WMX said last week it agreed to sell most of its Canadian assets to the Canadian unit of USA Waste Services Inc -- the latest step in WMX's plan to divest $1.5 billion in assets.  
Under pressure from unhappy shareholders, WMX -- the largest U.S. garbage hauler -- also is in the process of finding a new chief executive, cutting 3,000 jobs, and doing its own Dutch auction for $1 billion. "They're making progress," said Parker/Hunter industry analyst Richard Sporrer.
Analysts were unsure about the broader meaning of the Wheelabrator deferral, especially when viewed in light of the resignation last month of WMX chief executive Philip Rooney, architect of the WMX restructuring strategy.  
Tuesday's news could signal that Rooney's plans are being back-burnered, said Edward Jones analyst William Fiala. "It would make sense because they're going to have a new CEO ... and they're going to want him to have more say in the decisions affecting the future of the company," Fiala said.
Gagalis said he is unaware of any further impending delays or changes in the WMX shake-up. He said WMX plans to proceed with its own, $1-billion Dutch auction in April.
"In terms of all the other aspects of the WMX plan, I think everything else is being implemented as previously announced," Gagalis said.
Sporrer said, "Not having a CEO will stretch out to some degree the restructuring efforts they've been talking about. But I don't think it will be material ... Waste Management has spent a lot of time thinking through these changes. I don't think they're going to back off."
((--Chicago Newsdesk 312-408-8787))
