Eli Lilly &amp; Co is fighting in Kentucky this week to end the last major legal battle still lingering from Prozac's liability troubles of the early 1990s.
The Indianapolis-based drug giant Wednesday asked the Kentucky Court of Appeals to halt a hearing set for Thursday in Louisville before Jefferson Circuit Judge John Potter.
Potter's hearing would likely reveal publicly how and for how much Lilly and plaintiffs agreed to end a landmark case involving Prozac and a 1989 mass murder in Louisville.  
Lilly wants to keep the details of the agreement under wraps, although it conceded for the first time Monday that the so-called Joseph Wesbecker case was settled, at least in part.
For months, the company had said only that it reached a pre-verdict agreement in the case and that an unspecified amount of money changed hands as a result.
"We acknowledge that after the jury verdict, the high-low agreement provided for settlement of the compensatory and punitive damage phases of the trial," said Lilly spokesman Edward West Wednesday in a telephone interview.  
That acknowledgment allowed Potter to amend the Wesbecker verdict to say the case was "dismissed as settled" -- a legal intricacy he and Lilly have wrangled over since 1994.
"After nearly two-and-a-half years of this, we and the plaintiffs said to (Potter) Monday ... enter your corrected judgment. If that's what you think you need to do to be at peace with this matter, then do that," West said. "It's time to put this matter to rest ... We have nothing to hide."  
Wall Street considers the disputed deal that ended the Wesbecker case a non-event. Analysts said major drug companies often pay plaintiffs "hush money" in liability cases, but Lilly has fought any revelations by Potter's court about the company's arrangement with the Wesbecker plaintiffs.
"There is a confidentiality agreement in place ... We've honored that," West said.
In 1989, while on Prozac and other drugs, 47-year-old Joseph Wesbecker walked into his former workplace in Louisville with an AK-47 assault rifle and went on a shooting rampage.  
He killed eight people, wounded 12, and then committed suicide.
Survivors of the Standard Gravure Printing plant massacre and victims' families sued Lilly for $50 million, alleging that Prozac drove Wesbecker to his horrible end. A flood of more than 160 similar legal actions followed and Prozac came under national legal and scientific scrutiny.
Potter presided over the 47-day Wesbecker lawsuit trial in late 1994 and early 1995.  
The jury found Lilly not liable in the case and Potter dismissed it. But in April 1995, he had second thoughts because he said he suspected the case had been secretly settled out of court. He filed a motion that the verdict be changed to say that the case was "dismissed as settled."
Lilly fought the motion, but the Kentucky Supreme Court ordered Potter to look into the matter because, the court said, it suspected "there may have been deception, bad faith conduct, abuse of the judicial process or perhaps even fraud."  
An investigation was conducted by a lawyer for the Kentucky attorney general's office. The probe revealed the nature and cost of the pre-verdict agreement that Lilly has since acknowledged making. But many of the facts surrounding the agreement, including its price-tag, remain under wraps.
Potter declined to comment Tuesday on the objectives of the hearing he hopes to convene.
West said, "Judge Potter ... has stated on the record he intends to release the aggregate amount of the agreement."
To this day, Lilly defends Prozac as safe and has been backed by panels of medical experts. Until this week, the company also contended it had never lost or settled any of the Prozac court cases. Despite the settlement of the damages phase of the Wesbecker trial, West said, the fact remains that the jury cleared Lilly on the question of liability.
"They heard everything about Prozac and decided that the product had nothing to do with Wesbecker's actions," he said.
((--Chicago Newsdesk 312-408-8787))
