The tough job of reversing the steady decline of Snapple sales passed Thursday from Quaker Oats Co, which couldn't pull it off, to a firm that rescued the similar Mistic beverage line last year, but which is itself in transition.
In agreeing to acquire Snapple for $300 million in cash, Triarc Cos Inc took on a task at which Quaker labored for 2-1/2 years without success. At the same time, Triarc's deal cast a new light on its pending plans to spin off its beverage and fast-food businesses, analysts said.  
Buying Snapple could affect the proposed spinoff of Mistic, Royal Crown soft drinks and Arby's restaurants into a new company, said Triarc spokesman Martin Shea. "We're waiting for an IRS ruling" on the spinoff, he said.
The effect could be a plus, said analysts, who suggested the deal shows Triarc is serious about making sense out of its jumble of assets and becoming a player in consumer brands.
"This new management team at Triarc is damn good," said Wheat First Butcher Singer food industry analyst John Maxwell.
Based in New York, Triarc was pieced together during the anything-goes junk-bond era by Victor Posner, analysts said.  
Posner exited when Triarc was taken over by financiers Nelson Peltz and Peter May in 1993. They have since followed a course of asset redistribution aimed at rationalizing Triarc's businesses and attracting more Wall Street attention.
In the past four years, Triarc has gained new respect, sold 16 businesses, paid off $500 million in debt and raised $200 million in cash, Shea said.
The firm bought Mistic for $95 million in 1995. In 1996, the juice line posted sales of $130 million. Triarc's Royal Crown soft drink line had 1996 sales of about $175 million, said Triarc beverage chief executive Michael Weinstein.  
"We know how to make a brand succeed," Weinstein said.
That knowledge will be needed to turn around Snapple. The brand virtually invented the premium soft drink category, and it remains the market leader. But Snapple sales have declined every year since 1994. Last year, they were $551 million, down eight percent from 1995, Quaker reported.
Quaker, the Chicago-based food giant, acquired Snapple in December 1994 near the height of its popularity for $1.8 billion, including acquisition costs. The sale price agreed to this week with Triarc will force Quaker to post a $1.4 billion one-time loss in its first quarter.  
"The (Snapple) investment's been a disaster" for Quaker, said Prudential Securities food analyst John McMillin.
Wall Street treated Quaker kindly Thursday, however, following the announcement of the sale, reflecting some relief that the company finally sold off the money-losing unit.
Shares in Quaker -- which retains such crown jewel products as Gatorade and several cereal brands -- closed up 1/4 at 37-3/4. Shares in Triarc closed up 1-5/8 at 17-3/8.
((--Chicago Newsdesk 312-408-8787))
