Quaker Oats Co. conceded defeat Thursday in its effort to turn around its struggling Snapple beverage unit and agreed to sell it for $300 million -- $1.4 billion less than it paid for the business -- to Triarc Cos. Inc., the owner of rival Mistic beverages.
The selling price -- far below the $1.7 billion Quaker paid for the premium beverage company in 1994 -- disappointed Wall Street, but analysts said they were pleased that Quaker did the deal.
"It was a fire sale price ... The bad news is the investment has been a disaster, the good news is they're trying to put it behind them," said John McMillin, a food industry analyst at Prudential Securities, a brokerage and investment bank.
Snapple's ready-to-drink teas and juices virtually invented the premium soft drink market and remain a leader, with more than $500 million in 1996 sales. But Snapple has lost money ever since Chicago-based Quaker -- better known for its breakfast cereals and Gatorade sports drinks -- bought it.
Snapple sales fell 8 percent in the United States and Canada in 1996, the company reported last month.
"The decision to sell Snapple was reached after an extensive review of various shareholder value-building options by management," said Quaker Chairman William Smithburg in a statement.
"After reviewing all possible options, we decided it was in the shareholders' interest to remove the financial burdens and risks Snapple brought to the portfolio and better focus on our value-driving businesses," Smithburg said.
New York-based Triarc, the buyer, owns the Mistic drinks business, a Snapple rival. It also owns Royal Crown soft drinks, Arby's Inc. fast-food restaurants and other businesses.
"With respect to Triarc, this transaction is very positive ... it is complementary to Triarc's existing position in Mistic, which is fruit juices, while Snapple is mostly teas," said Michael Branca, a food industry analyst at Lehman Brothers, a brokerage and investment bank.
"In addition, Triarc's beverage management is highly respected in the beverage distribution business ... Snapple could well be reborn under Triarc," Branca said.
Triarc Beverage Group Chief Executive Michael Weinstein said his company plans to apply similar marketing principles to Snapple that it used to turn around the Mistic line.
Triarc will consult distributors and review the consumer research on Snapple, and "Then we're going to move like hell to do some really cool, innovative things in packaging and product and advertising to try to build the brand back up again," Weinstein said.
Triarc bought the Mistic juices line from a sole proprietor for $95 million in August 1995. It had sales of about $130 million in 1996.
"We have a track record in this category with Mistic, of taking a brand that was slumping and applying some basic principles ... to it. We know how to make a brand succeed. We're more entrepreneurial," Weinstein said.
Quaker's stock rose  25 cents to $37.75 in consolidated trading on the New York Stock Exchange, while Triarc rose $1.625 to $17.375.
Quaker said it would take a non-cash pretax charge of about $1.4 billion, or $8.40 a share, in its first quarter, to record the loss on the sale.
The company also said it would be able to recoup about $250 million in taxes paid on previous capital gains, "making the cash value of the transaction approximately $550 million."
A Quaker spokesman said the tax consideration was a key part of the company's decision to sell Snapple to Triarc now.
The spokesman added that Triarc had indicated it intends to transfer virtually all Snapple employees with the business.
Triarc said it expected to close the deal by the end of June, subject to customary conditions, including government antitrust clearance.
Besides Snapple, Quaker's other products include Gatorade, which continues to dominate the sports drink market, and cereals, such as Quaker oatmeals, Cap'n Crunch and Life.
"Quaker still has the crown jewels -- Gatorade and the cereals -- and performance in those businesses has been pretty good," said food industry analyst George Staphos of the investment bank and brokerage of PaineWebber.
"The monkey is finally off Quaker Oats' back," said John O'Neil, food industry analyst at BT Securities.
