Triarc Cos Inc plans to apply the same marketing principles to Snapple that it used to turn around the Mistic beverage line -- minus Dennis Rodman -- said Triarc Beverage Group chief executive Michael Weinstein.
"We used Dennis in our Mistic commercials this year, which was perfect," Weinstein said in an interview with Reuters.
But the quirky Chicago Bulls basketball forward is unlikely to be endorsing Snapple, which Triarc said Thursday it will acquire from Quaker Oats Co for $300 million.
"No, no.  Dennis is the Mistic guy," Weinstein said.  
Edgy advertising, careful attention to distributor relationships, colorful labelling and a focus on cold-bottle street sales comprised Triarc's successful formula for Mistic and will set the tune for Snapple, too, he said.
After the deal with Quaker closes, Triarc will consult distributors and review the consumer research on Snapple. "Then we're going to move like hell to do some really cool, innovative things in packaging and product and advertising to try to build the brand back up again," Weinstein said.
Snapple sales in 1996 were about $550 million, down eight percent from 1995 under Quaker's unsuccessful management.  
Triarc has not yet set Snapple sales targets and is taking a long-term approach, Weinstein said.  "Our focus is on 1998. You can't take over a brand and then snap your fingers and have it turn around overnight.  But we believe that there are lots of opportunities for growth," he said.
Taking on Snapple will nearly triple Triarc's beverage revenues.  "I'm going to be busy.  I'm going to have to start coming in in the afternoons now," he said.
New York-based Triarc is a diversified company that is 25-percent owned by financiers Nelson Peltz and Peter May. They bought it from Victor Posner in 1993 for $72 million.  
Since then, Triarc has sold off 16 businesses, paid off $500 million in debt and raised $200 million in cash.  The objective, said Triarc spokesman Martin Shea, has been to create a consumer brands business.
Triarc bought the Mistic juices line from a sole proprietor for $95 million in August 1995.  Mistic had sales in 1996 of about $130 million.
"We have a track record in this category with Mistic, of taking a brand that was slumping and applying some basic principles ... to it. We know how to make a brand succeed. We're more entrepreneurial," Weinstein said.
Snapple, the brand that virtually created the premium soft drinks category, was bought by Chicago-based Quaker two-and-a-half years ago but has lost money ever since.
((--Chicago Newsdesk 312-408-8787))
