United Wisconsin Services Inc expects its medical-loss ratio to decline to levels not seen in years as long as Washington does not spring another healthcare reform initiative on the HMO industry.
In an interview with Reuters, United Wisconsin chief executive Thomas Hefty said the ratio -- the share of premium revenues spent covering HMO members' healthcare costs -- could fall into the seventies. "The loss ratio is higher than we would like, but we're seeing, particularly in our small-group PPO unit, an improvement over last year," Hefty said.  
United Wisconsin finished its second quarter in June with its medical-loss ratio at 81.9 percent, down from 88.3 percent a year earlier. Hefty said it could fall to the seventies.
Premium revenues that are left over after covering member costs constitute the bulk of profits for a health maintenance organization, or HMO. "We think the industry overall is poised for a better 1997 and 1998," Hefty said. "Probably the biggest uncertainty in the market is the reaction to the election."
When the Clinton administration unveiled its healthcare reform proposal in 1994, medical cost inflation plummeted and HMO profits soared.  
When healthcare reform failed, medical cost inflation roared back and profits suffered industry-wide. These trends have moderated recently, Hefty said, but he added that Hillary Clinton's speech at the Democratic Convention caused concern.
"It said that if the Democrats have a big victory, we'll see healthcare reform again with all of the interplay on the psychology of patients and physicians," he said.
In the meantime, Hefty said he sees room for premium hikes to boost HMOs' profits. "In our market in Wisconsin, we compete against Humana and United Healthcare and both of them have been taking strong pricing action," he said.
"We're out there with price increases. Underlying healthcare trends have been coming down again," Hefty said.
Enrollment at United Wisconsin is growing, as well "The Milwaukee HMO has a lost a little bit of enrollment with price increases, but we're still overall up a couple percent" due to enrollment gains in the company's rural HMOs, he said.
"Our strategy is to keep looking for the rural markets ... We think those are good markets. You get better margins and we've shown the ability to not only get those margins, but get operating costs down," Hefty said.
