Stericycle Inc said it is comfortable with Wall Street estimates of an operating-basis break-even third quarter, a fourth-quarter operating profit and a profitable year for the first time in 1997.
"The Dillon Read report has us punching through on an operating profit in the fourth quarter of this year, with break-even at the operating line in the third quarter...We're very comfortable with a profitable year," chief executive Mark Miller said in an interview Tuesday with Reuters.  
Stericycle lost $2.4 million, or $0.30 per share, in 1996.
As for the possibility of moving into the black in the first quarter, Miller added: "We're going to be pretty close."
In business since 1989, Deerfield, Ill.-based Stericycle has never turned a profit and its stock has languished below its $9 per share initial public offering price of last August.
Shares were unchanged at eight on very light volume Tuesday.
Boosted by a recent acquisition, accelerating internal growth and the withdrawal from the market of some key rivals, Stericycle looks to 1997 as a possible breakout year.  
At its present run rate, Stericycle 1997 revenues would be "north of $36 million," Miller said.
Although 1996 revenues were just $24.5 million, Stericycle is the second-largest player in a $1 billion U.S. market from which larger competitors are fleeing.
Houston's Browning-Ferris Industries Inc remains the largest medical waste handler, but BFI is selling assets as part of a back-to-basics restructuring. If BFI decided to exit, Miller said: "We would obviously love to buy it."  
In December, Stericycle acquired the bulk of Waste Management's medical waste business for $11 million in cash and notes. Waste Management parent WMX Technologies Inc is also in the midst of a corporate restructuring.
Canada's Laidlaw Inc is also in the process of separating itself from the medical waste business. The remainder of the market is divided among many smaller firms.
"We see ourselves as the best consolidator opportunity for the vast majority of sellers," Miller said.  
More market share may become available to Stericycle beginning this summer as major hospitals with on-site waste incinerators confront new federal emission regulations.
"We think that will create new opportunities," he said.
While hospitals remain Stericycle's core business, sales and marketing is focused on physician offices, nursing homes, laboratories, outpatient surgical centers and clinics.
These smaller generators of waste present Stericycle with fatter profit margins and better growth opportunities as managed healthcare drives more medical procedures out of of acute care hospitals and into sub-acute facilities.
"These are the people that really need the outsourcing that we offer," Miller said.
Alternate site business was up 59 percent in the fourth quarter year-over-year, while the core hospital business was up 13 percent in the fourth quarter.
Partly as a result, the company's overall 1996 revenues grew 15 percent over 1995, while margins expanded 33 percent.
((--Chicago Newsdesk 312-408-8787))
