Ford Motor Co., following several competitors in offering "certified" used cars, said Monday its Ford and Lincoln brands are starting used vehicle warranty programmes that eventually will be available nationwide.
Under the programmes, Ford and Lincoln-Mercury dealers will put cars and trucks through special inspection and reconditioning processes and offer factory-backed warranties and three-day, money-back guarantees.
"This is not just an individual, dealer programme," said Ford division spokesman Dan Bedore. "It's backed by the Ford Motor Company."
The Ford Division programme will be launched in the spring following a regional rollout in the southeastern United States in mid-November, while the Lincoln programme will be introduced in major markets Dec. 9.
A third programme covering Ford's Mercury brand cars and trucks will begin next summer, a Ford spokesman said.
The programmes are among several now offered by major automakers, including General Motors Corp. and Toyota Motor Corp., in an effort to keep their dealers competitive in the growing market for used cars and trucks.
Ample supplies of used vehicles that have come off of two-year leases have given rise to several new used-car "superstore" chains, such as Circuit City Stores Inc.'s successful CarMax unit, and a new chain called AutoNation USA, started by Blockbuster Entertainment founder H. Wayne Huizenga.
Ford estimated the annual pre-owned car and truck market at 43 million units and $370 billion in revenues. Automakers are expected to sell about 15.5 million new cars and trucks in the United States this year.
To qualify for the Ford Quality Certified programme, Ford brand cars and trucks must be under four years old and have been driven less than 50,000 miles. Those vehicles must pass a 100-point inspection, and following reconditioning, will receive a one-year, 12,000-mile warranty, 24-hour assistance and a three-day, 300-mile money-back guarantee.
To qualify for the Lincoln Assured prgram, Lincoln luxury cars must be one-owner 1994 models or later with less than 36,000 miles and have suffered no major damage.
They will undergo a 150-point inspection and will be backed by a two-year, 24,000-mile bumper-to-bumper warranty, Lincoln-Mercury said, adding that brake pads will be replaced on all Lincoln cars with more than 25,000 miles.
