The Canadian Auto Workers union's choice of Chrysler Corp as its strike target on Wednesday sets up a battle between General Motors Corp and Ford Motor Co to take the lead in bargaining with the larger United Auto Workers.
Currently, Ford appears to gaining an edge, analysts say.
Detroit's No. 2 automaker, viewed as least likely to be named the UAW's target a few weeks ago, has recenly made offers that show a willingness to work with the union on the thorny issue of outsourcing, analysts say.  
"Ford is working hard to give the UAW a framework agreement," said Sean McAlinden, a labor analyst with the University of Michigan's Office for the Study of Automotive Transportation.
Now that the Canadian union has chosen Chrysler, it appears highly unlikely that UAW President Stephen Yokich will choose Chrysler as the U.S. target. Traditionally, the two unions have chosen different targets and threaten each with a national strike to push negotiations along.
Pacts covering about 400,000 Big Three hourly workers in the United States and 53,000 in Canada expire on September 14.  
McAlinden said Ford has offered the UAW some opportunities to move some parts manufacturing now done by outside suppliers back into Ford plants. That's the opposite of the task that GM is trying accomplish -- shifting more of its parts work to outside suppliers to bring down its burdensome cost structure.
In addition, Ford earlier this year encouraged one of its suppliers, Johnson Controls Inc to allow some of its plants to be organized by the UAW -- a move that could help the union reverse declining membership rolls.  
If Ford is chosen to negotiate the pattern agreement for the Big Three automakers in the United States, it could craft an agreement that would help meet its own needs, but that would hold back GM's cost-cutting progress.
"Ford may try to throw them a chicken bone to choke on," McAlinden said.
Yokich last week opted to delay the union's choice of a target and analysts said he could let GM and Ford compete for a while longer to be named the target. In 1984, the union named the two automakers as "dual targets" and later negotiated the patern agreement with GM.  
"A dual target is certainly possible, but it's hard to focus on two places at once," said Harley Shaiken, a professor of labor relations at the University of California-Berkeley. "The UAW may just let it roll a bit longer and select the best offer sometime later."
Shaiken believes the Canadian Auto Workers' choice was probably dictated by the UAW's decision to eliminate Chrysler from consideration. CAW President Buzz Hargrove's decision to focus on Chrysler "was a reluctant choice" since he had spent much of the summer talking tough to GM.
Some UAW leaders at individual Chrysler plants said they supported Yokich's apparent decision to focus on Ford or GM.
"I have full confidence that the UAW leadership is making the right decision," said Gary Kimbel, vice president of UAW Local 140 at Chrysler's Warren, Mich., truck plant.
