General Motors Corp. said on Thursday it expected an $870 million reduction in its fourth quarter earnings due to recent strikes in the United States and Canada and costs associated with its new United Auto Workers contract
In its quarterly 10-Q report, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission in Washington, D.C., the auto giant also said its Delco Electronics unit faced a substantial decline in future profit margins from price cuts and the loss of GM-related business.
GM said the costs associated with the U.S. and Canadian strikes came to $700 million, or 91 cents a share. The Canadian Auto Workers was on strike for three weeks in October over contract negotiations with the automaker, causing factory shutdowns in the United States.
GM was still reeling from the Canadian walkout when UAW members staged local strikes at a metal stamping plant in Indianapolis and a truck plant in Janesville, Wis., which forced GM to idle more workers.
Production was cut back at 17 North American assembly plants and numerous parts facilities. GM said earlier this week the strikes cost it at least 151,000 vehicles in the walkouts, cutting its planned fourth quarter production to 1.169 million cars and trucks
GM said lump-sum payments to U.S. workers under its new UAW contract will force it to book a charge of $170 million, or 22 cents a share, against fourth quarter earnings.
Under the pact, GM will pay each of its 215,000 UAW workers a $2,000 bonus in the first year of the contract, followed by three percent increases in base wages during the second and third years of the pact.
GM also for the first time disclosed that it will gain several benefits from the pact, including greater worker mobility and certain exclusions from its promise to guarantee employment at 95 percent of current levels over the next three years.
"Greater worker mobility will make it easier for General Motors to relocate UAW members and thus will decrease the number of employees that GM must pay income security protection," the company said in the filing.
Under its past three contracts, GM has agreed to continue to pay workers who are idled. The automaker spent $1.21 billion on such payments in the 1993-96 contract, and pledged to make $4.33 billion available for future payments, if needed, under the new contract.
The 95-percent job guarantee is not expected to restrict GM's ability to reduce employment due to productivity gains or volume reductions. GM also said it preserves the company's ability to sell certain unprofitable parts plants.
GM also said its Delco Electronics unit, which makes audio systems and a host of other electronics components for GM cars and trucks, will see its profit margins drop to the low diouble digit range from 15.9 percent in.
GM said as its automotive operations move to cut costs, they will seek price cuts and will likely buy more electronic components from other suppliers. Delco, a part of GM's Hughes Electronics Corp. subsidiary, now supplies about $900 in components for every GM vehicle, a figure that is expected to drop.
Earlier Thursday, Hughes announced a management shakeup for Kokomo, Ind.-based Delco, naming Michael Burns as general manager, replacing the retiring Gary Dickinson. Burns was previously in charge of GM's Delphi Thermal Systems unit which makes vehicle radiators and climate control systems.
