The man accused of a shooting rampage at a Ford Motor Co. plant that left one person dead and three others injured was apparently despondent over a rejection of a marriage proposal by a woman who worked at the factory, authorities said Friday.
Gerald Atkins, 29, a former U.S. Army paratrooper, planned an elaborate escape from the car assembly plant in Wixom, Mich., leaving a backpack in nearby woods that contained fresh clothing, water and military food rations.
Atkins was arraigned on more than two dozen criminal charges Friday, including first-degree murder, 11 counts of assault with intent to commit murder, numerous felony firearms charges, and auto theft, for a stolen truck he used to drive to the suburban Detroit factory.
"This was something that was planned out, that was deliberate, and according to what we find now, that he was planning to make his escape," Oakland County Prosecutor Richard Thompson told a news conference.
Atkins, an employee at a Walled Lake, Mich., glass factory, had apparently tried to enter the plant previously in the past week to talk to a female employee Thompson identified as "Debbie."
Thompson said Atkins was turned away from the factory last Saturday when he apparently tried to propose to the woman. Investigators found a diamond engagement ring in a trash can at Atkins' Wixom apartment.
Ford spokesman Bill Carroll also said Atkins was turned away again Thursday. He came back about an hour later dressed in green camouflage with a military-style assault rifle and shot out the exterior windows of the plant's security office.
Broken glass from the volley injured a man working on computer equipment in the office.
The man killed in the rampage, manufacturing planning manager Darrell Izzard, came outside to investigate, but was shot twice in the leg. Police said he tried to escape into the factory, but Atkins followed him and shot him three more times, in the hip, chest and elbow.
Atkins sprayed gunfire at police in several areas of the plant and wounded two sheriff's deputies outside of the facility when he tried to escape, according to the charges. He held police at bay for more than four hours by barricading himself in a network of drainage tunnels on the plant property.
In 52nd District Court in Novi, Mich., Atkins was ordered held without bond. If convicted on the murder charge, he faces mandatory life in prison.
