Kellogg Co., in a move to broaden its breakfast food business and help offset sluggish cereal sales, said Monday it will acquire the Lender's Bagels business from Kraft Foods Inc. for $455 million.
Lender's, based in White Plains, N.Y., is the nation's largest maker of fresh and frozen bagels sold in grocery stores, with annual sales of about $275 million. Kraft is owned by Philip Morris Cos. Inc., the New York-based food and tobacco giant.
"Lender's Bagels is a perfect fit for Kellogg Company's fast-growing convenience foods business," Kellogg Chairman Arnold Langbo said.
"With our heritage based in nutrition and our technical competence in grain-based food products, adding the nation's number one brand in bagels ... offers substantial new opportunities to grow our business," he said in a statement.
Analysts said the deal would extend Kellogg's reach into America's breakfast pantry by moving it into the fast-growing bagel business, with sales estimated at about $2.8 billion a year.
In addition to being the world's largest maker of ready-to-eat breakfast cereal, Kellogg also makes Pop-Tarts toaster pastries, Eggo frozen waffles and Nutri-Grain breakfast bars.
"It's a good fit in that it is a breakfast business," said Salomon Brothers analyst Nomi Ghez. "It recognises that the cereal market has matured, and other areas are eating into it. They have to move into those other areas."
The deal, expected to close by year-end, includes Lender's plants in New Haven, Conn.; Mattoon, Ill., and Buffalo, N.Y., Kellogg said.
But the acquisition is not big enough to halt the erosion in Kellogg's mainstay cereal business, analysts said. Price cuts of about 19 percent this year have failed to boost demand, and Kellogg's cereal sales fell as much as 15 percent in the third quarter due to stiff competition, they said.
Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. Monday cut its ratings outlook for $1.3 billion in Kellogg corporate debt to negative from stable because it believes the company will have difficulty in recapturing lost sales and improving profits.
Kellogg's earlier this month warned that its first quarter 1997 profits will likely fall below the year-earlier results.
Kellogg stock fell 12.5 cents to $68.125 on the New York Stock Exchange.
At a price of more than 1.5 times Lender's sales, the acquisition will depress Kellogg's earnings slightly in 1997, Ghez estimated. It should boost profits in 1998, she said.
Joseph Stewart, Kellogg's senior vice president of corporate affairs, said the company sees long-term growth prospects for Lender's Bagels, which has 45 percent of the nation's prepackaged bagel market.
"This is a long-term positive proposition to build shareholder value," Stewart said.
Kraft, based in Northfield, Ill., is the nation's largest packaged food company with revenues of $16 billion.
Kellogg, based in Battle Creek, Mich., has annual sales of about $7 billion.
