General Motors Corp. workers overwhelmingly ratified a new labour contract, the United Auto Workers union said Monday, capping a contentious bargaining season for the Big Three U.S. automakers.
The UAW said 85 percent of the hourly and skilled workers who voted approved the three-year pact, marking the largest approval margin in 20 years.
The pact marks the end of the union's national bargaining for more than 386,000 hourly workers at GM, Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp.. While the Ford and Chrysler talks hit minor snags, negotiations at GM ignited a national strike by the Canadian Auto Workers in October and local UAW strikes at two plants that stretched into November.
GM said last week the walkouts will reduce its fourth quarter profits by some $700 million, and other costs associated with the UAW pact will cost another $170 million.
GM's UAW contract follows the pattern set by Ford and Chrysler on most issues, including a guarantee that GM will maintain employment at 95 percent of its current UAW hourly work force of 215,000 people.
All three pacts offer workers about $13,900 over the life of the agreement, including $2,000 lump-sum payments in the first year and 3 percent base wage increases in the second and third years.
But the GM pact also includes some tougher restrictions aimed at preventing the shifting of parts work to outside suppliers.
In return, the world's largest automaker gained the ability to drop below the 95 percent level when it makes productivity improvements -- a big factor given the many new car and truck models GM will introduce in the next few years.
GM also gained flexibility to transfer workers more freely between plants and retained its ability to sell some unprofitable factories. The company will proceed with plans to sell a door hinge plant in Flint, Mich., and an interior trim plant in Livonia, Mich., GM spokesman Charles Licari said.
"We have the ability to execute our business plan," Licari said. "We have the ability to reduce employment through productivity gains and attrition."
He declined to say how many jobs GM hopes to eliminate over the life of the agreement. Analysts estimate that if GM is allowed to shrink by its normal retirement rate of about 5 percent a year, it could cut 30,000 jobs.
"We believe that it is a fair and equitable agreement that provides additional job security as well as economic and benefit enhancements for our employees while giving GM the flexibility that it needs to be more competitive in the future," Licari said.
The 85 percent approval margin for the GM contract was higher than any ratification vote since 1976, when 86.9 percent of GM's production workers and 69 percent of a smaller group of skilled workers approved the pact.
Lehman Brothers analyst Joseph Phillippi said the 1996 contract should allow GM to become much more competitive than it could under the previous agreement.
"I think GM won this time around, as opposed to 1993. The key here is they have gained the ability to ride the attrition curve," he said.
But GM still faces a major hurdle in negotiating plant-level labour agreements at the vast majority of its 123 UAW locals. UAW officials have said GM could face more local strikes, and such agreements could make it more difficult to reduce employment at each individual plant.
Ford and Chrysler achieved labour peace in their agreements, but they also are likely to have some flexibility to exit certain unprofitable businesses, Phillippi said.
