Using cost cuts to offset flat same-store sales, discount retail giant Kmart Corp. Wednesday reported a $9 million third-quarter profit, compared with a year-ago loss of $69 million.
The results, equal to 2 cents a share, slightly exceeded Wall Street analysts' consensus expectation that the Troy, Mich.-based retailer would break even during the August-October period.
Nevertheless, Kmart stock closed down 62.5 cents at $10.50 on the New York Stock Exchange after Chairman Floyd Hall dismissed rumours that Kmart was the target of a possible takeover by leveraged buyout specialists Kohlberg Kravis Roberts &amp; Co.
The rumours drove Kmart's stock up $1.625 on Tuesday.
Speaking to reporters at the opening of Kmart's second Manhattan store, Hall said he has not heard from KKR.
"As far as we know, they are all rumours," he said.
In a statement accompanying the third-quarter results, Hall said Kmart is "beginning to see meaningful progress toward a recovery."
"Our biggest challenge of the year lies just ahead in the fourth quarter, and we remain cautiously optimistic about our near-term outlook," he added.
But sales growth has been a tough challenge since Hall was hired to rebuild Kmart in June 1995.
Kmart's total revenues for the quarter fell 1.6 percent from last year to $7.85 billion. Company-wide same-store sales rose 0.1 percent from a year ago and same-store sales for U.S. Kmart stores increased 0.8 percent.
Hall said revenues did not meet the company's growth expectations for the period, but savings from store closings, contracting out of certain functions and other costs cuts have resulted in a $370 million reduction in Kmart's year-to-date selling, general and administrative expenses.
But Kmart's gross margin rate for the third quarter increased to 22.6 percent of sales from 21.2 percent last year, reflecting fewer markdowns to clear aged inventory and a lower level of overall promotional activity, Kmart said.
Analysts said the slow sales growth suggests that Kmart is still losing market share to archrivals Wal-Mart Stores Inc. and Target, a unit of Dayton Hudson Corp. But they were pleased with Kmart's 8 percent reduction in selling, general and administrative expenses for the period.
"If you compare it with last year, the company is making considerable progress. The part of the equation that remains is to get the sales up," said Brown Brothers Harriman analyst Joseph Ronning.
Kmart executives told analysts in a conference call that they expect better sales results in the near future from their apparel offerings -- particularly children's clothing -- and the "pantry concept" stores, which offer several aisles of attractively priced consumable items such as soft drinks and snacks just inside the front entrance.
Kmart now has about 180 pantry concept stores in the United States and will change 450 stores to the new format annually for the next couple of years.
Hall also told reporters that Kmart is aiming for a 3.5 percent to 5 percent increase in same-store sales for the all-important holiday selling period. Kmart could achieve a 6-7 percent increase, Hall said. But he cautioned that he didn't want to sacrifice profit margins to achieve that figure.
Still, he said analysts' estimates that Kmart will earn a profit of $165.5 million for the fourth quarter ending in January 1997 were "reasonable."
Kmart, the second largest retailer in the United States, operates 2,143 Kmart and 168 Builders Square retail outlets, and operates 129 stores internationally.
