Chrysler Corp., forced to scrape together all of its resources to survive just five years ago, broke ground Tuesday on a $10 million red granite monument to its up-and-down past.
The automaker is building a 35,000-square-foot historical museum on the grounds of its corporate headquarters and technical center here to house vintage vehicles, company archives and a theater.
The project will be the first full-fledged company-owned museum among Detroit's Big Three automakers. German automakers Mercedes-Benz AG and Bayerische Motoren Werke AG have museums in their respective home cities of Stuttgart and Munich that have become major tourist attractions.
Eaton said the Chrysler Historical Museum also will eventually open to the public, but added that it also is intended to instill pride in the company's employees.
The project is another sign of Chrysler's confidence in its future and of the dramatic shift in the automaker's fortunes since its brushes with financial ruin in 1980 and again in 1991.
The automaker nearly sold its collection of vintage vehicles -- including the very first 1924 Chrysler Six touring car -- in the late 1970s to raise cash.
"Five years ago, we wouldn't have been talking about being able to afford this," Eaton said.
But he insisted that the museum was not corporate largesse brought on by Chrysler's financial success this year and does not expect any backlash from shareholders.
"I don't think there would ever be anybody who would ask that question when you consider the amount we've invested in in new products and in the shareholders, etcetera."
Prodded by Chrysler's largest shareholder, Las Vegas billionaire Kirk Kerkorian, Eaton pledged to buy back $3 billion in stock over the last two years and will repurchase another $1 billion worth in 1997.
It is unclear how the museum will treat Lee Iacocca, the legendary former Chrysler chairman who joined Kerkorian's failed takeover bid for the automaker last year.
Asked if Iacocca's role in Chrysler's history will be featured in the museum, Eaton said, "He's part of the history, so there's a likelihood he will."
Eaton also said Chrysler wants to purchase a few key vehicles for the collection. He's in the market for a 1955 Chrysler 300 equipped with a "hemi" V-8 engine.
