Chrysler Corp., moving to shed its last defense subsidiary, said Monday it agreed to sell Pentastar Electronics Inc. to a management-led investment group for less than $50 million.
Pentastar Electronics, based in Huntsville, Ala., produces electronic test equipment for tanks and other military systems. A remnant of Chrysler's former position as the nation's major tank builder, Pentastar has about 350 employees and annual sales in the $50-million range.
Terms of the sale to PEI Acquisition Corp. were not announced, but the price is less than Pentastar's annual revenues, said Tom Noojin, Chairman of Huntsville-based Hickory Venture Capital Corp., the major financial partner in the deal.
Chrysler said it hoped to close the sale before the end of 1996, but noted that the certain conditions may push the closing into 1997. A company spokeswoman declined to say whether the automaker would book a gain on the deal.
The new company, which will operate as PEI Electronics Inc., also negotiated significant changes to the new United Auto Workers contract at the plant. Noojin said the deal preserved UAW wages and benefits for current workers, but allowed PEI to hire new workers at lower wages that are more typical of the defense industry.
The company also won permission to change work rules and job classifications inside the plant to improve efficiency. Existing PEI workers, however, will have opportunities to transfer back to Chrysler's Acustar Electronics unit in Huntsville, which makes automotive electronics.
"This could not have gone through without the cooperation of the United Auto Workers," Noojin said. "As a stand-alone facility, the union would have made this company non-competitive."
UAW officials could not be immediately reached for comment on the pact.
PEI expects to hire about 200 new workers over the next 12 months as it executes expansion plans that were curtailed over the past two years by Chrysler's efforts to sell the subsidiary, Noojin said. He added that Hickory, an affiliate of Memphis-based First Tennessee National Corp., will remain a passive investor.
Joseph Ritch, another local investor in the deal, said the company hoped to expand its business by developing commercial applications for its diagnostic test equipment, which plugs into tanks and other equipment to help technicians make repairs.
The transaction will complete Chrysler's plans to divest all of its aerospace and defense businesses.
The automaker in June sold Electrospace Systems Inc., a defense electronics unit, and Chrysler Technologies Airborne Systems Inc. to Raytheon Co.'s E-Systems Inc. unit for $475 million. Chrysler sold its tank business in 1981 to General Dynamics Corp.
Chrysler also has said it wants to divest other non-core businesses, such as its Dollar and Thrifty rental car chains, as part of its plans to focus on its core automotive business.
Separately, Chrysler said it had broken an eight-year-old record for U.S. calendar year sales with more than a month to go in the year. Chrysler said its 1996 sales through November 22 reached 2,214,289 cars and trucks, toppling the company's 1988 record of 2,208,057 vehicles.
Chrysler shares rose 37.5 cents Monday on the New York Stock Exchange to close at $34.875.
