Dow Corning Corp. said Monday it would set aside up to $2 billion to pay silicone breast implant claims under a $3 billion bankruptcy reorganization plan but that it also was seeking a trial on whether the implants cause diseases.
Dow Corning said the plan, filed Monday with the U.S. Bankruptcy Court in Bay City, Mich., would provide up to an additional $1 billion to pay commercial creditors.
The Midland, Mich.-based company, a joint venture between Dow Chemical Co. and Corning Inc., filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in May 1995 because of lawsuits by thousands of women who alleged that their implants have caused a variety of medical problems, including lupus and other autoimmune disorders.
Dow Corning introduced silicone gel breast implants in 1964 and was the largest maker of the products until the Food and Drug Administration imposed a moratorium in 1992.
Under the reorganization plan, Dow Corning said it would set up a $600 million fund for out-of-court settlements. Another $1.4 billion would become available for implant claims if it was proven in a trial that implants caused disease.
Dow Corning said it wanted a jury to hear testimony from a court-appointed, independent panel of doctors on the issue and to decide whether the company should compensate claimants.
The company has long held that numerous scientific studies have failed to show a link between the implants and disease.
"We believe the value of breast implant claims should be based on the best and most compelling scientific evidence available," Dow Corning Chairman Richard Hazleton said in a statement. He added that the plan "provides a fair process to resolve the central legal controversy of whether breast implants cause disease."
Plaintiffs said the $600 million settlement fund was not enough to address the needs of some 300,000 women who have received Dow Corning implants.
"It is not adequate to address the number of tort claims and the kinds of tort claims they face," said Elizabeth Cabraser, a San Francisco attorney representing women with breast implants. "This is not a plan that is ready to go out of the box or should be approved."
Cabraser said a committee of plantiffs attorneys would submit an alternative proposal to the bankruptcy court in the coming weeks.
Sybil Niden Goldrich, a former breast cancer sufferer and plaintiff who had her implants removed in 1984, said the out-of-court settlements would likely only give women about $2,000 each -- an amount she said would not cover the cost of removal.
"You can't sell these things for 30 years and just give women $2,000 and tell them to go away," she said.
If Dow Chemical ends up spending the full $2 billion on implant claims, it would be roughly the same amount as the company agreed to pay in a global settlement plan that collapsed in 1995.
In November 1995, five other manufacturers, including Bristol-Myers Squibb Co., Baxter International Inc. and Minnesota Mining &amp; Manufacturing Co. agreed to a new open-ended settlement offer that would pay women up to $250,000 each.
Hazleton said the plan would ensure the viability of Dow Corning while providing women with flexible options to resolve their claims and preserving their right to a jury trial.
The plan offered five settlement choices available over several years to process and resolve the claims:
-- Women who can prove a physical injury arising from a Dow Corning implant could obtain an expedited cash payment.
-- Those who want to have their implants removed could obtain a certificate for an "explant" procedure.
-- Women with claims that meet an established range of criteria could obtain a cash payment, but the precise definition of the criteria and the payment schedule would depend on the outcome of the causation trial.
-- Women could also choose an individual evaluation of their claim, which would require a higher level of proof, including a possible independent medical examination.
-- Women could also agree on non-binding mediation as an alternative to proceeding with the expense and uncertainty of a jury trial, it said.
Dow Chemical's stock closed up 25 cents at $84 and Corning rose 62.5 cents to $41.125 Monday on the New York Stock Exchange.
Separately, specialty materials maker Rogers Corp. said it has received approvals to buy Dow Corning's Bisco Products silicone foam business for $12 million. Rogers and Dow Corning have agreed to continue to work together to develop silicone foam resins over a seven-year period.
