Continuing the shake-up of its huge marketing organisation, General Motors Corp. Wednesday said it will replace the heads of its Buick and Cadillac divisions, which have been hurt by slow sales in recent years.
The departures of veteran Cadillac General Manager John Grettenberger and long-time Buick General Manager Ed Mertz on Feb. 1 will bring to four the number of GM division chiefs to leave the automaker in the past year.
Oldsmobile General Manager John Rock announced in October that he will retire at year-end, amid reports of clashes with GM Executive Vice President of Marketing Ronald Zarrella.
James Perkins retired as Chevrolet general manager earlier this year, turning the reins of GM's largest division to John Middlebrook, previously in charge of Pontiac, which was merged with the GMC Truck division.
GM has been in the process of reducing the power and independence of its divisions -- which once operated as separate automakers and competed for new products -- to bring its vast array of brands into sharper focus.
Over the next several years, GM will move its division staffs from their traditional home cities throughout Michigan to the automaker's new corporate headquarters at Detroit's riverfront Renaissance Centre.
Mertz, 59, Buick's general manager since 1986, will be succeeded by 59-year-old Robert Coletta, a 41-year Buick veteran who was previously the division's general sales and service manager.
Grettenberger, 59, Cadillac general manager since 1984, will be succeeded by John F. Smith, 45, who was previously president of GM's Allison transmission division.
Smith is no relation to GM Chairman John F. Smith Jr., but worked under him at the automaker's European operations and on its corporate finance staff. The new Cadillac general manager was a vice president of planning for GM-Europe, regarded as the automaker's most efficient operation, from 1989 to 1994.
Smith and Colletta will report to Zarrella, the executive guiding the marketing overhaul at the world's largest automaker.
Since joining GM in December 1994, Zarrella has hired more than 34 new brand managers, some of them from non-automotive consumer product industries, and put them in charge of developing stronger brand character for GM's cars and trucks.
On Tuesday, Zarrella said GM was preparing to build its Cadillac brand into a world-class luxury car nameplate that sells cars worldwide and can compete with Mercedes and Lexus.
In recent years, Cadillac has suffered from its reputation as a builder of massive, traditional American luxury cars with soft rides and plush upholstery.
Cadillac's annual sales peaked in 1978 at 350,813 cars, but have declined steadily as consumers have turned to Japanese and European luxury brands and sport/utility vehicles. For the first 11 months of 1996, Cadillac sales fell 5.8 percent from a year earlier to 153,393 units.
But Cadillac recently introduced a new entry-level luxury car, the German-built Catera, in an effort to draw younger buyers. It is also developing a new generation Seville that will be sold in world markets.
"The 1998 Seville is sized right for international markets. It will have right-hand-drive," Zarrella said.
Also on Tuesday, Buick unveiled its next-generation Regal sedan, which will go into production next year with other important GM mid-sized sedans. GM is trying to position Buick to capture more conservative buyers who have traditionally gravitated to Oldsmobile as Oldsmobile tries to compete with import near-luxury brands.
Buick, which also gets a replacement for its Century sedan this year, has also seen its sales decline steadily from their 1984 peak of 941,611 cars. This year through November, Buick sales are down 9.8 percent to 399,627 cars.
Mertz is retiring after a 40-year career with GM and Grettenberger has spent 34 years with the company.
