General Motors Corp is expected to seek bids for its Hughes Electronics Corp defense businesses in the first of a series of transactions aimed at divesting its remaining non-automotive assets, analysts said Thursday.
The possible sale of Hughes' defense operations for as much as $8 billion is the latest speculative scenario to emerge about GM's plans for Hughes Electronics.  
"I think the GM board and Hughes Electronics management are very interested in divesting the defense business, merging the Delco Electronics unit with the Delphi components business and spinning off the communications business into a separate company," CS First Boston defense analyst Peter Aseritis said.
"My sense is that they want to find a merger partner for the defense business first," he added.
Analysts said there are several candidates interested in Hughes' defense units, including McDonnell Douglas Corp, Raytheon Co and Northrop Grumman Corp.  
GM declined to comment Thursday on a possible sale of the defense business, first reported by the Wall Street Journal.
"I have to classify it all in the realm of speculation, for which we have no comment," said GM spokeswoman Toni Simmonetti in New York.
However, GM disclosed in recent U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission filings that Hughes was open to divestitures, saying the unit wanted to "strengthen its leadership position through acquisitions, consolidations, realignments and divestitures," among other actions.  
"Clearly I would personally be surprised if there was an outright sale," said BT Securities analyst Wolfgang Demisch.
A sale of the defense business would clear the way for GM to fold its Delco Electronics unit, which makes vehicle audio systems and other automotive electronics components, back into its Delphi Automotive Systems auto parts unit.
That would leave Hughes' lucrative telecommunications and space segment, which has been soaring on the growth of its DirecTV satellite broadcasting service. Those operations may be spun off into a separate company, analysts said.  
Hughes' missile systems, radar, electronic warfare, thermal imaging, information systems and other businesses posted operating profit of $688 million on revenues of $5.95 billion in 1995. The businesses are regarded as attractive assets in a consolidating defense industry.
McDonnell Douglas, which many analysts believe is ready to make an acquisition, declined to confirm any specific bidding, but said it was interested in Hughes.
McDonnell President Harry Stonecipher "has gone on record saying that he is interested in making an acquisition. He finds Hughes an interesting choice," a spokeswoman said.
