Chrysler Corp., formalising plans to keep President Robert Lutz on its payroll past the age of 65 and develop a new generation of managers, said its board of directors named Lutz vice chairman on Thursday.
The board gave Lutz's title of president to Chairman and Chief Executive Officer Robert Eaton, who will take on more day-to-day operating duties. The chief operating officer post that Lutz also held was left vacant.
Lutz, a former Marine fighter pilot who is credited with pumping new life into Chrysler's product development process and making it the most efficient in the industry, is expected to stay on for two more years, a company spokesman said.
Chrysler's board also on Thursday took steps to boost shareholder value by increasing its share buyback programme to $2 billion from $1 billion for 1997, and hiking the annual dividend to $1.60 a share from $1.40.
The new quarterly dividend of 40 cents a share is payable Jan. 15 to stockholders of record as of Dec. 15.
Chrysler said it has now raised its dividend seven times in the past three years and has increased the payout by 433 percent since September 1993. Thursday's actions come about 10 months after the company settled a bitter fight with Las Vegas billionaire Kirk Kerkorian.
Kerkorian and his Tracinda Corp., the automaker's largest single shareholder, had mounted a hostile takeover attempt of Chrysler last year, complaining the company was not doing enough to reward shareholders. A Tracinda representative could not be reached for comment Thursday.
In its personnel moves, Chrysler switched international and product development duties among two top executives considered to be in line to succeed Eaton some day, Thomas Gale and Francois Castaing.
Gale will trade his duties as head of international operations for Castaing's duties as head of engineering and product development.
Gale, who becomes executive vice president - product development, will retain his control over product design, while Castaing, who becomes executive vice president - international, will retain his control of powertrain operations.
Four other executive vice presidents did not receive job changes. But Chrysler spoksman Arthur Liebler said Gale and Castaing do not have an edge over them to be chosen as Chrysler's next chairman.
Lutz, who turns 65 in February, will report to Eaton and will focus primarily on the automaker's product development activities, and will serve as a "coach, mentor and advisor," the company said in a statement.
"As vice chairman, Bob will focus his considerable talents on the product development process ... specifically on making sure we retain our product edge well into the 21st Century," Eaton said in a statement.
"He will continue as a member of the Office of the Chairman and as a director of the Company and will continue to be involved in all major decisions," Eaton said.
Industry analysts said the moves were aimed at allowing Chrysler to continue to take advantage of Lutz' skills while not eliminating any prospective future chairmen.
"They've really kept out of a sort of hysterical concern about where people fit in the organisation -- and that might not be too bad," said David Cole, director of the University of Michigan's Centre for the Study of Automotive Transporation.
Cole theorised Chrysler may never hand out the president title to a rising executive, thus allowing its executive vice presidents to concentrate on their current jobs.
"What they're really doing is managing the transition from the old Chrysler to the new one," he said.
