General Motors Corp. was expected to seek bids for its Hughes Electronics Corp. defence businesses in the first of several transactions aimed at shedding GM's remaining non-automotive assets, analysts said Thursday.
The possible sale of Hughes' defence operations for as much as $8 billion was the latest of several scenarios that have emerged in recent months regarding GM's plans for Hughes, which it bought in 1985 for about $5 billion.
"I think the GM board and Hughes Electronics management are very interested in divesting the defence business, merging the Delco Electronics unit with the Delphi components business, and spinning off the communications business into a separate company," said CS First Boston defence analyst Peter Aseritis.
"My sense is that they want to find a merger partner for the defence business first," he added.
Analysts said several candidates could be interested in Hughes' defence units, including McDonnell Douglas Corp., Raytheon Co. and Northrop Grumman Corp.
GM declined to comment on the idea of splitting off the defence business, first reported by the Wall Street Journal.
"I have to classify it all in the realm of speculation, for which we have no comment," said GM spokeswoman Toni Simmonetti in New York.
However, GM disclosed in recent Securities and Exchange Commission filings that Hughes wants to "strengthen its leadership position through acquisitions, consolidations, realignments and divestitures," among other actions.
Hughes' missile systems, radar, electronic warfare, thermal imaging, information systems and other defence units, which earned operating profits of $688 million on revenues of $5.95 billion in 1995, are regarded as attractive plums in a consolidating defence industry.
McDonnell Douglas, which many analysts said was ready for an acquisition, declined to confirm any specific bidding activity, but said it was interested in Hughes. McDonnell President Harry Stonecipher "has gone on record saying that he is interested in making an acquisition. He finds Hughes an interesting choice," a McDonnell spokeswoman said.
But analysts cautioned that any transaction involving Hughes would be complicated, because of tax considerations for GM and its Class H shareholders.
Under a complex ownership structure, shareholders of GM Class H stock are entitled to dividends based on Hughes' earnings while GM owns the subsidiary's assets. Thus an outrightright sale would create a major tax liability for GM.
For that reason, analysts said GM was more likely to pursue a non-cash transaction, such as a stock swap or other type of deal that could take some time to structure.
"Clearly I would personally be surprised if there was an outright sale," said BT Securities analyst Wolfgang Demisch.
A sale of the defence business would clear the way for GM to fold its Delco Electronics unit, which makes audio systems and other components, back into its Delphi Automotive Systems auto parts unit.
That would leave Hughes' lucrative telecommunications and space segment, which has been soaring on the growth of its DirecTV satellite broadcasting service. Those operations may be spun off into a separate company, analysts said.
