Mary Graessle had wanted a house of her own, so three months ago she took a deep breath and bought a mobile home in Chateau Properties Inc.'s Lake in the Hills community here.
Today, her double-wide, vinyl-sided dwelling, built in a Redman Industries Inc. factory, is at the centre of some of the biggest merger activity ever to hit the manufactured housing industry.
Two competing mobile home community operators -- Sun Communties Inc. and Chicago investor Sam Zell's Manufactured Home Communities Inc., are bidding for Chateau, while Champion Enterprises Inc. recently agreed to acquire Redman in a $315 million stock swap.
The deals are expected to make Auburn Hills-based Champion the nation's largest home manufacturer and whoever buys Chateau will become the largest real estate investment trust in the industry. Some analysts expect Chateau, based in Clinton Township, Mich., to respond to the offers in the next few weeks.
Graessle's purchase decision was based on pure economics. The recently divorced, 48-year-old bookkeeper for a medical equipment firm simply found that she could get more house for her money in a manufactured home. She paid under $60,000 for a three-bedroom, 1,680 square-foot house, versus more than $100,000 for a similarly sized site-built home.
"I had a hard time with it at first. I did not want to move into a trailer park," she said. "But I felt better once I saw this place. It's not junked-up."
Lake in the Hills, a well-maintained community near Chrysler Corp.'s gleaming new headquarters in one of metro Detroit's hottest real estate markets, is one of a growing number of communities that are helping to revamp the image of mobile homes.
The dwellings that occupy them are no longer the tin boxes they were in the 1960s. They offer cathedral ceilings, drywall interiors, exterior dormers and other features that make them look more like conventional site-built homes.
"This is no longer the trailer of 30 years ago of 'I Love Lucy' fame," noted Champion Chief Executive Walter Young.
For the first six months of 1996, manufactured homes made up about 24 percent of U.S. housing starts and 32 percent of all sales of new homes.
Industry executives believe they can account for 30 percent of new housing starts in the next several years, although growth in home shipments has slowed to 9.5 percent this year from 20 percent two years ago.
Walter Wells, chief executive officer of Middlebury, Ind.-based Schult Homes Corp., said he believes the recent merger activity is the result of the industry's profit potential and shows it is losing its trailer-park stigma.
"Fundamentally, the industry continues to gain share of single-family housing starts," Wells said. "It's doing that because the product offered to consumers these days matches what a house should be -- it looks like a house, it has all the amenities of a site-built house and it offers a better value per square foot."
According to the Manufactured Housing Institute, the average price per square foot for a multi-section mobile home was $26.79, versus $56.28 for a site-built home, excluding land costs. The average multi-section home sold for $45,900, compared with $119,025 for a site-built home, excluding land costs.
The industry's growth also is a boon to suppliers. Grand Rapids, Mich.-based Universal Forest Products Inc., which makes 60 percent of the roof trusses used in manufactured homes, last month reported a 55 percent gain in second-quarter earnings to $8.2 million.
The industry's growth in urban areas, however, could be limited by difficulties in obtaining and development approvals for new manufactured home communities. Conventional homeowners still worry that nearby manufactured homes will drag down their property values.
"Zoning remains difficult to achieve," said Jeffrey Jorissen, chief financial officer for Farmington Hills, Mich.-based Sun Communities. "It's the not-in-my backyard syndrome."
But that has also created an opportunity for mobile home community operators because the limited supply of parks maintains strong demand for prime suburban home sites.
That allows firms like Sun and Chateau to increase land rents annually for homeowners like Graessle. She pays about $370 a month for her large lot, which offers backyard views of a pond and a stand of trees.
A prime location also means that her home is more likely to appreciate in value. Although such dwellings have steel frames that allow them to be transported, few are ever moved because of the prohibitive cost -- $4,000 to $10,000.
Graessle, herself a sceptic at first, said her total costs, between $700 and $800 a month for mortgage and land rent, are tough to beat.
"For what you pay for an apartment, you're getting three times the size and you own it," she said.
