Marking another step in the consolidation of the automotive interior parts industry, Canada's Magna International Inc. said Thursday it will acquire seat maker Douglas &amp; Lomason Co. for about $135 million in cash.
Under the deal, Magna made a $31-a-share tender offer for all of Douglas &amp; Lomason's 4.45 million common shares outstanding, which include some managment stock options to be bought at lower option prices.
Douglas &amp; Lomason shares rose 37.5 cents to $26.125 on Nasdaq prior to the merger announcement.
The acquisition will beef-up Markham, Ontario-based Magna's North American car and truck seating business, allowing it to better compete with Johnson Controls Inc. and Lear Corp..
Family-controlled Douglas &amp; Lomason, which had 1995 revenues of $561 million, was finding it more difficult to compete for new seating contracts from automakers, said James Hoey, chief financial officer.
"Unfortunately, in the auto industry these days, a $500 million company is not a big company any more," Hoey said. "This merger makes us much more competitive."
Douglas &amp; Lomason's profits have been hurt in the past year by model changeovers that had limited production at some key customers, but were recovering, analysts said.
The company earned $11.2 million on sales of $299 million in the first six months of 1996, up from year-earlier earnings of $4.7 million on sales of $285.7 million.
Some analysts said the deal was encouraged by Ford Motor Co. because it wanted Magna to become a stronger competitor to Lear and Johnson Controls, its principal seat suppliers.
Douglas &amp; Lomason currently supplies seats for the Ford Contour and Mystique cars and other models, while Magna's only major seat contract is for Chrysler Corp.'s minivans.
A Ford spokesman said the automaker did not take an active role in encouraging the merger, but he added that Ford was pleased with the deal.
Ford plans to cut its roster of 2,300 tier-one suppliers -- those it deals with directly -- in half over the next five years.
"The deal really levels the seating field somewhat," said John Casesa of Schroder Wertheim &amp; Co. "It should give Magna the critical mass to be a bigger player in that market."
Magna's traditional strength has been instrument panels, door panels and other interior components.
Magna, Johnson Controls and Lear have been working to build up their capabilties to supply complete interiors to automakers, including seats, instrument panels, door panels and carpeting.
Johnson Controls Inc. last month agreed to acquire Holland, Mich.-base Prince Automotive for $1.35 billion in cash to build up its non-seating capabilities.
Lear also has made several acquisitions in the past year to add to its capabilities.
