General Motors Corp.'s move to deflate Wall Street expectations about its fourth-quarter earnings will not likely be repeated by rivals Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp., analysts said Thursday.
GM told analysts Wednesday that its fourth-quarter North American incentive and other marketing costs were higher than earlier estimates, causing analysts to slash their estimates by hundreds of millions of dollars.
The automaker also said its product mix in Europe will be weaker than expected, with the low-margin Corsa subcompact making up a bigger portion of sales, and new product launch costs remain high.
As a result, many analysts slashed their estimates by 45 cents to 50 cents a share, helping to drive down GM stock by $1.375 over the past two days, to close at $54.50 on the New York Stock Exchange on Thursday.
Burnham Securities analyst David Healy now estimates that GM will earn $435 million, or 52 cents a share, in the fourth quarter, excluding extraordinary items.
Among other items, GM plans to take a charge of $170 million, or 22 cents a share, to make lump-sum payments to United Auto Workers members as part of the company's new contract with the union.
GM also previously disclosed that strikes in the United States and Canada during the quarter reduced its fourth-quarter profit by about $700 million. In the fourth quarter of 1995, GM earned $1.87 billion, or $1.98 a share.
Analyst Michael Ward of brokerage PaineWebber Inc. said GM appears to be viewing the fourth quarter as a "cleanup quarter" and may accelerate some costs to help improve next year's results.
But analysts did not expect Ford and Chrysler to reveal similar surprises with marketing costs.
"Both Ford and Chrysler are more heavily weighted toward trucks," said brokerage A.G. Edwards &amp; Sons analyst Michael Braig. "I don't know that I have to get any more skeptical than I have already been with them."
Ford could earn as much as $1.25 billion, or $1.03 a share, in the fourth quarter before extraordinary items, according to a consensus estimate by First Call Corp., which tracks analyst forecasts. That total excludes an expected charge of $400 million, or 34 cents a share, to cover costs of an early retirement program for salaried workers.
In the fourth quarter of 1995, new product launch costs held Ford's profit to $660 million, or 48 cents a share.
Although Ford continues to struggle with problems in Europe and Brazil, it is reaping benefits in North America from its new F-150 pickup truck, the new Ford Expedition sport utility vehicle and continued strong sales of the Explorer sport utility.
Ford said Thursday it sold 2 million trucks in a single year for the first time ever, including 800,000 F-Series trucks.
Lehman Brothers brokerage analyst Joseph Phillippi said Ford may announce another onetime charge for restructuring its European operations in the fourth quarter. Ford officials have declined to discuss plans for specific cost-cutting actions in Europe, but expect such actions to pay off in 1997.
Chrysler, which is enjoying a record sales year, is expected to cruise to a fourth-quarter profit of more than $1 billion, or about $1.40 a share, according to First Call. Driving the Chrysler earnings are strong sales of minivans, pickup trucks, and sport utility vehicles.
Chrysler chief economist Van Bussmann said Thursday that the automaker's market share, now at about 16 percent vs. 12 percent five years ago, should grow further in 1997. The automaker is introducing a new generation of large sedans and a new Dodge Durango sport utility vehicle based on its new Dakota pickup truck.
