United Auto Workers leaders said Monday they will likely choose a strike target in the next few days among the Big Three automakers, giving the union less than two weeks to craft a pattern-setting labour agreement.
Speaking to reporters at Detroit's annual Labour Day parade, UAW Vice President Ernest Lofton said the UAW is currently focusing on General Motors Corp. and Ford Motor Co. for its later-than-normal choice.
Chrysler Corp. will not likely be the lead company because it has been chosen as the Canadian Auto Workers' strike target, he said.
Labour contracts covering about 400,000 UAW and 53,000 CAW hourly workers at Detroit's Big Three automakers expire Sept. 14. The Canadian union has extended its deadline until Sept. 17.
"I imagine we've got to do it this week," Lofton said of the U.S. target selection. Some UAW officials said an announcement could come as early as Tuesday.
Historically, the UAW's target choice has come before Labour Day. The union normally focuses negotiations on a single company and the resulting agreement serves as a pattern for the other two to follow. The target company is threatened with a national strike, but none has occurred since 1976.
UAW President Stephen Yokich this year delayed the choice of a target to allow one of the companies to show itself more willing to meet union demands on job security and outsourcing issues.
Yokich, who ultimately will decide the target, said little at the Labour Day Parade, where more than 100,000 unionized workers marched through downtown Detroit.
"I'm not here to talk about negotiations. I'm here to talk about Labour Day," he told reporters.
Lofton, who heads the union's negotiations with Ford, said he believes Ford has a very good chance of being chosen because of its willingness to cooperate with the union on job security. He also sees little chance of a strike at the No. 2 carmaker.
"When we need to get a principle established, we've gone to Ford," Lofton said.
Ford has shown some willingness to encourage its suppliers to allow the UAW to organise some of their plants, including Johnson Controls Inc. UAW officials also have said Ford has offered the union some opportunities to shift work back into Ford plants from outside suppliers and is interested in a contract longer than the normal three-year period.
Lofton said it matters little that Ford negotiated the pattern agreement for the current contract in 1993.
"We never have taken turns," he said. "We go where we think we can get the best contract with the least amount of difficulties."
UAW Vice President Richard Shoemaker, who heads negotiations with GM, said talks with the world's largest automaker have not progressed much since Aug. 22, when the union announced that it would delay its target choice.
"There hasn't been a lot of difference in the status" at General Motors, Shoemaker said.
In an unusual twist to the UAW-dominated parade, a group of 18 Japanese trade unionists marched to show support for U.S. rubber workers in a dispute with Bridgestone-Firestone Inc., a unit of Japan's Bridgestone Corp.
The tire company hired more than 2,000 replacement workers during an 11-month strike that ended in May 1995 and has failed to call back several hundred former strikers.
"We're very upset about the way they've been treated," said Yoshiaki Jingu, a member of Japan's National Railway Workers Union. He added that the delegation also was "hoping to strengthen the labour movement back home" by coming to Detroit.
Also marching in the parade was AFL-CIO President John Sweeney, who was arrested Friday during a peaceful protest against the lack of negotiations in the nearly 14-month-old strike against the The Detroit News and Free Press.
"I'm always happy to go to jail on behalf of striking workers. We're fighting against some of the greediest employers," said Sweeney, who received a $50 ticket for disorderly conduct when he blocked the entrance to the News building.
Striking newspaper workers led the parade for the second consecutive year.
Sweeney said he was pleased with the support shown by union members for the Clinton-Gore presidential ticket, but said that labour needs to rebuild its grass-roots orgaization to regain its political clout.
"We have to move from a Washington-based organisation to a strong, active movement in every congressional district," he said.
