Automakers, eager to fill Americans' insatiable appetite for sport/utility vehicles, plan to introduce a variety of new models at next week's North American International Auto show here.
The annual festival in Detroit features new heights in size, style, luxury and refinement for the once-crude go-anywhere haulers.
Analysts are watching most closely the public reaction to Ford Motor Co.'s new luxury behemoth, the Lincoln Navigator, and Chrysler Corp.'s smaller Dodge Durango, which borrows its meaty front-end styling from the Dodge Dakota pickup truck.
But they also have their eyes on Subaru's new Forester, a car-based hybrid sport/utility vehicle that is among the first of a coming new breed of vehicles with truck-like bodies atop passenger car underpinnings.
The industry's continued fixation on sport/utility vehicles is understandable. U.S. compact sport/utility sales were the second-fastest growing segment in the industry in 1996, increasing 17.9 percent through November to 1,575,627 units and making up 11.3 percent of the market.
The only segment to grow faster was full-size sport/utility vehicles, up 51.5 percent to 379,260 vehicles through November.
"They're technically trucks, but a whole lot of people driving them don't know they're trucks," said James Holden, Chrysler's executive vice president of sales and marketing. "The minivans and Jeeps are in suburban garages all over the place, so the definition of trucks is sort of blurring."
In 1996, trucks, including sport/utility vehicles and minivans made up 66 percent of Chrysler's total vehicle sales.
The introduction of the Durango -- slightly larger than Ford's Explorer -- is expected to push that percentage even higher, and Holden said new sport/utility vehicles will push up other automakers' truck mix as well.
Ford is trying to push the luxury limits of the segment with the Navigator, a vehicle based on the F-150 pickup truck swathed in soft leather and likely to be priced in the same mid-$40,000 range as the Range Rover and Lexus LX450 vehicle.
Ford also is testing the consumer waters with two other concept sport/utilities, including an all-wheel drive version of its Taurus station wagon and a design study for a future Explorer model featuring more aggressive styling.
Mercedes-Benz also aims to whet the appetites of luxury sport/utility buyers by showing off the chassis for its Alabama-built M-Class sport/utility, which enters production next year. It is not showing off the vehicle's body, which is expected to be toned down from a concept vehicle shown at last year's show.
Mercedes also will spotlight a segment that has received little attention in recent years -- the luxury coupe -- by introducing its new CLK coupe to the world. The car borrows its elliptical headlamp styling from the larger E-Class sedan.
General Motors Corp., which dominated last year's show with the introduction of four new mid-size sedans, is expected to limit its splash to sports car buffs with the introduction of its first all-new Corvette in 14 years.
The fifth-generation plastic-bodied 'Vette is expected to offer more power and performance, but also more comfort and interior room for drivers and luggage.
More practical cars also are scheduled for introduction, including Ford's new Escort coupe, and Chrysler's next-generation LH family sedans -- the Dodge Intrepid, Chrysler Concorde, LHS and Eagle Vision.
Toyota Motor Corp will unveil its first serious assault on the U.S. minivan market, an all-new U.S.-built minivan based on the Camry family sedan. The Toyota Sienna is scheduled for introduction later this year.
"This is the first real Japanese foray into a North American stronghold," said Michael Robinet, an auto analyst with CSM Forecasting in Farmington Hills, Mich. "Toyota has gone squarely after Chrysler's NS minivans."
The Detroit auto show is open to the public Jan. 11 through Jan. 20.
