Chrysler Corp. said on Monday it has developed a new way to extract hydrogen from gasoline that could shave 10 years off the introduction of super-efficient electric cars powered by "fuel cells."
Chrysler said the system it developed would use normal gasoline to obtain hydrogen and power a future car with a 50 percent increase in fuel efficiency over current cars.
Cars using the system would be vastly more expensive than cars with internal combustion engines. But Chrysler officials said the system could be commercially viable by 2010 to 2015.  
If the system ever makes it out of the laboratory, drivers of gasoline fuel cell cars would simply refuel at a normal gasoline station, although the car would have a smaller tank than those used today. Chrysler hopes to have a working test vehicle within three years.
"We believe hydrogen needs to be processed from gasoline on-board vehicles because hydrogen isn't a practical fuel choice today," Francois Castaing, Chrysler's vice president of vehicle engineering, said at the North American International Auto Show here  
"Simply put, there's not any filling stations supplying it to a mass market," Castaing said.
Further development of the elaborate system -- called an on-board "refinery" by Chrysler advanced technologies specialist Christopher Borroni-Bird -- faces significant hurdles. Packed with precious metal catalysts to remove harmful sulfur and carbon monoxide emissions, it would currently cost 10 times more than a conventional internal combustion engine, or about $30,000.  
Long used in spacecraft applications, fuel cells generate electricity through the chemical reaction between hydrogen and oxygen, triggered by a platinum catalyst.
Detroit automotive engineers have studied them as a potential power source, but have scratched their heads at the problems associated with producing, distributing and storing highly volatile hydrogen fuel. The on-board "refinery" would solve that problem by extracting hydrogen from gasoline.  
"In time, we think development of this processor will help open the door to the use of fuel cells as the primary power source in a series hybrid vehicle that meets consumer demands for range and performance," Castaing said.
The first wave of modern electric vehicles from Detroit and Japan are now being introduced. They rely on batteries to provide electrical energy, but their range is severely limited.  
General Motors Corp became the industry's first automaker to introduce a new-generation vehicle, the $35,000 two-seat EV1, which can only drive 60 to 70 miles between charges.
Automakers also are tinkering with hybrid electric vehicles, which use a small internal combustion engine to drive a generator that supplies electricity to drive the wheels. The cars also use an interim storage device, such as a battery or flywheel.
Automotive engineers say the major problem with such hybrids is their high cost -- they essentially use two separate powertrains, instead of just one in conventional internal combustion cars.
