Chrysler Corp Vice Chairman Robert Lutz, who recently throttled back on his corporate responsibilities, said Tuesday he still sees himself as an integral part of Chrysler's product creation activities.
"I don't see that anything changed," Lutz told Reuters in an interview at Detroit's North American International Auto Show. As of January 1, Lutz gave up his president and chief operating officer titles to become vice chairman in anticipation of his 65th birthday in February.  
Although Lutz is largely credited with turning around Chrysler's product development operations by instituting a system of super-efficient "platform teams" to bring each new vehicle to market, he said he rarely gives orders to subordinates.
He said he will continue to act as a coach and mentor for the engineers and product executives responsible for new products.
Lutz said he and Chrysler Chairman Robert Eaton "are really more cheerleaders and coaches rather than the captain of the team that's out on the field actually playing.  
Eaton took over Lutz's chief operating officer duties and now has several executive vice presidents reporting directly to him.
Lutz said the new structure will give Eaton a chance to work more closely with the executive vice presidents, which will ease the transition to the next generation of leadership. He declined to comment on which executive vice presidents -- who include product development chief Thomas Gale, international chief Francois Castaing and sales and marketing chief James Holden -- have the best shot at succeeding the 57-year-old Eaton as the company's next chief executive.  
Lutz said he will probably stay at Chrysler for at most two "I have to use to use this transitional period to ease myself out gradually, because the harsh reality is that I cannot stay around until I'm 70," he said. "I would be seriously worried about a company that had its product fortunes guided by a 70-year-old guy. That usually results in cars directed at 70-year-olds."
Lutz said he will probably become less involved in Chrysler's manufacturing operations, but will probably spend more time visiting Chrysler's international operations, an area in which he has more expertise.
