Chrysler Corp Chairman and Chief Executive Officer Robert Eaton said Tuesday that the automaker will report record earnings for the full 1996 year, based on record worldwide sales of 2.97 million vehicles.
"We're going to have a record year," Eaton told Reuters in an interview at Detroit's North American International Auto Show.  
Chrysler's previous annual profit record came in 1994, when the company earned $3.713 billion. It earned $2.025 billion in 1995, when sales were held to 2.61 million units by the launch of its current line of minivans.
Eaton also said Chrysler in 1997 should be able to exceed its 1996 sales results because the company will be able to produce about 190,000 more trucks in 1997 than it built in 1996.  
The increase will be made up of added capacity for the new Dodge Durango sport/utility vehicle in Newark, Del., as well as increased line speeds for the Dodge Ram pickup truck in St. Louis, and increased production of Dodge Dakota pickup trucks in Warren, Mich.
Chrysler plans to unveil the Durango at the Detroit auto show later Tuesday.  
In other capacity moves, Eaton also said Chrysler has tentatively planned to add a third production shift to its Bramalea, Ontario, car assembly plant after it launches production of a new generation of LH family sedans later this year.
The LH line includes the Dodge Intrepid, Chrysler Concorde and LHS and Eagle Vision, which also are expected to be introduced at the show.
Eaton said despite sluggish industry car sales the increasing popularity and profitability of light truck models, the automaker has not cut back on investment in future car programs.  
However, he said Chrysler may shift its investment plans if trucks continue to gain market share. "We're going to put the money where the market goes," he said, adding that new, more efficient truck engines should allow Chrysler to continue to increase truck capacity without violating federal fuel economy laws.  
Eaton said he is pleased with the financial stability that Chrysler has acheived in recent years, but it still needs to continue to prove itself to Wall Street to earn a higher stock price and raise its price-to-earnings ratio above the current level of 7.3 percent. Chrysler shares were trading down 1/4 at 35-3/8.
He reiterated that Chrysler can earn still earn a profit even if U.S. automotive industry sales fall by 20 percent.
