General Motors Corp., stung by years of steady losses in its U.S. market share -- including another 1.3 percentage points in 1996 -- Wednesday vowed to aggressively reverse the trend in 1997.
"In 1997, we plan on aggressively increasing our U.S. share," Chairman Jack Smith told reporters at the North American International Auto Show here.
GM remains the world's largest automaker, but it has sunk far since its glory days in the 1960s when it commanded half of the U.S. market. As recently as the mid-1980s it held as much as 45 percent of the U.S. passenger car market.
In 1996, GM's U.S. light vehicle sales fell 2.7 percent to 4.74 million units, causing its market share to drop to 31.3 percent from 32.6 percent in 1995 and 33.1 percent in 1994.
Smith said the company's U.S. market share was hurt in 1996 by costly labor strikes in March and October, as well as by factory down-time to retool for new models.
The strikes by the United Auto Workers and Canadian Auto Workers cost GM an estimated $1.2 billion to $1.3 billion in profits in 1996 as the company lost production of about 300,000 vehicles, said GM North American Operations President G. Richard Wagoner.
Wagoner added, however, that the strikes were "worth it" because they resulted in productivity-related gains for the automaker.
Smith added that there could be other work stoppages, as GM still needed to reach local labor agreements at many of its assembly and parts plants.
Assuming GM's labor relations are peaceful, the company expects to utilize more than 90 percent of its North American factory capacity in 1997, which will significantly help the company's profitability.
GM's factory utilization in 1996 fell below the 85 percent it had in 1995, but was still well above the dark days of 1991-92, when it sank to 60-65 percent and led to massive losses.
Wagoner said GM was getting back on track toward reaching its goal of a 5 percent return on sales in North America but would not reach that level until the end of the decade.
Smith said GM was in a "strong position" to regain market share this year with 15 new models being introduced during the 1997 model year. GM will not sacrifice profitability to gain market share, but will stay competitive with other automakers in offering incentives, he said.
"What we're looking for is for our products to sell themselves," Smith said. "If we're in a market where somebody else has heavy incentives, we're going to be competitive. We're going to be a player."
GM, however, sees greater opportunities for growth in its international operations, where sales in 1997 are expected to expand to $38 billion from $35 billion in 1996.
Worldwide, Smith said GM holds about 17 percent of the global car and truck market and is aiming to raise that share by expanding into growing areas of the world, including Asia, Latin America and Eastern Europe.
GM will expand its investments in overseas operations faster than in the United States, but it does not plan to cut back on North American product investment.
Smith also announced that the automaker was developing new technologies that could help improve the fuel efficiency of its cars by 50 percent. Those include:
-- A new direct-injection diesel engine that is now being introduced in overseas markets. The four-cylinder diesel could raise fuel economy in GM's minivans to 38 miles per gallon from about 20 miles per gallon for current V-6 gasoline engines.
-- An electric-powered transmission flywheel that gives a boost to a conventional drivetrain and increases fuel economy. It also acts as a starter and alternator for the vehicle.
-- Lightweight aluminum body structures that save weight.
-- Hybrid electric vehicle technology that combine internal combustion engines and electric motors to gain dramatic range and efficiency improvements over both electric and conventional cars.
