Chrysler Corp. will report record earnings for 1996, based on record worldwide sales of 2.97 million vehicles, company chairman Robert Eaton said Tuesday.
"We're going to have a record year," Eaton said in an interview at Detroit's North American International Auto Show.
Chrysler's previous annual profit record came in 1994, when the company earned $3.713 billion. It earned $2.025 billion in 1995, when sales were held to 2.61 million units by the launch of its current line of minivans.
Eaton also said Chrysler in 1997 should be able to exceed its 1996 sales results because the company will be able to produce about 190,000 more trucks in 1997 than in 1996.
The increase will be come from added capacity for the new Dodge Durango sport utility vehicle in Newark, Del., as well as increased assembly line speeds for the Dodge Ram pickup truck in St. Louis, and increased production of Dodge Dakota pickup trucks in Warren, Mich.
Chrysler planned to unveil the Durango at the Detroit auto show later Tuesday.
Eaton said despite sluggish industrywide car sales and the increasing popularity and profitability of light trucks, the automaker has not cut back on investment in future car programmes.
He said, however, that Chrysler may shift its investment plans if trucks continued to gain market share.
"We're going to put the money where the market goes," he said, adding that new, more efficient truck engines should allow Chrysler to continue to increase truck capacity without violating federal fuel economy laws.
Eaton reiterated that Chrysler can earn still earn a profit even if U.S. automotive industry sales fall by 20 percent.
Separately, Chrysler Vice Chairman Robert Lutz, who recently cut back on his corporate responsibilities, said he he still saw himself as an integral part of Chrysler's product creation activities.
"I don't see that anything changed," Lutz said. As of Jan. 1, Lutz gave up his president and chief operating officer titles to become vice chairman in anticipation of his 65th birthday in February.
Lutz is largely credited with turning around Chrysler's product development operations by instituting a system of super-efficient "platform teams" to bring each new vehicle to market. He said he will continue to act as a coach and mentor to engineers working on Chrysler's car and truck programmes.
Lutz said he will probably stay at Chrysler for a maximum of two more years.
"I have to use this transitional period to ease myself out gradually, because the harsh reality is that I cannot stay around until I'm 70," he said. "I would be seriously worried about a company that had its product fortunes guided by a 70-year-old guy. That usually results in cars directed at 70-year-olds."
Chrysler stock was unchanged at $35.625 on the New York Stock Exchange.
