Ford Motor Co., moving to stem losses in Europe, said Sunday it will restructure but not close its giant Halewood car plant in England, with some job losses expected.
Susanne Wegerhoff, a Ford spokeswoman in Brentwood, England, said the automaker will announce operating changes for the plant after a meeting scheduled for Thursday with major unions. She denied a British newspaper report that Ford was threatening to close the facility.
"Halewood is going to have a future. What we are going to talk about is a plan to secure a realistic future for Halewood," Wegerhoff said in a telephone interview.
She declined to discuss specifics before the meeting with the Transport and General Workers union and other unions, adding that "it is people's careers we're talking about."
London's Observer newspaper reported on Saturday that Ford wanted to cut 500 jobs at Halewood and install new, more efficient work practices. The newspaper said Ford would threaten to close the plant or build its next-generation Escort elsewhere if unions fail to agree to the concessions.
The plant, which employs 6,500 workers, produces Ford's European-designed Escort sub-compact cars. Similar in size to the U.S.-built Escort, the cars are Ford's main mid-range models in Europe, competing with Volkswagen AG's Golf and General Motors Corp.'s Opel Astra.
The moves to restructure the Halewood plant come as Ford is struggling in Europe. In the third quarter of 1996, the latest figures available, Ford's losses in Europe climbed to $472 million from $320 million in the year-earlier period.
Ford Chairman Alex Trotman declined to comment last week on fourth quarter and full-year 1996 European results, but said he expected a profit in Europe for the current year.
Industry analysts consider the Halewood plant in northwestern England the least efficient of Ford's three Escort plants in Europe, including its sister facility at Dagenham in London, which also builds smaller Fiesta models, and the Saarlouis, Germany, plant.
"We have an issue of overcapacity, particularly in that segment of medium-sized cars," Wegerhoff said.
In a meeting Friday with Wall Street analysts, Ford executives said they planned to take actions to reduce excess capacity but did not offer specifics, Burnham Securities analyst David Healy said.
At the North American International Auto Show in Detroit last week, Ford Automotive Operations President Jacques Nasser said Ford wanted to avoid outright plant closures.
"We prefer to use the facilities and the resources we've got," Nasser said in an interview.
Ford's previous two European Escort models have been a disappointment for the automaker in the heart of the European car market. The next generation Escort, expected to debut in 1999, will be the first car engineered under Ford's new global product development structure, dubbed "Ford 2000."
