The scrutinized right engine of a Comair commuter aircraft was replaced on Jan. 4, five days before the plane plunged into a snowy Michigan field, killing 29 people, the airline said on Tuesday.
Meghan Glynn, a spokeswoman for Erlanger, Ky.-based Comair Holdings Inc, said the engine on the Embraer 120 Brasilia turboprop was replaced during routine maintenance operations. She said the company does not believe the engine change was a factor in the crash.
But the Pratt &amp; Whitney PW118 engine has become a major focus of the federal crash probe, as cockpit controls indicated that pilots may have tried to shut down the engine and activate a fire extinguishing system.
A spokesman for the National Transportation Safety Board was not immediately available to comment on the significance of the engine replacement.
But NTSB investigators have said previously there was evidence that the right engine's propeller may have been over-speeding, or racing out of control, shortly before the crash. There was no evidence of an in-flight fire.
The 30-seat commuter plane nosedived to earth in a snowstorm on Jan. 9 in Raisinville Township, Mich., as it was making a 30-degree left-hand turn on its approach to Detroit Metropolitan Airport from Cincinnati. Comair flight 3272's 26 passengers and three crew members died instantly in the fiery impact.
According to flight data recorder information released late on Monday, trouble started 38 seconds before the crash, when the plane kept turning to the left, even though the autopilot tried to move it to the right.
The autopilot disengaged and a stall warning -- a mechanism that vibrates the plane's control stick when wings lose lift -- went off about 17 seconds before the crash.
Within the next five seconds, the plane's nose tipped from three degrees up to 50 degrees down, and the aircraft rolled violently. Cockpit voice recordings revealed that the crew was silent during the doomed plane's final oscillations.
Aviation experts said an over-speeding engine would pose serious control problems for such a turboprop aircraft, since one engine would be providing too much thrust, throwing the plane out of balance.
"If you had an engine over-speed situation, you'd go through an engine shutdown," said Richard Schaden, a pilot and air crash attorney based in Bloomfield Hills, Mich.
In addition, NTSB officials said another pilot in the vicinity reported icing conditions 20 minutes after the crash. Ice formation on wings or propellers can wreak havoc an aircraft's ability to maintain lift and control.
"It sounded like it hit them all at once," Beau Murphey, a former Comair pilot, told the Detroit News. "If you're making a 30-degree left-hand turn and your right propeller over-speeds, man, you're in trouble."
Schaden said he is representing families of three of the victims and eventually plans to file lawsuits on behalf of them. He said the suits may be filed in Broward County, Fla., because the U.S. headquarters of the plane's Brazilian-based maker, Embraer SA, is located in Fort Lauderdale.
Michigan "is not a very good jurisdiction for victims these days," because of recent laws limiting non-economic damages to $500,000 in personal liability cases.
Meanwhile, recovery of wreckage at the crash site near Monroe, Mich., continued Tuesday, and more parts of the aircraft were moved to a building at the nearby county fairgrounds.
Monroe County Medical Examiner David Lieberman said all victim remains had been removed from the site and most had been identified. All died of massive injuries and had to be identified through fingerprints or dental records, he said.
