Pulling back from the battered car rental business, Ford Motor Co. said Tuesday it agreed to sell its interests in Budget Rent a Car Corp. to a Florida firm in a deal valued at about $350 million.
Team Rental Group Inc., the Daytona Beach-based buyer, already owns and operates 13 Budget franchises with 155 locations. It also leases commuter vans in 22 states and sells used vehicles.
"In light of investor interest in the entire rental car industry, we concluded that it is now in the best interests of Budget and Ford if Team Rental, Budget's largest franchisee, were to acquire Budget. It's a good fit," Ford Vice Chairman Ed Hagenlocker said in a statement.
Although the sale of Ford's preferred stock in Budget is not expected to close until March, the automaker said it will book an unspecified gain on the deal in its fourth quarter 1996 earnings.
The gain will partially reverse a $437 million after-tax write-off Ford took on its investment and on loans to Budget in the second quarter.
The deal also will add cash to Ford's coffers, bringing it closer to a future stock repurchase program.
Ford spokesman Christian Vinyard said top Ford executives told analysts Friday that the company will consider such repurchases after it cuts automotive costs by $1 billion and boosts cash reserves above their current level of $7 billion.
"We said it's on the menu, but way down the line," Vinyard said of a stock buyback program. "Don't be looking for it in the March or April timeframe."
Tuesday's deal marked a major shift by Ford to reduce its rental car holdings and reverses a plan announced by the automaker last year to acquire full ownership of Budget.
Ford also has said it may sell a partial stake in its Hertz Corp. subsidiary, among other strategic options it examining.
Archrival General Motors Corp.  has already divested its holdings in National Car Rental System Inc. and Avis Inc., while Chrysler Corp.'s Dollar and Thrifty units remain on the sale block.
Analysts said a new breed of bottom line-oriented investors was now taking a dominant role in car rental industry.
"That industry has gotten a little fat," said George Magliano, an automotive consultant with WEFA Group in New York. "They sit with a lot of cars that go unrented. And when that happens, the bottom line is destroyed," said George
Lisle, Ill.-based Budget, together with its independent licensees, ranks as the world's fourth-largest rental car business, Ford said.
Ford does not own Budget outright, but controls it through a stock purchase option.
"We have the right to direct the sale of the common shares and that's what we have done," Vinyard said.
A Team Rental spokesman said the company will pay $275 million in cash and issue non-voting preferred securities convertible into 4.5 million shares of Team common stock with a minimum value at closing of $75 million.
The board of Team Rental already has approved the deal, spokesman Steve Polito said.
Ford said it would continue to be a major supplier of cars and trucks to Budget's fleet. The transaction also includes a new vehicle supply arrangement between Ford and Budget.
Automakers began acquiring rental car companies in the mid-1980s with the idea that they could absorb unsold auto inventory into their fleets and keep Detroit's factories running.
That strategy worked for a few years, but then backfired when sales of barely used rental vehicles began eating into new car sales.
The Budget deal is the second major car rental sale in just over a week. On Jan. 6, investor H. Wayne Huizenga's Republic Industries Inc. bought National from a private investor group for $600 million. Republic bought Alamo Rent-A-Car Inc. late last year.
Ford's stock closed up 50 cents at $33.75 on the New York Stock Exchange.
