General Motors Corp. said Friday it will consolidate all of its commercial truck production in Flint, Mich., but will discontinue some engineering work there and in Lansing, Mich.
The moves ensure a solid future for the automaker's truck plant in Flint, which will expand its work force by up to 3,000 jobs by the year 2001, according to United Auto Workers officials. It now employs about 2,000 workers.
But the gain for Flint, a beleagured GM factory town hit hard by job losses in recent years, will be a blow to Detroit's inner city. GM said it will close a 78-year-old truck and bus chassis plant in Detroit that employs 494 people and move the production to Flint in the year 2000.
About 90 engineers at the six-story plant will be transferred immediately to GM facilities in Pontiac, Mich.
GM also will shift production of medium-duty commercial trucks from Janesville, Wis., to Flint, in 2001. The Janesville truck line employs about 1,000 people, but GM officials say many of those workers should be absorbed by Janesville's full-size sport utility vehicle assembly line.
GM said the Janesville plant will build the next-generation Chevrolet Tahoe and Suburban and GMC Yukon vehicles, but it did not disclose any plans to expand Janesville's capacity to build the trucks.
GM will begin building the popular sport utility vehicles at a second plant, in Arlington, Texas, later this year.
The auto giant said it will invest about $500 million in the Flint truck plant to prepare it for the medium-duty truck production and to expand its capacity to build the next generation of GM's full-size C/K pickup trucks.
The plant currently builds larger commercial versions of C/K pickups, but before Friday's announcement, GM had not assigned it a future product, leaving its fate clouded.
The investments will pay for two new body shops, a second paint shop and additional chassis, trim and general assembly lines at the facility. Expanded production at the plant will increase GM's truck production capacity by about 5 percent, allowing it to grab a bigger share of the expanding truck market.
However, long before Flint sees new jobs at the truck plant, it will have to give up the jobs of about 950 engine and transmission engineers, which GM will transfer to other facilities in Warren and Milford, Mich., in 1998.
GM also is discontinuing other powertrain engineering work in Lansing that employs about 600 people. That work also will be transferred to Warren and Milford.
Another 550 engineers have already been transferred to those locations from elsewhere in the Detroit area, bringing the total affected by the powertrain moves to 2,100.
The consolidation moves are aimed at reducing GM's production and operating costs, but GM officials did not specify the expected savings.
"The optimization of our facilities will allow us to reduce our structural costs, make better use of our resources and improve our productivity," said Ned McClurg, general manager of the GM Powertrain Group.
Few of the production workers displaced by the moves will be left without a paycheck. Under GM's UAW contract, it must continue to pay workers who are idled by such actions.
A day after it announced the long-awaited, $9.5 billion sale of its Hughes Aircraft defense operations to Raytheon Co., GM's stock had slipped 25 cents to $60.125 in late trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
