In addition to the $9.5 billion in value that General Motors Corp. and its shareholders will see from selling Hughes Aircraft Co., GM said Friday it will gain about $100 million in annual savings from no longer having to write off Hughes' goodwill, or intangible assets.
Each quarter, GM writes off about $25 million worth of good will associated with its 1985 purchase of the Hughes defence assets, said GM spokesman Mark Tanner. He said the write-offs will end after the complicated sale to Raytheon Co. closes, an event expected by midyear.
"Project Triple Play," as the massive deal was known to GM executives, includes the spin-off and merger of the Hughes defence business with Raytheon, the shift of Hughes' Delco Electronics business into GM's automotive operations, and the infusion of capital into Hughes' remaining telecommunications and space satellite business.
Most of the $4.4 billion in cash that GM will receive in the deal will be injected into the telcommunications business, which will continue to use the Hughes Electronics Corp. name.
GM Chief Financial Officer J. Michael Losh said the biggest single use of that cash will be to complete Hughes Electronics' $3 billion acquisition of satellite services company PanAmSat Corp.
GM also will use the cash to fund the growth of its DirecTV satellite broadcasting business and its Hughes Network Systems business.
The automaker has no plans to spin off the telecommunications business, which is growing quickly.
"We think it's a very exciting business to be in," GM Vice Chairman Harry Pearce said Thursday. "We think we're early in terms of the potential of the business."
Losh said also said holders of GM's Class H common stock will receive additional shares in the post-merger Raytheon to compensate them for GM's plan to move Delco Electronics out of Hughes and into into its Delphi Automotive Systems subsidiary.
Currently, Class H shareholders have a 25 percent interest in Delco's earnings, while GM and its automotive shareholders control the rest.
But Losh said Class H shareholders will get more than 25 percent of the new Raytheon shares allocated to all GM stockholders. GM's automotive shareholders will get less than 75 percent.
Overall, GM stockholders will control 30 percent of Raytheon after the Hughes merger.
GM Class H stock, currently tied to Hughes' Delco, defence and telecommunications business, closed up 37.5 cents Friday at $63 on the New York Stock Exchange.
Raytheon closed up 25 cents at $48.75, while GM's automotive stock lost 50 cents to $60.125.
