In addition to the $9.5 billion in value that General Motors Corp and its shareholders will gain from the sale of Hughes Aircraft Co, GM said Friday it will gain about $100 million in annual savings from no longer having to write off Hughes' goodwill.
Each quarter, GM writes off about $25 million worth of goodwill associated with its 1985 purchase of the Hughes defense assets, said GM spokesman Mark Tanner. He said the write-offs will end after the complicated sale to Raytheon Co closes, an event expected by mid-year.  
In an interview Friday, GM Chief Financial Officer J. Michael Losh also said GM's Class H shareholders will receive additional shares in the post-merger Raytheon to compensate them for GM's plan to move Delco Electronics out of Hughes and into into its Delphi Automotive Systems subsidiary.
The amount of Raytheon shares that will be distributed to holders of Class H shares versus the holders of GM $1-2/3 par-value, or autmotive, stock, will be determined when GM assigns a value to Delco, which makes automotive electronics.
"That's a valuation that's being done by the investment bankers right now," Losh said.  
Currently, Class H shareholders have a 25 percent interest in Delco's earnings, while GM and its automotive shareholders control the rest. But Losh said Class H shareholders will get more than 25 percent of the new Raytheon shares allocated to all GM stockholders. GM's automotive shareholders will get less than 75 percent.
Overall, GM stockholders will control 30 percent of Raytheon after the Hughes merger.
Delco will be valued based on its current performance as well as its future performance potential as a part of Delphi.  
For the first nine months of 1996, Delco's operating profit fell to $562 million from $655 million in the same period of 1995. Revenues for the 1996 period fell to $4.1 billion from $4.15 billion in 1995.
"If your're an H shareholder, in effect what you get is a new defense stock that's the equivalent of your 25 percent holdings in (Hughes) defense today, plus compensation for the 25 percent holding in Delco Electronics that's going back to GM and an exchange of today's H stock for a new H stock that's a telecommunications and space stock."  
Kenneth Blaschke, an analyst with Dean Witter Reynolds Inc, said he did not expect the valuation of Delco to significantly alter the distribution ratio of new Raytheon shares beyond the 75 percent-25 percent mix.
GM Class H stock, currently tied to Hughes' Delco, defense and telecommunications business, closed up 25 cents Friday at $63 on the New York Stock Exchange.
Raytheon closed up 12 cents at $48.625, while GM's automotive stock lost 37.5 cents to $60.  
Losh said "Project Triple Play," as the massive transaction was known to GM executives, will give Class H shareholders a stock that tracks a more focused, fast growing telecommunications company.
The three steps of the deal as they saw it included the the spinoff and merger of Hughes defense assets, pulling Delco back into GM's automotive operations and infusing capital into Hughes remaining telecommunications and space operations.
Most of the $4.4 billion in cash that GM will receive in the deal will be injected into the telcom business, which will continue to use the Hughes Electronics Corp name.  
The biggest single use of that cash will be to complete Hughes Electronics' $3 billion acquisition of satellite services company PanAmSat Corp.
GM also will use the cash to fund the growth of its DirecTV satellite broadcasting business and its Hughes Network Systems business. The automaker said it has no plans to spin off the telecommunications business, which is growing rapidly.
"We think it's a very exciting business to be in," GM Vice Chairman Harry Pearce said on Thursday. "We think we're early in terms of the potential of the business."
