Trampling a half-century of tradition, United Auto Workers President Stephen Yokich is reinventing the way the union negotiates its biggest and richest contract.
At every turn in the triennial ritual of labor negotiations with Detroit's Big Three automakers, Yokich has surprised industry observers with new, ground-breaking twists, such as dispensing with the traditional concept of a "strike target."
On Tuesday, he quietly anointed Ford Motor Co. to lead the negotiations for a new contract covering over 385,000 workers. At the same time, the UAW will continue talks with General Motors Corp. and Chrysler Corp. -- leaving the door slightly open for them to come up with a last minute offer and putting subtle pressure on Ford.
"Yokich is an unusually confident and bold leader," said Harley Shaiken, a professor of labor relations at the University of California-Berkeley. "He knows where he wants to go, and if a precedent is preventing from getting there, he throws it out."
The 61-year-old Yokich, who became the UAW's eighth president last year, has even downplayed the importance of enforcing a strict pattern agreement at all three automakers -- something held sacred by the UAW for decades.
Every three years since roughly the end of World War II, the UAW has selected a strike target to hammer out a pattern agreement for all three companies, with the threat of a national strike if talks run past contract's expiration.
In many cases, the contracts were negotiated partly through the media, with both sides publicly castigating each other.
"I remember back in the early to mid-80s, it was an 'I'll take whatever I can get' attitude on both sides," said PaineWebber analyst Michael Ward.
But Yokich prefers to duck the media limelight and has gone out of his way to show that he doesn't want a strike, even to the point of saying that he has banishing the word "strike target" from his vocabulary.
"Our members didn't elect us to go out on strike, they elected us to bring them an agreement," Yokich said last month.
Yokich, who worked as a tool and die maker before entering union politics, has a close relationship with Peter Pestillo, Ford executive vice president of corporate relations, which analysts believe will help smooth the way for a quick settlement.
Indeed, UAW officials in recent days say that with less than two weeks to go before the contract expires Sept. 14, bargainers at all three companies are closer to agreements than at the same point in any prior negotiation year.
There may be other breakthroughs -- the UAW and Ford have discussed the possibility of a longer contract of up to five or six years, and Ford has shown some willingness to encourage suppliers to allow the UAW to organize their plants.
Labor analysts said they expect him to come up with an agreement that provides some improved job security for UAW members, but will not hamstring the automakers' competitiveness.
"Yokich is a fairly sensible negotiator," Ward said. "He has a big-picture view of the industry."
He also has a big-picture view of labor, causing him to embark last year on what may one day be viewed as his greatest accomplishment, the proposed merger of the UAW, the United Steel Workers and the International Association of Machinists and Aerospace workers into a giant metal trades union with over 2 million members.
Retired UAW leaders applaud Yokich's new direction and do not view him as tearing down their legacy.
"He's breaking out of the mold and trying something different," Doug Fraser, who was the UAW president in the late 1970s and early 1980s. "In my view it can only be positive."
