General Motors Corp. stock rose Friday on widening optimism that the auto giant's board of directors on Monday will reward shareholders with a dividend increase and stock buyback programme of up to $5 billion, analysts said.
GM shares were up $1.125 to $63 in composite trading after hitting a 52-week high of $63.75 on the New York Stock Exchange in early afternoon trading.
Analysts said GM, flying high a week after it announced the sale of its Hughes Aircraft defence operations to Raytheon Corp. in a deal worth $9.5 billion, was working to catch up with rivals Chrysler Corp. and Ford Motor Co. in returning cash to shareholders.
"I think GM is looking at this rightly. It's time to pay the shareholders for their patience," said CS First Boston analyst Nicholas Colas. "They want to hand some cash back to shareholders who have been long waiting on the suffering side."
GM spokeswoman Toni Simonetti said GM was scheduled to consider its dividend at the board meeting, but would not comment on a possible increase or stock buyback programme.
The automaker could have afforded such a move last fall, but analysts said it did not want a big payoff to shareholders throwing a wrench into tense contract negotiations with the United Auto Workers union.
Analysts estimated that the board, which holds its regularly scheduled board meeting for February on Monday, will increase the quarterly dividend by 10 cents to 20 cents a share and announce $2 billion to $3 billion in stock repurchases this year. GM now pays a quarterly dividend of 40 cents a share.
Colas said his estimate that GM will buyback $3 billion worth of stock this year was based on expectations that GM ended 1996 with $15 billion in cash, $3 billion above its target of $12 billion.
He noted that Chrysler, less than a third of GM's size, plans to repurchase $2 billion worth of shares in 1997. Chrysler's buyback programme has put a floor under the automaker's stock, allowing it to outperform its rivals.
Smith Barney analyst David Garrity said the board could authorise as much as $5 billion in repurchases over a longer period of time.
GM's dividend hike will be aimed at improving the automakers dividend yield to competitive levels, analysts said. It now is at 2.59 percent, compared with 4.56 percent for Ford and 4.57 percent for Chrysler.
A regular share repurchase programme also would lend stability to GM's share price and help it sustain its recent gains, analysts say.
In the past month alone, GM shares have risen about 15 percent, from about $55 a share, largely on anticipation of the Hughes deal, news that it settled its industrial espionage dispute with Volkswagen AG and expectations of strong cash flow.
"They've packed an awful lot of good news into a short period of time," Bear Stearns &amp; Co. analyst Nicholas Lobaccaro said. "They've accomplished the goal of getting the stock price up, and now the challenge is to sustain it. That can only get done through consistent earnings for several quarters."
The euphoria over the Hughes deal has overshadowed GM's fourth quarter earnings, which are expected to show the ravages of lower production due to strikes and model launches.
GM has said U.S. and Canadian strikes in October and November reduced its fourth quarter results by $700 million. The automaker also is taking a $170 million charge for lump-sum payments associated with its new United Auto Workers contract.
According to consensus Wall Street estimates, GM on Tuesday is expected to post fourth quarter earnings of about $385 million, or 51 cents a share, which excludes the $170 million charge.
In the fourth quarter of 1995, GM earned a record $1.9 billion, or $1.98 a share, a figure helped by about $577 million worth of tax benefits.
