For the second time in a row, the United Auto Workers union has chosen Ford Motor Co. to lead the union's labor contract negotiations with the Big Three U.S. automakers, officials said late on Tuesday.
UAW vice president Ernest Lofton said union leaders notified Ford executives of the decision Tuesday, but added that the union was not viewing the company as a traditional "strike target" in the talks.
"They are the lead company in regards to resolving our 1996 negotiations," Lofton said Tuesday night in a brief interview on WDIV-TV.
The selection will allow the No. 2 U.S. automaker to negotiate an agreement that will serve as a pattern for rivals General Motors Corp and Chrysler Corp to follow.
Contracts covering nearly 400,000 U.S. hourly workers at all three companies expire September 14. Despite the conciliatory talk, Ford as the target company faces the threat of a national strike if it fails to reach an agreement before the expiration.
Ford spokesman Jon Harmon would only read the following statement Tuesday: "We're hard at work negotiating with the UAW at the subcommittee level as well as at the main table, and we are encouraged by the tone of the negotiations," he said.
"Our team is working under the assumption that we will be closely involved in whatever transpires over the next two weeks. And that's been our preference all along."
The decision marks the second time in a row that the union has chosen Ford to lead its Big Three U.S. negotiations. Ford, which employs about 104,000 UAW members,  negotiated the current pact in 1993 and is widely viewed to have the best union relations among the three automakers.
The UAW's top priorities in the 1996 negotiations are improved job security for its workers and restrictions on the automakers' ability to shift work to lower-cost outside suppliers. Analysts say Ford has shown willingness to cooperate with the union on both fronts.
General Motors has been shrinking its workforce in an effort to become cost-competitive, presenting negotiators with more difficult problems to overcome. The UAW typically has first gone to the company where it believes it could reach the most favorable contract with the least amount of difficulty.
Chrysler, which UAW officials say was less willing to meet their demands, has instead been chosen as the Canadian Auto Workers union's negotiating target. The CAW's Big Three labor contract, covering about 53,000 workers, has been extended until September 17.
