General Motors Corp.'s board of directors Monday approved a $2.5 billion stock buyback programme and a 25 percent dividend hike, but the moves apparently were not enough to satisfy Wall Street's inflated expectations.
GM shares were off $1.875 at $60.625 in early afternoon trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
"Failure to generate a positive surprise is punished without mercy by the stock market," said Burnham Securities analyst David Healy, who noted that GM's moves were widely anticipated.
Some analysts had predicted GM would boost the payout by up to 50 percent and commit to buying back up to $5 billion worth of stock, which pushed GM shares up last week.
The auto giant said the stock repurchases would take place over the next 12 months and at current prices would reduce the number of its automotive shares by slightly more than 5 percent.
GM raised its quarterly dividend on the automotive shares to 50 cents a share from 40 cents previously. It was the third increase since May 1995, but left GM's payout well short of its peak of 75 cents a share in 1989 and 1990.
The automaker does not plan to release its year-end 1996 earnings results until Tuesday, but it said Monday that it ended 1996 with a whopping cash balance of $17 billion, up from $10.2 billion at the end of 1995.
Many analysts had estimated GM's cash pile at $15 billion.
Auto analyst Scott Merlis, president of Merlis Automotive International, said that showed GM had the resources to buy back shares for a long time to come.
"I would see this repurchase as the tip of the iceberg and the first of a sustainable repurchase programme that can boost earnings per share by 5 percent a year," Merlis said.
GM Chairman Jack Smith said in a statement that the automaker will consider additional stock buybacks in the future and added that GM's board was committed to enhancing shareholder value.
He also noted that GM's new dividend rate would be sustainable through the ups and downs of the business cycle.
"We intend to pursue the repurchase programme vigorously," Smith added. "The decision to announce a $2.5 billion programme at this time is based on our belief that we can execute a programme of this size quickly and with confidence."
GM last issued common stock in 1992, offering 50 million shares to raise about $2.1 billion to help carry the automaker through the worst financial crisis in its history. GM has bought back about $800 million in stock over the past two years, but has reissued shares to support employee benefit and executive compensation programmes.
GM's board also raised the dividend on its Class H shares, which are tied to the performance of its Hughes Electronics Corp. subsidiary, to 25 cents a share from 24 cents.
The new dividends on both the Class H and automotive stocks are payable March 10 to shareholders of record as of Feb. 6.
