General Motors Corp.'s 50.8 percent drop in fourth quarter earnings from continuing operations earnings was a disappointment long anticipated by Wall Street, but the automaker's strong cash generation has hopes raised for a strong performance in 1997.
Despite the earnings drop, GM's cash and marketable securities topped the $17 billion mark at year-end, up $2.5 billion from September 30, 1996 and up $6.8 billion from a year earlier.  
Although $1 billion of GM's fourth quarter cash increase came from a tax refund, analysts said the $1.5 billion increase in cash from strike-marred operations was impressive.
"It's a good news bad news quarter," said Burnham Securities analyst David Healy. "It suggests that if 1997 is normal and largely free of strikes, it ought to be another good year for cash generation."
GM's fourth quarter North American production volume, mauled by strikes and new model launches, fell 11.4 percent, resulting in a $124 million North American loss, compared to a year earlier profit of $603 million.  
But analysts expect GM to bounce back in 1997 with new models and robust production. And as the new product benefits that management has been promising for several years materialize, GM's 1997 profits and cash flow should swell.
J.P. Morgan analyst David Bradley estimated that GM in 1997 could wind up with $28 billion in cash at the end of 1997, including about $4.5 billion from the sale of Hughes Aircraft Co to Raytheon Corp.
That's about $15 billion above GM's cash reserve target of $13 billion, and he added that GM could make up to $12 billion of that available for stock repurchases.  
"This company could have enough cash to buy back a quarter of its shares," Bradley said.
GM on Monday committed to repurchasing $2.5 billion worth of stock in the next 12 months, but GM Chief Financial Officer J. Michael Losh said the automaker wants to complete that quickly and "revisit" the stock buyback issue.
Nonetheless, GM shares fell 1-1/8 to 60-3/4, reflecting profit taking on the stock's climb from the last month, earnings that were roughly in line with expectations  and continued market disappointment that GM did not announce a bigger stock buyback program.  
"I think the disappointment of yesterday was not counterbalanced by positive surprises today," said Prudential Securities analyst Philip Fricke.
GM reported that its fourth quarter net income from continuing operations, which included a host of extraordinary items, came to $786 million, or $0.92 a share, down from $1.6 billion, or $1.95 a share, a year earlier.
The results also included weaker profits in Europe, which is plagued with a slumping market. Earnings from International Operations, long GM's standout performer, will likely be flat or declining next year, putting more pressure on GM's North American operations.
Fricke said 1997 is a "show and tell" year for that must reveal steady improvements in the automaker's vehicle profit margins.
"What will be the telling factor is whether the improvement in operating income goes way beyond what can be explained by higher production volumes," he said.
To accomplish that, GM's new cars and trucks must be a hit with consumers and help reverse the automaker's long-term slide in U.S. market share. GM ended 1996 with about 31 percent of the U.S. market, down from 32.4 percent in 1995.
"GM has to make believers out of people as far as market share goes," added Healy. "If they don't gain market share this year, I don't know if they ever will."
