Members of the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) forum must accelerate liberalisation in the fast-growing telecommunications sector, an Australia official told an APEC meeting on Wednesday.
Telecommunications Minister Richard Alston said the world's US$2.0 trillion telecommunications and information technology market presented huge investment opportunities.
"APEC leaders and ministers have...consistently confirmed a clear agenda for APEC to liberalise the telecommunications environment," Alston said told the meeting of APEC telecommunications ministers.
"This meeting aims to accelerate this agenda by identifying areas where further work is needed and by endorsing new forward looking intiatives," he added.
Total global telecommunications investment for 1996 is estimated to be about US$161 billion, said John Legere, president and chief executive officer of AT&amp;T Asia Pacific.
Australia's telecommunications industry, meanwhile, was growing faster than the nation's economy -- a similar story to other APEC nations, Alston said.
The U.S. telephone giant, which has a presence in every market in the Asia Pacific, is keen to expand in the region through further investment, Legere told Reuters in an interview.
"Asia-Pacific is by far the fastest growing area in the world. The telecommunications services per density is the lowest in the world. AT&amp;T sees Asia-Pacific as one of the key markets it needs to tap into for future growth," Legere said.
Legere said the industry investment opportunities would be diverse, from mobile communications to fixed telephone lines, as well as the Internet, on-line and entertainment services.
Australia's Alston gave a local example on the investment opportunities that have been created since the country started deregulating its telecommunications market in 1992 and which is to be fully deregulated by July 1, 1997.
Australia's two largest telecommunications carriers state-owned Telstra Corp and Optus Communications are investing A$7.5 billion on laying their respective fibre optic cable networks to carry telephony, on-line and interactive services.
"We shall continue to pursue and encourage private sector investment and provide for a liberalised telecommunications environment," he said.
Indonesia is also in the process of opening up its telecommunications market and had attracted a large flow of funds as a consequence, said Jonathon Parapak, secretary general of Indonesia's telecommunications department.
Parapak told Reuters that Indonesia, which has a low fixed telephone penetration rate, planned to invest over US$10 billion, with most of the funds coming offshore, in the five years leading to 1999.
"We needed this foreign investment as we knew we could not do it by ourseleves," Parapak said.
Indonesia had at the end of 1995 1.7 telephone lines per 100, but the country plans to have five telephone lines per 100 people by the year 2000, Parapak said.
The APEC ministers hope to agree on a policy framework for the telecommunications and information industry by Friday, the final day of the APEC meeting.
APEC groups Australia, Brunei, Canada, Chile, China, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Japan, South Korea, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, the Philippines, Singapore, Taiwan, Thailand and the United States.  
"This meeting aims to accelerate this agenda by identifying areas where further work is needed and by endorsing new forward looking intiatives," he said.
Alston told the second APEC telecommunications ministers meeting that the world's telecommunications and information technology industry was currently worth US$2.0 trillion.
Australia's telecommunications industry was growing faster than the nation's economy -- a similar story to other APEC nations, he said.  
World telecommunications investment for 1996 is estimated to be about US$161 billion, said John Legere, president and chief executive officer of AT&amp;T Asia Pacific.
The U.S. telephone giant, which has a presence in every market in the Asia Pacific is keen to expand in the region through further investment, Legere told Reuters in an interview.
"Asia-Pacific is by far the fastest growing area in the world. The telecommunications services per density is the lowest in the world. AT&amp;T sees Asia-Pacific as one of the key markets it needs to tap into for future growth," Legere said.  
Legere said the industry investment opportunities would be diverse, from mobile communications to fixed telephone lines, as well as the Internet, on-line and entertainment services.
Australia's Alston gave a local example on the investment opportunities that have been created since the country started deregulating its telecommunications market in 1992 and which is to be fully deregulation on July 1, 1997.
Australia's two largest telecommunications carriers, state-owned Telstra Corp and Optus Communications, are investing A$7.5 billion on laying their respective fibre optic cable networks to carry telephony, on-line and interactive services.  
"We shall continue to pursue and encourage private sector investment and provide for a liberalised telecommunications environment," he said.
Indonesia is also in the process of opening up its telecommunications market and had attracted a large flow of funds as a consequence, said Jonathon Parapak, secretary general of Indonesia's telecommunications department.
Parapak told Reuters that Indonesia, which has one of the lowest fixed telephone penetration rates, planned to invest over US$10 billion, with most of the funds coming from offshore, in the five years leading to 1999.  
"We needed this foreign investment as we knew we could not do it by ourseleves," Parapak told Reuters in an interview.
Indonesia had at the end of 1995 1.7 telephone lines per 100, but the country plans to have five telephone lines per 100 people by the year 2000, Parapak said.
The APEC ministers hope to agree on a policy framework for the telecommunications and information industry by Friday, the final day of the APEC meeting.  
APEC groups Australia, Brunei, Canada, Chile, China, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Japan, South Korea, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, the Philippines, Singapore, Taiwan, Thailand and the United States.
-- Sydney newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
