Australian Internet service provider OzEmail Ltd on Thursday launched long-distance telephone calls over the Internet at a quarter the cost charged by existing Australian phone companies Telstra Corp and Optus.
OzEmail, which is based in Sydney but listed on the technology-heavy NASDAQ market in the United States, said users do not need a personal computer for the new service. A call can be made from any telephone by dialling a number which then connects the call to the Internet and the destination.
The new service, called a world first by OzEmail, was launched with former Australian Prime Minister Paul Keating making the first call to Mark Roberts, telecommunications analyst at Montgomery Securities in the United States.
"Today, I am pleased to launch what I am confident will become one of the major means by which we will communicate with the rest of the world," Keating told reporters at the launch.
Keating described the call's quality as being equal to or better than a call on a cellular phone. Under OzEmail's new service, calls to the U.S. and Britain would cost A$21 (US$27) per hour compared with about A$77 charged by Telstra and Optus.
"Calls over the Internet are less expensive because of the superior bandwidth utilisation of the Internet as compared to the traditional technology employed by telephone companies," OzEmail chief executive Sean Howard told reporters.
The service would initially be exclusive to OzEmail's 100,000-plus Internet customers, who would only be able to place long-distance calls within Australia and to New Zealand, the United States and Britain in the early stages, Howard said.
After two months the service would be made available to the public with the residential market targeted first, Howard said. The reach of its calls will then be expanded to Japan, Hong Kong and Italy, with Taiwan and another Asian country a possibility.
Calls can only be made from Australia or by Australians travelling overseas, as regulations prevented OzEmail from providing the service to citizens of other countries.
Keating said: "It opens up a new market, particularly for low-income families that were previously excluded from the long-distance market because of the high cost."
Under Keating's term as prime minister, which ended in March 1996, Australia started deregulating its telecommunications industry, which will become fully deregulated on July 1, 1997.
The current coalition government of Prime Minister John Howard is also planning to sell a third of state-owned Telstra, which could raise an estimated A$8.0 billion (US$6.2 billion).
Any valuation on Telstra could be affected by the impact of cheaper telephone calls over the Internet, Keating said.
"This might even lower the valuation of Telstra, but I don't have to worry about that anymore," a smiling Keating said.
Australian telecommunications analysts agreed that cheaper telephone service via the Internet would be a threat to both Telstra and Optus, which also plans a share-market float.
"Local telephony over the Internet has been a threat to the carrier market for some time and that is why Telstra and Optus are trying to get involved in the Internet and carry more Internet traffic," one Sydney-based telecoms analyst said.
"I don't think they (Telstra and Optus) will be encouraging local calls over the Internet," the analyst said.
(A$1 = US$.775)
