St George Bank Ltd managing director Jim Sweeney said on Thursday the bank is aiming to achieve higher costs savings from the Advance Bank Australia Ltd merger than the A$140 million currently targetted.
"We are on the public record as saying that we want to take A$140 million out. Our private aim is to do better than that," Sweeney told Reuters in a telephone interview.
"I am not going to go to the market with any disappointing news on the cost front over the next 12 to 18 months," Sweeney said.  
The St George-Advance merger cleared its final hurdle on Tuesday, when the Supreme Court of New South Wales approved Advance's capital reduction programme as part of the scheme of arrangement between the two Sydney-based banks.
Sweeney said the merged bank, which will trade as St George, will have a bigger balance sheet which will enable it to introduce new products which could, in turn, increase revenue.
"We are paying a huge amount of attention to costs, but we are also paying a huge amount of attention on the revenue side and there are a number of things that we will announce in the next couple of weeks that will also give that a major boost."  
"There is something in the pipeline that we are quite excited about, which we think is a revenue advantage compared with others," said Sweeney, but would not add further details.
Sweeney said the merged bank, which would double the size of St George to a bank with A$40 billion in assets, would look at outsourcing some of its activities in order to reduce costs.
"We are really looking at everything that gets done in the bank...and we want to strip the place down and start again."
"We are questioning everything...for instance do you need to manage your own mortgages? could these things be outsourced? do you you need to own your own mainframe?," Sweeney said.  
Sweeney said the country's mortgage market was patchy. The main lending product of St George, which changed from a building society to a bank in 1992, is mortgages.
"It is very patchy. I have been disappointed that the new cottage (home) starts haven't been stronger than what they are."
"St George on its own has been writing some very handsome figures over the last few months, but it seems to be that other organisations are experiencing similar situations and some are not going too well at all," Sweeney said.
Australia's latest housing data showed housing finance fell 2.9 percent in November.  
St George would have a market capitalisation of over A$4.00 billion after the merger, based on current prices making it one of the countries top 25 listed companies.
But, Sweeney said the merger did not mean that the bank was takeover-proof. National Australia Bank Ltd has a 6.8 percent stake in St George and has been seen by some investors as a predator for St George.
"I don't think in the long run that any publicly-listed company is takeover proof," Sweeney said. Results of the Wallis Inquiry into Australia's financial system, which are due in March, may loosen current bank ownership rules.  
The Advance takeover was St George's fifth takeover attempt of a fellow regional bank over the past two years, but Advance was also the largest bank St George tried to take over.
"Whilst we have certainly had some disappointments through a range of different reasons, if you were ever going to suceed (in a takeover) this was the one to succeed with because it's the one with one fell swoop makes an enormous amount of difference." St George's offer values Advance at over A$2.6 billion. The merger is expected to be formally complete on January 29, but it is expected to take around two years to integrate the two banks.
-- Sydney newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
