Singapore's Communications Minister Mah Bow Tan said on Thursday that APEC members must strike a balance between liberalising their telecommunications market and maintaining local control.
"One of the things we are discussing, what are the benefits of liberalisation, as opposed to the need to protect local companies from being swamped," Mah said after addressing Asia Pacific Economic Coooperation (APEC) forum telecommunications ministers here.
"The benefits of liberalisation are clear, but also we need to balance that benefit with making sure that it is not just foreign companies that make all the profits," Mah told Reuters in an interview.
"So that is part of the bargaining, of discussions, that is taking place in this meeting," said Mah, who has offered to hold the next meeting of APEC's telecommunication and information technology ministers in Singapore in mid-1998.
Mah said there were massive investment requirements in the infrastructure of the region's telecommunications industry, with most of this investment likely to come from the private sector.
"In dollar amounts there is a lot of money to be invested, but the question is, who gets to take part in that investment," said Mah, who will be in talks with other APEC telecommunications ministers until Friday.
"If you take everybody into account there are a lot of investment opportunities and this is one of the areas of potential, not just for our (Singapore) companies but for companies in other countries like America, Canada, Australia and Japan," Mah said.
In May, Mah brought forward Singapore's plans to end the local telephone monopoly by state-controlled Singapore Telecom to the year 2000 from 2007. However, Singapore plans to open its cellular phone market to competition next year.
Last month, Mah also announced a further sell-down of Singapore Telecom, which will leave the government owning 75 percent of the telephone carrier.
APEC groups Australia, Brunei, Canada, Chile, China, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Japan, South Korea, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, the Philippines, Singapore, Taiwan, Thailand and the United States.
