The Asia-Pacific region should work towards lowering telephone charges to stimulate usage and promote economic growth, Australian Telecommunications Minister Richard Alston said on Thursday.
"An important emphasis of our work must be to ensure that users benefit from progress being made in telecommunications," Alston told the second Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) telecommunications ministers meeting.  
"At the most basic level this means providing access to people who have lacked it, by extending the reach of networks and by lowering prices to ensure that genuine access is available to all our people," Alston said.
"Our experience is that real cost reductions are possible, but they are less likely to be achieved under monopoly arrangements," he said.
Alston cited Australia's example. In June, privately owned telecommunications and pay television group Optus Vision started to offer local telephone calls at 20 cents per call, which was 25 percent cheaper than that charged by state-owned Telstra.  
Australia's six-month-old conservative government plans to sell one-third of Telstra in the 1997/98 financial year to June.
The three-day APEC ministers meeting aims to co-ordinate a regional telecommunications policy, also known as Asia-Pacific Information Infrastructure (APII).
"The development of the APII will encourage business activity and growth in the region. It will increase the investment funds available for the provision, expansion and modernisation of telecommunications networks," Alston said.  
Alston, who is hosting the APEC meeting, said lower prices for telecommunications services, telephones, on-line and interactive services would stimulate economic activity.
"It remains a paramount objective of APEC to ensure that these trade and investment flows are able to occur by removing barriers through liberalising reforms," he said.
A more sophisticated telecommunications infrastruture in the Asia-Pacific region would result in the provision of more services and employment opportunities, Alston said.  
"Consumers and businessess, both large and small, will benefit from increased activity in information services with lower prices and the availability of a greater range of services," Alston said.
APEC groups Australia, Brunei, Canada, Chile, China, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Japan, South Korea, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, the Philippines, Singapore, Taiwan, Thailand and the United States.
-- Sydney newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
