The opening of Australia's two largest casinos later this year is likely to put more pressure on the nation's already struggling small casinos, analysts said.
Crown Ltd is set to open the A$1.6 billion Crown casino in Melboure in May, making it Australia's largest, while Sydney Harbour Casino Holdings Ltd (SHC) is expected to open the A$1.0 billion Sydney casino later this year.
"There is going to be a clear operational performance between Crown and Sydney, and the rest," said Paul Xavier at brokers BNP Equities.  
"Those two will pull away from the pack," Xavier told Reuters. Australian casino analysts expect earnings for Crown and SHC to jump once the permanment casinos open.
But the earnings outlook for Australia's smaller casinos is not so rosy. Breakwater Island Trust, which operates the Townsville casino in north Queensland, reported a 65 percent fall in net profit for the six months ended December 31, 1996.
Breakwater said this week it was cautious about the outlook.
The three local casinos run by Casinos Austria International Ltd (CAIL) have all had operational problems recently and their future performance is uncertain, analysts said.  
The Reef Casino Trust, which owns the Casinos Austria-managed Reef Casino in the north Queensland city of Cairns, has been forced to seek a capital injection by its bankers to reduce its debt of A$105 million.
Casinos Austria is also in a row with Indonesian businessman Robby Sumampow, the owner of the Christmas Island casino in the Indian Ocean, with Sumampow wanting CAIL to leave the loss making casino.
Since the opening of Sydney's temporary casino in late 1995, the operating performance of the Canberra casino, which is also operated by CAIL, has been badly hit, analysts said.  
"These (small) casinos, if they are relying on their local market, it would just be a flat business and if they want to get the junket market they will be fighting bigger Australian casinos," said Richard Wolf, an analyst at Bell Securities.
Last month Australia's richest man and most renowned gambler Kerry Packer bought management control at the Sydney casino and Crown is looking to buy the management contract at the Melbourne casino from Hudson Conway Ltd.
"The industry is undergoing some rationalisation -- a lot of the changes seem to evolve around management issues," said Jenny Owen, tourism and leisure analyst at Macquarie Equities.  
"It all about the size of the market. I don't know if Australia is large enough to support 14 casinos, when you only have 18 million people," Owen told Reuters.
However, analysts said it would too hard to predict if Packer's move into the Sydney casino would spark rationalisation amongst local casinos. Packer also has a stake in Crown casino, which has triggered rumours of a merger between the two.
Packer's purchase was not the only change in casino ownership recently. The downmarket Alice Springs casino in the Northern Territory was recently sold to Malaysian investors and the Adelaide casino is expected to be put up for sale.  
Analysts said it was still early days to say what impact the new Sydney and Melbourne casinos would have on the industry.
"When the Crown and Sydney permanment casinos open they will be a world first - there are no casino monopolies like this in any major city in the world. The only ones built to this size are in Las Vegas and Atlantic City," one casino analyst said.
"So nobody knows what is going to happen when these casinos open up their doors, there is no benchmark," the analyst said.
-- Sydney newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
