APEC ministers agreed on Friday to further trade and investment liberalisation in the telecommunications sector, but recognised they cannot drag China into the forum's agenda of trade liberalisation.
"There has been an agreement by all economies to adopt the strategy of going towards open trade and liberalisation in trade in telecommunications," Australian Telecommunications Minister Richard Alston told reporters.
Alston, who hosted the second Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) ministerial meeting on telecommunications and the information industry, said APEC could not push member countries to conform to a uniform policy.
"It is not a regional government. It is not intended to drag unwilling players along a path that the majority thinks desirable," Alston said when asked about reports that China was reluctant to adopt telecom liberalisation.
"Whilst there might be some domestic reservations about particular aspects, the overall guiding principles are well recognised. You simply don't find a member economy that does not espouse the principles of the reforms in this area," he said.
Alston said China was connecting 15 million telephone lines a year but still had one of the lowest penetration rates of fixed telephone lines among the 18 APEC nations.
"The challenges and the enormity of scale of operations of that country can hardly be compared to countries such as PNG (Papua New Guinea) and Brunei...and so that is why you would have to allow for different views," he said at the end of the three-day meeting.
Alston said he was hopeful Malaysia, the only member of the forum not to attend, would be at future meetings. Malaysia also did not attend the initial APEC telecommunications ministers meeting in Seoul in 1995.
"We would all hope Malaysia will over time see the benefits that derive from collective discussions," Alston said.
Although there were no tangible projects from the meeting, ministers agreed on further collaboration on working groups to look at telecommunications for rural development, distance education, information sharing and the environment.
"It would be very short-sighted if we simply committed ourselves to physical rollout without taking into account the effect on the natural environment," Alston said.
Rapid technological change has brought new challenges such as dealing with the acceptance of electronic commerce and the taxation issues that go with it, he said.
"Undoubtedly, there will be a reluctance to fully embrace electronic commerce and all of its manifestations until we do solve problems of privacy," Alston said.
He said he expected electronic commerce to be a growing industry once encryption and security issues had been resolved, but taxation issues will start become more important.
"It hasn't yet reached the stage of being an avalanche of siphoning off the revenue from the taxation authorities, but it clearly has some potential in that regard and I think all member economies are aware of the need to handle the issue," he said.
The next telecom ministers' meeting is set for Singapore in mid-1998. APEC groups Australia, Brunei, Canada, Chile, China, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, the Philippines, Singapore, South Korea, Taiwan, Thailand and the United States.
