Australia's oldest newspaper group John Fairfax Holdings Ltd is expected to unveil sharply lower 1996/97 half year earnings on Friday, but analysts say the results may show the worst is over.
Media analysts contacted by Reuters estimated Fairfax to report a net profit before abnormals of between A$37 million and A$42 million for the first half. Fairfax reported a 23.2 percent fall in net profit to A$62.43 million for the 1995/96 half.  
However, they said the result should show improving advertising revenue in the second quarter, along with lower newsprint costs.
"They have certainly seen a pick up in ad volumes. It is still down on last year but nowhere near as much down as in the first quarter," said Nola Hodgson, analyst at HSBC James Capel. Hodgson tips a net profit of A$38 million to A$39 million, with the dividend remaining at 3.5 cents for the half.
Vince Pepe at broker Burdett Buckeridge and Young estimated Fairfax to report a net profit of A$40 million for the half and A$75.1 million for the 1996/97 year.  
Fairfax reported a net profit before abnormals of A$102 million in the 1995/96 year (July/June).
Fairfax profits have been tumbling for the past 18 months on higher newsprint costs and falling advertising revenue, the latter a sign of a weak labour market.
"The pick-up in the ANZ job ads was some encouragement," Pepe said.
On Monday, the closely-watched ANZ job advertisment series for January rose a seasonally adjusted 3.3 percent, the largest gain in a year.  
"Ad volumes are still down, but we are starting to see signs of life in real estate and employment," James Capel's Hodgson said.
One Sydney-based analyst forecast Fairfax to report a net profit of A$37 million, while another, who also asked not to be named, estimated the newspaper publisher to report a net profit of A$42 million.
Analysts were mixed about the second half as the first six months is traditionally Fairfax's stronger with advertising volumes associated with the Christmas period usually boosting the bottom line.  
Kerry Packer's Publishing and Broadcasting Ltd (PBL) owns about 15 percent of Fairfax and has never been shy of his intention to own Fairfax.
"This is not a company about earnings. The key issue is whether Packer is going to make a bid for it," the analyst said.
Canadian media baron Conrad Black sold his 25 percent Fairfax stake last year, frustrated by the government's refusal to change foreign ownership laws for Australian media assets, which prevented Black from securing 50 percent control as he wished.  
Analysts expect Fairfax to report an annual net profit of between A$75 million to A$84 million, an indication that some are forecasting a stronger second half.
Fairfax's classified advertisments, which were dubbed by media baron Rupert Murdoch as "rivers of gold", are often viewed as a reflection of the Australian economy. Most economists tip the local economy to grow stronger in 1997.
However, another media analyst, who also asked not to be named, said the market was not really concerned about Fairfax earnings and was instead preoccupied with a potential change in Australia's media ownership laws, which are under review.  
Black sold a 19.9 percent stake to New Zealand's Brierley Investments Ltd. Brierley plans to buy the rest of Black's stake if its gets Fairfax shareholder approval at a meeting on February 24.
Fairfax shares closed four cents lower on Tuesday at A$3.04.
-- Sydney newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
