Australian television broadcaster Seven Network Ltd on Wednesday reported a 31.5 percent fall in net profit for the half year to December 31 as the network started to account for tax.
A slightly better performance in the second half of the 1996/97 year is expected, compared with the same period a year earlier, giving a stronger full year result, Seven's managing director Gary Rice told Reuters in an interview.
Seven, about 15 percent owned by Rupert Murdoch's News Corp Ltd, reported a fall in net profit to A$63 million (US$47.55 million) in the half, from A$91.88 million a year earlier, after paying A$34.3 million in tax.
Seven, 20 percent owned by its chairman Kerry Stokes, also unveiled earnings for Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer (MGM) for the first time since it jointly took control of the Hollywood studio with United States billionaire Kirk Kerkorian late last year.
MGM reported earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortisation (EBITDA) of US$16.7 million in the period from October 10 last year to December 31 on an operating revenue of $228.7 million, Seven said in a statement.
"We are very happy with the progress at MGM," Rice said.
However, the MGM figures were not included in Seven's group result.
The second half of the year to June 30, 1997, should show some operational improvements, Rice said. "I think in relative terms, I would expect to see a slight improvement in general performance terms in the second half."
Asked if he saw a better performance for the whole year, Rice replied: "Yes." The network also declared a half year dividend of 4.5 cents, steady with the same period in 1995/96.
Analysts forecast Seven to report a net profit before abnormals of A$59 million to A$65 million for the first half.
Seven has nearly exhausted its tax credits following losses racked up by previous owner, fugitive Australian businessman Christopher Skase, whose business empire collapsed after a failed US$1.5 billion takeover bid for MGM in 1989.
Although it did not expect to pay tax for another two years, accounting standards required recognition of the income tax expense, Seven said.
Seven reported a 3.2 percent rise in operating profit to A$96 million for the 26 weeks to December 28, a company record and also within market expectations. Seven said the result was achieved despite a softening in the advertising market.
Sales for the television network rose 16 percent to A$418.3 million for the half, boosted by advertising revenue from its coverage of the Atlanta Olympics last year and the acquisition of regional TV group Sunshine Broadcasting in December 1995.
The coverage of the Atlanta Olympics produced a small gross profit and it recorded an abnormal gain of A$3.2 million on the sale of Sunshine Broadcasting's radio asset, Seven said.
Rice said he was optimistic about meeting targets.
"I think we will meet our financial targets and I think our performance will be quite strong in every respect," he said.
"We have had a reasonable January, February is not bad. We achieved budget in January and we will go close to achieving budget in February. So it's not bad, but it hasn't really kicked at this stage."
Seven shares were carried to a strong finish as the overall market hit a record close. The company's shares closed five cents stronger to A$4.18 after spending most of the day's below Tuesday's close.
(A$ = US$0.7550)
