Seven Network Ltd chairman Kerry Stokes said on Wednesday that Seven would probably sell pay-tv firm Optus Vision to an international phone company if it was successful in litigation against Optus Vision shareholders.
Seven claims in its court action that fellow shareholders in Optus Vision had breached the Optus Vision shareholders' agreement. Seven, a two percent shareholder in Optus Vision, has said successful litigation would mean it would be allowed to acquire Optus Vision at a discount to its full valuation.  
"We are talking to some international companies, mainly telecommunications and informational technology companies," Stokes told Reuters in a telephone interview.
Stokes, who owns about 20 percent of Seven, said Seven would have 12 months in which it would be required to sell Optus Vision, which is spending A$3 billion on a fibre optic cable network around Australia carrying pay TV and telephone services.
Stokes said there was more interest from companies in using the Optus Vision assets for telephone services than for pay TV.
He added that none of the firms he had spoken to have any existing interest in Australia's pay television industry.  
On Monday, Seven said it had two offers to buy the rest of Optus Vision, one for A$648.74 million and the other for A$533.80 million. It said it had 10 days to consider and respond to the offers.
Asked if Seven would pay anymore than the A$648.74 million offer, Stokes replied: "No, we won't have to." He said that under the shareholder agreement, the Optus Vision shareholders would be required to sell at those prices.
Australia's telecommunications industry is to be fully deregulated on July 1.  
Stokes said there had been a lot of interest in the Optus Vision assets.
"You wouldn't be able to build that kind of infrastructure for the prices we will be able to get it at," Stokes said.
Other Optus Vision shareholders involved in the battle with Seven are Optus Communications Pty Ltd and U.S. West unit Continental CableVision, each of which own 46.5 percent, and Kerry Packer's Publishing and Broadcasting Ltd, which has a five percent stake in the pay TV group.
Ligitation between Seven and the other Optus shareholders is to be heard in the New South Wales Supreme Court on February 24.  
Optus Communications is 25 percent owned by Mayne Nickless Ltd. The balance is owned by Australian institutions.
Seven earlier on Wednesday reported a 31.5 percent drop in net profit in the 26 weeks to December 28 as the company started to account for income tax after exhausting its tax credits from operating losses racked up by previous owners.
Seven is also 15 percent owned by News Corp Ltd, which owns 50 percent of pay television network Foxtel, which is a rival to Optus Vision.
Shares in Seven closed five cents up at A$4.18 on Wednesday.
-- Sydney newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
