Television broadcaster Seven Network Ltd on Wednesday reported a 31.5 percent fall in net profit for the half year to December 31 as the network started to account for tax.
But managing director Gary Rice said he expected a slightly better performance in the second half of the 1996/97 year, compared with the same period a year earlier.
Seven, about 20 percent owned by chairman Kerry Stokes, said net profit fell to A$62.98 million in the half, from A$91.88 million a year earlier, after paying A$34.3 million in tax.  
The first half result was boosted by an abnormal profit of A$1.30 million from the sale of radio stations.
Analysts forecast Seven to reported a net profit before abnromals of A$59 million to A$65 million for the first half.
However, the result received a muted response from traders with Seven's shares down on Tuesday's close despite the overall market hitting a record high.
Seven, which is also 15 percent owned by News Corp Ltd, also unveiled earnings for Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer (MGM) for the first time since it took control of the Hollywood studio with United States billionaire Kirk Kerkorian late last year.  
Seven said MGM reported earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortisation (EBITDA) of US$16.7 million in the period from October 10 last year to December 31 on an operating revenue of $228.7 million.
"We are very happy with the progress at MGM," Rice said.
However, the MGM figures were not included in Seven's group result.
"I don't think you can read too much into those (MGM) numbers," one Melbourne-based media analyst said.  
Rice told Reuters in a telephone interview: "I think in relative terms, I would expect to see a slight improvement in general performance terms in the second half."
Asked if he saw a better performance for the whole year, Rice replied: "Yes." The network also declared a half year dividend of 4.5 cents, steady with the same period in 1995/96.
Seven reported a 3.2 percent rise in operating profit to A$96 million for the 26 weeks to December 28, a company record and also within market expectations.
Seven said the result was achieved despite a softening in advertising market.  
Sales for the television network rose 16 percent to A$418.3 million for the half, boosted by advertising revenue from its coverage of the Atlanta Olympics last year and the acquisition of Sunshine Broadcasting in December 1995.
Seven said its coverage of the Atlanta Olympics produced a small gross profit and it recorded an abnormal gain of A$3.2 million on the sale Sunshine Broadcasting's radio asset.
Seven has nearly exhausted its tax credits following losses racked up by previous owner, fugitive Australian businessman Christopher Skase, whose business empire collapsed after a failed US$1.5 billion takeover bid for MGM in 1989.  
Seven said although it did not expect to pay tax for another two years, accounting standards required recognition of this income tax expense.
Rice said he was optimistic about meeting targets.
"I think we will meet our financial targets and I think our performance will be quite strong in every respect," he said.
"We have had a reasonable January, February is not bad. We achieved budget in January and we will go close to achieving budget in February. So it's not bad, but it hasn't really kicked at this stage."
At 3.15 p.m. (0400 GMT), Seven shares were steady at A$4.13.  
-- Sydney newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
