APEC ministers agreed on Friday on further trade and investment liberalisation in the telecommunications sector, but recognised they cannot drag China into the forum's agenda of trade liberalisation.
"There has been an agreement by all economies to adopt the strategy of going towards open trade and liberalisation in the trade in telecommunications," Australian telecommunications minister Richard Alston told reporters.  
The Australian minister said China was connecting 15 million telephone lines a year, but still had one of the lowest penetration rates of fixed telephone lines amongst members of the APEC (Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation) forum.
"The challenges and the enormity of scale of operations of that country can hardly be compared to countries such as PNG (Papua New Guinea) and Brunei ... and so that is why you would have to allow for different views," he said at the end of the three-day meeting.  
Alston said he was also hopeful that Malaysia, which was the only member of the APEC group not to come to the meeting, to attend future meetings.
Malaysia did not attend the initial APEC telecommunications ministers meeting in Seoul in 1995.
"We would all hope Malaysia will over time see the benefits that derive from collective discussions," Alston said.
"I think the high level of interest amongst the 17 economies, that will benefit Malaysia, even in absence."  
Alston, who hosted the second APEC ministerial meeting on telecommunications and the information industry, said APEC could not push member countries to conform to a uniform policy.
"It is not a regional government. It is not intended to drag unwilling players along a path that the majority thinks desirable," said Alston in reply to a question about reports that China was reluctant to adopt telecom liberalisation.
"Whilst there might be some domestic reservations about particular aspects, the overall guiding principles are well recognised. You simply don't find a member economy that does not espouse the principles of the reforms in this area," he said.  
Although there were no tangible projects to come out of the meeting, ministers agreed on further collaboration on working groups to look at telecommunications for rural development, distance education, information sharing and the environment.
"It would be very short sighted if we simply committed ourselves to physical rollout without taking into account the effect to the natural environment," Alston said.
Alston said rapid technological change in informational technology and telecommunications had thrown up new challenges, such as dealing with the acceptance of electronic commerce and taxation issues that go along with it.  
"Undoubtably there will a reluctance to fully embrace electronic commerce and all of its manifestations, until we do solve problems of privacy," Alston said.
Alston said he expected electronic commerce to be a growing industry once encryption and security issues had been resolved, but taxation issues will start become more important.
"It hasn't yet reached the stage of being an avalanche of siphoning off the revenue from the taxation authorities, but it clearly has some potential in that regard and I think all member economies are aware of the need to handle the issue," he said.  
The next meeting of telecom ministers is in Singapore in mid-1998. APEC groups Australia, Brunei, Canada, Chile, China, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Japan, South Korea, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, the Philippines, Singapore, Taiwan, Thailand and the United States.
-- Sydney Newsroom 61-2 373-1800
