Demands for cheaper telephone services by businesses would drive liberalisation in the telecommunications markets of the APEC region, said Larry Irving, a telecommunications adviser to U.S. President Clinton
"The biggest advocates of change of telecommunications law aren't the United States, Australia or New Zealand, it is the business people in those countries, who want better service and lower prices," Irving told Reuters in an interview.  
"The biggest proponent is not the telecom companies, it is the industrialists, who are demanding better services and cheaper prices," said Irving, who is head administrator of the National Telecommunication Informational Agency (NTIA).
"It is becoming a competitive edge, countries cannot afford not to liberalise their telecom markets," said, Irving, who is attending a meeting of APEC telecommunications ministers here.
Countries that liberalise their telecommunications markets would create more telecom-related jobs than those that retain state-owned monopolies, Irving said, citing Chile, Mexico and New Zealand as APEC countries with open  markets.  
Irving said 400,000 jobs were created in the United States last year in telecommunications and information technology industry or about one-fifth of all new jobs in the U.S. economy.
Chile's undersecretary of communications Gregorio San Martin Ricci said more jobs have been created in his country's telecom industry since the South American nation deregulated the market in the late 1980s.
"There are now nine companies providing local telehony services and six firms provide long distance calls, compared with two companies in the late 1980s, which has meant more jobs," San Martin told Reuters in an interview.  
A deregulated telecom market has also made Chile more internationally competitive, the Chilean minister said on the last day of the three-day meeting of the telecom ministers of Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) forum.
"Before our markets used to be so far away, because we are right down the bottom of South America but with good telecommunications our customers are now very close and distance is no longer a problem," San Martin said.  
Fellow Latin American delegate, Carlos Mier y Tieran, director general of Mexico's telecommunications department, said his nation also took steps in the 1980s to deregulate its telecom market in order to become more competitive.
"There is no question that it has made us more competitive, but we realised we had to open it to private investment because we could not afford to do it ourselves," he told Reuters in an interview.
Mier y Tieran said about US$11 billion had been invested in Mexico's telecommunications market over the past six years.  
"In many ways Mexico has a geographical advantage, we are a neighbour to the biggest market in the world, the United States, we are part of APEC on the Pacific coast and Europe on the Atlantic side, and we are historically connected to the rest of Latin America, but to take advantage of this we need good infrastructure and if we don't we will lose out," he said.
APEC groups Australia, Brunei, Canada, Chile, China, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Japan, South Korea, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, the Philippines, Singapore, Taiwan, Thailand and the United States.
-- Sydney newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
