Australian cinema operator Hoyts Cinema Ltd reported on Wednesday a half year net profit in line with expectations and announced further expansion plans in Latin America by entering the Chilean cinema market.
Hoyts said it made a net profit of A$13.1 million for the six months to December 31 and that it was confident of achieving its net profit forecast of A$22 million for the 1996/97 year.
Hoyts chief executive Peter Ivany said the first half result was largely helped by its screening of "Independence Day" a film about an aliens attack on Earth.  
"The results are pleasing and in line with our prospectus forecast," Ivany said. "As indicated in the prospectus, we expect to declare an interim dividend of four cents in July 1997 and a final four cent dividend in November 1997."
"We are very confident we can meet the forecasts," Ivany told reporters after the release of the results.
Hoyts, which currently operates cinema screens in Australia, New Zealand, United States and Mexico, unveiled further expansion plans with a move into Chile, where it plans to operate 42 screens in the capital Santiago.  
Ivany said Hoyts had spent the past 18 months researching countries where cinema exhibition markets were underderveloped. "Chile represents one of these underdeveloped markets."
He said Hoyts planned to spend A$47 million on further expansion in Latin America over the next four to five years.
Ivany said Hoyts was looking at another market in Latin America and had an office in Brussels where it was assessing its European strategy.
He said Hoyts planned to open another 270 screens by the end of calendar 1997, bringing the total number of screens to be operated by the group to 1,400 by the end of the year.  
Ivany said the funds spent on expansion would depend on how many countries Hoyts entered. "At the moment we have a plan to be in 10 markets over the next 10 years."
"A$500 million is what we orginally have indicated and after we went out to the market it got closer to A$600 million," said Ivany in reponse to a question on how much Hoyts will spend on expansion over the next five years.
Ivany said about 80 percent of the A$600 million is expected to be spent on its existing markets, mainly in the United States and Australia with the balance to be spent on new markets.  
He said Hoyts would look at the international operations of U.S. cinema operator United Artists Theatre Circuit if they became available.
"If United Artists were in a position where they formally looked to sell some parts of their businesses, then if they declare that publicly and, they haven't, then we would look at it," Ivany said.
United Artists owners, Merrill Lynch Capital Partners Inc and Tele-Communications Inc, have not said the company or any of its businesses are for sale.  
"Our financial structure is amongst the top in the industry and we have the flexibility to be able to take up opportunities as they come along," Ivany said.
Hoyts is 47.5 percent owned by U.S.-based investment group Hellman and Friedman Capital.
However, the result and the expansion plans failed to excite the market. At 4.10 p.m. (0510 GMT), Hoyts shares were one cent down at A$2.67.
Hoyts shares listed on the Australian Stock Exchange at A$2.40 last August
-- Sydney newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
