Australian flag carrier Qantas Airways Ltd on Thursday reported a 2.4 percent rise in net profit for the 1996/97 first half, but warned its Japan routes were unlikely to repeat the profitabiliy of the early 1990s.
Qantas, 25 percent owned by British Airways Plc, reported a net profit of A$151.6 million for the six months ended December 31, a result towards the higher end of market expectations which ranged from A$116 million to A$154 million.
For the year to June 30, the airline said it aimed to at least match the A$246.2 million net profit recorded in 1995/96.  
Qantas said revenues were not expected to grow quickly, fuel prices were forecast to remain high and price competition was expected to continue in most markets.
Future capacity expansion would be limited by the rate of productivity gains. "The outlook is therefore for relatively modest fleet expansion and an undiminished drive for efficiency improvements and cost reductions to increase profits."
Qantas chairman Gary Pemberton told reporters the growth in first half profit was largely attributable to the airline's cost cutting programme which is aimed to offset the anticipated slowdown in the rate of revenue growth.  
Pemberton said cost savings of A$237 million had been made in the half year, and full year cost savings were expected to exceed the airline's target of A$430 million.
Sales rose 2.5 percent to A$3.97 billion for the half, with A$2.03 billion coming from its domestic operations.
Overall passenger revenue was flat, with revenue falling in its North American, Japanese, and other Asian markets.
Revenue from Japan fell about 30 percent to A$315 million in the first half. Qantas did not expect the contribution from the Japanese market to improve in the second half. "It won't improve significantly," finance director Gary Toomey told reporters.  
"Major changes in the Japanese market resulted in virtually no net contribution. This is a sharp contrast to the situation three years ago when the Japan route accounted for the bulk of Qantas international profits," Pemberton said in a statement.
Qantas' international routes recorded earnings before interest and tax of A$168.3 million in the first half, compared with A$163.3 million a year earlier, while domestic earnings fell to A$88.2 million from A$93.0 million.  
"There is fundamental change occuring in distribution in the travel industry in Japan. It is becoming less structured, there is more competitive pricing," managing director James Strong said.
"The economic situation is not very buoyant in Japan, the currency has been very strong, so it is a combination of all of those factors," Strong said.
Pemberton told Reuters after the news conference that the fall in contribution from Japan would not be made up from tourism growth to Australia from other Asian markets.  
"No it won't compensate. They are different markets, there is a different yield structure and customer profile."
He said other Asian markets, which included South Korea and Taiwan, were very competitive and historically operated on lower yields than the Japanese market had done in the recent past.
Pemberton said the first half result was also hit by higher fuel prices. Qantas had absorbed increases of over A$50 million, net of hedging gains. At constant fuel prices, operating profit before tax would be up over 21 percent on a year earlier.  
"Looking beyond 1996/97, the airline will continue to expand, but at a slower rate than the very high levels of the last three years," Pemberton said.
Passenger numbers had grown more than 32 percent and capacity by more than 27 percent since December 1993.
Investors welcomed the result pushing Qantas shares up four cents to A$2.46 at 0400 GMT, while the broader market fell.
-- Sydney newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
