Australian flag carrier Qantas Airways Ltd on Thursday reported a 2.4 percent rise in net profit for the 1996/97 first half, but warned its Japan routes were unlikely to repeat the profitability of the early 1990s.
Qantas, 25 percent owned by British Airways Plc, reported a net profit of A$151.6 million (US$116.42 million) for the six months ended December 31, which was towards the higher end of market expectations.
For the 1996/97 year to June 30, the airline said it aimed to at least match the A$246.2 million net profit recorded in the full 1995/96 fiscal year.
The growth in profit was largely due to the airline's cost cutting programme, chairman Gary Pemberton told reporters.
Qantas has cut costs by over A$1.0 billion in the past three years. Sales rose 2.5 percent to A$3.97 billion for the fiscal half-year, with A$2.03 billion coming from its domestic operations.
Overall passenger revenue was flat, with revenue falling in its North American, Japanese, and other Asian markets.
Revenue from Japan fell about 30 percent to A$315 million in the first half. Qantas did not expect the contribution from the Japanese market to improve in the second half.
"It won't improve significantly," finance director Gary Toomey told reporters.
"Major changes in the Japanese market resulted in virtually no net contribution. This is a sharp contrast to the situation three years ago when the Japan route accounted for the bulk of Qantas international profits," Pemberton said in a statement.
"There is fundamental change occuring in distribution in the travel industry in Japan. It is becoming less structured, there is more competitive pricing," Qantas managing director James Strong told reporters.
"The economic situation is not very buoyant in Japan, the currency has been very strong, so it is a combination of all of those factors," Strong said.
Yield, a measure of revenue to the number of passengers, was likely to remain lower than in previous years due to the structural change in the Japanese tourism market, Pemberton told Reuters after the news conference.
Australia's share of Japan's tourism market has fallen by half a percent to 4.9 percent between the 1993/94 and 1995/96 fiscal years, even though more Japanese go on overseas holidays. Group revenues were not expected to grow quickly, fuel prices were forecast to remain high and price competition was expected to continue in most markets, Qantas said.
"The outlook is therefore for relatively modest fleet expansion and an undiminished drive for efficiency improvements and cost reductions to increase profits," it said.
The first half result was also hit by higher fuel prices. Qantas had absorbed increases of over A$50 million, net of hedging gains. At constant fuel prices, operating profit before tax would be up over 21 percent on a year earlier, it said.
"Looking beyond 1996/97, the airline will continue to expand, but at a slower rate than the very high levels of the last three years," Pemberton said.
(A$1=US$.7860)
