Australian television broadcaster Seven Network Ltd said on Monday the advertising market was fairly "tough" but the group was meeting its budget targets.
"It's a fairly tough market but we are going all right. We are on track for our budgets," Seven managing director Gary Rice told Reuters in a telephone interview.
Seven, which is 15 percent owned by Rupert Murdoch's News Corp Ltd, reported a jump in net profit to A$115.13 million in the year to June 30 from A$41.26 million in 1994/95.
Last year's result was hit by an advertising rate bungle.  
Rice described the 1995/96 year result as "satisfactory". But Rice said it was too earlier to forecast earnings for 1996/97. He said there was unlikely to be much of an impact from its Australian broadcast rights to the Atlanta Olympics in July.
"There is no short term gain or advertising dollars from an event like the Olympics," Rice said.
Seven has focussed on building up its news and current affairs programming over the past year, which should increase costs, but also increase revenue.
"I have said that would have a net impact on costs," he said.  
Asked if the costs associated with the news and current affairs programming initiatives had cut into margins, Rice repiled: "Not substantially, because it has also had a revenue benefit."
Seven, which is also 20 percent owned by its chairman Kerry Stokes, reported a 15.2 percent rise in sales to A$671.15 million in 1995/96.
In July, Seven teamed up, in a surprise move, with United States billionaire investor Kirk Kerkorian to back a management buyout of Hollywood film studio Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Inc (MGM) for US$1.3 billion from French bank Credit Lyonnais.  
Rice said there would be nothing in the short term coming out from Seven's link to MGM, but in a few years there may be some joint efforts. "I think you will see down the track some joint promotion and the marketing of certain things."
"There will probably minimal returns out of MGM in the short term, but it is not a major cost in terms of potential payback," Rice said.
"Hopefully from a shareholder point of view, you will see some benefits flowing to Seven as we go down the track. We are looking at three or four years before we get maximum benefit from MGM," he said.  
Rice said the company had made not a decision yet about exercising its option in Optus Vision, which would increase its stake in the pay television and telephony group to 15 percent from two percent.
"We don't have a view one way or the other, we don't have to make a decision until then, we don't have enough information at the moment," Rice said.
Seven shares closed six cents lower at A$3.75 on low volume.
-- Sydney newsroom 61-2 9373 1800
