News Corp Ltd shares soared on Tuesday after Rupert Murdoch's media empire struck a deal with satellite TV group EchoStar Communications Corp to offer U.S. subscription television service.
News Corp shares were the most actively sought in Australia, with over A$120 million (US$93 million) worth traded. News' ordinary shares jumped 37 cents or 5.51 percent to A$7.09 and non-voting preferred shares 40 cents or 7.1 percent to A$6.03.
"It is a bit of a manic depressive this stock. It has been depressed for the past 18 months and now it is about to go manic," said Greg Matthew, executive director of equities at fund managers Mercantile Mutual.
Under the deal, News Corp, which owns the U.S. Fox television network, would contribute satellites, cash and other assets of US$1 billion from its American Sky Broadcasting (AskyB) unit in return for a 50-percent stake in EchoStar.
MCI Communications Corp, a partner in ASkyB, will acquire a portion of News Corp's stake in the venture, bringing News Corp's ownership to 40 percent compared with 10 percent for MCI and 50 percent for EchoStar.
The deal is estimated to be worth about A$2.6 billion to Murdoch's media empire or about 65 cents per News Corp share, one Sydney-based broker said.
Officials with both companies said the alliance would enable the company to respond to the growing popularity for pay television services, currently dominated by cable TV operators.
"Our goal is not to be complimentary to cable, we want to eliminate cable," said Charles Ergen, chief executive officer of EchoStar. The service is scheduled to start service early 1998.
"Jointly we will create a dynamic and promising new competitive force in the subscription marketplace," Murdoch said in a statement.
The alliance will operate under the Sky name and is expected to lose around $500 million in its first year but it should reach break-even by 1999 and generate more than $1 billion in operating cash flow by the year 2002, the companies said.
"Everyone thought AskyB would break even probably as far out as 2003, they are now saying it would break even by 1999, so the market quite likes that," the Sydney broker said.
Brokers said they also liked News Corp's comments that it planned to sell US$800 million of non-core assets and that it had raised its earnings forecast for its U.S. TV interests by $500 million over the next three years.
The new Sky service is expected to include seven satellites, more than 500 channels, retransmission of local TV stations in markets representing more than 75 percent of all U.S. television households and low consumer entry cost.
The deal is also likely to step up the challenge to existing U.S. satellite television operators, DirecTV, which is owned by General Motors Corp's Hughes Electronics and AT&amp;T Corp and Primestar, which is owned by a group of cable TV operators.
News Corp, also controls Britain's leading pay-TV provider BSkyB and has a satellite TV joint venture in Japan, JSkyB, that is expected to begin full service next year.
Murdoch also confirmed at a news conference after the deal announcement that News Corp has held friendly talks with Japanese electronics and entertainment gaint Sony Corp about Sony acquiring a stake in JSkyB.
News Corp ordinary shares closed at a three month high, while the preferred shares ended at a four month high.
(A$=US$.7750)
