Tabcorp Holdings Ltd managing director Ross Wilson said the betting agency and gaming group was on track to meet its forecasts for the 1996/97 year and was eyeing the New South Wales (NSW) Totalisator Agency Board (TAB).
"Typically, you have a slight downturn in the second half, because you haven't got the Spring Carnival," Wilson told Reuters in a telephone interview. "But certainly we are still looking okay and on track for our forecasts for the year."
Tabcorp earlier reported a 17.5 percent rise in net profit to A$51.21 million in the six months ended December 31, 1997.  
Wilson said January and February are up on the same period a year earlier but were down on the November and December period.
"You always have a downturn in gaming in January, February and March as people flock to the beaches and it has happened again this year," said Wilson from Tabcorp's head office in Melbourne.
Tabcorp, which was floated by the state government of Victoria in 1994, reported a net profit of A$87.17 million in the year to June 30, 1996.
He said Tabcorp has a strong balance sheet to fund any major acquisitions and maintain high dividend payouts.  
"We have no debt, we have about A$90 million in cash and the business is a strong cash flow business so with a balance sheet like that you have significant funding capacity," Wilsons said.
Wilson said Tabcorp had a market capitialisation of A$1.8 billion and shareholders funds of A$800 million.
He said the group was interested if the NSW government decided to sell its TAB betting business. The Labor government in NSW has yet to say publicly whether it would privatise the TAB, but it is expected to announce plans to sell this year.
"Obviously if the terms were right we would be very interested being involved in it," he said.  
Wilson said Tabcorp would also be interested in any privatisation by the Queensland government of its TAB business.
Queensland, New South Wales and Victoria are Australia's three major racing states. He said he did not expect any slowing in the growth rate of Australia's booming gaming industry.
"Whilst we have had significant growth over the last few years, both nationally and in Victoria, we see that growth being maintained, with compound growth of 10 percent plus through to at least 2000," he said.
However, he said there would be some effect from the opening of the permanment Crown Ltd casino later this year.  
"There is no doubt that when you have a brand new venue like the casino opening up and it is very large it will attract a lot of lookers...and it might have some initial impact but we don't think it will have any long term impact," Wilson said.
The A$1.6 billion Crown casino complex is expected to open in Melbourne around April-May.
Tabcorp surprised the sharemarket last year with a special dividend of 12 cents a share for the 1995/96 second half on top of a 10 cents a share final dividend.
Wilson did not rule out another special dividend in the 1996/97 year.  
"We closed last year with A$110 million in cash, we paid something like A$66 million in this last period and...I always said we are happy to pay out a high dividend pay out ratio based on our cash flow forecasts," Wilson said.
"Then clearly if opportunities do not arise, then we are happy to continue the high pay out ratios," he said.
Tabcorp raised its first half dividend to 11 cents a share in the first half, up from nine cents a year earlier.
Tabcorp shares ended six cents lower at A$6.02.
-- Sydney newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
