Australian appliance, packaging and wine group Southcorp Holdings Ltd on Tuesday reported a 22.3 percent rise in first half net profit and tipped a record result for the year to June 30.
Southcorp posted a net profit after abnormals of A$64.92 million for the six months ended December 31, 1996, compared with A$52.36 million a year earlier.
"We are now on track to meet our year-end forecast and our year-end forecast is broadly in line with market expectations," chief executive officer Graham Kraehe told reporters.  
Kraehe said market expectations were around A$130 million net profit before abnormals. Southcorp reported a net profit of A$124.22 million in 1995/96, which included a record second half profit of A$64.3 million.
"Each business, we expect, in the full year, as they have in the last two periods, to grow earnings over the corresponding period," he said.
Kraehe said the forecasts were dependent on there being no significant downturn in the Australian economy.
"On that basis, we are very confident that 1996/97 will be another record year for Southcorp."  
The December 1996 half results showed a profit improvement for all three divisions, with its appliance division growing the strongest despite lower sales.
Kraehe said in a statement the strong appliance division result reflected cost cuts and better productivity, supported by the launch of a range of new whitegoods products.
But its American Water Heater business, formerly called Mor-Flo, continued to make losses although they were half of the A$2.1 million loss in the June 1996 period.
Group sales fell 0.5 percent to A$1.30 billion in the first half and dividends were steady at 8.25 cents a share.  
Kraehe said Southcorp was still on the prowl for more acquisitions in the wine business, particularly in overseas markets, and also add-on acquisitions in packaging.
"For acquisitions, we are looking at, internationally in wine and in areas in packaging, which add on to our core businesses, either in Australia, North America or Asia."
"We are also looking at some Asian development, which will essentially be greenfield development," Kraehe said.
Southcorp is currently building a manufacturing plant in Dalian, China, to make steel and aluminium cans.  
"Whatever we do (in wine), if it is in Australia or if it is something offshore, the end result is that it is going to be able to better serve the international markets, that says that the probability is that it (acquisition) is going to be offshore," Kraehe said.
"In Australia our primary focus is to continue to invest in our our strong vineyard and winery facilities...with a heavy focus on red (wine)," he said.
Southcorp made two wine acqusitions in Australia in 1996 but had no plans to raise new funds for any more purchases.  
"Our gearing has come down to a pretty comfortable level, if we wanted to do something major, particularly something major in wine, that could cause us to look at means of raising capital," Kraehe said.
"But generally speaking we could fund an acquisition and development programmes within our existing cash flow," he said.
Southcorp's net debt to equity fell to 63.7 percent in the December half, from 72.1 percent a year earlier.
Southcorp shares closed steady at A$4.56. The shares hit a record high of A$4.66 last Tuesday.
-- Sydney newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
