Australian media group Publishing and Broadcasting, controlled by billionaire Kerry Packer, on Wednesday reported a lower 1996/97 first half net profit due to weaker television and magazine advertising sales.
PBL, which is about 45 percent owned by the Packer family, reported a net profit of A$104.30 million (US$82 million) in the six months ended December 31, 1996, down from A$107.66 million a year earlier.
However the Sydney-based media group noted the 1995/96 result had been boosted by an abnormal gain, and said earnings before interest and tax (EBIT) would be slightly higher in the year to June 30, 1997 compared with the previous year.
"The group overall should end this financial year in EBIT terms slightly ahead of last year," said PBL managing director James Packer, Kerry's only son.
"Our television and magazines divisions continue to operate in a very soft advertising market, with little prospect of any significant improvement in the second half," he said.
PBL is Australia's largest magazine publisher, while the Nine Network is the nation's largest TV network. Overall sales fell 2.2 percent to A$581.56 million for the half.
Earnings from PBL's Nine Network television network were likely to be flat in the second half, compared with a year earlier, due to higher costs associated with additional movies becoming available, Packer said.
Despite the profit drop, PBL raised its dividend payment to shareholders to nine cents a share from seven cents a year ago.
PBL's third arm, its Enterprise division, includes its 15 percent investment in Australia's oldest newspaper group John Fairfax Holdings Ltd, U.S. film production house Regency Enterprises and Australia satellite TV operator Australis Media.
Kerry Packer has long held an ambition to take over the Fairfax newspaper empire, publisher of the Sydney Morning Herald, the Age and business daily Australian Financial Review.
"Our strategic goals towards Fairfax remain unchanged and we await the outcome of the government's review of the cross-media laws," James Packer said.
The Liberal-National government is expected to announce by mid-1997 the results of its cross-media ownership laws.
Under the current cross-media regulations, media owners are not allowed to have large shareholdings in both broadcast and print media in the same market.
Australian media analysts said PBL's first half result was a little stronger than expected. They said the full year result was unlikely to include any contribution from Packer's recent investment in the Sydney casino.
PBL shares ended one cent up at A$6.35 after shedding 14 cents earlier in the day.
(A$1=US$0.7860)
