Optus Communications Pty Ltd, Australia's second largest telecommunications carrier, said on Wednesday it expects a strong result for the year to June 30 and aimed for a sharemarket float in 1997 despite litigation delays.
Optus also formally reported a net profit of A$58.9 million (US$46.4 million) in the six months ended December 31, 1996, up from A$7.1 million a year earlier.
Sales rose 31.2 percent to A$1.19 billion, buoyed by a strong lift in revenue from its mobile phone business. Sales are expected to continue the strong trend in the 1996/97 second half, chief operating officer Phil Jacobs told Reuters.
"It will be somewhere (near) a similar amount," Jacobs said.
"We are expecting a very strong result for the full year," Optus chief executive officer Ziggy Switkowski told reporters at a briefing after the results announcement. Optus reported a profit of A$60.3 million for the 1995/96 year.
Optus still planned a sharemarket float in calendar 1997 but that would have to await the outcome of litigation between its pay television offshoot, Optus Vision, and free-to-air television station Seven Network Ltd, Switkowski said.
Asked if Optus Communications would postpone its float beyond this year, Switkowski said: "No, not at all. The float is clearly held up by the process of the litigation. Once the litigation is resolved, the board will meet and make decisions about how the float should proceed.
"The timetable for this year is still very much our desire," Switkowski said.
However, Switkowski said there was a possibility Optus's planned float would clash with the timing of the sale of one-third of the government-owned Telstra Corp, Australia's biggest carrier, which is seen by analysts as a far bigger capital-raising operation than for Optus.
"It is not impossible that those floats will happen about the same time, we will see later this year," he said.
Switkowski would not comment on the litigation battle which, if Optus loses, could see it forced to sell its Vision stake at a discount to Seven.
Optus Communications has pumped about A$605 million into Optus Vision, which is currently rolling out its cable network to 2.5 million homes or 40 percent of Australian households at a cost of about A$3.0 billion.
The full deregulation of the Australian telecommunications industry on July 1, 1997, would pressure margins, Jacobs said.
"There is no doubt that there will be erosion in some areas of our business as competition comes in...but we fully expect that erosion of (market) share would be more than offset by the continued growth of the business," Jacobs said.
Australian telecommunications analysts welcomed the result, but described post-deregulation as a "big unknown" for Optus.
"The rest of this year looks all right, but the big question mark is next year, with all the new players coming into the market. It's hard to know what effect it is going to have on Optus," one Sydney-based analyst said.
Market analysts expect global operators such as British Telecom and the U.S. giant AT&amp;T to enter a deregulated Australian market later this year.
Optus was set up in 1992 as a partial deregulation of the local market, which was previously a government monopoly.
The Sydney-based group is 25 percent owned by Australian transport group Mayne Nickless Ltd and 24.5 percent each owned by Cable and Wireless Plc of Britain and U.S. telephone carrier BellSouth Corp Inc.
The remainder is owned by Australian institutions.
