Australia's second largest telecom carrier Optus Communications Pty Ltd said on Wednesday it expects a strong result for the June 30 year and still aimed for a sharemarket float in 1997, despite litigation delays.
Optus also formally reported a net profit of A$58.9 million in the six months ended December 31, 1996, up from A$7.1 million a year earlier. The result was first announced last week by its 25 percent shareholder Mayne Nickless Ltd.
"We are expecting a very strong result for the full year," Optus chief executive officer Ziggy Switkowski told reporters.  
Optus reported a profit of A$60.3 million for the 1995/96 year, which compared with a loss of A$17.0 million in 1994/95.
Sales rose 31.2 percent to A$1.19 billion, buoyed by a strong lift in revenue from its mobile business.
Chief operating officer Phil Jacobs told Reuters he expected sales to continue the strong trend in the 1996/97 second half.
"It will be somewhere by a similar amount," Jacobs said.
Switkowski said Optus still planned a sharemarket float in calendar 1997, but a float would have to await the outcome of the litigation between its 46.5 percent owned associate Optus Vision and television station Seven Network Ltd.  
Asked at a media briefing if Optus Communications would put off its float past this year, Switkowski said: "No, not at all the float is clearly held up by the process of the litigation, once the litigation is resolved, the board will meet and make decisions about how the float should proceed going forward."
"The timetable for this year is still very much our desire," Switkowski said.
However, Switkowski said there was a possibility that Optus' planned float may clash with the timing of the sale of one third of government owned Telstra Corp, which would be a far bigger capital raising than Optus.  
"It does appear that the Telstra float will be at the latter part of the year, so when our schedule is clarified and indeed when the Telstra schedule is clarified, we will have a look at what that means to us," Switkowski said.
"It is not impossible that those floats will happen about the same time, we will see later this year," he said.
Switkowski would not comment on the litigation between Optus Vision and Seven or Vision's local telephony services launched mid-1996 to break Telstra A$5 billion market monopoly.
But Optus' Jacobs said Optus Communications had other strategies besides using Optus Vision for the local call market.  
Optus Communications has pumped about A$605 million into Optus Vision, which is currently rolling out its cable network to 2.5 million homes or 40 percent of Australian households.
"It has never been Optus Vision's intention to cable up to 100 percent of Australia's population," Jacobs told reporters.
"It has been our intention as Optus Communications to offer our services to a wide a customer base as possible and we have from the very beginning looked at a multiple strategy to get to those customers," Jacobs said.
If Optus Vision loses its legal battle with Seven, Optus forced to sell its Vision stake at a discount to Seven.  
Jacobs said the full deregulation of Australia's telecom market on July 1, 1997 would put pressure on margins across all of its businesses, but this would be more than offset by growth in the overall telecommunications market.
"There is no doubt that there will be erosion in some areas of our business as competition comes in...but we fully expect that erosion of share would be more than offset by the continued growth of the business," Jacobs said.
Optus is also owned 24.5 percent each by Cable and Wireless Plc of Britain and U.S. telephone carrier BellSouth Corp Inc. The remainder is owned by Australian institutions.  
-- Sydney newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
