Building products group Boral Ltd shares topped the turnover charts on Friday as investors ploughed into the building material sector on the back of a change of sentiment for the recently depressed housing sector.
Boral shares jumped 13.6 cents or 3.71 percent to close at A$3.806 on a turnover of 8.8 million shares. The shares ended off their intra-day high of A$3.91, which was their highest level since March 1994.
Fellow building material groups Pioneer International Ltd and CSR Ltd also recorded strong gains.  
Pioneer shares closed at their highest level since the 1987 sharemarket crash, up 14.4 cents or 3.55 percent at A$4.20, while CSR shares ended 14 cents or three percent higher at A$4.81, its highest level since August 1994.
"I think there is just a lot of sentiment around the stocks, people want to get set for the upturn," said Chris Haynes, a building materials analyst at broker BT Securities.
Australian housing finance data due out next Thursday are expected to show further recent evidence that the industry is set for an upturn after a two year depression, with construction activity picking up by mid-1997.  
"There is no doubt in people's mind that the physical cycle has turned and that should have been evident three or four months ago, but it takes a while before people are convinced," said John North of J.B Were &amp; Son.
Analysts said institutions may have been behind the heavy share trading in Boral, as not many major insitutions have the stock in their portfolio.
"The thing with Boral is that no major institution is on the register, so there are some people who are a little bit worried by not having any of the stock," BT's Haynes said.  
Both Boral and Pioneer recently reported lower profits for the six months to December 31, 1996. CSR reported in December.
On Tuesday, Boral reported a net profit of A$93.16 million for the 1995/96 first half, down from A$169.71 million in the 1995/96 first half, but it said it expected a higher profit for the second half to June 30.
Last week, Pioneer reported a net profit of A$112.7 million for the first half, down from A$138.0 million a year earlier.
But, Pioneer said it expected a lower full year profit due to lower returns from its investment in petroleum refiner Ampol.  
However, the current corporate earnings season is seen as reporting mainly in line results with many better than expected results. Analysts said the solid earnings season is also a reason for the change in sentiment for the cyclical stocks.
"The reporting season has significantly decreased the risk attached to the future profit outlook for the sector," said Fabian Babich at ABN AMRO Hoare Govett.
Babich said there was also evidence that volumes are up.
"So if volumes are going up and you have achieved costs savings and you have sold off underperforming businesses, what is going to happen to your profits?...they are going to go up."  
The only Australian building material group to miss out on the big price jumps was James Hardie Industries Ltd, which had prior to today being the strongest share price performer in the sector ove rthe past 12 months.
James Hardie shares rose one cent to A$3.84 on Friday.
"Hardie is more of a growth story, the others are more of a cyclical story," JB Were's North said.
Australia's building material index jumped 2.57 percent and was one of the few rises on Friday with the broader All Ordinaries index down 8,9 points to 2,438.5 points.
-- Sydney newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
