The success of Australia's film industry, basking in the international spotlight after a spate of worldwide hits, has spurred Hollywood talent scouts to search down under for the next "Shine" or "Babe".
This has been evident at Sydney's "Tropfest" short film festival, which attracted representatives from Hollywood agency William Morris and the Cannes film festival for the first time.
The festival has drawn big-name judges, too. This year's included George Miller, the producer of box-office hit "Babe", while actress Nicole Kidman and "Portrait of a Lady" director Jane Campion were judges last year.
Oscar-nominated Geoffrey Rush was to attend but went to Los Angeles to collect his Screen Actors' Guild Award for best actor in "Shine", said John Polson, Tropfest's founder and director.
Now seen as the nation's premier short-film festival and a talent pool of film-makers, the first Tropfest four years ago saw just 50 film buffs squashed into a Sydney cafe one night to watch their home-made films on a television set.
"Although it started as a bit of a joke, it is seen by many people as a legitimate thing to win," Polson said.
"I know many people out there in the commercial (advertising) field, who are just desperate to win Tropfest and get some sort of acclaim from their peers," Polson told Reuters.
"Previous winners each year they have gone on to big and better things," said Polson, who is also an actor.
Gregor Jordan won the 1995 Tropfest with his film "Swinger" and went on to win the Cannes Film Festival jury prize for best short film. Last year's Tropfest winner, Jonathon Ogilvie, was a Cannes finalist with his work "This Film is a Dog".
NEARLY 200 ENTRIES
TV stuntman Nat Edgerton won this year's Tropfest with "Deadline" over nearly 200 other films, almost double the number entered in 1996. The first Tropfest drew just eight entries.
Because of the increase in films, Polson decided to show them in February and March at cafes on Sydney's cappuccino strip -- Victoria Street -- near the King Cross red light district.
The month-long festival, which ends on March 23, has become big business. This year's festival cost about A$180,000 (US$141,000) -- the first Tropfest cost Polson about A$800.
Tropfest takes its name from the Tropicana Cafe in Victoria Street, seen as a popular hangout for aspiring film-makers. The cafe still has a strong link with the festival, donating a year's supply of coffee to a winner of its own choice.
"I saw it (Tropicana) in those days as the place where people were most guilty of sitting around and talking about movies and not actually out there making them," Polson said.
"The festival is about encouraging people to make films, it is not just about screening them. We could be a festival where we just get the best short films from around the world."
The only criterion for a Tropfest entry is that the film must be seven minutes long and have a pickle in it. Last year it was a teaspoon and the year before that it was a coffee bean.
Tropicana was the sole host of the first two festivals. In its third year the festival crowd took up the whole of Victoria Street, and this year, 13,000 people filled Victoria Street and the local park, where the films were simulcast by satellite.
POPULAR BLEND
Mixing films and coffee has proved a popular blend in Sydney and Polson plans to take this combination to cafes around Australia with the help of satellite technology.
"What I want to do next year is have a link-up with other cafes in capital cities around Australia so that we have a national film festival happening simultaneously," Polson said.
The boom in local short-film festivals is attributed both to Australians'love of film viewing and the international success of Australian films.
"I think people are realising that it is just as satisfying, if not more so, to...watch 10 or 12 succinct, strong and well executed ideas as it is to go and watch a feature," Polson said.
In recent years, Sydney has hosted the Flickerfest and Metfest festivals, and Melbourne the St Kilda festival.
Ansett Airlines has started begun showing short films on its flights and TV's Seven Network Ltd is about to begin a 30-minute programme of shorts. Both are partly owned by media mogul Rupert Murdoch, who also has 50 percent of Australian pay television network Foxtel, which has the right to show the Tropfest films.
