Upmarket retailer David Jones Ltd, expected to report a sharp fall in half year profit on Wednesday, is shopping around for a new chief executive just as retailing conditions are expected to turn for the better.
Analysts said Chris Tideman who resigned as CEO on Tuesday was the victim of a weak retail environment at a time when David Jones was spending more on opening new stores and restructuring.
David Jones has disappointed investors since it listed in November 1995 with its failure to match prospectus forecasts.  
"I think the cycle worked against them," a Melbourne retailing analyst said.
"They have underperformed the cycle and that is a bit of a shame. That reflects the costs of the new store openings."
Analysts said Tideman may have been trying to do too much at one time. David Jones was introducing new systems to manage its inventory as well as increasing its range of private label merchandise and restructuring its buying department.
The retailer had also restructured its South Australian operations and announced plans to expand into Western Australia and New Zealand.  
"They have committed themselves to a lot of new stores and so far the new stores they have opened up ... are loss making and they have committed themselves to other new stores so their cost structure is a bit pumped up," said Simon Shakesheff a retail analyst at Macquarie Equities.
David Jones' share price has hardly been above its A$2.00 issue price since the float. The group is due to release its results for the 26 weeks to January 25 on Wednesday.
In January, the retailer said it expected its results to be up to 50 percent down on a year ago.  
Tideman cited personal reasons for leaving and the company said he would return to Britain.
Analysts expect David Jones to report a net profit before abnormals of between A$20 million and A$22 million.
The dividend is expected to be about three cents a share for the 1996/97 first half.
David Jones reported a net profit before abnormals of A$44.2 million for the 1995/96 first half and a dividend of six cents a share. Analysts estimate the full 1996/97 year result to be between A$34 million and A$38 million.  
The retailer reported a net profit of A$67.53 million in the 1995/96 year, which was up on the 1995 prospectus forecast of A$64.6 million, but its 1995/96 sales were below forecasts.
Analysts were mixed about the outlook. Some said the new chief had a tough job ahead due to re-invigorated Coles Myer Ltd owned Grace Bros-Myer department stores and the entry into the local market by Britain's Marks &amp; Spencer.
But other analysts said Australia's retail outlook for 1997 had improved and that the restructuring of David Jones was almost complete, meaning the new chief should not have as bumpy a ride as Tideman since he joined the group in 1994.  
"It could be a dream job, coming in at the bottom of the cycle and six months away from full systems implemention," said John Burgess, a retail analyst at Pru-Bache Securities.
"We have had two bad Christmases in 1995 and 1996," Burgess said. "You will reach the bottom of the spending cycle in the next two quarters, so you have spending on the rise, albeit slowly, towards the end of 1997," he said.
Analysts said David Jones may even announce the new chief executive on Wednesday. Investors reacted positively to Tideman's exit, pushing up the shares by three cents to A$1.74. About 1.21 million shares had traded by 2.15 p.m. (0315 GMT).
