Upmarket retailer David Jones Ltd reported on Wednesday a 50 percent fall in net profit for the 1996/97 first half and said it expected to make the appointment of its new chief executive officer (CEO) soon.
David Jones, which is currently without a chief following the resignation of Chris Tideman on Monday, reported a net profit of A$22.34 million in the 26 weeks ended January 25, compared with a net profit of A$44.64 million a year ago.
The retailer also said the 1996/97 year net profit would be lower than the previous year.  
Chairman Richard Warburton said the retailer would also review five or six of its underperperforming stores, but would not say if that meant store closures, but added that David Jones was also committed to its store expansion programme.
Tideman, who joined the company in 1994, made a surprise resignation on Monday, citing personal reasons.
Responding to reports that there was shareholder pressure on Tideman to resign, Warburton said Tideman left of his own will and that there was no pressure from the board or shareholders.  
Tideman oversaw the refloat of David Jones in November 1995 from the corporate remains of the debt-laden Adelaide Steamship Co Ltd, which cash-starved David Jones for most of the latter part of its 15-year ownership tenure.
"We expect to make an annoucement within days, not weeks," Warburton said about the chief executive appointment.
Warburton said the half year results were helped by a good January, but described the result as "disappointing."
"February saw a bit of a correction from the January upturn, but we have seen a slight increase in March," Warburton said.  
"Over the balance of the year, the company will continue to focus on implementing initiatives in product, consumer service and systems," the company said in the results statement.
"However, at this stage it is anticipated that the profit before tax level in the second half will be below the same period last year," the company said.
David Jones warned in early January that its first half profit would be up to 50 percent below forecast due to a lacklustre retail trading environment.  
Warburton said today the company did not expect any material improvement in retail trading conditions in the second half, adding that three reductions in official interest rates in 1996 had yet to filter through to the retailing sector.
Finance director Robert Wright said today David Jones' 1996/97 profit would be within analysts forecasts of between A$32 million and A$37 million.
David Jones sales fell one percent to A$782.58 million in the 1996/97 first half.  
Warburton said the retailer would review about five or six of its 30 stores department stores which were underperforming and not returing any shareholder vale.
He said about one-third of David Jones stores were performing very well, another third were making a profit, but could be improved, while the final third were underperforming and not returning any shareholder value.
"You have got a final third that's just not producing shareholder value. They are not necessarily losing money but they are not increasing shareholder value," he said.  
"Out of that third a half, I believe, with a bit of hard work and creative juices could take them above the line, the other half we have to look at very, very closely."
"So you can see we have about five or six stores to look at, that does not necessarily mean closure. It may mean you have to look at different things to do with those stores," he said.
At 2.50 p.m. (0350 GMT), David Jones shares were two cents lower at A$1.72 with 487,292 shares traded.
-- Sydney newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
