The Australian government appointed stockbrokers on Thursday to manage the proposed sharemarket float of its telecommunications carrier Telstra Corp, which will be the nation's largest privatisation.
The float is estimated to raise a minimum of A$8.0 billion (US$6.32 billion) -- and perhaps much more.
Finance Minister John Fahey said he wanted the Telstra float, through the sale of a third of the government's 100-percent stake, to go through by the end of the year.
"I want it ready to go to the market this year, this calendar year," Fahey told reporters.
"But I am not saying it will," he said. He added it was unclear whether the float of other international telephone companies would affect the float timing. France Telecom and Italy's state-owned Stet are also planned for sale this year.
Australian brokers J.B Were &amp; Son, U.S.-based CS First Boston and European based ABN AMRO/Rothschild had been appointed global co-ordinators for the float, Fahey said.
He said J.B Were, Ord Minnett of Australia,  CS First Boston, U.S.-Australian consortium Goldman Sachs/Macquarie Bank, Daiwa of Japan, ABN AMRO/Rothschild and German owned Deutsche Morgan Grenfell were appointed joint lead managers.
The float would not be underwritten in Australia, where 65 percent of the offer is to be sold. But the shares offered in the United States would be underwritten and listed on the New York Stock Exchange, the minister said.
Two percent of the offer is set aside for Telstra employees and foreign investors are entitled to 35 percent.
Fahey would not comment on how much the government expects to raise from the partial sale of Telstra. "I want to get optimum value for taxpayers of Australia," Fahey said.
Australia's Liberal-National Party coalition government was elected just over a year ago promsing to sell one-third of Telstra, with A$1.0 billion of the sale proceeds going to set up an environment fund.
The float of Telstra will far exceed other privatisations by the Australian government in recent years. The sale of Commonwealth Bank of Australia raised a total of A$8.0 billion, in two separate tranches, and the 1995 float of Qantas Airways Ltd raised A$1.45 billion.
The announcement was a boon to Australia's stockbroking community whose Christmas bonuses will be swelled by the Telstra float. The bidding for the Telstra deal was contested by 30 broking firms, which were invited to lodge proposals.
(A$1 =US$.79)
