Australian corporate profits, largely in line with expectations in the latest earnings season just finished, are on the mend after 18 months of disappointment, analysts said.
Overall earnings still fell but analysts are optimistic that profits for the year to June 30 should show an overall rise as economic growth gathers pace and commodity prices trend higher. The results also reflected cost cutting, as companies tear into costs to deliver earnings growth in Australia's low inflation environment, analysts said.  
Craig Drummond, head of research at brokers J.B. Were &amp; Son, said earnings per share (EPS) for industrial companies was 1.7 percent up while resource company EPS was down four to five percent.
The drop in resource earnings, due mainly to lower commodity prices and a higher Australian dollar, pulled overall earnings slightly down, Drummond said.
He said this corporate earnings season marked the end of disappointing profits that industrial groups have posted over the past 18 months. He said both industrial and resource profits should rise in the second half of 1996/97 and calendar 1998.  
"The market is not really worried about this half year result and we should start with banks having reasonable results in May," Drummond said.
Three of Australia's four largest banks, National Australia Bank Ltd, Westpac Banking Corp and Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd, are to report their 1996/97 first half results in May.
David Rees, equity strategist at brokers BT Securities: "I think compared with 12 months ago there have been a lot of signs of improvement. I think compared with what people were expecting, ... it is pretty close to line ball."  
Commonwealth Bank of Australia, pastoral and energy group Wesfarmers Ltd and retailers Woolworths Ltd and Coles Myer Ltd all reported better-than-expected profits.
"I think what is important for the market is what happens next and our view is that given the evidence of cost cutting and restructuring, given what has happened, we are looking for improvements across a whole range of companies," Rees said.
Rees said there should also be earnings improvements coming from the growth in Australia's capital expenditure (capex), which the government expects to be about 17 percent for 1996/97.  
"What we are now looking for is the follow through from capex ... to the bottom line," Rees said. Analysts said many companies improved their 1996/97 half profits by cost cutting.
Marcus Tuck, economist at HSBC James Capel, said: "Generally the cost cutting has been good and you could say that managers are slowly learning to deal with a low inflation environment."
Australia, which has enjoyed 22 quarters of continuous economic growth, has only seen three quarters with inflation rates above five percent and has had 12 quarters since June 1991 with an inflation rate below two percent.  
With the results season out of the way, investors are currently more concerned about the outlook for U.S. interest rates, said Mark O'Brien, head of equities at Australian Mutual Provident Society (AMP).
"The results that have been coming out having been largely in line. Very quickly once they (investors) realised the results weren't going to be disappointing, they turned their attention to U.S. interest rates," O'Brien said.
-- Sydney newsroom 61-2 9373-1800
