Peace could be about to break out in Australia's pay television war as the industry's biggest investors, telecoms carriers Telstra Corp and Optus Communications Pty Ltd, turn to other battles.
Both face upcoming sharemarket floats and new struggles in a soon-to-be deregulated telephone market.  
Any peace deal could see rationalisation amongst the three main players in Australia's pay-TV industry, Foxtel, Optus Vision and Australis Media Ltd, which between them have racked up losses of nearly A$1.5 billion since 1993, when satellite-TV operator Australis was formed.
The rationalisation may include each pay TV operator sharing cable and satellite facilities and an end to exclusive programming, which are expensive, analysts said.  
"I think if they can rationalise the pay TV industry, it is a positive for everyone. No one is going to lose out," one Sydney-based telecommunications analyst said. He added it could swell the market valuations of both Telstra and Optus.
The first signs of peace emerged earlier this month when both Optus and Telstra during the release of their respective profit results for the six months to December 31, 1996 confirmed they were in talks with each other about sharing infrastructure.
"People are in a more conciliatory mood now, than they have been for a long time," the telecommunications analyst said.  
Telstra is currently committed to spending about A$4 billion on rolling out its fibre-optic cable network to four million Australian homes, which carries its Foxtel pay TV service, which it jointly owns with Rupert Murdoch's News Corp Ltd.
Optus Communications' 46.5 percent owned Optus Vision is spending A$3.0 billion on a rival cable network.
The duplication of networks is a concern to Telstra chief executive Frank Blount, who said this month he was talking to Optus about these issues. "Yes, we are talking about all of our initiativies in the industry," Blount told a news conference. The cost of the two networks is making losses until almost next century, both Telstra and Optus have said.
It is these loss-making areas that potential investors are nervous about. They want them fixed before they take a punt on the Telstra and Optus floats, which are both earmarked for 1997.
"Both are to face the rigours of the stockmarket and both of them have to turn around what are big black holes," said Bob Peters, media strategist at brokers ANZ Securities.
However, any rationalisation of Australia's pay-TV industry will depend on the outcome of the courtroom drama between Optus Vision shareholders and television broadcaster Seven Network Ltd, which has a two percent holding in Optus Vision.  
Seven, which is 15 percent owned by Murdoch's News Corp, has accused fellow Optus Vision shareholders, Kerry Packer's Publishing and Broadcasting Ltd, telecom group U.S. West Inc and Optus Communications, of breaching an agreement.
If Seven wins the court case it could be entitled to buy Optus Vision at a discount.
The outcome of court action, may be settled outside the courtroom as one of the parties has confirmed to Reuters it is in talks with the other about reaching an agreement.  
This agreement could be the catalyst for the pay-TV industry shake-up and see Optus Communications taking over the Optus Vision network and it would then be able to strike a new deal with Telstra about sharing his other's networks, analysts said.
But any agreement between Telstra and Optus over pay-TV needs the approval of anti-monopolies watchdog, the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC), which prevented a merger attempt between Foxtel and Australis last year.
The Seven-Optus Vision courtroom brawl has already stalled the planned float of Optus Communications.  
Telstra's float could be held up if it does not clear up its liability to Foxtel, which is paying A$4.5 billion to Australis for a supply of movies over 25 years, analysts said. The Australian government wants Telstra to float by the end of 1997. The settlement in January between arch rivals Rupert Murdoch and Kerry Packer over the broadcasting of the Murdoch-backed Super League football competition following a meeting of the two on Murdoch's yacht off New Zealand's Bay of Islands at the end of last year, paves the way for more deals, analysts said.
"The changing relations between Packer and Murdoch may have a lot to do with it as well," ANZ's Peters said.  
"It is complicated and it will take a while to resolve, but it is heading in the right direction," Peters said.
