Muhammad Yunus may have the travel itinerary and packed schedule of an international banker, but that is where the comparisons stop.
He wears not pinstripes, but the traditional, billowing Bangladeshi panjami. He eschews five-star hotels and stays instead with friends and supporters around the world.
Yet Yunus is Bangladesh's most successful banker, a man who has gained international renown for doing the unthinkable.
Yunus is head of Grameen Bank, which makes money out of lending money to some of the world's poorest people. Ninety-four percent of Grameen's borrowers are women, and the bank makes loans to people with no collateral or credit rating.
To the traditional banker this may sound like financial suicide, but Grameen has attracted more than two million customers since it started in 1976 and its lending philosophy has spread to over 50 countries.
Yunus, founder and managing director of Grameen Bank, says his strategy works -- 98 percent of loans get repaid, a banker's dream, and most borrowers escape from their poverty trap.
"Our goal is to take the poor people out of poverty as many ways as possible," Yunus told Reuters during a visit to Australia to meet Grameen supporter groups and politicans.
AID GOES TO BUREAUCRACY, NOT POOR
Some of the world's biggest bankers are now listening to Yunus's cry against poverty. The World Bank has appointed him chairman of its policy advisory group in its lending programmes to the poor.
The world's first Micro-Credit Summit, held last month in Washington, set out to ensure that 100 million of the world's poorest families, especially women, receive credit by the year 2005. A large part of the credit programmes will be based on policies used by the Grameen Bank, which is 92-percent owned by its borrowers. The rest is owned by the Bangladesh government.
The formation two years ago of CGAP (the Consultative Group to Assist the Poorest), with the financial backing of the World Bank and European Commission, is an endorsement by the World Bank of Yunus's vision.
The CGAP has a budget of US$291 million to set up micro-lending banks around the world. Yunus wants to make sure all of this money reaches the people that need it and that it is not chewed up by bureaucracy.
"We are saying exactly US$291 million should reach the hands of the poor people and you make the minimum out of service charges and we are suggesting a mechanism to do that," he said.
"Most of the aid money gets dried up in the servicing of the aid. I am not blaming the bureaucracy itself. I am simply saying the design is wrong," said the former economics professor.
The world aid system also has its faults, Yunus told Reuters before a public lecture to a packed unversity audience.
BUBBLE UP, NOT TRICKLE DOWN
If he is not giving lectures in foreign countries he is receiving prizes or honorary degress and meeting supporters.
Each year about US$60 billion is given in aid by the World Bank and other government agencies, but these funds fail to meet their market -- the poor, Yunus said.
This aid has been given to large infrastructure projects on the trickle-down economic theory rationale, but these do not create sustainable employment, said the U.S. educated banker.
Yunus' idea for Grameen Bank came when he returned to newly-independent Bangladesh in 1972 to become head of the economics department at Chittagong University. He found that the theories he was teaching were not working -- just outside the university walls people lived in squalor.
Almost half of Bangladesh's 112 million people live below the poverty line and about 68 percent of the population are illiterate.
The 57-year-old banker knew that poverty was not due to laziness or lack of intelligence but a lack of capital in order to raise cows, make stools or pedal rickshaws.
Grameen Bank now has 12,600 staff who visit 36,000 of Bangladesh's 68,000 villages each week to meet their 2.1 million customers. In 1996 the bank loaned about US$400 million with the average loan at $150. The bank has two loans -- a one-year self employment loan and a 10-year housing loan.
MICRO-CREDIT ONLY PART OF SOLUTION
"It (capital) is a very important part of alleviating poverty, but it is not the only one," said Yunus, tipped by United States President Bill Clinton as a future Nobel Peace Prize winner.
"But other pieces become easier to fit in when you have created this centrepiece, then you can add the health piece, you can add education," said Yunus, who also plans to provide health care insurance, solar heating and cellular telephone services to Grameen customers.
"Our goal is to get these 2.1 million families out of poverty in the next five years in Bangladesh," Yunus said.
"Worldwide we shall look for a day when all the poor people are out of poverty.
"If it can be done in Bangladesh with 2.1 million families, it can be done worldwide. It is just a question of will."
