The consortium building the Sydney 2000 Olympic stadium on Thursday closed the books on an innovative funding scheme that turned into one of Australia's biggest market flops.
Stadium Australia had hoped to offset some of its A$660 million (US$515 million) construction costs through the sale of 34,400 "Gold Passes" giving investors a mixture of Olympic tickets, equity and stadium membership.
But investors and sports fans alike shunned the A$364.4 million (US$286.05 million) offer, leaving underwriters facing a massive funding shortfall.
Analysts and local media put the gap at up to A$240 million, which would make it one of Australia's biggest share flops and mean big losses for the four firms that underwrote the issue.
A spokeswoman for Stadium Australia said it expected to release the results of the float late next week, even though the issue officially closed on Thursday afternoon.
Sydney Organising Committee for the Olympic Games (SOCOG) president Michael Knight, who is also Olympics minister in the New South Wales government, agreed on Thursday that the Stadium Australia float likely fell short.
"It is not a direct concern to either the government or to SOCOG, although obviously we would prefer that the stadium float was better subscribed than is apparently the case," Knight told reporters.
The disappointment comes hard on the heels of the unexpected departure of SOCOG chief executive Mal Hemmerling, although the issue was unrelated. Hemmerling was replaced by Sandy Hollway, who worked for former prime minister Bob Hawke.
It also follows financial difficulties experienced by the Australian Olympic Committee, which has lost millions of dollars investing in a Queensland casino.
The Stadium Australia offer has been open for almost six months, more than twice as long as most share offers.
Its offer of 34,400 gold packages at A$10,000 each and 600 platinum passes at A$33,000 each opened on October 7, and its closing date has been extended twice due to lack of demand.
The gold packages include a seat at every stadium session of the 2000 Olympic Games, stadium membership for 30 years and 1,000 shares in the stadium company itself. The platinum package includes two priority seats and membership privileges.
Australian stockbrokers said the offer was too expensive given that average income in Australia was only A$36,000.
"Nobody is going to buy just one ticket, with a family you are more likely to buy four, so it's going to cost A$40,000," said one Sydney-based broker.
"Not many people can spend that sort of money, particularly if there is no guarantee on what events are going to be held there after the Olympics," the broker said.
The four underwriters of the stadium offer are ANZ Securities, Deutsche Morgan Grenfell, Macquarie Bank Ltd and ABN AMRO Hoare Govett.
"If there is a shortfall, (and) that appears to be the case, after today they will still have a considerable period of time to trade their way out of trouble," Knight said of the four.
The underwriters must fund the project regardless of whether all the packages are sold, thus guaranteeing the completion of the 110,000-seat stadium, which is due to open in 1999 in time for a season of pre-Olympic competitions.
"The money is absolutely guaranteed, the stadium construction is rocketing ahead and will not be affected in any way by the difficulties the underwriters are facing in recouping the money," Knight said.
The stadium is being built by a consortium led by private Australian construction group Multiplex Constructions Pty Ltd, British investment bank Hambros Plc and Japanese building contractor Obayashi Corp.
(A$=US$.7850)
