Computer Associates International Inc., a leading maker of software for businesses, said Monday it agreed to pay about $1.2 billion for Cheyenne Software Inc.
Computer Associates, the largest independent maker of business software for mainframe computers, said it will offer $30.50 in cash for each share of Cheyenne. Cheyenne's stock jumped $7.625 to $30 in afternoon trading on the American Stock Exchange.
Computer Associates' stock gained 62.5 cents to $63.375 on the New York Stock Exchange.
While investors applauded the announcement, industry analysts said they were puzzled by what they viewed as the expensive price Computer Associates agreed to pay.
"This is departure from their standard practice," said UBS Securities analyst Joseph Farley. "They are paying more than they ever have. There's clearly some synergies," he added. "The question is whether those synergies are worth seven times sales."
Cheyenne reported revenues of $174.1 million in its fiscal year ending June 1996.
The deal, which has been rumoured for several months, has been unanimously approved by the boards of directors of both Cheyenne and Computer Associates, the companies said.
Roslyn, N.Y.-based Cheyenne makes storage management, anti-virus and communications software products designed to run on client/server networks in which personal computers are tied together in a network run by a larger computer, or server.
Computer Associates said Cheyenne's products will bolster its own systems management software offerings, which run on both client/server and mainframe computer networks. CA derives a majority of its revenues from mainframe software.
"We are extremely excited by the synergistic nature of this acquisition," said CA Chairman Charles Wang.
Computer Associates said it will fund the acquisition through cash balances and existing credit facilities.
"Cheyenne is the recognised leader in storage management solutions for the Windows NT and NetWare environments," Wang said in a statement. "The addition of its product suite will strengthen our efforts in the desktop and LAN environments."
Computer Associates said it intended to retain all of Cheyenne's employees. It is expected that Cheyenne will operate as a division of Computer Associates and will continue to support its current distribution channel strategy.
Both companies are based on New York's Long Island.
Earlier this year, Cheyenne successively waged an aggressive fight to fend off a $1 billion unwelcome takeover bid by McAffee Associates Inc, a rival maker of systems management and anti-virus software.
Since 1976, Computer Associates has grown through a campaign of approximately 60 acquisitions to become of the world's leading independent supplier of software.
Paul Mason, a software analyst with technology research firm International Data Corp. in Framingham, Mass., said the latest acquisition does not fit what he called "the CA model, both in terms of acqusisitions and product strategy.
"It's hard to see where this fits in. If they were getting this at a great price, I could understand the deal," he said.
The companies scheduled a teleconference with Wall Street analysts Monday afternoon.
