Cascade Communications Corp's earnings for the third quarter ended September blew past the published analysts' consensus estimate by a solid $0.02 a share, but fell shy of Wall Street expectations nonetheless.
Despite year-on-year quarterly earnings growth of roughly 200 percent, investors dumped the stock in after-hours trading on Thursday evening, sending the stock down 6-1/2 to 80, traders said. Cascade reported $0.21 versus $0.07 a year ago.
Securities analysts said the disappointment lay in comparing Casade's sequential quarterly earnings growth.
"The issue was that it was trading at 60 times over the 1997 earnings forecast," said Hambrecht network equipment analyst Joe Noel, who holds a strong buy on the stock.
"They really needed $0.04 per share on the upside to maintain that price on the upside in my opinion," he said.
Investors were betting Cascade could once again blow past analysts earnings estimates on the same scale it had done in the second quarter ended in June, the analyst said.
In the June quarter, Cascade reported earnings that were 43.5 percent greater than seen in the first quarter of 1996.
"The second quarter had a big revenues spike and the third quarter was expected to be up on a similar basis sequentially," Noel said.
By contrast, the most recent third quarter showed sequential growth of only 17 percent versus the strong second quarter. Cascade had reported above 20 percent sequential growth in quarterly earnings for every period since June 1995.
There was nothing in the report or the conference call that followed which suggested problems in the company's business fundamentals, several analysts stressed.
Noel said he expected the sell-off to continue to play out on Friday morning, but for bargain-hunters to then snatch up the stock, as it remains one of the strongest plays in its sector.
In a phone interview after a conference call with analysts, Cascade chief executive Daniel Smith said he could point to nothing in the company's third quarter experience that would explain the sell-off in the company's stock.
To demonstrate it health, Smith pointed to how the company had derived between 10 and 15 percent of its overall revenues from Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM) products, an entirely new line of business introduced only early this year.
In addition, Smith said Cascade's strategic alliance with International Business Machines Corp was performing according to plan.
"We are pleased with the progress we are making and our plans are on track with IBM," he said.
Noel said the principal hazard for an investor in a telecommunmications equipment supplier like Cascade was the lumpiness of earnings from quarter to quarter.
He noted that Cascade's small number of telephone company customers thought in terms of year-long buying cycles, causing Cascade shipment volumes to fluctuate from quarter to quarter, and leaving it exposed if even one customer delays a purchase.
In its earnings report, Cascade said its revenues for the third quarter increased 162 percent to $94.2 million from $36.0 million recorded for the same period in 1995.
Net income for the quarter increased to $20.3 million, or $0.21 per share, compared with net income of $6.8 million, or $0.07 per share, for the same period in 1995. Analysts had expected $0.19 per share in the most recent quarter.
-- New York Newsdesk, 212-859-1736
