Intel Corp stock surged ahead in heavy trading on the strength of its third quarter earnings report, but while its success fueled gains in the stocks of PC makers, the Intel report did little to buoy other chipmakers.
Still, analysts said Intel's share gains Tuesday remained restrained by uncertainties over whether the third quarter ramp-up might lead to a reduction in fourth quarter orders, a concern magnified by Intel's unwillingness to make forecasts.
At midday Tuesday, Intel stock was up 3-3/8 at 111, after trading as high as 114-1/4 near the opening of trading.  
Stocks of personal computer manufacturers who rely on Intel micrprocessors also showed significant gains, as investors saw Intel's order surge as confirmation of strong demand for the machines themselves.
Compaq Computer Corp was up 1-1/2 to 73-3/8. Dell Computer Corp gained 1-1/4 to 86-1/8. Gateway 2000 Inc swelled two to 55-3/8.
"The Intel report was clearly a positive for the whole PC industry," said veteran chip analyst Dan Klesken of Robertson Stephens. "It is an endorsement of our view that we are in for a strong upgrade cycle for the second half of year," he said.  
Chips, a PC graphics chip maker, released its own strong earnings report Monday, with income of $0.42 per share in its first quarter ended September 30 versus $0.20 per share in the year ago fiscal first quarter.
Other gainers in the segment included Trident Microsystems Inc, which was up 7/8 to 20-1/8, after rising nearly two points earlier Tuesday.
Despite these gains, the Philadelphia Semiconductor Index of 16 leading chipmakers was down 1.69 points on the day to 197.97. There were only three advancers, including Intel, compared with 12 losers. One was unchanged.  
Securities analysts said Intel's latest results demonstrate how fundamentally different it is from other semiconductor makers, operating as it does with a virtual monopoly over microprocessors, the core chips of PCs.
Indeed, Intel has benefited from the pain endured by other segments of the seminconductor industry throughout the past year, especially suppliers of memory chips used in PCs.
Memory chip prices have fallen by 80 percent in the last year.  A 32-megabit memory now sells for one-third less than an eight-megabit memory did a year ago but has four times the processing power, noted Robertson's Klesken.  
Earlier Tuesday, for instance, Texas Instruments Inc, a leading U.S. memory chip maker, reported sharply lower operating income for its third quarter of $44 million versus $289 million a year ago.
Correspondingly, the percentage of revenues Texas Instrument derived from Dynamic Random Access Memory (DRAM) computer memory chips in its recent quarter fell to about 25 percent of company revenues from almost 40 percent last year.
Intel has cut its own prices by up to 50 or 60 percent on processors since last year.  The combined price cuts have spurred order growth Intel is now seeing, Klesken said.  
Robertson's Klesken noted that while the industry revenues are expected to down 10 percent in terms of dollar growth, "Intel will grow 25 percent in terms of top line, full-year revenues."
Excluding the wounded memory chip makers, which account for roughly 30 percent of the semiconductor industry, the chip industry is due to grow only five percent worldwide this year.
"That says it all," Klesken said adding that, "Intel is so clearly head and shoulders above the rest of the industry."  
Intel, which Monday had reported earnings of $1.48 per share in its September quarter, swept past Wall Street's consensus expectations of $1.25 per share for the quarter.
Securities analysts responded Tuesday with a wave of higher earnings estimates for Intel's 1996 and 1997 years.
While trading volume in Intel had reached more than 17 million shares by mid-afternoon, gains in the share price were tempered by lingering questions about whether Intel would see its surge in sales carry through the fourth quarter of 1996.
Intel did not respond directly to such concerns in a conference call with analysts Monday, citing a proposed law on the California ballot in November that would make executives and directors liable for financial forecasts they made.
In addition, some investors appeared to be capturing the recent gains in Intel stock, said Lehman analyst Michael Andrew Gumport, who nontheless reaffirmed his buy rating and set a new 12-month target price of $150 on the stock.
"The stock has done so well that clearly some people are going to take some profits," Gumport said.  Intel traded at around 100 only last Thursday.  The stock hovered around 72 in late July.
-- Eric Auchard, New York Newsdesk, 212-859-1736
