Intel Corp. stock surged Tuesday, lifted by a quarterly earnings report that substantially outpaced Wall Street expectations and confirmed its status among analysts as the shooting star of technology stocks.
The earnings report released Monday spurred gains in the stocks of personal computer makers who build machines based on Intel microprocessors but it did little to buoy other chip makers.
"The Intel report was clearly a positive for the whole PC industry," said veteran semiconductor analyst Dan Klesken of Robertson Stephens &amp; Co.
"It is an endorsement of our view that we are in for a strong upgrade cycle for the second half of the year," said Klesken.
Still, analysts said Intel stock gains were restrained by uncertainties over whether the third quarter's sharp rise in orders may have come at the expense of the fourth quarter.
The concern was magnified by Intel's decision to at least temporarily halt the practice of forecasting its business prospects.
Intel stock rose $3.50 to $111.125 Tuesday on Nasdaq in a volatile day of trading in which just under 20 million Intel shares changed hands. Intel's gains sparked the technology-heavy Nasdaq index to 1,258.10, up 1.74, its second consecutive record closing high.
On Monday Intel reported third-quarter profits of $1.3 billion, up from $931 million in 1995's third quarter. Wall Street had predicted profits of $1.1 billion.
Brokers responded to the results with a wave of higher earnings projections for Intel for 1996 and 1997.
Personal computer makers who rely on Intel micrprocessors also saw significant gains, as investors viewed Intel's order surge as confirmation of strong demand for the machines themselves.
Compaq Computer Corp. gained $2 to close at $74.75 in consolidated trading on the New York Stock Exchange, a day ahead of its own earnings report, due Wednesday.
Dell Computer Corp. rose $3.50 to $88.375 and Gateway 2000 Inc. climbed $3.375 to $56.75, both on Nasdaq.
But Intel's swelling fortunes were seen as having only limited effect on other semiconductor suppliers.
Montgomery Securities analyst Clark Westmont said the main beneficiaries were a handful of custom PC chip makers who sell graphics controllers and other PC-related devices.
Every Intel processor that goes into a PC is accompanied by serveral such ancillary chips.
"Intel is the locomotive who drags along all the other guys in this food chain," Westmont said. "As a result, these other guys are enjoying higher recognition today."
He pointed in particular to PC graphics component supplier Chips and Technologies Inc. stock, which jumped $4.875 to $19.75, or roughly 25 percent, after it released its own strong quarterly earnings report.
