Computer Associates International Inc. issued its quarterly financial results, soundly beating Wall Street's consensus forecast.
But the stock fell sharply Wednesday morning after company executives told securities analysts they planned to acclerate investments in its personal computer-based corporate software products and de-emphasise mainframe software sales.
Analysts also said some investors were spooked by a slowdown in the company's international sales, which fell about 5 percent in the latest quarter ended in September compared to a year ago.
Computer Associates shares lost more than than $4 in early trading but regained some ground later in the day after several analysts reaffirmed "buy" ratings on the stock and raised their future earnings projections on the company.
The stock closed at $62.875, down $2.75 on the day, in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
In a phone interview, Computer Associates President Sanjay Kumar confirmed the company planned to increase its investments in its PC-related mid-range software business.
"In reality, (mid-range software) is the right place to be," Kumar said of the company's planned shift in emphasis. "It is the high-growth business."
The executive said mid-range software amounted to about 31 percent of overall revenue in the latest quarter and was the fastest-growing portion of its business, with sales rising 56 percent above last year's September quarter, he said.
"What we neeed to do is engineer the business to move in that direction," Kumar said.
But mainframe software continues to account for more than twice the revenues of mid-range products, or 63 percent of the latest quarter's total reveneues of $990 million.
Mainframe sales rose 10 percent compared to the year-ago quarter, a rate Kumar said he expected would continue.
The remaining 6 percent of revenues derived from its small consumer accounting software and systems integration business.
Computer Associates has long been the world's leading supplier of mainframe software, but in recent years has sought to extend this dominance throughout corporate organisations by developing software used to manage personal computers.
This shift in focus to the smaller, albeit faster-growing part of its business prompted fears among some investors that Computer Assocites was entering a complicated transition.
"In general, you have to be concerned when a company says that it is going to be de-emphasising a part of its business that amounts to 60 percent of (its) revenues," said UBS Securities analyst Joe Farley.
But Farley discounted such concerns, saying the company's move came as no surprise to long-time observers of the business software maker. He embraced the choice to accelerate the company's commitment to the newer, higher-growth business.
"Their actions have already indicated that they are moving that way," Farley said of Computer Associates' increasing shift to PC-based mid-range products. "Their words are following their actions," he said.
Kumar said the company contemplated a "smooth transition" over the next two years.
Mid-range sales will "cross the threshold in fiscal 1998 probably" and become the dominant source of revenue, he said.
In the interview, Kumar also said he expected the company to take a charge "in the $500 million range" related to a writedown of assets in its planned acquisition of Cheyenne Software Inc. during the current quarter ending in December.
The company began a $30.50 per share cash tender offer last Friday for Cheyenne.
The company expects the total cost of the Cheyenne acquisition to come to $1.2 billion, which it plans to fund through a combination of cash reserves and existing credit.
