Shares of leading U.S. technology companies, already trading near all-time highs, languished on Tuesday as quarterly earnings raised concern that growth would be strong enough to push them to new peaks.
Intead, the sector was raked by profit-taking after a strong run-up in stock prices earlier in the fall season.
Several analysts and traders expressed concern over the lagging performance of top issues such as Microsoft Corp and International Business Machines Corp, which have taken hits even after healthy earnings reports.  
Microsoft was down 2-3/8 at 131-1/2 Tuesday, despite third quarter earnings that beat expectations by a nickel a share.
IBM slid 1-1/2 at 128-1/2, the day after it reported quarterly earnings two cents above the Wall Street consensus.
Intel Corp was trading 2-5/16 points lower Tuesday at 105-7/16, continuing a retreat from the record level of 114-1/4 it hit after its earnings release last week.
"Some companies are doing better (earnings-wise) and stocks are trading down," said one trader. "Not that there's anything we have seen in the quality of earnings or the outlooks coming from a lot of major companies," he said.  
But other analysts argued that the lack of follow-through on recent share gains showed appropriate concern over valuations on the stocks, which had enjoyed a healthy rebound after the beating they took in early summer.
"They had a big run and they basically delivered what they are supposed to deliver," said James Cramer, president of trading firm Cramer &amp; Co.
IBM stock, for example, had been trading at record highs for the year recently. It reached above 135 at one point on Monday, a record intraday level for the past several years.  
"These stocks have come very far in a short amount of time," said Phil Orlando, market strategist for Value Line Asset Management of the sector's lagging share prices.
"We have just got earnings out of the way and now we are going to take some profits," he said of the market's reaction.
Other analysts noted how several once high-flying computer stocks have yielded disappointments this earnings season.
Silicon Graphics Inc shares suffered a pounding last week after it reported a net loss. The stock was down 1/4 of a point on Tuesday afternoon at 19-7/8, a new year-low.  
Earlier on Tuesday, Digital Equipment Corp reported a loss in its latest quarter of $0.48, well below the estimated loss of $0.14 per share analysts had been expecting. Digital was trading at a new year low of 29-1/8, off 5-1/4.
Sun Microsystems Inc was down 2-13/16 at 57-1/2 on Tuesday, continuing a decline seen since it disappointed investors last week by failing to deliver the strong upside earnings surprise now demanded of such high-growth companies.
Prior to Sun's report, the stock had reached above 70, or 30 percent above its level in the first week of September.  
A few analysts speculated that the lack of follow-through as expressed in share price gains may be tied to a retincence by technology executives to offer guidance on the future and thereby offer fresh reasons to propel these stocks forward.
Last week, officials at industry bellwether Intel refused to offer their typical outlook on industry trends, citing fears of shareholder lawsuits that might result if a California ballot proposal were to pass in November.
But others heaped scorn on the idea that possible passage of state initiative Proposition 211 was in any way depressing the stocks.  
"Proposition 211 is irrelevant to the market activity we are seeing," said John Kinnucan, a technology stock portfolio manage with Strome, Susskind Investment Management LP in Santa Monica, Calif.
"The reason is that people are looking at the quarterly financial results and the share price valuations and they see a mismatch," he said.
Kinnucan said it was reasonable to question the valuations of even a premier name like Microsoft, shares of which he noted have appreciated more than 1000 since late 1992.
"What would be of concern would be if people weren't asking questions about the valuations of these stocks," he said.
-- Eric Auchard, New York Newsdesk, 212-859-1736
