MCI Communications Corp. said Monday it reached a 10-year deal with NextWave Telecom Inc. that thrusts MCI into the top tier of U.S. wireless communications providers.
Under terms of the deal, MCI said it will connect its network to a system planned by NextWave to provide wireless personal communications services, giving it the capacity to offer service to more than 110 million individuals in 63 areas, including 29 of the top 50 markets.
Washington-based MCI said it will buy at least 10 billion minutes of capacity for its personal communications services from NextWave over 10 years.
Terms of the deal were not disclosed.
Personal communications services represent the new generation of celluar communications services, allowing customers to send both voice and data transmissions over wireless telephones.
The deal will help underpin the financial future of debt-laden NextWave, which was the largest bidder in the U.S. Federal Communications Commission's auctions for "C-band" wireless radio spectrum held in early July.
NextWave, based in San Diego and New York, also plans to sell stock to the public.
For MCI, the deal enables it to expand quickly into the rapidly growing market for wireless personal communications services.
Two years ago, MCI dropped out of the auctions for PCS licences after the bidding became too rich for its taste. But with the NextWave pact and previous smaller deals, MCI has moved to become a major reseller of wireless services.
As part of the deal announced Monday, NextWave selected MCI to provide telecommunications and other services supporting the development and ongoing operations of its personal communications services system, MCI said.
Among the major markets where Nextwave has licenses are New York, Los Angeles, Washington D.C. and Baltimore, Boston and Denver.
"This agreement with NextWave establishes an immediate nationwide PCS footprint for MCI and represents an important next step in MCI's wireless strategy," said Whitey Bluestein, vice president for MCI wireless strategy and development.
"This is the first full interconnection agreement of its kind and brings new competition to the wireless marketplace," he said, noting that with full interconnection, MCI does not need to own its own wireless facilities.
Industry analysts expect to see some ferocious price-cutting in wireless telephone as competition heats up, and the latest deal will make it even more intense.
"It is going to be a battle of the Goliaths," said Bill Bane, a consultant at Mercer Management Consulting.
MCI said the NextWave agreement is a model for additional agreements it expects to sign with other wireless providers as part of its wireless interconnected network strategy.
The strategy is MCI's blueprint for developing a full range of wireless services and features that will be integrated into its existing communications services.
"This was MCI's strategy all along," said Jeffrey Kagan, an Atlanta-based telecommunications industry analyst.
He said MCI has historically preferred to resell communications services initially rather than investing in its own infrastructure. Over time, the company selectively builds its own infrastructure as it proves profitable to do so.
"Reselling service was how they became a heavy hitter in long distance in the first place," Kagan said. "What their plan is, is to resell service from other providers and build networks where they see the need to do so," he said.
Kagan said MCI's deal with NextWave marks the rapid realisation of its reseller strategy. "This all of a sudden puts MCI on the wireless communications map in a big way."
MCI's plunge into the wireless market makes it a viable competitor to the several existing national players in the wireless business and is bound to heat up the competition in the increasingly crowded market for cellular services.
Other national players include AT&amp;T Corp.'s AT&amp;T Wireless unit, Sprint Corp.'s Sprint Spectrum venture with several cable companies, and PCS PrimeCo L.P., a joint venture of AirTouch Communications, Bell Atlantic Corp., NYNEX Corp. and U.S. West Communications Group.
Still, Kagan noted that AT&amp;T's wireless unit, the former McCaw Cellular business, remains twice as large as MCI's cellular business, with about 6.5 million subscribers in geographic regions covering 207 million potential customers.
MCI's deal with NextWave covers about 110 million potential customers living in a mix of metropolitan and less-densely populated areas.
MCI's stock added 75 cents to trade at $26.25 on Nasdaq in late afternoon trading.
