AT&amp;T Corp's decision to name outsider John Walter as heir to Chairman and Chief Executive Robert Allen boils down to a basic gamble the company believes it must take to prepare for the torrent of competition ahead.
The nation's largest phone company rejected the standard telecoms pedigree shared by most top executives in the industry -- including Allen -- in favor of a more general set of business leadership skills Walter has demonstrated.  
Wednesday, AT&amp;T said Walter, until recently the chief executive of commercial printer R.R. Donnelley &amp; Sons Co, would replace Allen as CEO and chairman in 18 months.
"The magnitude of the challenge has got to be at least of the same magnitude as the one that IBM faced," said Robert Miles, a top corporate turnaround consultant and author of a forthcoming book of case studies called, "Corporate Comeback."
But analysts who followed his tenure at Donnelley credited Walter with being a tough-minded visionary who successfully guided the expansion of his commercial publishing firm into a computer-savvy marketing services firm.  
"Walter understands how to run a business and make money," said Frank Dzubeck, president of Communcations Network Architects, a Washington, D.C.-based technology consulting firm.
At Donnelley, he closed businesses which could not carry their own weight. Earlier this year Donnelley spun off direct mailer Metromail Corp and is planning the spinoff of Donnelley Enterprise Solutions Inc, a provider of information management services to large law firms and investment bank.
This crucible of experience will come in handy for Walter at AT&amp;T as the giant company undergoes a similarly wrenching business and technology transition, but on a massive scale.  
Walter is certainly not without his critics on Wall Street. Financial analysts must be convinced he can scale his Donnelley lessons upward to address $80 billion-a-year AT&amp;T. Donnelley had 1995 revenues of $6.5 billion.
Wednesday, SBC Warburg analyst Barry Sine cut his rating on AT&amp;T to hold from buy, citing disappointment about the naming of Walter to lead the company. "In our view what was needed was a fresh face with a high-tech resume," he said.
Donnelley's growth came at a price, other analysts added, noting how despite Walter's visionary style the publisher struggled with falling earnings and restructuring issues.  
"A lot of things have been going wrong," said one analyst, citing the lower earnings outlook and falling stock price. The stock price has performed listlessly recently, trading near its 52-week lows. The stock Thursday was at 38-1/8, up 1/4.
Still, several analysts classified Walter among the new breed of top technology managers who earn their stripes as sophisticated consumers of technology but who know how to delegate decisions about the nuts and bolts of technology.  
Perhaps the most famous example of this type is an executive like Louis Gerstner, who joined IBM Corp in 1993 from consumer products distributor RJR Nabisco Holdings Corp and was with American Express Co prior to that.
"Maybe you don't actually have to have a guy who has time to get his hands dirty," Dzubeck said.
"I think the operating issues, the strategic issues become paramount," he said, while technology strategy can best be left to second and third-tier managers.
Other outsiders who have become the top-guns at successful technology companies include Jim Barksdale of Netscape Communications Corp, the former chief information officer of air freight forwarder Federal Express Corp.
Another example would be Alex Mandl, the man Walter has initially been hired to replace as second-in-command at AT&amp;T, following Mandl's departure in August to join a wireless communications venture of Associated Group Inc.
Before joining AT&amp;T in 1991, Mandl headed SeaLand Services.
"He's transformed a large, old-line company challenged by new technologies and changing markets into a tough global competitor," said Allen in a statement. "Meeting those challenges is what leading the 'new' AT&amp;T is all about."
