MCI Communications Corp. said Monday it reached a 10-year deal with NextWave Telecom Inc. that thrusts MCI into the top tier of U.S. wireless communications providers.
However, analysts said that while the NextWave deal should allow MCI to compete with other wireless industry heavyweights like AT&amp;T Corp., and the Sprint Spectrum and PCS PrimeCo joint ventures, MCI's wireless investment remains a cautious one.
MCI has opted to function as a major reseller of wireless services instead of paying the hefty price required to buy cellular operating licenses and to build the network infrastructure needed to offer the new services.
Under terms of the NextWave deal, MCI will offer wireless services to more than 110 million potential customers in 63 U.S. cities, including 29 of the top 50 metropolitan markets.
Washington-based MCI said it will purchase from NextWave over the next 10 years at least 10 billion minutes of capacity to offer wireless personal communications services.
MCI also said it will plug the MCI network into NextWave's, enabling MCI to offer wireless services as a seamless part of its overall package of long-distance, local access, Internet and data communications services.
"This agreement with NextWave establishes an immediate nationwide PCS footprint for MCI and represents an important next step in MCI's wireless strategy," said Whitey Bluestein, vice president for MCI wireless strategy and development.
"This is the first full interconnection agreement of its kind and brings new competition to the wireless marketplace," he said, noting that with full interconnection, MCI does not need to own wireless facilities.
Personal Communications Services (PCS) represent a new generation of cellular communications services, allowing customers to send both voice and data transmissions over wireless telephones.
Terms of the deal were not disclosed, but the MCI official said the price per minute would be "competitive" with expected rates for wireless phone services over the coming years.
As part of the deal announced Monday, NextWave selected MCI to provide telecommunications and other services supporting the development and ongoing operations of its personal communications services system, MCI said.
NextWave, which is based in San Diego and New York, was founded only a year ago by Allen Salmasi, a former executive at Qualcomm Inc., developers of the wireless communications technology NextWave plans to use on its proposed network.
NextWave is backed by a host of blue-chip venture capital funds and consumer electronics makers who have chipped in a total of $450 million in private financing. The company also is planning an initial public offering of stock.
The MCI deal will help underpin the financial future of debt-laden NextWave, which was the largest bidder in the U.S. Federal Communications Commission's auctions for "C-band" wireless radio spectrum held earlier this year.
NextWave paid $4.7 billion for its 63 city licenses. Among the major markets where Nextwave has won the chance to operate are New York, Los Angeles, Washington D.C., Boston and Denver.
That bidding process, and additional auctions that coincidentally got under way in Washington Monday, are designed to allow entrepreneurial companies a shot at competing in the emerging markets for wireless communications services.
For MCI, the deal enables it to expand quickly into the rapidly growing market for wireless personal communications services after having missed several chances to enter the business in prior years.
In early 1995, MCI dropped out of an earlier round of "big-league" auctions for PCS licences after the bidding became too rich for its taste.
Previously, MCI had flirted with the acquistion of Nextel Communications Inc. as a route into the wireless arena.
While impressive sounding, analysts noted that MCI's committment to buy an average of one billion minutes per year over 10 years from NextWave represents a conservative bet on the growth of the wireless phone market.
One billion minutes of air-time amounts to a fraction of current cellular phone use, which is estimated to be running at about 40 billion minutes this year, based on industry calculations of roughly 36 million subscribers.
MCI said the NextWave agreement is a model for additional agreements it expects to sign with other wireless providers as part of its wireless interconnected network strategy.
"This was MCI's strategy all along," said Jeffrey Kagan, an Atlanta-based telecommunications industry analyst.
"Reselling service was how they became a heavy hitter in long distance in the first place," Kagan said. "What their plan is, is to resell service from other providers and build networks where they see the need to do so," he said.
Industry analysts expect to see ferocious price-cutting among wireless telephone service providers as competition heats up, and the latest deal will make it even more intense.
MCI's stock gained $1.25 to close at $26.75 on the Nasdaq.
