The picture for personal computer demand in the third quarter of 1996 was either half-empty or half-full, depending on which of two market research firms' data is used.
Technology market research firm International Data Corp. said Monday that growth in U.S. PC shipments from a year ago slackened to 12 percent, "the slowest pace in five years," based on its preliminary third-quarter statistics.
A second firm, Dataquest, said PC makers "prospered" in the third quarter as worldwide shipments rose 16.3 percent from the same period a year ago.
The conflicting conclusions reflect IDC's focus on the U.S. market, which accounts for a substantial majority of world PC demand, versus Dataquest's emphasis on overall global shipments.
"We're making mountains out of molehillls," Dataquest PC analyst Kimball Brown said of concerns that PC growth may be slowing. "The point here is that we had a strong PC market all year ... What other market of this size grows at 20 percent?"
Reflecting a more sombre view of the industry's recent performance, IDC analyst Eric Lewis said "PC vendors are being extra careful this year, after getting burned by excess inventory at the end of 1995."
However, the researchers agreed on which companies ended up as winners and losers in the third period.
They said Compaq Computer Corp. once again led in shipments of PCs both worldwide and in the United States. At the same time, Apple Computer Inc. and the combined force of Packard Bell Inc. and NEC Corp. saw declines, compared with very strong year-ago periods.
Both research firms agreed that fourth quarter PC shipments are likely to pick up the pace over the third quarter, boosting the totals for the full year.
IDC forecast that worldwide personal computer shipments will grow 18.5 percent for 1996 as a whole, while Dataquest projects the global PC market will grow by 19.7 percent.
Underlying the dispute over the health of the current market is a comparison with last year's banner year, viewed by analysts as a historic upswing in demand that is unlikely to be repeated anytime soon.
IDC reckoned that worldwide PC shipments grew 23.8 percent in 1995, while Dataquest put the figure at 24.7 percent.
Dataquest said U.S. PC shipments rose 12.5 percent during the third quarter, or roughly the same level as reported by International Data.
IDC said quarterly unit shipments rose 16 percent worldwide, down slightly from what Dataquest reported.
PC makers showed greater caution in the latest third quarter, compared with the same period a year ago, IDC said.
In the 1995 third quarter, a number of vendors, especially Apple and Packard Bell, had shipped large quantities of PCs to retailers in anticipation of strong holiday sales.
That jump led to an over-supply of inventory that hurt the industry late last year and resulted in greater caution this time around. PC vendors now appear to be holding back on shipments while they gauge holiday buyers' demand, IDC said.
In the upcoming quarter, IDC's Lewis predicted, "Shipments will pick up as we move through the fourth quarter, leading to a happy holiday season for the PC industry."
Though he too is optimistic about fourth quarter market growth, Dataquest's Brown cautioned that "Every year it gets tougher to maintain 20 percent annual growth."
