America Online Inc unveiled a broad strategy to transform the online service provider into a mass media company in a move that further renders Internet access services a commodity business.
Earlier Tuesday, the world's leading online service introduced a flat-rate Internet pricing option as a part of a comprehensive restructuring plan, ending years of resistance to competing directly with Internet access providers on price.  
In addition, AOL said it hired Robert Pittman, a prominent media executive, to head its flagship online service, and put forth measures aimed at shoring up its image with investors.
AOL had said it planned to take $460 million in charges spread over the recently ended September quarter and the upcoming December period, mainly to cover its switch to a more conservative method of accounting for marketing costs.
The stock see-sawed as investors digested whether the near-term profits impact was compensated for by the prospect AOL would become a stable, but growing, mass media enterprise.
AOL shares had risen 1 to 25-5/8 in late trading Tuesday.  
Gary Arlen, an online industry analyst, said "the market is responding to the financial announcements and not to the promise of all these other plans, including what Pittman brings to the company."
Arlen added that the restructuring plan demonstrates that AOL "is a dynamic company that can respond to challenges decisively.
In an interview, AOL chairman Steve Case said Pittman -- the broadcast executive who created MTV and made it the first profitble cable TV company -- was hired to help lead AOL into a new era of growth by addressing the mass media market.  
While Case expects AOL to pass the 10 million mark in subscriptions late in calender year 1997, "The focus is not on getting to 10 million, but getting out to tens of millions and that's what (Pittman) is focused on," he said of the new divsion head.
Pittman, who also took part in the phone interview, said that with TV-sized audiences on the horizon, AOL planned to accelerate its emphasis on advertising, online merchandising and sources of revenue other than subscriber fees.
"The main point is that we are really shifting the business model toward these new sources of revenues," he said.  
Analysts said AOL's thrust into the Internet access business will have reprucussions for rival online companies, Internet access providers and even the firms that create special entertainment and other programming for the Internet.
Arlen said the first casualty of AOL's plans to offer seemless access to the Internet will be its own GNN Internet service, which AOL told analysts it plans to discontinue.
At a new rate of $19.95, AOL puts itself in the same pricing league as "pure" Internet access providers, such as Netcom On-Line Communications Inc and Earthlink Network Inc, which offer little or no proprietary content.  
"What happens is that access becomes a commodity service," said Arlen, who heads Arlen Communications Inc in Bethesda, Md. "AOL has now defined the $20 a month Internet access rate as a commodity," he said.
However, in a phone interview, David Garrison, Netcom's chief executive said he expects to feel little direct impact from the AOL move, since Netcom is mainly focused on serving and "adding value" for business customers.
Netcom, with 562,000 paying subscribers as of September 30, is the largest independent provider of Internet access. More than 98 percent of Netcom's customers already pay $19.95.  
"The difference is that our product is not aimed at the consumer, the entertainment sector if you will," he said in contrasting AOL's core market with Netcom's business focus.
Reflecting the differing demand of his base of small and medium-sized business customers, Garrison claimed that Netcom turnover rates have remained relatively low and stable over the last seven quarters -- in striking contrast to AOL.
Arlen noted that America Online also discussed ambitious plans to develop an increasing amount of programming content for the Internet in its newly created AOL Studio division, led by long-time executive Ted Leonsis.  
In effect, AOL is commodifying the programming content on the Web, much in the way the big Hollywood movie studios have dominated film and broadcast production, Arlen said.
"AOL is becoming a one-stop source for Internet access, programming content and other services," Arlen said. "I expect that AOL's offerings will be totally satisfactory to the millions of users who are newbies to the Internet and a large number of heavy users who are fed up with shopping for deals."
Abhishek Gami, an analyst at Nesbitt Burns Securities, added that, "Now there will be less confusion both for investors and for consumers as well."
-- New York newsdesk, 212-859-1736
