Bay Networks Inc shares bounded higher on Wednesday on news the company had named a senior Intel Corp official as chairman and chief executive, a move analysts said could give Bay the strong hand it has lacked.
"It's quite a positive," said Bear Stearns networking analyst Eric Blachno of the long-time Intel executive David House's selection. "It's good to know the company is not going to be rudderless."  
Bay shares gained 1-3/4 to 20-1/8 on Wednesday, rising from their 52-week basement.
The shares were among the five most active on the NYSE.
Blachno said he will remain on the sidelines before once again backing the stock until he sees what strategies House may have in store to return Bay to prominence within the networking industry.
The analyst downgraded the stock to neutral from buy after Bay's last earnings report, which he said included "ominous" signs of trouble in the company switching business, which accounts for about 20 percent revenues.  
Bay's switch business has shown sequential declines in revenues for the last two quarters, even as rivals Cisco Systems Inc and 3Com Corp have delivered double-digit growth on larger revenue bases, Blachno noted.
Despite its reputation as a technology leader in the networking industry, Bay's finanical performance has marked it as a laggard within the group over the last several years.
By contrast, Cisco and 3Com have positioned themselves in front of an avalanche of demand for networking products and their shares have reflected that success.  
Wall Street analysts have complained that the company has suffered from a crisis of leadership in recent months.
Leadership has been an issue for Bay ever since it was formed by the merger of Wellfleet and Synoptics and 1994.
Analysts said difficulties encountered in combining the predecessor companies' product lines became magnified by an attempt to operate the companies out of headquarters on two coasts: in Santa Clara, Calif. and Billerica, Mass.
The hiring of David House as chairman, president and CEO consolidates in one leader's hands the role of chairman, which had been held by Paul Severino founder of Wellfleet, and former chief executive Andrew Ludwick, a founder of Synoptics.
Severino remains a director of the company and is expected to play an important role in defining technology strategy.
Ludwick resigned two weeks ago from the company, following several months of speculation that he planned to leave.
"We continue to believe Bay is going to be a long-term player and one of the leading companies in its industry," said Blachno, adding that, "Of course, it will take some time before the new leader maps his course."
-- Eric Auchard, New York newsdesk, 212-859-1736
