Computer distribution powerhouse Ingram Micro Inc. is set to hold its widely anticipated initial public offering on Wall Street Thursday despite some last-minute delays, including management changes.
"We haven't seen anything comparable in the technology sector with its kind of name this year," said Manish Shah, editor and publisher of the IPO Maven, of the new issue.
Anticipating heavy demand, the estimated price on Ingram's 20 million share offering was boosted to $17 to $19 a share Wednesday from $14 to $16, said underwriter Morgan Stanley.
As the world's leading distributor of computer hardware, software and networking equipment to corporate resellers and computer retailers, Santa Ana, Calif.-based Ingram is a veritable steam-engine of computer industry growth.
There are really only three world-class distributors of computer products: Ingram, with revenues expected to hit roughly $10 billion this year, Merisel Inc. with $6 billion and Tech Data Corp. at $4 billion.
That size advantage is crucial said Seymour Merrin, a leading industry analyst, who heads Merrin Information Services Inc. in Palo Alto, Calif. "Market share isn't just an important factor," Merrin said. "It's the only factor."
Ingram's suppliers read like a Who's Who of the leading computer brands -- names like IBM, Intel, Microsoft, Cisco, Apple, Novell and U.S. Robotics. And like many of those names, Ingram is seen as the undisputed leader in its own industry.
Its main customers are not end-users of technology products, but the middlemen of distribution -- corporate resellers, systems intergrators and computer retailers.
"Ingram's got it all: distribution power, brand quality and customer or franchise loyalty," Shah said.
Underlying excitement about the new stock is a belief that Ingram is positioned to benefit directly from a multi-year computer buying boom expected to take hold later this year or early in 1997 and last for anywhere from two to four years.
Companies are preparing to upgrade to faster Intel Pentium PCs running Microsoft Windows NT and buy a host of related products made passible by the more powerful machines.
"We are coming close to the proverbial elbow of the hockey stick," said Merrin, referring to the hook upwards on sales charts that signifies explosive growth.
In one important respect, however, Ingram should not be classified with other top technology names famous for their explosive earnings growth and spiraling stock prices.
Ingram competes in a brutal low-margin business that has more in common with supermarkets or trucking than computers -- its profit margins have in fact declined to 6.8 percent in the first half of 1996 from 8.1 percent in 1993.
The company's path to Wall Street has not been without its detours and mishaps.
An anticipated public offering was temporarily derailed earlier in the year when Linwood "Chip" Lacy -- the engineer credited with driving Ingram Micro's growth over the years -- resigned as chairman and chief executive.
Ingram located a prominent replacement in Jerre Stead, the former head of mainframe software maker Legent Corp. until its 1995 acqusition by Computer Associates International Inc. It named Michael Grainger chief finacial officer two weeks ago.
But any Ingram doubters will remain on the sidelines Thursday.
"It is definitely one of the best offerings of the year. There is great demand," said Shah for shares of the stock. "I think it will remain strong and by the end of year, it could be a $30 stock," he added.
