Battling competition in its core long-distance phone business, a need to enter new markets and a looming management transition, AT&amp;T Corp. faces an even broader challenge in the proposed merger of British Telecommunications Plc and MCI Communications Inc., two of its biggest adversaries.
British Telecom announced Sunday it planned to acquire the remaining 80 percent of MCI it does not already own in a complicated cash and stock transaction that values MCI at more than $20 billion.
AT&amp;T responded to news of the huge cross-border deal by calling on U.S. and European regulators to condition approval of it on a further freeing of competition in British Telecom's home market in the United Kingdom, even as British Telecom argued that it was already among the world's most open.
The merger would bring together the aggressive marketing skills of MCI -- the No. 2 U.S. long distance provider behind AT&amp;T -- with the deep pockets of the former British phone monopoly to form Concert, a combined entity with unprecedented global reach.
Analysts said the merger increases British Telecom's and MCI's scope for global pooling of resources and strategy coordination and puts pressure on AT&amp;T to beef-up its international strategies even as it must contend with an array of distractions at home.
"AT&amp;T is the one with the most to lose," said Forrester Research industry analyst David Goodtree. "The company is in danger of becoming just another player," he said, noting how rivals large and small have begun to erode AT&amp;T's long-held dominance of the U.S. long-distance business.
The former U.S. phone monopoly has seen its share of the country's $75 billion long-distance market slip to under 55 percent from 60 percent two years ago.
"This deal really forces AT&amp;T to respond and unfold its strategy," said Berge Ayvazian, senior telecoms analyst with Yankee Group in Boston.
With British Telecom's financial backing, MCI is expected to step up its attack on the $90 billion local U.S. phone market, Ayvazian said. MCI already plows nearly $1 billion a year into the fiber optic networks that will allow its MCI Metro unit to supply local phone service in roughly half the United States.
AT&amp;T has been groping for a strategy to enter the U.S. market for local telephone services, even as another set of rivals, the regional Bell companies like Bell Atlantic/NYNEX Corp. and SBC/Pacific Telesis Group seek permission to enter the long-distance business.
"AT&amp;T must now find some counterpoint to the BT-MCI strategy by trying to open up and reveal its local plans," Ayvazian said.
"The company has become more and more isolated as the Bell companies prepare to enter the long-distance market and as AT&amp;T still relies on a go-it-alone strategy," agreed David Roddy, chief telecommunications economist at the Deloitte &amp; Touche Consulting Group.
The proposed merger of BT and MCI is just the latest in a succession of threats to AT&amp;T's status as a global telecommunications carrier and its leadership of the U.S. phone business.
In September, AT&amp;T shocked Wall Street by warning that its second-half earnings would be dampened by continuing pressures in its long-distance business and efforts to gear up to offer local phone service in most of the 50 states. AT&amp;T also said its near-term earnings were being hurt by investments in new online and wireless services.
The decline in its financial results comes on the heels of AT&amp;T's year-long split-up of the company into three separate pieces, a move widely praised as necessary but one which nonetheless appears to have been a major distraction to its management. AT&amp;T recently completed the spin-off of Lucent Technologies Inc., its former telecom equipment arm, and is planning to spin off its NCR computer operation in coming months.
The break-up of AT&amp;T  has heightened dependence on its imperiled long-distance phone revenues. Responding to mounting concerns about AT&amp;T Chairman Robert Allen's leadership, the company recently named printing industry executive John Walter as its new president and chief operating officer and Allen's eventual successor after an 18-month transition.
Wall Street securities analysts have questioned the choice of Walter, an outsider to the telecommunications industry, while simultaneously criticizing the delay in handing over responsibility to him. Even those who praise Walter's track record as chief executive at R.R. Donnelley -- where he successfully engineered a complex transformation of the old line catalog printer into marketer of digital printing services -- said Walter faces a daunting learning curve at AT&amp;T.
BT still controls the lion's share of the British telephone market, with its grip on local service still amounting to 90 percent. But recent deregulation of the local service market has allowed rivals, including AT&amp;T through its AT&amp;T U.K. operation, to begin competing on BT turf.
