Iomega Corp's plans to apply its computer storage technology to handheld consumer electronics may fundamentally lower the cost of saving and transfering data to such devices.
The reusable data storage system, to be known as "n-hand," could be used in digital cameras, computer game devices, cellular phones and handheld personal computers known as digital assistants.  
In cameras, for example, the technology could function as a removable "digital film" that would replace existing chemical photographic film.
"Our n-hand technology ... has the potential to change the way consumers use portable electronic devices," said Kim Edwards, president and chief executive of the Roy, Utah-based company, in a statement.
"We are bringing personal computer-like storage to portable devices," added George Meyer, Iomega's director of marketing for new business, in a phone interview.  
The n-hand disks are expected to be priced at less than $10 for a 20-megabyte disk, and could be available by the second half of 1997. Iomega said the n-hand disks are about half the size of a business card.
Several industry analysts said they believe Iomega's technology could help propel digital cameras into the consumer mainstream within a matter of years, by freeing users from the fixed capacity of existing flash memory storage and by substantially reducing the overall cost of such cameras.  
A digital camera could store from 50 to 80 images on a single $10 n-hand disk, Iomega said, depending on image resolution. Consumers now pay hundreds of dollars for a flash memory card capable of holding the same number of images, it noted.
Jim Porter, a data storage analyst with market research firm Disk/Trend Inc. of Mountain View, Calif., said the Iomega technology could cut the cost of storing photographs by a factor of 20 times.
A Kodak digital camera now costing $499 could be priced as low as $300 within a matter of years, he said, reflecting the elimination of more costly digital storage methods.  
Iomega's plans pose a theat to makers of flash memory chips that are used to store digital information in such small electronic devices currently. Leading makers include Sandisk Corp, Intel Corp and Toshiba Corp.
In addition, the Iomega system could help accelerate the current digital transformation of the camera industry, leading to a decline in revenues that cameramakers receive from conventional silver-halide-based photo film and equipment.
"With 'n-hand' you have a digital camera that you can treat like a regular camera," Meyer said, referring to the replaceable nature of the Iomega high-density floppy disk system.
"This technology can make digital cameras much more competitive with regular ones," he said.
Besides lacking a low-cost removable storage medium, digital cameras offer inferior picture quality but image resolution is improving rapidly, analysts said. This could lead to explosive growth of the new cameras in coming years.
Shares of the company closed up $1.375 to $25.375 on Thursday in active trading on the Nasdaq. On Friday, Iomega's stock will begin trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
-- New York Newsdesk, 212-859-1736
