H&amp;R Block Inc., citing problems facing the online service industry, said Wednesday it has decided not to complete the spin-off of the rest of its CompuServe online unit, at least for now.
The Kansas City, Mo.-based company, which owns 80 percent of CompuServe after spinning off part of the online service earlier this year, cited CompuServe's recent financial troubles and uncertainties facing the online industry.
Industry analysts said the problems reflect the changes rippling through the online industry but were also partly unique to Columbus, Ohio-based Compuserve, which has about 5.2 million subscribers, slightly more than half of them outside of the United States.
America Online Inc., the largest with more than 6 million subscribers, No. 2 Compuserve and Prodigy have all been hurt as users have gone directly to the Internet with lower-cost Internet access providers rather than online services.
Some analysts have said that the online services, which offer packages of specialised information as well as Internet access, may not survive in the long run, though the eventual shape of the online industry remains far from certain.
"A lot of the people are going to read this as the online market is at a crossroads and pretty shaky," said one analyst who follows the industry.
H&amp;R Block spun off 20 percent of CompuServe in April and had planned to distribute the rest to its shareholders.
But it said Wednesday that it has decided not to present the proposed spin-off of the rest of CompuServe to shareholders at its annual meeting scheduled for Sept. 11.
"The board continues to believe that a separation of CompuServe is in the best interests of H&amp;R Block shareholders and will continue to consider the matter," H&amp;R Block interim President Frank Salizzoni said.
CompuServe's stock has dropped from a high of $35.50 on its first day of trading to near $10 recently. The stock rose after Wednesday's announcement because new CompuServe shares still owned by H&amp;R Block will not come onto the market.
CompuServe added 93.75 cents to $13.25 on Nasdaq, while H&amp;R Block fell $2.125 to $25.75 on the New York Stock Exchange. America Online added 75 cents to $31.625, also on Nasdaq.
In July, CompuServe shocked Wall Street with a warning that it expected a loss for its first quarter ended July 31, its first as a publicly traded company.
The company blamed the high costs of introducing its new Wow! consumer online service and investing in an overhaul of its network infrastructure, as well as a decline in overall subscriber growth as cancellations outpaced new customers.
In response, CompuServe and H&amp;R Block were slapped with a shareholder lawsuit alleging they had misrepresented the online service's prospects in the prospectus for the stock offering.
When the company last week reported a first-quarter loss of $29.6 million, or 32 cents a share, it also warned investors that losses would continue for the second quarter ending in October.
H&amp;R Block, which is also the nation's largest consumer tax filing service, is likely to wait for the online industry to settle down before completing the spin-off, analysts said.
In addition to the losses, H&amp;R Block cited the planned introduction next month of new technology for CompuServe and its new Wow! service.
Meanwhile, America Online has had problems of its own, including price cuts to stay competitive with Internet access providers and an embarrassing 19-hour service blackout earlier this month. But analysts said that in contrast to CompuServe, America Online has continued to grow, though at a slower pace.
"The problems CompuServe is having are likely to benefit America Online in the next nine months," one analyst said.
