Shiva Corp stock rose five points Wednesday amid resurgent speculation that it may be an acquisition target of a major network equipment player.
    "It sure looks like people are speculating that its going to be taking over," said Robertson Stephens analyst Paul Johnson, who maintains a long-term attractive on the stock.
    Shiva shares have risen nearly 14 percent in the last two days. By early afternoon Wendesday, the stock was trading at 53-3/4, up 5 points on the day.
    Shiva declined comment on what it called "a market rumor."
 "We have had rumors like this before," said Cynthia Deysher, Shiva's chief financial officer. "Our firm policy on this is not to comment on market rumors," she said.
    Several analysts said signs of merger speculation were apparent in the stock's recent gains.
    Cowen &amp; Co analyst Chris Stix noted that Shiva was mentioned in a trade magazine gossip column published Monday as among potential merger candidates in the network industry.
    The article, published in the November 11 issue of Communications Week, spoke of a possible tie-up between rival Ascend Communications Inc and Shiva, among others.
    Stix said another factor behind the rebound in recent weeks of Shiva's share price may be the company's comments in public forums that it has a potential major contract win with a major telecom carrier it has declined to name.
    The Cowen analyst maintains a strong buy on Shiva.
    The stock hit a low of 38 in late September, following a steep three-month decline from its historic high of 87 reached in June, when it was a favorite among momentum investors.
    Although enthusiastic about Shiva's business fundamentals, Johnson discounted any recent product announcements as the cause behind the recent share price moves.
   "This doesn't appear to me that its product-related. It's too violent," he said. "It's not valuation-related either."
    Analysts consider Shiva one of two pure plays in the explosively growing market for remote access
telecommunications equipment. The other is high-flying Ascend, the dominant player in the market.
    Johnson said Shiva might also prove attractive to any of the large data networking companies seeking to gain quick market share in the remote access business.
    "With a company in Shiva's position, I can't think of a company that wouldn't be interested," he said.
 Johnson said that Shiva, which by his estimates has 13 percent of the remote access market, may prove attractive to any of the major network industry leaders -- Cisco Systems Inc, 3Com Corp or Bay Networks Inc.
    He left off Cabletron Systems Inc from the list of potential buyers, noting that Cabletron had acquired Network Express Inc in May to beef up its remote access line.
    Shiva has carved out a strategic niche in the market for remote acccess products, which are used by companies, Internet service providers and telecommunications carriers to handle data communications over far-flung wide-area networks.
    Shiva is the No. 3 supplier in remote acccess, behind Ascend, which  holds 40 percent of the market, and U.S. Robotics, a more diversified company with a 31 percent share, according to Johonson's estimates.
    Stix said Shiva, in partnership with Northern Telecom Ltd, has the lead in a new type of network switching product that allows telephone carriers to address the growing overload of their voice networks by Internet data traffic.
    -- Wall Street bureau, 212-859-1736  REUTER
