Intel Corp shares slid another four points on Friday, continuing a three-day retreat triggered by smaller rival Advanced Micro Devices Inc's statement that its turnaround plan is on track.
But analysts and money managers were unruffled by what they said was profit-taking in Intel and a temporary shift among some momentum investors to AMD and away from Intel.
Intel stock has lost about six percent of its value since Wednesday, when Advanced Micro said it was sampling its Pentium-like K6 chip, which its expect to ship in early 1997.  
Intel closed at 115-7/8, down 4, on volume of 15 million shares, marking it as the most active Nasdaq stock. Intel, a key component in the Nasdaq Composite index, has acted as a drag on the market even as the NYSE has hit new record highs.
The Nasdaq Composite Index closed at 1261.81, off 8.55.
Edwin Turney, a Silicon Valley-based technology money manager who runs the Panagea fund, agreed, saying: "You have a lot of profit-taking and then you have got the momentum players who have had a hell of a run in the last 6 months.
"So now they are looking at the secondary players," Turney said, referring specifically to Advanced Micro.  
"AMD has been a catalyst for other people to take profit," agreed Merrill Lynch semiconductor analyst Thomas Kurlak.
"There is really nothing specifically to explain (Intel's recent decline). It's just another wiggle in the chart."
Soundview President James Townsend agreed AMD's announcement may have provided an excuse for some investors to temporarily shift out of Intel.
"With a stock that has been this incredibly successful, it may be enough to take some profits off the table," Townsend said. He was referring to Intel's impressive 50 point rise to new record levels since mid-summer.  
AMD stock has languished in recent years after repeated failures to match Intel's Pentium technology. However, since Wednesday, the stock has gained more than 20 percent. It closed at 25-1/8, up 1/2 point on the day on Friday.
Analysts said AMD's new K6 chips are not compatible with Intel latest Pentium Pro chips, but the chip could do a healthy business as a simple Pentium alternative.
"There's clearly room enough for both companies to do well," said C.B. Lee, an analyst at Hancock Institutional Partners, who follows both Intel and AMD.  
"Clearly, AMD has had some impact in the minds of some investors," Lee said of Intel's declines in recent days, but added: "In my mind AMD is not a threat."
Analysts expect Intel to produce 20 million Pentium microprocessors in the current quarter, while AMD will build only a tiny fraction of that number -- and less powerful processers at that.
Like most chip sector securities analysts, Kurlak maintains a strong buy on Intel and a neutral rating on AMD.
Lee said he also remains neutral on AMD, "but its back in my good graces" with its plans to introduce the K6 chip.
In the last week, Prudential Securities analyst Mark Edelstone was alone among Wall Street analysts in upgrading AMD to a buy from a hold in response to the K6 announcement.
-- New York newsdesk, 212-859-1736
