Semiconductor equipment stocks surged Friday on fresh signs the downturn in the chip industry has hit bottom, and the buying spilled over into some computer chip makers as well.
Investors jumped in after the leading maker of equipment used to produce computer chips, Applied Materials Inc., gave support to the growing consensus in the industry that the market for chip-making machinery would turn up in 1997.
Applied Materials on Thursday reported lower earnings for the latest quarter but also said that even at the low point in the current technology spending cycle, it expected profit margins to stay higher than in prior downturns.
That was enough for investors to rush in, even while the industry's profits have yet to start a meaningful rebound. Semiconductor equipment stocks are often seen by investors as bellwethers for the next wave of technology growth.
"Now we have an indication out of Applied Materials that the bottom is not as deep as some may have worried or suggested," said Deutsche Morgan analyst Elliott Rogers, who was one of several analysts to raise Applied to "buy" from "hold" Friday.
Applied Materials stock surged $6.625 to $38.625 in afternoon trading on Nasdaq, where it was the most active issue with more than 21 million shares traded.
In addition to Applied Materials, KLA Instruments Corp. rallied $5 to $38.25, Tencor Instruments rose $5.50 to $26.75, and Lam Research Corp. increased $4.625 to $34.125.
The four equipment stocks were among Nasdaq's 10 most active, while Intel Corp., the world's biggest chip maker, rose $3.125 to $122.
Other chip equipment makers also rose, including PRI Automation Inc., up $6.375 to $42.875, and Novellus Systems Inc., up $8 to $57.875.
After the market closed Thursday, Applied Materials said profits fell 53 percent to $73.1 million, or 40 cents a share, for its fourth fiscal quarter, which was about in line with expectations.
But Wall Street analysts widely believe a new chapter has begun to unfold for the chip industry, which could lead to a rebound in orders for production equipment.
The recovery is expected since sales of personal computers appear to be picking up, which means renewed demand for additional chip-making equipment cannot far behind. PCs soak up about half of all semiconductors produced worldwide.
The chip industry over the years has become notorious for its boom-to-bust cycles. Many now argue that the latest year-long slow-down in semiconductor equipment spending has stabilised, leaving the industry poised to begin another of its cyclical upturns early next year.
This could come even after chip makers aggressively built plants and added capacity last year, which flooded the market and led to a glut of chip inventory earlier this year.
Alex. Brown analyst Byron Walker said that during a conference call Thursday, Applied Materials executives said they saw equipment order rates stabilising.
But while Walker upgraded Applied Materials and other stocks in the group, he cautioned the companies might be hurt next year by a continued glut of computer memory chips, the biggest category of semiconductors.
