Investors snatched up semiconductor equipment stocks Friday amid further signs the cyclical downturn in chips has hit bottom, spurring a round of buy ratings to be issued for leading industry names.
The buying spree followed comments by sector flagship Applied Materials Inc that even at the low-point in the current cycle, the company expects its profit margins to remain higher than in previous market cycles, analysts said.
Applied shares gained 4-3/4 points to 36-3/4 in early trading Friday on extremely heavy volume of 11 million shares.  
"Now we have an indication out of Applied Materials that the bottom is not as deep as some may have worried or suggested," said Deutsche Morgan analyst Elliott Rogers, who was one of several to raise Applied to buy from hold Friday.
Besides Applied, KLA Instruments Corp rallied 5-7/8 to 39-1/8 while both Tencor Instruments and Lam Research Corp sailed up 4-3/8 points, to 25-5/8 for Tencor and 33-7/8 for Lam, respectively.
The four equipment stocks were among Nasdaq's six most active, while microprocessor giant Intel Corp, the most likely benificiary of a recovery, was up 2-1/8 to 121.  
Chip equipments were also marquee names among net percentange gainers on Nasdaq, with Novellus Systems Inc and PRI Automation Inc featured. Novellus rose 6-41/64 points to 56-5/8 and PRI gained 4-1/4 to 40-3/4.
Alex. Brown analyst Byron Walker said that during a conference call Thursday, Applied Materials executives had spoken of a potential stabilization of equipment order rates.
But while Walker joined the rush to upgrade Applied and others in the group to buy from neutral, he cautioned that he considered these stocks near-term "trading vehicles" that could be hurt by the continued glut of memory chips in 1997.  
Several analysts said the rush to buy semiconductor equipment stocks reflected a positive upturn in chip industry book-to-bill figures released earlier this month, which suggested the rebound in the chip market is expanding beyond PC-related chip sets to include other industrial markets.
"Clearly the IC (integrated circuit) industry, lead by Intel is posting a nice rebound," Rogers said.
"More importantly at least for (Applied is that) their margins are more sustainable at the trough than was the case in the prior cycle," Rogers said of the 1991-1992 downturn that crunched profits in the typically boom-to-bust industry.
He said Applied's operating margins were unlikely to dip under "the low to mid-teens" in the current cycle of inventory correction compared with the low-point of the 1991-1992 cycle, when operating margins of eight to nine percent obtained.
Several analysts, including PaineWebber's Gunnar Miller and DMG's Rogers, argued that valuations of the group did not reflect the sector's rebounding earnings potential.
Rogers said he had bumped up his earnings estimates on Applied's fiscal 1997 year to $1.90 per share from $1.85. He maintained his estimate of $3.40 per share for fiscal 1998.
Thursday, after the market close, Applied Materials had released earnings for the fourth quarter ended October 27 of $0.40 per share, excluding a $0.09 per share charge, which analysts described as in line with expectations.
"More to the point, prior to last night I thought I was going to have to cut the number," Rogers said of his decision to increase his earnings projection for fiscal 1997.
-- E. Auchard, New York newsdesk, 212-859-1736
