Texas Instruments Inc. said Tuesday it set a licensing pact with Samsung Electronics Co. Ltd. of Korea that will generate royalty payments of more than $1 billion over 10 years.
In exchange, each side agreed to drop pending patent infringement lawsuits against each other.
The agreement replaces a previous five-year deal that expired at the end of 1995, the Dallas-based maker of computer chips, notebook computers and other electronics products said.
While the deal reassured some Wall Street analysts who were not already counting on additional earnings from the settlement, others noted the terms appeared to be far less generous than one with Samsung in 1995.
"Texas Instruments appears willing to take a lower number to get the suits dropped against them," Merrill Lynch analyst Thomas Kurlak said.
"Our assessment is that the agreement is at roughly 40 to 50 percent of the rate of the old agreement," Kurlak said of the royalty formula Samsung will use to pay Texas Instruments.
The new license, which runs until the end of 2005, covers a broad base of patents from both companies, including those for semiconductors, personal computers, consumer products and telecommunications equipment, Texas Instruments said.
"We are pleased with this agreement and the value it places on our patented technology," said Richard Agnich, a senior vice president and general counsel at Dallas-based Texas Instruments.
The company in 1985 started to more aggressively defend alleged unauthorised use of its technology in a bid to improve the value of its intellectual property within the semiconductor industry. In the intervening decade, the company has won billions of dollars in additional royalties, a spokesman said.
Texas Instruments said it expected Samsung to pay it about $105 million in the fourth quarter for "catch-up royalties" covering the first nine months of 1996 when the companies were battling in court.
Analysts said the "catch up" payments should substantially boost earnings for the quarter ending in December, but the gain will be offset by a charge for an undisclosed amount the company plans to take for an early retirmement programme.
Kurlak estimated Texas Instruments will see $35 million in additional quarterly royalties going forward as a result of the Samsung deal, but that is down from the roughly $85 million it received quarterly from Samsung at the end of 1995.
With this deal, Texas Instruments said it has almost completed its 1995 round of patent cross-license agreements with major semiconductor makers.
Earlier in the year, Texas Instruments reached 10-year deals with Fujitsu Ltd., Oki Electric Industry Co. Ltd. and Matsushita Electric Industrial Co. Ltd.
It said talks continue with NEC Corp. and several smaller producers.
The royalty payments will bolster Texas Instruments's net income, and allow it to focus on more profitable lines of business, analysts said.
Texas Instrument stock jumped $4.375 to $60.875 on the New York Stock Exchange.
