America Online Inc's new flat rate pricing plan and moves to meet spiraling subscriber demand suggest AOL is securely on course for becoming a major media player comparable to broadcast or cable TV networks.
But analysts caution that underlying this success looms a real threat that the online network's capacity to serve its more than seven million subscribers could soon be overwhelmed.
They warn that the additional demand on AOL's network generated by the company's offer of unlimited usage for $19.95 per month imperil its near-term capacity to handle demand.  
If only a small fraction of AOL's millions of members were to take up the company's offer of unlimited access and remain connected to the service for long periods of the day, the service would quickly grind to a halt, detractors say.
Clearly, investors are betting the company can surmount such challenges, as AOL has done repeatedly in mushrooming sevenfold from under one million users three years ago.
In recent weeks, the stock's momentum has revived, doubling from a year-low of 22 to reach 44 earlier Tuesday. An afternoon sell-off caused the stock to fall back to 37-1/2.  
"The market appears to have taken a very bullish view of the new pricing scheme," said Arthur Newman, an analyst with brokerage firm Gerard Klauer of the stock's recent run-up.
"But you have to balance this with the realization that the more time users spend online, the higher the cost of adding capacity" requiring new equipment investments, he said.
"All of a sudden its free candy at the candy store," Newman said of the paradoxical downside of a sudden explosion in demand. Although a long-time follower of AOL, the analyst currently maintains no stock recommendation on the stock.  
To be fair, AOL officials have warned repeatedly that they expect the next two quarters to be transitional, both operationally and financially, as the company shifts to a new business model that derives revenues from advertising and commercial transactions instead of mainly subscriber fees.
But Abishek Gami, an analyst with Nesbitt Burns Securities, believes AOL has proven its capacity to weather the pressures of the explosively growing online medium. In particular, AOL has measures in place to limit excessive connection times by users who now have little incentive to disconnect and free up pressure network time for others.  
"Will this demand on its network be enough to destroy the company? I think not. What the company will do is build-out to meet demand and stage a comeback," said Gami, who maintains a strong buy rating on AOL stock.
Gary Arlen, a veteran online industry analyst at Arlen Communications Inc in Bethesda, Md, agreed.
"Anyone who is writing this company's obituary is going to be disappointed," he said.
Monday, AOL said it was undertaking a major expansion of its online network and planned to spend $250 million by next June to double its network capacity and improve service.  
Gami estimated the company has about 200,000 modems now available to handle incoming customer calls for its online service and that this number will rise to about 400,000 by next June, the end of its fiscal year.
In its Monday announcement, the world's largest online service provider said it was upgrading its network to meet the surge in demand generated by its new pricing and recent marketing initiatives.
As of Sunday, AOL began offering the new flat-rate pricing plan, one of several pricing options available to customers.  
An America Online spokesman said that, despite heavy usage over the Thanksgiving holiday weekend, there were no serious problems with its online network.
The Dulles, Va.-based company said that, since July 1, it has added tens of thousands of new modems to AOLnet, which it said was the world's largest dial-in network. The expansion is to accelerate through the spring with tens of thousands of new modems being installed monthly.
Analysts said that, with more new users expected, AOL needs to upgrade its network, especially after its nearly 19 hour outage on August 7, which happened during regular maintenance caused by a software glitch and angered many users.
Already this quarter, AOL's subscriber growth is on the rebound and, in October, the company added 275,000 new members. In the summer, AOL was hurt by a seasonal slowdown in subscriber growth, a phenomenon common to all online services.
Still, in its latest quarterly SEC filing, AOL said profit margins will be hurt in the near-term and it is only likely to break into profitability again in the June 1997 quarter.
