America Online Inc.'s new flat-rate pricing plan and moves to meet spiraling subscriber demand suggest it is on track to become a major media player, comparable to broadcast or cable TV networks, analysts said Tuesday.
Analysts cautioned, however, that underlying this success loomed a real threat that the online network's capacity to serve its more than 7 million subscribers could soon be overwhelmed.
They warned that the additional demand on AOL's network generated by the company's offer of unlimited usage for $19.95 per month imperilled its near-term capacity to handle demand.
If only a small fraction of AOL's millions of subscribers were to take up the company's offer of unlimited access and remain connected to the service for long periods of the day, the service would quickly grind to a halt, detractors said.
Clearly, investors are betting the company can surmount such challenges, as AOL has done repeatedly in mushrooming sevenfold from less than 1 million users three years ago.
In recent weeks, the stock's momentum has revived, doubling from a year-low of $22 to reach $44 earlier Tuesday. An afternoon sell-off caused the stock to fall back to $37.50. down $2.375.
"The market appears to have taken a very bullish view of the new pricing scheme," said Arthur Newman, an analyst with brokerage firm Gerard Klauer of the stock's recent run-up.
"But you have to balance this with the realisation that the more time users spend online, the higher the cost of adding capacity" requiring new equipment investments, he said.
AOL officials have warned repeatedly that they expect the next two quarters to be transitional ones, both operationally and financially, as the company seeks to gain revenues from advertising and commercial transactions instead of mainly subscriber fees.
But Abishek Gami, an analyst with Nesbitt Burns Securities, said he believed AOL had proven its capacity to weather the pressures of the explosively growing online medium.
In particular, Gami said AOL has measures in place to limit excessive connection times by users who now have little incentive to disconnect and free up network time for other users.
"Will this demand on its network be enough to destroy the company? I think not," said Gami. "What the company will do is build out to meet demand and stage a comeback," said the analyst.
"Anyone who is writing this company's obituary is going to be disappointed," agreed Gary Arlen, an online industry analyst at Arlen Communications Inc.
AOL said Monday it was greatly expanding its online network and planned to spend $250 million by next June to double its network capacity and improve service.
