Flextronics International Inc Chief Executive Michael Marks said he expects revenues of around $1 billion during fiscal 1998, more than double the $500 million expected in the fiscal 1997 year ending in March.
Marks was responding to the nose-dive in Flextronics stock price Wednesday morning that send the stock down 12-1/4 to 25. The sharp decline came after the company announced a restructuring plan that is likely to dampen near-term profits.
"We are going to more than double our revenues next year... to somewhere around $1 billion," Marks said.  
"There is nothing but good news here," Marks told Reuters by phone from San Jose, Calif.. He was referring to the company's business prospects going forward.
He said Flextronics' restructuring was designed to allow it to continue to gain market share and position for it for annual earnings growth of 35-40 percent through the year 2000.
"Next year we will be third in the market by revenues," Marks said, rising from its current fourth place position. Only SCI Systems Inc and Solectron Corp remain larger, he said. "We are on fire as a company," he added.  
The executive blamed the volatility of the Nasdaq market and the departure of momentum players who had invested in his company recently for the tumble in Flextronic stock price.
In particular, he said the sell-off was sparked Wednesday when sellers dumped a relatively small volume of about 80,000 shares, creating the downward spiral in the stock price.
"It's one of the reasons why everyone thinks about getting out of Nasdaq," Marks said.  
Asked if he considered the stock a buy at current levels, he declined to comment.
In a statement released earlier, Flextronics said its restructuring would include charges of $5 to $7 million spread over the December and March quarters, to "prepare for accelerated growth over the next several years."
The company also said it had told analysts in a briefing Tuesday of new contract wins with Ascend Communications Inc, Harris Corp's Communications unit and Philips Electronics NV.
With Ascend in particular, he said the company would be manufacturing the company's mainstream MAX TNT remote access network equipment. "We expect (Ascend) will be one of our top 10 customers," Marks said.
These latest wins follow a recent $350 million contract win with Telefon AB L.M. Ericsson, bolstering its already strong activity in the contract manufacturing of telecommuncation and data communciation products, he said.
Other major customers include Microsoft Corp MSFT.O and LifeScan Inc, a unit of Johnson &amp; Johnson.
Flextronics is Singapore based.
-- New York newsdesk, 212-859-1736
