The stock of General Electric Co. rose in active trading Tuesday, boosted by speculation it might raise its dividend and increase its share buyback programme following upbeat comments by Chairman John Welch.
Salomon Brothers analyst Russell Leavitt said Welch told analysts who attended a private meeting with him on Monday that he "expected earnings to be up about 13 percent this year, in line with expectations."
According to First Call, which monitors Wall Street analysts' earnings projections, GE's profits for the 1996 calendar year are expected to equal $4.40 per share.
In 1995, GE earned profits of $3.90 per share, or $6.6 billion, on revenues of $43 billion.
Analysts said news from the meeting helped propel General Electric's stock onto the NYSE most actives list. The stock was up $2.25 to $97.50 in late afternoon trading after earlier climbing as much as $3.25.
A GE spokesman declined to comment on Welch's remarks to analysts. He said the company had gone on record in its third-quarter earnings report, released Oct. 10, as being on track for a "record year" in 1996.
The spokesman confirmed, however, that GE's board would meet on Friday.
After the meeting, CS First Boston said analyst Martin Sankey reiterated his strong buy recommendation on GE's stock and boosted his 1997 earnings estimate 5 cents to $5 per share.
"They are looking for good progress next year," Leavitt said, adding that while little new was disclosed at the twice-yearly briefing, "There seems to be a high level of conviction that progress is in place."
Welch specifically cited a turnaround in the company's power businesses and strong growth in its NBC broadcasting unit, Leavitt said.
"You've got everything pretty much clicking in the company," said NatWest Securites analyst Nicholas Heyman, who also attended the meeting. He said Welch spoke of 13 percent earnings growth for both the current year and for 1997.
More good news could come as early as Friday, when GE's board of directors is scheduled to meet.
At that meeting, several analysts said they believed the board will authorise a two-for-one split of GE shares and increase its authorisation to buy back the company's shares to $13 billion from its current level of $9 billion.
Company share buybacks increase the value of remaining shares by decreasing the number of shares outstanding, a move looked on with favour by investors, since the underlying value of each share held increases.
In addition, NatWest's Heyman said he expected the board to boost the stock's annual dividend by 13 percent to $2.08 from its current level of $1.84 per share.
Since early 1995, General Electric's stock has proven one of Wall Street's best perfomers, more than doubling in value.
"Most of the Wall Street analysts came away comfortable that the earnings estimates will be realised this year and next year," one fund manager said of the meeting with Welch. "It's his usual magic with Wall Street."
