Blue chip technology stocks charged ahead Wednesday in a new buying spree spurred on by optimism about holiday PC sales and year-end book-squaring by money managers, traders and market analysts said.
Market participants said the rally was spurred by positive comments from a Soundview analyst about Compaq Computer Corp, and waning fears that the holiday sales season would prove a failure for consumer personal-computer makers.
The enthusiasm swept up other PC makers such as Dell Computer Corp and spilled over to other top technology names.  
By late afternoon, Compaq had added 6-1/2 points on the day to 78-3/4 while International Business Machines Corp gained 6-1/8 to 157-3/4.
Leading Nasdaq's most actives was Intel Corp, which swelled 5-3/8 to 135-3/8, Dell, up 3-5/8 to 57 and Microsoft Corp, which gained 2-3/4 to 82-5/8.
"It looks like they're going after the group again," said one trader, pointing in particular to Compaq, Intel and IBM.
"They are just buying the techs in a dramatic way again," agreed another trader. "The PC scare isn't what they thought it would be," he said.  
"It's a group move, if you look at other names, like Compaq up six, Intel up 5-1/8, Dell up 4-1/8," said Peter Jenkins, director of global equity trading at Scudder Stevens &amp; Clark, listing some of the most active names.
"We're coming to the end of the year," he said, "and these are big (institutional) holdings."
"IBM and Intel I think have sold here over last couple of weeks, and whatever had to be done has been done," he argued, laying the groundwork for institutional buyers to add to their holdings.
"All (these) stocks are in a year-end window-dressing rally," said Philip Orlando, chief investment officer at Value Line Asset Management, who concurred that several of these stocks had been oversold in the past two weeks.
"IBM is the one all the money managers want in their portfolios," Orlando said, referring to the desire to put the best face on their end-of-year report cards by which investors judge the relative performances of funds.
Earlier, Soundview PC analyst Mark Specker upgraded his short-term rating on Compaq to buy from hold and retained his long-term buy position on the stock.
-- Wall Street bureau, 212-859-1736
