Technology stocks rose Wednesday on a growing belief that recent price-cutting has spurred holiday personal computer sales as money managers loaded up on stocks to dress up their portfolios at year-end.
Traders and analysts said the rally was sparked by positive comments from a Soundview analyst about Compaq Computer Corp., and waning fears that the holiday sales season would be a dismal one for makers of PCs for consumers.
Soundview Financial analyst Mark Specker upgraded his short-term rating on Compaq to buy from hold and continued to recommend buying the stock for long-term gains.
His recommendations on technology stocks hold strong sway among institutional investors.
The enthusiasm swept up other PC makers like Dell Computer Corp. and spilled over to other top technology names.
Compaq rose $6.375 to $78.625 on Nasdaq while International Business Machines Corp. added $6.75 to $158.625 on the New York Stock Exchange.
Leading Nasdaq's most actives was Intel Corp., which added $5.75 to $135.75, Dell, up $3.125 to $56.50 and Microsoft Corp., which gained $2.75 to $82.625.
The Nasdaq composite index, laden with technology stocks, jumped 19.06 points to 1,285.38, a gain of 1.5 percent compared with a rise of 0.6 percent for the Dow Jones industrial average.
"It looks like they're going after the group again," said one trader, pointing in particular to Compaq, Intel and IBM.
"They are just buying the techs in a dramatic way again," agreed another trader. "The PC scare isn't what they thought it would be," he said.
Both IBM and Intel shares had reached 52-week highs in recent weeks, only to fall back in end-of-year profit-taking and a broader market downturn.
Peter Jenkins, director of global stock trading at Scudder Stevens &amp; Clark said, "It's a group move ... we're coming to the end of the year and these are big (institutional) holdings."
"IBM and Intel, I think have sold here over last couple of weeks, and whatever had to be done has been done," he said, which laid the groundwork for institutional buyers to add to their holdings.
"All (these) stocks are in a year-end window-dressing rally," said Philip Orlando, chief investment officer at Value Line Asset Management, who concurred that several of these stocks had been oversold in recent weeks.
"IBM is the one all the money managers want in their portfolios," Orlando said, referring to the desire to put the best face on their end-of-year report cards by which investors judge a fund's relative performance.
