Apple Computer Inc shares crumbled 17 percent on Monday as hope faded on Wall Street for a short-term turnaround in the computer maker's fortunes and further darkened the company's long-term outlook.
Several brokerages urged investors to dump the stock, with Wall Street analysts turning gloomy about the ability of Apple management to put the company's business strategies in order.
Apple fell four points to 17-3/4, and was the most actively traded Nasdaq issue with more than 10 million traded.  
The company said Friday it expected an operating loss of $100 to $150 million in the first quarter, ended December 27.
Apple blamed weak U.S. demand for its Performa consumer PC line and continued shortages of PowerBook notebook computers.
The company said these factors contributed to a 10 percent decline in December quarter revenues, versus the September quarter, when Apple reported $2.3 billion in revenues.
"You can't dismiss this as a one-time issue," Montgomery analyst Kurt King said. "It really does say something about Apple's long-term position in the consumer market." King said he maintained his hold rating on the stock.  
Beyond the earnings disappointment, analysts expressed concern over the impending onslaught of rival machines that will be based on new multimedia chip technology from Intel Corp and will run Microsoft Corp Windows software.
The latest financial disappointment is likely to deepen Apple's image problems among PC buyers, where widespread doubts have lingered about the company's ability to compete with rival PCs that run Windows software.  
In recent years, the distinctions separating Apple's easy-to-use Macintosh operating system from the more complex Microsoft Windows system have narrowed. The changes have led many consumers to abandon Apple for lower cost Intel-based machines that offer a greater variety of software programs.
There is also confusion over Apple's future operating system and whether it can introduce a new, distinctive system, based on the NeXT system, which it acquired last month.
Apple's latest earnings disappointment arrived just ahead of the company's annual in-gathering of Macintosh loyalists at the MacWorld trade show in San Francisco, which begins Monday.  
In a speech slated for Tuesday, Apple Chairman Gil Amelio was expected to chart the company's future course.
But Prudential's Young doubted whether Amelio could say anything to reignite enthusiasm for the stock.
Young said the speech simply comes too soon after Apple's acquisition of NeXT for Amelio to provide much concrete guidance on the company's future strategy.
"The problem is that he now has to start talking about futures, but he doesn't know enough now to be making this speech," he said.
"(Amelio) is not going to be able to say a whole lot about the technical plan, or what they are going to do to bring the new operating system to market," Young said.
-- Wall Street bureau, 212-859-1736.
