Shiva Corp. stock lost almost half its value Wednesday after the data communications equipment maker stunned Wall Street by revealing that fourth-quarter earnings were likely to be no more than a third of expectations.
The company's stock plunged $15.625, or 45 percent, to $19.25 on Nasdaq after it said late on Tuesday it expected earnings for the fourth quarter of 1996 to be between 5 cents and 7 cents a share.
That would be sharply below consensus estimates of 21 cents a share, according to First Call, which tracks analysts' estimates. Twenty-four million shares exchanged hands, making it the day's most actively traded issue.
Securities analysts said the earnings shortfall triggered the massive sell-off, but that the decline was accelerated by plans by company officials to make changes in Shiva's business strategy that analysts said could imperil earnings further.
"I think the drop was to a large extent a reaction in the stock to the warning of lower earnings," said Smith Barney analyst Therese Murphy. "But I think when people sit back they are also going to be concerned about the change in strategy."
In a brief statement released after the markets closed on Tuesday, the Bedford, Mass.-based company said the shortfall was based on preliminary calculations.
Chief Financial Officer Cynthia Deysher said in a phone interview on Tuesday that the shortfall was mainly due to weakness in domestic sales and a decision by International Business Machines Corp. to delay an order during the quarter.
"We didn't receive the Q4 (order) from IBM," Deysher said. IBM is a key reseller of Shiva's networking products. She also said the company did not ship as much product as it expected in the quarter.
The Shiva official said the company would take steps to address the shortfall, including reorganizing its sales force.
Deysher said Shiva had renegotiated terms of its strategic alliance with Canada's Northern Telecom Ltd., a move she said is likely to cause revenues to decline but profit margins to rise, ensuring it can still meet its earnings goals.
Deysher said NorTel will assume the costs of manufacturing products resulting from the alliance and cover a larger share of the partnership's research and development costs.
Shiva's switching equipment is one piece of a larger Northern Telecom communications system that allows remote callers such as telecommuters or traveling sales staff to dial into central office computers.
"We felt it would be more profitable because we are moving to a royalty arrangement" with Nortel, Deysher said. Shiva will be paid a percentage of sales instead of for each product it builds, as called for under the prior terms of the alliance.
Before its fall from grace, many Wall Street analysts classified Shiva as one of the fast-growing companies best-positioned to participate in the massive demand for network equipment used to build the Internet's infrastructure.
While executives said they remained confident Shiva could make up the lost ground in future quarters and still meet the Wall Street consensus expectation of $1.06 per share for fiscal 1998, Wall Street analysts refused to buy the argument.
Analysts slashed earnings estimates well below company forecasts and those who had not previously done so downgraded their ratings on the stock. Most advised investors to dispose of shares and remain on the sidelines until Shiva shows concrete evidence it can meet earnings targets again.
According to First Call, of nine Wall Street analysts who follow the company, seven cut earnings forecasts and or stock ratings on Shiva.
In spite of Shiva's optimism long-term, the new earnings consensus for the year ending January 1998 of the seven analysts was $0.83 per share, down from $1.07 previously.
Murphy said that even if Shiva's plans to focus on its newer switching equipment products succeed, it faces stiff competition from larger rivals like Ascend Communications Inc., Cascade Communications Corp. and U.S. Robotics Inc.
"I didn't encourage people to bottom-fish on this correction," she said, referring to her recommendation to brokerage clients.
"When you miss numbers as significantly as they did, it draws a lot of different questions," said Matt Barzowskas, an analyst for First Albany. "You get a lot more conservative."
"After a quarter like this you have to just step back and evaluate," Barzowskas said. "I am not ready to believe they can do what they think they can do at the moment."
But while he slashed his earnings estimates for the foreseeable future, the First Albany analyst maintained his buy rating on the stock at its now severely reduced price.
Shiva said it expected revenue for the three months ending Dec. 28 to be $48 million to $50 million, compared with $57.1 million for the prior quarter, which ended in September. The company reported $35.6 million in revenues for the fourth quarter of 1995.
Shiva said it will report final results for the fourth quarter and year on Jan. 23 after the close of the market.
