Western Resources Inc, which has spent much of 1996 laying the groundwork to buy ADT Ltd, is widely expected to sweeten its unsolicited $3.5 billion offer for the electronic security giant.
Industry experts said the bid, which values ADT at 22-1/2 per share, is deliberately low and merely reflects an opening salvo in a hostile transaction.
"The price is a low-ball price. There is a very good chance this deal will be done at a higher price," said Andrew Jeffrey, analyst at Robertson Stephens &amp; Co.
Long considered one of the premier properties in the highly-fragmented electronic security industry, most industry analysts value ADT at significantly more than the Western Resources offer announced earlier Wednesday.
"I feel this stock will go to 25 to 30 on earnings in 1997. Anything below that range is not acceptable," said Rosario Ilacqua of Rothschild Inc.
Furthermore, ADT's proposed acquisition by Republic Industries Inc, which collapsed in September, valued the company at about 29 per share. That deal fell apart due uncertainty from Republic's volatile stock price.
Shares of ADT jumped 2-3/4 to 22-7/8 on Wednesday.
In a telephone interview, Western president Dave Wittig declined to discuss a potential higher bid, noting only that shares of ADT have appreciated considerably in recent months.
"I think that what we're putting on the table is a fair and full price," Wittig said.
Western Resources has long been considered a potential buyer of ADT, but the company was not yet expected to pursue a transaction. Western holds a 27 percent stake in ADT and earlier this year opposed ADT's proposed transaction with Republic.
Wittig said Western Resources did not pursue an offer for ADT during the Republic deal because it was consumed with its hostile bid for Kansas City Power and Light. That transaction is still not resolved, but Western Resources is holding merger talks with the Kansas utility.
The proposed acquisition of ADT also holds problems for Western, which is taking its offer directly to shareholders in an attempt to install its own board of directors. ADT has a poison pill anti-takeover defense that would be triggered if Western bought more shares of ADT.
Wittig said he is hopeful that ADT's management will come to the bargaining table, but noted the company previously was not interested in a business transaction with Western. Wittig said Western executives last spoke with ADT in June.
Western Resources has actively expanded its role in the security business as it built its stake in ADT. It has signed six letters of intent to buy security companies this year, including Monday's proposed $368 million acquisition of the security division of Westinghouse Electric Corp.
And last week, Western Resources announced plans to divest its natural gas assets as part of a strategy to focus on its electricity and security businesses.
"They've got a lot on their plate, but as far as wanting to run the electronic security business, this is the way to do it," Jeffrey said.
The electronic security business has grown increasingly attractive to utilities and telecommunications companies in recent months as they prepare to enter new markets that previously were off-limits due to government regulation. The phone companies and utilities hope to add protection to their menu of services and expand their presence in homes and businesses.
