Western Resources Inc. on Wednesday offered to buy ADT Ltd. in a $3.5 billion cash and stock transaction that would transform the Kansas utility into the nation's top provider of electronic security services.
The move marks the latest step in Western's aggressive strategy to dominate the highly fragmented security industry, which has grown increasingly attractive to utilities and telecommunication companies.
Topeka, Kansas-based Western Resources, which already holds a 27 percent stake in ADT, said it would take its unsolicited offer directly to ADT shareholders. It also said it would call a special meeting of shareholders to replace the existing ADT board of directors.
"We have demonstrated our belief in ADT's future through our investment. The benefits of this transaction are compelling, offering a natural extension of our respective businesses," Western Resources Chairman John Hayes said in a statement.
Hayes advised ADT of its offer in a letter in which he noted that ADT previously said it was not interested in a transaction with Western Resources.
"Now, after careful study and consideration, we have determined that the potential benefits to ADT, Western Resources and ADT's other shareowners from a combination of Western Resources and ADT are simply too compelling to ignore," Hayes wrote to ADT Chairman Michael Ashcroft. "We firmly believe that this combination will provide significant benefits to our respective shareowners, customers and employees not available to either company on its own."
Western said it would pay $22.50 for each share of ADT, consisting of $15 in Western Resources common stock and $7.50 cash. The offer would give ADT holders a 12 percent premium over Tuesday's closing stock price of $20.125 on NYSE.
ADT climbed $2.625 to $22.75 in afternoon trading on the New York Stock Exchange, where Western Resources' stock was unchanged at $31.25.
Western's proposal also calls for ADT shareholders to receive the equivalent of a 99 cents per ADT share annual dividend. ADT does not presently pay a dividend.
Boca Raton, Fla.-based ADT said it would review the offer in due course and advised shareholders to await a recommendation from its board.
The offer for ADT marks the second security acquisition proposal made this week by Western Resources. On Monday, Western Resources announced plans to buy the security business of Westinghouse Electric Corp. for $368 million in cash.
Long considered a premier property in the electronic security industry, ADT earlier this year was to be acquired by Republic Industries Inc. for $5 billion. But that transaction collapsed in September after months of uncertainty due to stock price volatility.
Western Resources has been aggressively pursuing deals in other areas. It has mounted a $1.9 billion takeover bid for Kansas City. Mo.-based Kansas City Power &amp; Light Co.
Last week, Western Resources agreed to sell its natural gas assets to Oklahoma-based Oneok Inc. in a $660 million deal in which Western Resources will take a large stake in Oneok, the parent of Oklahoma Natural Gas Co. The utility's customers could become clients for Western Resources' other services, such as home security.
