CSX Corp. raised the stakes in the bidding war for Conrail Inc. on Thursday, amending its friendly merger agreement with the railroad to give unhappy shareholders another $870 million and bringing the total value of its offer to $9.5 billion.
Richmond, Va.-based CSX and Conrail of Philadelphia are battling with Norfolk, Va.-based Norfolk Southern Corp., which has bid $10 billion, or $110 per share in cash, for Conrail. Conrail has rejected Norfolk Southern's offer, contending that a transaction with CSX is a better fit.
The new agreement would give Conrail shareholders another $16 per share, payable in CSX convertible preferred shares, as part of the stock portion of the cash and stock transaction.
Based on Thursday trading in CSX shares, an industry analyst estimated the value of the new CSX-Conrail deal at $104 per share, or $9.5 billion. The value of the stock portion of the deal changes daily as the stocks of the companies rise and fall.
"In every respect this merger holds great potential and clearly offers the best result for Conrail. This amendment to the merger agreement reaffirms the decision of the Conrail board that it is not willing to agree to the sale of Conrail to Norfolk Southern," Conrail Chairman David LeVan said in a statement.
Norfolk Southern immediately indicated that it was not walking away from its hostile effort. Industry experts widely expect it to raise its bid soon.
"There should be no doubt that Norfolk Southern remains as determined as ever to acquire Conrail and will use any and all appropriate financial means to accomplish that objective," Norfolk Southern said in a statement.
In a further enticement to investors, CSX and Conrail established a voting trust to accelerate payment to Conrail shareholders by 1997. Previously, shareholders would have not been paid until the transaction received required regulatory and other approvals.
The establishment of the voting trust is likely to encourage some shareholders to tender their stock to CSX and exit the controversial transaction, experts said.
One of the most controversial portions of the revised deal prohibits both CSX and Conrail from pursuing a merger with another company before the end of 1998. Shareholders, who had opposed the previous deadline of mid-1997 on the grounds that it prevented Conrail from considering a potentially higher offer, blasted the extension.
Members of the investment community also expect Norfolk Southern to challenge the exclusivity period in court. An attorney for Norfolk Southern said legal action was probably forthcoming.
Other aspects of the Conrail-CSX agreement are unchanged. They include $110 per share for 40 percent of the outstanding Conrail shares and 1.85619 shares of CSX common stock for each Conrail share.
CSX already has bought 19.9 percent of Conrail in a cash tender offer at $110 per share and is seeking to buy another 20.1 percent.
Conrail also delayed a special shareholder meeting to Jan. 17 from Dec. 23, and CSX extended its tender offer to Jan. 22. At the meeting, shareholders are to consider a key provision that would effectively permit CSX to proceed with the acquisition.
Many members of the investment community had predicted shareholders would defeat the provision.
While the new terms were widely considered to be more attractive, Wall Street and industry sources said they may not be strong enough to clinch the deal.
The new pact "definitely doesn't lock it up because you've got to wait for Norfolk Southern to come back. It definitely makes it more attractive and more equitable across the board," said analyst Peter Gleason of Institutional Shareholder Services, a shareholder advisory firm that last week recommended investors defeat the provision at the special shareholder meeting.
The proposed merger of Conrail and CSX, first announced Oct. 15, would create a giant that would dominate the rail freight industry on the East Coast.
In afternoon trading on the New York Stock Exchange, Conrail shares rose $1.875 to $100.875, CSX shares fell $1.25 to $44 and Norfolk Southern rose $2.25 to $88.50.
"The actions taken by the CSX and Conrail boards allow us to move on to the next stage of the process, the filing of our merger application with the (Surface Transportation Board)," the federal regulatory agency overseeing railroads, said CSX Chairman John Snow.
Anthony Hatch of NatWest Securities noted that the deal was becoming less financially attractive to the prospective buyers as the bidding war continues.
"We're bumping up against the point at which this is getting pricey. It still makes some sense, but for CSX it's getting close," Hatch said, adding that Norfolk Southern can well afford to raise its offer.
