CSX Corp's sweetened bid for Conrail Inc makes the deal more appealing to Conrail shareholders than its previous offer, but it may not be strong enough to clinch the deal.
Although the new terms are financially more attractive and reduce investor risk, members of the Wall Street investment community blasted a provision that prohibits either company from pursuing another partner until the end of 1998.
Furthermore, rival Norfolk Southern Corp, which still has a higher offer, is expected to raise its bid.  
The new pact "definitely doesn't lock it up because you've got to wait for Norfolk Southern to come back. It definitely makes it more attractive and more equitable across the board," said Peter Gleason, an analyst at Institutional Shareholder Services, an shareholder advisory firm that last week recommended investors reject a key provision of the deal.
The new terms raise the previous bid by about $870 million by offering shareholders convertible preferred shares valued at $16 each. CSX already has bought 19.9 percent of Conrail in a cash tender offer and is seeking to buy another 20.1 percent. It has proposed buying the rest of Conrail for stock.  
Based on Thursday's trading, analysts said the new terms value Conrail at about $104 per share, or $9.5 billion in cash and stock, still less than Norfolk Southern's $10 billion, $110-per-share all-cash offer.
The new terms also sets a voting trust for Conrail shareholders to guarantee speedy payment for their shares. Under the previous offer, shareholders would not receive payment until the deal cleared regulatory hurdles.
The establishment of the voting trust is likely to encourage some shareholders to tender their stock to CSX and exit the controversial transaction, experts said.  
A source familiar with the talks said the CSX board decided to add another $16 per share to the offer and hammered out the details of the strategy Wednesday night.
The source also defended the extension of the pact's exclusivity agreement, saying that it would prevent a continued bidding war.
"The message to the world is, take this deal or wait an awful long time for an alternative," said the source, who did not want to be identified.  
Still, Wall Street experts expect Norfolk Southern to challenge the exclusivity period in court. An attorney for Norfolk Southern said legal action was likely forthcoming.
Norfolk Southern also earlier said it expected to respond promptly to a new CSX offer.
Meanwhile, Anthony Hatch of NatWest Securities noted that the deal was becoming less financially attractive to the prospective buyers as the bidding war continued.
"We're bumping up against the point at which this is getting pricey. It still makes some sense, but for CSX it's getting close," Hatch said, adding that Norfolk Southern can well afford to raise its offer.
By 1430 EST/1930 GMT Thursday, shares of Conrail were 1-1/2 higher at 100-1/2 in trading on the New York Stock Exchange, amid expectations that Norfolk Southern would raise the stakes in the battle.
