Conrail Inc. and CSX Corp. raised the stakes Thursday in the bidding war for Conrail, amending their $8.5 billion merger agreement to provide Conrail shareholders with another $870 million.
The new agreement would give Conrail shareholders another $16 per share, payable in CSX convertible preferred shares, as part of the stock portion of the cash and stock transaction.
CSX and Conrail are battling with Norfolk Southern Corp., which has bid $10 billion, or $110 per share in cash, for Conrail.
An industry analyst estimated the value of the new CSX-Conrail deal at $104 per share, or $9.5 billion.
Norfolk Southern Corp. said after the amended deal was announced that it remained determined to acquire Conrail, was studying its options and would respond on Thursday or Friday.
Conrail has rejected Norfolk Southern's offer, contending that a transaction with CSX is a better fit.
Other aspects of the Conrail-CSX agreement are unchanged. They include $110 per share for 40 percent of the outstanding Conrail shares and 1.85619 shares of CSX common stock for each Conrail share.
The proposed merger of Conrail and CSX, first announced on Oct. 15, would create a giant that would dominate the rail freight industry on the East Coast.
In early trading on the New York Stock Exchange, Conrail shares traded at $100.375, up $1.375, and CSX traded at $44, down $1.25. Norfolk Southern traded at $86.375, down 12.5 cents, also on the NYSE.
CSX and Conrail also established a voting trust to permit payment to Conrail shareholders by 1997.
The companies said a Conrail shareholder meeting slated for Dec. 23 would be rescheduled for Jan. 17 and the CSX tender offer would be extended to Jan 22.
The revised pact prohibits Conrail and CSX from entering into an agreement with a third party until Dec 31, 1998. The previous transaction set a July 1997 date.
"In every respect this merger holds great potential and clearly offers the best result for Conrail. This amendment to the merger agreement reaffirms the decision of the Conrail board that it is not willing to agree to the sale of Conrail to Norfolk Southern," Conrail chairman David LeVan said in a statement.
CSX already has bought 19.9 percent of Conrail in a cash tender offer at $110 per share and is seeking to buy another 20.1 percent.
"The actions taken by the CSX and Conrail boards allow us to move on to the next stage of the process, the filing of our merger application with the (Surface Transportation Board)," the federal regulatory agency overseeing railroads, said CSX chairman John Snow.
