CSX Corp and Conrail Inc were expected Thursday to announce sweetened terms for their proposed friendly $8.5 billion merger, according to sources familiar with the transaction.
The new terms were expected to include a richer exchange ratio in the stock portion of the cash and stock transaction and a speedier payment to investors by setting up a voting trust for all shares, the sources said.
Conrail and CSX have been discussing a sweetened deal for weeks in an attempt to appease shareholders who favour Norfolk Southern Corp's $10 billion all-cash bid for Conrail.
Specific details of the new terms were not immediately available. The CSX board reportedly met on Wednesday night to discuss the new terms.
A spokesman for CSX declined to comment. Conrail could not be reached for comment.
Early on Wednesday evening, a source close to the talks said the two companies were on the verge of reaching new terms.
"It's very close," said the source who did not want to be identified, adding the boards were pursuing revisions that would give shareholders "more value and quicker payment".
Upon announcing new terms for the controversial transaction, Conrail is expected to cancel a December 23 meeting in which shareholders were set to vote on a key provision of the deal.
CSX already has bought 19.9 percent of Conrail for $110 per share in a cash tender offer and is seeking to buy another 20.1 percent in a second cash tender offer.
CSX plans to buy the remaining 60 percent of Conrail shares in stock at an exchange ratio of 1.85619 CSX shares for each Conrail share.
Norfolk Southern has offered to buy Conrail for $110 per share in cash. Conrail has rejected the offer, contending that a transaction with CSX is a better fit.
But the Conrail-CSX merger needs shareholders to waive a Pennsylvania law in order for CSX to buy another 20.1 percent of Conrail. A U.S. judge on Tuesday ordered Conrail to conduct the December 23 meeting even though it contended that it could delay the vote if it didn't have enough shareholder support.
Conrail would be permitted to delay the meeting if it revised the existing merger agreement.
Shareholders have expressed concern that they would not receive payment for the stock portion of the transaction until the deal clears regulatory hurdles.
The proposed merger of Conrail and CSX, first announced on October 15, would create an powerhouse railroad on the U.S. East Coast.
But a revision of terms might not signal an end to the battle for Conrail. Industry experts have widely expected Norfolk Southern to quickly raise its bid if Conrail and CSC sweeten the terms of their proposal.
A spokesman for Norfolk Southern declined to comment on whether it will be prepared to raise its offer, noting only "we have said that, whatever they do, we will respond appropriately".
