The bidding war for Conrail Inc. appears to be drawing to a close, but big legal and regulatory battles are right around the corner.
Industry analysts said Friday rival bidders CSX Corp. and Norfolk Southern Corp. were unlikely to offer much more for Philadelphia-based Conrail, but both sides will pursue the fight in court, before regulators and in the marketplace.
"That is the whole process that takes place over the course of 1997 -- the battle for market share as opposed to Conrail shares," said Anthony Hatch, analyst at NatWest Securities Corp.
CSX, based in Richmond, Va., on Thursday raised its offer for Conrail to give shareholders an extra $870 million in a friendly cash-and-stock merger. Based on Friday's stock activity, the deal is worth $9.3 billion, or about $102 per Conrail share.
A source close to CSX told Reuters on Thursday that CSX and Conrail hoped the revised deal would end the bidding war.
But just hours after CSX and Conrail unveiled the new terms of their planned merger, Norfolk Southern raised its all-cash offer by $500 million to about $10.5 billion, or $115 a share.
"If someone were to start to bid higher than this, they probably wouldn't get the economies out of the deal to make it work so the bidding war, I think, has come to the end," said Charles Vincent of PNC Asset Management Group.
Although Norfolk Southern's bid has been higher throughout the two-month takeover fight, Conrail contends the union with CSX is a better strategic fit.
Industry experts said Norfolk, Va.-based Norfolk Southern, which has the financial power to bid more than $10.5 billion, merely wants to preserve the spread between the two offers while it fights a key aspect of the Conrail-CSX pact in court.
Norfolk Southern is challenging part of the transaction that prohibits either CSX or Conrail from seeking another merger partner before 1999.
Some analysts and investors said that if the exclusivity provision is not thrown out after a Jan. 9 hearing in federal judge in Philadelphia, it could guarantee a victory for CSX because shareholders could not wait two years for a deal with Norfolk Southern.
Norfolk Southern last month lost a court fight in which it challenged previous terms of the deal, including an exclusivity provision that ruled out other talks before July 1997.
"This is a sign that they're not going to go bananaas (with a very high offer). If they're able to break the lock-up provision, they have a good bid," Hatch said.
"It was the right thing to do to keep pressure on the (Conrail) board," said one takeover stock trader, referring to investors who were unhappy with the Conrail board's decision to pursue the lower of the two bids.
The court case is expected to hinge on whether Conrail's agreeing to the extended exclusivity period is within the broad discretion allowed a board under Pennsylvania law, said Charles Yablon, a professor of corporate law at Cardozo University in New York.
"They're pushing the outside of the envelope and trying to take maximum advantage of the leeway that Pennsylvania law gives them," Yablon said. But if they can legally justify the move, CSX will probably prevail, he said.
Few analysts were predicting the outcome, but the war was expected to continue no matter which company wins in court.
After the court fight, the next battle site will be Washington where the losing bidder is expected to vehemently challenge the merger. The deal already is expected to face intense scrutiny from the Surface Transportation Board, the federal agency that oversees railroads.
"You're going to have a lot of opposition to this," PNC's Vincent said, citing railroads, shippers and state agencies that are expected to express their opinions when the transaction reaches the regulatory stage.
Last week, the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey said it would intervene in any merger involving Conrail.
Conrail stock fell 87.5 cents to $99.875 trading on the New York Stock Exchange. CSX stock fell 50 cents to $43.25 and Norfolk Southern shares rose $1.125 to $89.50, also on NYSE.
