Conrail Inc. on Friday spurned a sweetened $10.5 billion takeover offer from hostile suitor Norfolk Southern Corp. amid speculation that a 2-month-old bidding war for the railroad was drawing to a close.
As expected, Conrail rejected the offer and contended that its proposed friendly $9.3 billion merger with CSX Corp. would be a better corporate combination.
"The Conrail board has again confirmed that a merger of equals with CSX and not a sale to Norfolk Southern is in the best interests of Conrail and its constituencies, including shareholders, employees, suppliers, customers and communities served," Conrail Chairman David LeVan said in a statement.
The rejection came just one day after both CSX and Norfolk Southern raised their bids for Conrail.
Industry analysts said CSX and Norfolk Southern were unlikely to offer much more for the Philadelphia-based railroad, but both sides will pursue the fight in court, before regulators and in the marketplace.
"That is the whole process that takes place over the course of 1997 -- the battle for market share as opposed to Conrail shares," said NatWest Securities Corp. analyst Anthony Hatch.
On Thursday, Richmond, Va.-based CSX raised its offer for Conrail to give shareholders an extra $870 million in the cash-and-stock merger. Based on Friday's stock activity, the deal is worth $9.3 billion, or about $102 per Conrail share.
A source close to CSX told Reuters then that CSX and Conrail hoped the revised deal would end the bidding war.
But just hours after CSX and Conrail unveiled the new terms of their planned merger, Norfolk Southern raised its all-cash offer by $500 million to about $10.5 billion, or $115 a share.
"If someone were to start to bid higher than this, they probably wouldn't get the economies out of the deal to make it work, so the bidding war, I think, has come to the end," said Charles Vincent of PNC Asset Management Group.
Although Norfolk Southern's bid has been higher throughout the two-month takeover fight, Conrail contends the union with CSX is a better strategic fit.
Industry experts said Norfolk, Va.-based Norfolk Southern, which has the financial power to bid more than $10.5 billion, merely wants to preserve the spread between the two offers while it fights a key aspect of the Conrail-CSX pact in court.
Norfolk Southern is challenging part of the transaction that prohibits either CSX or Conrail from seeking another merger partner before 1999.
Norfolk Southern said in court documents that directors of Conrail had violated their duties to the company and misled shareholders by agreeing to that provision.
"Put simply, Conrail's directors have agreed to take a two-year leave of absence during what may be the most critical period in Conrail's history," Norfolk Southern said.
Some analysts and investors said that if the exclusivity provision is not thrown out after a Jan. 9 hearing before a federal judge in Philadelphia, it could guarantee a victory for CSX because shareholders would not wait two years for a deal with Norfolk Southern.
Norfolk Southern last month lost a court fight in which it challenged previous terms of the deal, including an exclusivity provision that ruled out other talks before July 1997.
The latest court case is expected to hinge on whether Conrail's agreeing to the extended exclusivity period falls within the broad discretion allowed a board under Pennsylvania law, said Charles Yablon, a professor of corporate law at Cardozo University in New York.
"They're pushing the outside of the envelope and trying to take maximum advantage of the leeway that Pennsylvania law gives them," Yablon said. But if they can legally justify the move, CSX will probably prevail in court, he said.
Few Wall Street analysts were predicting the outcome, but the war was expected to drag on no matter which company wins in court.
After the court fight, the next battle site will be Washington where the losing bidder is expected to vehemently challenge the merger. The deal already is expected to face intense scrutiny from the Surface Transportation Board, the federal agency that oversees railroads.
"You're going to have a lot of opposition to this," PNC's Vincent said, citing railroads, shippers and state agencies which are expected to express their opinions when the transaction reaches the regulatory stage.
Last week, the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey said it would intervene in any merger involving Conrail.
Conrail stock fell 87.5 cents to $99.875 on the New York Stock Exchange. CSX stock fell 50 cents to $43.25 and Norfolk Southern shares rose $1.125 to $89.50, also on NYSE.
