A Conrail Inc. director abstained from a key vote on the railroad's proposed $9.1 billion merger with CSX Corp. due to a controversial provision prohibiting both parties from seeking another deal until 1999.
In a filing late Friday with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Conrail disclosed that board member David Lewis abstained from the vote "in light of the provision... extending the exclusivity period to December 31, 1998."
Conrail did not disclose any other details, but noted that Lewis still fully supported the proposed transaction.
Lewis, a partner in Detroit law firm Lewis Clay &amp; Munday, could not be reached for comment.
CSX and Conrail last week revised terms of their merger to give shareholders another $870 million in the transaction and establish a voting trust to accelerate payment to investors.
The exclusivity period, which was extended from July 1997, is one of the most controversial aspects of the proposed deal.
Rival bidder Norfolk Southern Corp. has challenged the exclusivity period in court, contending that Conrail's board has violated its duties and misled shareholders.
A hearing on the issue has been set for Jan. 9 in U.S. district court.
Takeover stock traders speculated that Norfolk Southern would seek testimony from Lewis at the hearing about the reasons for his abstention.
CSX and Norfolk Southern have been locked in a two-month bidding war for Conrail. Although Norfolk Southern's $10.5 billion offer is higher, Conrail has rejected its advances and contends that its planned $9.3 billion merger with CSX is a better fit.
A Conrail spokesman declined to comment on Lewis' abstention. Conrail's other 11 board members reportedly voted in favour of the revised cash and stock CSX deal.
Shares of Conrail gained 12.5 cents to $100 on the New York Stock Exchange. CSX stock fell 25 cents to $43 and Norfolk Southern shares fell $1.125 to $88.375, also on the NYSE.
Legal experts last week noted that Pennsylvania corporate law grants broad discretion to corporate boards when they are considering a transaction.
In addition to the legal battle, industry sources widely anticipate any proposed transaction with Conrail will generate opposition at the regulatory level from the losing bidder, shippers and state agencies.
