Oil giant Texaco Inc. said Tuesday it would complete its exit from the chemicals business by selling a Texas facility to privately-held Huntsman Corp. for about $600 million.
White Plains, N.Y.-based Texaco, which sold the bulk of its chemicals business to Huntsman in 1994 for more than $1 billion, said the sale will allow it to concentrate on its core oil and natural gas businesses.
Salt Lake City, Utah-based Huntsman is the nation's largest privately-held chemicals company.
Huntsman has operated the Texaco propylene oxide/methyl tertiary butyl ether (PO/MTBE) plant at Port Neches, Texas since 1994 and owns an adjacent facility. The plant has a production capacity of about 400 million pounds per year of propylene oxide and about 15,000 barrels per day of MTBE, a gasoline additive.
Propylene oxide is a petrochemical used in home furnishings, construction, appliance, packaging and transportation. Huntsman consumes propylene oxide for the production of specialty chemicals.
Huntsman also said it has entered a long-term agreement with BASF AG under which BASF will receive a significant portion of the Port Neches propylene oxide production.
MTBE is a key gasoline additive used in the production of cleaner-burning blends. Texaco and Huntsman said they have have negotiated a long-term MTBE supply agreement.
As part of the agreement, Huntsman also will acquire Texaco's PO/MTBE manufacturing technology, including the right to license the technology around the world.
"This acquisition will greatly enhance our product integration and diversification by allowing us to add propylene oxide to our list of core products. It also will make us the nation's second-largest producer of MTBE, with capacity of more than 27,000 barrels per day," Jon Huntsman, chairman of the family-owned business, said in a statement.
The transaction is expected to be completed in the first quarter of 1997.
Huntsman's 1994 transaction with Texaco included a right to buy the Port Neches facility, but that option expired in April without an agreement between the two companies.
"While we have always had an abiding interest in the PO/MTBE facility, we were consumed with some other projects at the time," Jon Huntsman Jr., vice chairman and eldest son of the chairman, said in a telephone interview.
A Texaco spokesman said other potential buyers had expressed interest in the facility.
Huntsman said the purchase of the propylene oxide facility will fit well with its existing propylene production. The company makes more than 1 billion pounds per year of propylene.
"PO is a pretty robust market in terms of growth," he said, noting that growth is projected at more than 5 percent per year.
Huntsman also said he was optimistic about the growth potential for MTBE despite some market concerns that European demand may fall short of expectations. Global production of MTBE has exploded in the past five years due to environmental mandates for cleaner-burning fuels.
"We're believers in the future of MTBE. (The growth rate) is not at the 7, 8 or 9 percent that people were talking about earlier, but I think that was a bit overblown," he said, adding that more realistic projections call for MTBE to grow at a rate of 4 to 5 percent.
