Healthcare and oil companies are expected to be bigger players in 1997's corporate merger boom, although most of the activity is still likely to be dominated by telecommunications, utilities and insurance.
Several other sectors, including airlines and railroads, also are on the verge of participating in the deal frenzy that has gripped corporate America for nearly two years.
And the merger pace shows no sign of slowing in 1997 from 1996's record, said investment bankers and merger experts.  
"We see no reason why the (merger and acquisition) cycle should slow down.  We think the boom will continue through (1997)," said Philip Keevil, managing director at Salomon Brothers.
A record $658.8 billion worth of transactions was announced in 1996, far surpassing initial expectations for the year, according to figures compiled by Securities Data Co, a Newark, N.J.-based firm that tracks deals.
The key driver in the current merger trend has been the high-flying stock market, coupled with corporate trends that stress consolidation and cost-cutting.  
"At the beginning of 1996, it looked like it would be another good year for mergers.  That got blown to pieces. It's hard to know if (1997) will be better, but it feels real good," said Steven Wolitzer, managing partner and co-head of mergers and acquisitions at Lehman Brothers.
Industry experts said the pipeline for potential deals appears full for at least the first six months of 1997.
"We're at a really high level of activity.  There is good corporate profitability and people are using their money for share buybacks and acquisitions," said Robert Lovejoy, managing director at Lazard Freres &amp; Co.  
And investors like to see acquisitions.
"Shareholders expect managements to be taking pro-active steps to generate value-enhancing transactions.  And the management of these corporations realize they can't count on the stock market" to boost profitability, said Bruce Nolop, managing director at Wasserstein Perella &amp; Co.
Federal deregulation is expected to drive more consolidation in telecommunications and utilities, two of the most active sectors in 1996.  The telecommunications sector rang up the biggest deals of 1996 and the utilities industry also played a large role in the year's transactions.  
Although healthcare companies already have participated in the merger boom, experts anticipate more consolidation among pharmaceutical companies, hospitals and health maintenance organizations.
Merger experts also predict energy companies, which spent much of 1996 forming alliances and divesting properties, will become more aggressive buyers and sellers in 1997.  The nation's refiners, plagued with poor profit margins, especially are expected to participate in the merger trend.
Meanwhile, the prospect of mergers is hovering over the nation's airlines.
Industry experts believe airline industry consolidation is inevitable, especially as AMR Corp's American Airlines subsidiary and British Airways Plc pursue a wide-reaching partnership.
Similarly, a resolution if the takeover battle for Conrail Inc will likely trigger other railroad mergers, experts said. CSX Corp and Norfolk Southern Corp are locked in a bidding war for Conrail and the losing railroad is likely to seek another partner.
