Service Corp International said the decision to withdraw its $2.9 billion hostile bid for Loewen Group Inc won't temper its acquisition appetite.
The Houston-based funeral services company plans to pursue acquisitions in Europe and elsewhere, hoping to bring in at least the approximately $200 million in new revenues in 1997 that it reaped from acquisitions in 1996, president William Heiligbrodt told Reuters in a telephone interview.
"We've always been in the acquisition business...We're not changing any strategy," he said.  
Late Tuesday, Service Corp unexpectedly withdrew the four-month-old offer that had been fiercely opposed by Loewen, its chief competitor in the highly-fragmented and consolidating funeral service sector.
Heiligbrodt said Service Corp, North America's biggest funeral home operator, expects to incur minimal costs from the takeover attempt of its rival.  He did not elaborate.
Heiligbrodt declined to talk about specific acquisition targets, although he said the $200 million estimate would not include a large strategic acquisition.  
Other prime properties in the funeral services industry include Toronto-based Arbor Memorial Services Inc and New Orleans-based Stewart Enterprises Inc.
"We have an investment in Arbor and it's a very fine company.  That's really all.  We don't have any other intentions at this time," Heiligbrodt said.
In withdrawing its bid, Service Corp cited several actions taken by Loewen, including its aggressive acquisition program, and costs associated with Loewen's severance programs.  
Heiligbrodt also said Loewen's torrid pace of acquisitions, combined with the intense regulatory scrutiny of the proposed transaction, "probably put us in a position where (Service Corp) would have to sell more properties than we originally anticipated."
Heiligbrodt also cited Loewen's  Rose Hills and  Prime Succession Inc transactions, in which it partnered with merchant bank  Blackstone Capital Partners.  "There were just a whole myriad of factors that affected value," he said.
Shares of Service Corp rose sharply to reflect the removal of uncertainty that had surrounded the proposed acquisition of Loewen.  By late morning, Service Corp stock was up 1-7/8 to 29-1/2.
"I think it was prudent.  The word to use is 'discipline,'" Dean Witter analyst Todd Richter said of Service Corp's decision to withdraw its offer.  "You've got to applaud them for not getting caught up in this and just walking away."
