ADT Ltd. Wednesday rejected a $3.5 billion takeover bid from Western Resources Inc. as inadequate, but the security services company said it would consider a new offer from the utility or another bidder.
"The board will consider all bona fide offers presented to it (including one by Western) and may recommend a proposal if it reflects the full and fair value of the company, including its favourable prospects going forward," ADT said in a statement mailed to shareholders.
North America's largest security services company also set a July 8 date for a special meeting at which shareholders will vote to determine control of its board. Western is seeking to gain control of the board as part of its acquisition attempt.
Western, which owns 27.1 percent of ADT and spent much of last year laying the groundwork to take over the company, vowed to pursue its offer, which was disclosed last month.
"We still intend to move forward with our offer, which we believe is a fair offer," a Western spokeswoman said. She did not elaborate, saying the company was reviewing ADT's statements.
Boca Raton, Fla.-based ADT provides continuous monitoring of commercial and residential security systems to over 1.7 million customers. It is also the nation's second-largest provider of vehicle auction services, with 27 auction centres.
In a letter to shareholders, ADT said the "preliminary view" of its board of directors was that the offer was inadequate. The cash and stock transaction values ADT at about $22.50 a share.
Long considered one of the premier properties in the highly fragmented security sector, most industry analysts value ADT at between $25 and $30 a share.
ADT was slated to be acquired last year by Republic Industries Inc. in a transaction that valued it at about $29 a share, but the deal fell apart due to uncertainty over Republic's volatile stock price.
The electronic security business has grown increasingly attractive to utilities and telecommunications companies in recent months as they face heightened competition in a new era of deregulation.
"ADT believes that its ability to capitalise on a range of growth opportunities currently available to ADT would be impaired by an amalgamation with Western," the company said, adding it expects partnership opportunities in telecommunications, consumer electronics and insurance.
It also contended that the Western offer was subject to numerous conditions that "ADT believes have a high risk of not being fulfilled."
ADT also questioned the benefits of a transaction to its shareholders, saying, "Western has offered no support for the notion that ADT's nationwide customer base would have any interest in buying electric power from a Kansas utility."
It said Western does not have the regional and market positioning, range of services or cost structure that would make it a desirable partner.
ADT raised questions about Western's ability to finance the proposed transaction or finance the growth of the security business.
ADT also said it expects to take a one-time charge of about $110 million after taxes and report a $50 million gain from the sale of its remaining interest in Limelight Plc.
The charge was for the integration of the security businesses that ADT acquired recently as part of Automated Security Holdings Plc and for enhancing its technological infrastructure. ADT said the integration of the businesses into ADT should bring about "significant future cost savings."
ADT stock gained 25 cents to $23 while Western Resources rose 50 cents to $31.50 on the New York Stock Exchange.
