Tyco International Ltd. said Monday that it had made a $4 billion bid for American Standard Companies Inc. but would not pursue a merger after the maker of plumbing supplies and air conditioners rejected its offer.
"Tyco historically has not done hostile takeovers and we are not going to do a hostile takeover here," Senior Vice President David Brownell said in a telephone interview.
Brownell added that Tyco, a diversified manufacturing company, had not had any further contact with American Standard since its offer was rejected in early December, a day after it was made.
"We're off and doing other things. As far as we're concerned, it's past history," Brownell said.
In a letter dated Dec. 5, Tyco offered $50 a share, or about $4 billion, to acquire American Standard, which became a public company in February 1995.
Tyco said that under its proposal American Standard shareholders would have received $50 a share either in Tyco stock or cash, or a combination of both.
American Standard, however, rejected the offer almost immediately, believing it was in the best interest of its shareholders for it to remain independent.
"American Standard's board of directors reviewed the proposal and concluded that strategies already in place are working and the best way to increase earnings and shareholder value is to stay focused on carrying out the strategies as an independent company," the company said in a statement Monday.
"Accordingly, the company declined any interest in that proposal, has not had any discussions with Tyco concerning it and no discussions are contemplated."
American Standard noted in its statement that its stock price had doubled since it went public in 1995 and it planned to proceed with an announced secondary public offering and repurchase of shares next month.
American Standard, based in Piscataway, N.J., is the parent of companies that produce Trane and American Standard air conditioning products, American Standard, Ideal Standard, and Standard plumbing products and WABCO commercial and utility vehicle brake and control systems.
Tyco, based in Exeter, N.H., had said in its proposal that a combination of the companies would benefit both and produce annual cost savings of at least $150 million to $200 million.
Brownell also said Tyco would still welcome friendly talks with American Standard.
"If the American Standard management would like to speak with us, we would be happy to speak with them," he said.
American Standard, however, insisted Monday that it was determined to remain independent.
Tyco's offer of $50 a share would have meant paying a steep premium for American Standard, whose shares closed Friday at $40.25 on the New York Stock Exchange.
Both company's shares were suspended from trading early Monday on the New York Stock Exchange after the Wall Street Journal reported Tyco's offer in its Monday issue.
In afternoon trading, American Standard was up $2.375 to $42.625, while Tyco rose 12.5 cents to $54.75.
