Norfolk Southern Corp. Monday launched a new effort to derail a planned $9.1 billion merger between Conrail Inc. and CSX Corp., proposing to buy a stake in Conrail even though its takeover offer has been rejected.
The Norfolk, Va.-based railroad said it would buy 9.9 percent of Conrail stock for $115 per share if investors defeat a key provision that would allow the proposed Conrail-CSX union to move forward. Norfolk Southern made its offer in a direct appeal to Conrail shareholders, many of whom are unhappy with the proposed Conrail-CSX transaction.
Conrail shareholders are scheduled to vote on the provision Friday at a special meeting in Philadelphia.
Philadelphia-based Conrail has rejected Norfolk Southern's $10.3 billion cash offer, saying that the $9.1 billion cash and stock transaction with CSX provides more strategic benefits.
Conrail is asking shareholders to waive a Pennsylvania law that effectively requires CSX, which already owns 19.9 percent of Conrail shares, to pay $110 per share in cash for the rest.
If shareholders waive that provision, Richmond, Va.-based CSX will buy another 20 percent of Conrail shares for $110 per share and acquire the rest of Conrail in stock.
Norfolk Southern asked shareholders to reject the measure, saying it would amend its existing all-cash offer in order to buy about 8.2 million Conrail shares. The purchase of the shares would represent the maximum number of shares that Norfolk Southern can buy without triggering Conrail's "poison pill" anti-takeover defence plan.
Once completed, Norfolk Southern would then begin a second offer for all remaining Conrail shares.
Norfolk Southern said the 9.9 percent offer would not be subject to termination of the merger agreement between Conrail and CSX and would not require any action by Conrail's board.
"Conrail shareholders have an opportunity to reassert control over their corporation and reject the coercive tactics being used to pressure them into approving CSX's inferior offer," Norfolk Southern Chief Executive Officer David Goode said in a statement.
Officials from Conrail and CSX could not immediately be reached for comment.
Norfolk Southern announced its plan after the close of trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
It also said a vote to reject the CSX/Conrail measure would signal the beginning of the process to unseat Conrail directors at Conrail's next annual meeting.
