Conrail Inc. said Tuesday it planned to proceed with a crucial shareholder meeting Friday despite Norfolk Southern Corp.'s latest effort to thwart the railroad's planned $9.2 billion merger with CSX Corp.
CSX Chairman John Snow described Norfolk Southern's effort as a "desperate act" that may be confusing shareholders.
"They had suffered two stinging defeats. They were probably reeling and felt the need to do something," Snow said in a telephone interview.
He was referring to setbacks last week in which a federal judge and a regulatory agency denied Norfolk Southern's attempt to block the Conrail-CSX transaction.
Norfolk, Va.-based Norfolk Southern, whose $10.3 billion bid for Conrail has been rejected, said late Monday it would buy 9.9 percent of Conrail stock if the Philadelphia-based railroad's shareholders defeated a key measure that would allow the proposed Conrail-CSX transaction to proceed.
Wall Street sources had speculated the new development in the three-month takeover battle could prompt Conrail to delay the shareholder meeting.
Conrail will be asking shareholders to waive a Pennsylvania law that would essentially require Richmond, Va.-based CSX to pay for Conrail in cash. The proposed Conrail-CSX transaction is a mixture of cash and stock.
Norfolk Southern has offered to buy Conrail for cash.
Snow said he was "reasonably confident, but guarded" Conrail shareholders would approve the measure Friday.
Votes are expected to be tallied by early next week.
Wall Street analysts said Norfolk Southern might win some new allies with its plans, but said its efforts to derail the merger may not succeed.
"It might have some influence on (the shareholders), but it looks to me like it may be too late. This has been a tough battle for Norfolk Southern," said Thom Brown, managing director of investment firm Rutherford, Brown and Catherwood Inc., adding that Norfolk Southern was "trying to win over any uncommitted shareholder they can find."
If shareholders defeat the measure, Conrail has the right to call another meeting.
"If we lose it, I think it's going to be 'shame on us' for not having communicated fully the benefits of this merger," Snow said. "What I propose doing, if we lost it ... would be to take our time, and patiently go around and talk to the shareholders -- that may take three months, that may take six months -- until they really understood the merger."
Snow said he spoke earlier Tuesday to Conrail Chairman David LeVan.
"They're firmly committed to us. We're firmly committed to them," Snow said. "We certainly hope we win the vote. If we don't win the vote, we're still committed to each other. We have a contract that's binding for two years."
Under the proposed deal, Conrail and CSX are prohibited from entering another merger until 1999.
Separately, a U.S. appellate court scheduled arguments for Wednesday afternoon on a Norfolk Southern request to block the shareholders meeting.
