The chairman of CSX Corp said he is "reasonably confident, but guarded" that Conrail shareholders will approve a key provision of the planned $9.2 billion railroad merger, adding that CSX will remain committed to the union even if the measure is defeated.
John Snow also described rival bidder Norfolk Southern Corp's latest attempt to thwart the transaction as "a desperate act."
Snow spoke to Reuters in a telephone interview.  
Conrail shareholders will vote Friday on a provision that essentially will enable CSX to pay cash and stock for Conrail.
Rival bidder Norfolk Southern, whose $10.3 billion offer was rejected by Conrail, late Monday offered to buy 9.9 percent of the railroad if shareholders defeat the measure.
"It seems to me like it's a desperate act. I can't imagine it's going to affect very much," Snow said.
However, he admitted that the offer is probably creating some confusion in the market.  
Snow said the Norfolk Southern offer likely resulted from two setbacks last week. A U.S. district court judge and the Surface Transportation Board both denied Norfolk Southern's attempt to block the merger.
"They had suffered two stinging defeats. They were probably reeling and felt the need to do something," Snow said. He declined to speculate on the outcome of Friday's vote, which is expected to be tallied by early next week.
Under the proposed merger, neither Conrail or CSX can enter a partnership with another party before 1999.  
Snow also reiterated court testimony that CSX will not raise the bid for Conrail.
"Once the Street becomes convinced that this is the deal, that there isn't any other deal, that this is the price, it seems to me that we'll ultimately win the vote," Snow said.
If Conrail shareholders defeat the Friday vote, Conrail has the ability to call a new meeting.
"If we lose it, I think it's going to be shame on us for not having communicated fully the benefits of this merger. What I propose doing, if we lost it...would be to take our time and patiently go around and talk to the shareholders -- that may take three months, that may take six months -- until they really understood the merger," he said.
Snow said he spoke earlier on Tuesday with Conrail chairman David LeVan.
"They're firmly committed to us. We're firmly committed to them. We certainly hope we win the vote. If we don't win the vote, we're still committed to each other. We have a contract that's binding for two years," Snow added.
