Norfolk Southern Corp may win new allies with its latest plan to thwart Conrail Inc's planned $9.2 billion merger with CSX Corp, but Wall Street experts are not convinced the effort will succeed.
They said the outcome of Friday's crucial Conrail shareholder vote, already considered a tight race before Norfolk Southern disclosed its effort, is now even closer.
Norfolk Southern is "trying to win over any uncommitted shareholder they can find," said Thom Brown, managing director of investment firm Rutherford, Brown and Catherwood Inc.  
Conrail needs shareholder support in order to proceed with the planned cash and stock CSX deal.  The railroad is asking investors to waive a Pennsylvania law that would essentially require CSX to pay for Conrail in cash.
Conrail has rejected Norfolk Southern's $10.3 billion cash bid in favor of the CSX transaction.
Late Monday, Norfolk Southern launched a new attack on the Conrail-CSX deal, telling Conrail shareholders it would buy 9.9 percent of Conrail shares for $115 each if they defeated Friday's measure.  
"It might have some influence on (the shareholders), but it looks to me like it may be too late.  This has been a tough battle for Norfolk Southern," Brown said.
Sources close to CSX and Conrail said the vote tally is expected to take a couple of days.
"Our sense is that Conrail may well lose that vote...Norfolk's strategy here appears to be to try to build on the momentum it began by aggressively courting Conrail's shareholders last week," wrote James Higgins of Donaldson Lufkin &amp; Jenrette in a report issued Tuesday.  
Although some analysts had speculated that the plan disclosed by Norfolk Southern could prompt Conrail to delay the shareholder meeting, the railroad earlier confirmed that the meeting will take place Friday.
Norfolk Southern's offer is higher than CSX's, but a merger of the two railroads could not happen any time soon. According to its pact with CSX, Conrail would be prohibited from entering a partnership with Norfolk Southern or any other party until 1999.  Norfolk Southern challenged the exclusivity pact in court, but a federal judge last week upheld the terms of the Conrail-CSX merger.
Analysts said that the latest move by Norfolk Southern is an effort to convince shareholders that it is willing to take the risk of buying a stake in Conrail even though it would be prohibited from buying the railroad for two years.
"I think it's going to be very close.  This tells shareholders that (Norfolk Southern is) deadly serious and willing to commit," said Charles Vincent of PNC Asset Management Group.
