Norfolk Southern Corp. on Monday launched a new effort to derail a planned $9.1 billion merger between Conrail Inc. and CSX Corp., proposing to buy a stake in Conrail even though its takeover bid has been rejected several times.
Norfolk Southern made its offer in a direct appeal to Conrail shareholders, many of whom are unhappy with the proposed Conrail-CSX transaction.
The Norfolk, Va.-based railroad said it would buy 9.9 percent of Conrail stock for $115 per share if investors defeated a key provision that would allow the proposed Conrail-CSX union to move forward. Conrail shareholders are scheduled to vote on that measure Friday at a special meeting in Philadelphia.
Philadelphia-based Conrail has rejected Norfolk Southern's $10.3 billion cash offer, saying that the $9.1 billion cash and stock transaction with CSX provides more strategic benefits.
Conrail is asking shareholders to waive a Pennsylvania law that effectively requires CSX, which already owns 19.9 percent of Conrail shares, to pay $110 per share in cash for the rest.
If shareholders waive that provision, Richmond, Va.-based CSX will buy another 20 percent of Conrail shares for $110 per share and acquire the rest of Conrail in stock.
Norfolk Southern asked shareholders to reject the measure, saying it would amend its existing all-cash offer in order to buy about 8.2 million Conrail shares. The purchase of the shares would represent the maximum number of shares that Norfolk Southern can buy without triggering Conrail's "poison pill" anti-takeover defense plan.
Once completed, Norfolk Southern would then begin a second offer for all remaining Conrail shares.
Norfolk Southern said the 9.9 percent offer would not be subject to termination of the merger agreement between Conrail and CSX and would not require any action by Conrail's board.
"Conrail shareholders have an opportunity to reassert control over their corporation and reject the coercive tactics being used to pressure them into approving CSX's inferior offer," Norfolk Southern Chief Executive Officer David Goode said in a statement.
In a joint statement, Conrail and CSX said the offer made by Norfolk Southern would not affect their planned merger.
"Today's announcement by Norfolk Southern changes nothing. The fact is the CSX-Conrail merger is the only transaction where Conrail shareholders can receive value for 100 percent of their shares," the railroads said.
But a Wall Street analyst said the new offer would likely sway some shareholder votes.
"It seems like a pretty savvy thing to do. They're actually putting money on the table. I think it swings momentum back their way a little bit," said Anthony Hatch of NatWest Securities Corp.
The stock of Norfolk Southern, which announced its plan after the close of trading on the New York Stock Exchange, rose 50 cents to $89 per share. Conrail stock closed up $1 at $101.50 per share and CSX shares gained 37.5 cents to $44.375, both on the NYSE.
Earlier Monday, an independent advisory firm also urged Conrail shareholders to reject the key provision in the railroad's proposed merger.
Maryland-based Institutional Shareholder Services (ISS) said investors should defeat the measure in order to force Conrail to renegotiate the CSX pact and potentially consider Norfolk Southern's bid.
ISS urged shareholders last month urged shareholders to defeat the critical measure. But a Dec. 23 shareholder meeting was delayed when CSX raised its offer. Norfolk Southern also raised its bid, which Conrail again rejected.
The most controversial part of the proposed Conrail-CSX transaction is an exclusivity pact that prohibits either party from talking with another suitor until 1999. A U.S. district court judge last week upheld that provision, which was challenged by Norfolk Southern.
But ISS said a shareholder defeat of the waiver could keep the door open for a Norfolk Southern bid.
Meanwhile, Conrail shareholders were wooed in opposing newspaper advertisements bought by Conrail and Norfolk Southern.
"CSX-Conrail -- the right merger at the right time with the right companies," read the Conrail ad, which said the proposed transaction offered Conrail shareholders value at the high end of what has ever been paid in a railroad merger.
Norfolk Southern attacked the proposed union, saying Conrail and CSX are asking shareholders to settle for a lower value than it has offered and assume equity risks.
