Ending a fierce bidding war for one of the last big merger prizes in the defense industry, General Motors Corp. said Thursday it will sell its Hughes Aircraft unit to Raytheon Co. in a $9.5 billion stock-and-debt deal.
The deal, a major setback to losing bidder Northrop Grumman Corp., will create a new missile and electronics giant with about $21 billion in annual revenues and 127,000 employees.
The merged company, which will retain the Raytheon name, will become the third-largest U.S. defense contractor, after the merger of Boeing Co. and McDonnell Douglas Corp. and Lockheed Martin Corp.
"We are truly creating another defense electronics powerhouse," Raytheon Chairman Dennis Picard said in a statment.
GM Chairman Jack Smith said the deal was aimed at unlocking value for GM shareholders and was a response to "the rapidly changing landscape in the defense industry."
After swallowing the Hughes assets, Raytheon will dominate the U.S. missile and radar businesses and will look a lot like the defense specialist it was in the 1970s, before it began diversifying, analysts said.
Hughes and Raytheon make similar products, including missiles, radar, air traffic control systems and other defense electronics.
Hughes, based in El Segundo Calif., makes the Tomahawk cruise missile, air-to-air missiles for fighter jets and the Stinger anti-aircraft missile, among others.
Raytheon, based in Lexington, Mass., makes the Patriot air defense missile system and competes with Hughes on many other missile contracts. Earlier this month it agreed to buy Texas Instruments Inc.'s defense electronics business for $2.95 billion.
Raytheon also makes Amana appliances and Beech business aircraft. Picard said the company was taking a "hard look" at the future of its commercial businesses and will reveal specific plans in the next couple of months.
To help pay for the Hughes deal, Edward D. Jones &amp; Co analyst William Fiala said Raytheon "will look to spin off or outright sell one of three businesses -- appliances, aircraft and/or Engineering and Construction."
Under the deal, Raytheon will contribute $5.1 billion in stock and assume $4.4 billion in newly created Hughes debt.
The deal involves a complicated tax-free spin-off of Hughes Aircraft to holders of GM's Class H common stock and its automotive stock, known as $1-2/3 par-value common stock. When it is finished, GM-related shareholders will own about 30 perent of the post-merger Raytheon.
Raytheon executives said the deal will dilute earnings per share slightly in 1997, but will add to earnings in 1998.
The transaction does not include the non-defense businesses of GM's Hughes Electronics Corp. subsidiary, which the automaker acquired in 1985 for $5.1 billion.
GM plans to move Delco Electronics, Hughes' automotive electronics business, back into its Delphi Automotive Systems parts operation.
Delco was brought under the Hughes umbrella in the 1980s as part of then-GM Chairman Roger Smith's grand and controversial scheme to fuse aerospace technology into automobiles, which produced mixed results at best.
GM CEO Jack Smith, no relation to Roger Smith, told reporters at a news conference in New York Thursday that the automaker will consider a future public offering or spin-off of the new Delphi-Delco unit, but declined to offer a timetable for that transaction.
Hughes Electronics will retain its lucrative telecommunications and space unit, which builds satellites and operates the fast-growing DirecTV satellite broadcasting service.
GM Vice Chairman Harry Pearce said in an interview that the automaker had no plans to sell any interest in those operations, which are poised for rapid growth in the next several years. Hughes Chairman C. Michael Armstrong will continue to run them.
Proceeds from the $4.4 billion in new debt to be assumed by Raytheon as part of the deal will be transferred to the Hughes telecommunications and space unit to fund future growth.
The telcom unit's operating profit for the first nine months of 1996 increased 35.2 percent from a year earlier to $193.5 million, on revenues of $2.89 billion. For all of 1995, it earned $189.2 million on revenues of $3.09 billion.
The Hughes defense units posted 1995 operating earnings of $688 million on revenues of about $6 billion.
The deal was announced in the last hour of trading on the New York Stock Exchange. Raytheon shares closed up $1.50 to $48.50, while GM shares closed up 25 cents $60.375.
GM's Class H shares, which are tied to Hughes' performance but do not represent ownership in the company, ended unchanged at $62.625.
As part of the transaction, GM also plans to recapitalize its Class H stock to link it solely to the telecommunications and space business.
"In the past we have felt the market imposed a conglomerate discount to Class H stock because it tracked three businesses," Jack Smith told reporters. "Now the recapitalized Class H stock will track only one high-growth area, telecommunications."
