Norfolk Southern Corp was preparing Monday to buy nearly 10 percent of Conrail Inc. in a move that would further cement a stalemate in the three-month-old fight for control of the railroad giant.
The steps were taking place as Conrail and CSX Corp. assessed their strategy following Friday's shareholder defeat of a key measure in their proposed $9.4 billion merger.
"We've entered a stage where no one has ever been before. We're sailing in uncharted waters," said one source close to Conrail and CSX who did not want to be identified.  
Spurned bidder Norfolk Southern last week promised to acquire 9.9 percent of Conrail for $115 a share if the railroad's stockholders defeated the provision that would have allowed the Conrail-CSX transaction to proceed. Preliminary results showed that about 53 percent of Conrail's outstanding shares were voted against the measure.
The 9.9 percent investment is the maximum amount of Conrail stock that Norfolk Southern can purchase without triggering Conrail's poison pill anti-takeover defense.
"We will move without delay on our tender offer," said Norfolk Southern spokesman Robert Fort.  
The formal process was not expected to begin until later in the week when Conrail released final vote results.
Once it buys the stake, both Norfolk Southern and CSX will hold sizable investments in Conrail without any imminent opportunity to buy the rest of the company.
CSX, which bought 19.9 percent of Conrail in November as part of the planned friendly deal, needs to win approval of Conrail shareholders to proceed with the cash and stock transaction. Many shareholders favor Norfolk Southern's $10.3 billion cash offer, which has been rejected by Conrail.  
Under its pact with CSX, Conrail is prohibited from merging with another company until 1999.
"Right now, it's a standoff," said one Wall Street trader.
Conrail has vowed to convince shareholders that the proposed transaction with CSX is a better fit than the Norfolk Southern offer and plans to schedule another shareholder vote. No meeting date has been set yet.
"The next step in the strategy hasn't been determined. I don't think that there's any rush. We're not going anywhere," said a source close to the situation.  
But Conrail apparently plans to keep a low profile for the next few days. Sources said the railroad has cancelled a traditional meeting with analysts to discuss fourth quarter earnings, due to be released Wednesday.
Meanwhile, speculation abounds about the eventual outcome of the three-way battle. Wall Street analysts and traders have theorized that CSX may be forced to sweeten its offer for Conrail, despite repeated statements from CSX that no higher bid is forthcoming.
And other experts speculate Conrail's board may pursue a three-way deal among the railroads at some point, especially if Conrail's stock price erodes from current levels of about $103 per share.
