Rubbermaid Inc, hurt badly by skyrocketing costs of raw materials used to make key products, is hoping to limit its dependence on plastic with the acquisition of Graco Children's Products Inc.
The move to diversify its raw material base is critical for Rubbermaid, which earlier said third quarter earnings will fall short of expectations due to rising prices for resins.
"They are so reliant on this one raw material and its been obvious that resin costs have been going against them," said Eric Bosshard of Midwest Rsearch-Maxus Group.  
Rubbermaid sought to soften the bad earnings news by announcing plans to buy privately held Graco for $320 million in cash. Graco products, which include strollers and high chairs, are made of textiles and metals, as well as plastic.
But Rubbermaid shares extended morning losses in afternoon trade, tumbling 4 to 22-1/2 on fears it will feel the impact of the rising raw material costs beyond the third quarter.
The Wooster, Ohio-based company said third quarter sales and earnings will be flat with year-ago levels. Analysts had expected both sales and earnings to rise.  
The Graco acquisition also will extend Rubbermaid's move into juvenile products. It already is positioned in that market through its Little Tikes division, which makes plastic toys.
"We plan to grow and expand Graco. It will not be folded into Little Tikes," said Rubbermaid spokeswoman Lorrie Crum.
Like other divisions of Rubbermaid, Little Tikes is experiencing a disappointing third quarter. In addition to the higher raw material costs, Crum attributed weaker sales to competition from industry player Fisher-Price, which is owned by Mattel Inc.  
Crum also cited unusual summer weather in much of the U.S., which kept retail inventories high.
But the rising resin prices are considered the main issue Rubbermaid must combat in coming months even as the company moves forward with a restructuring announced last December. Strong demand for resins, combined with some supply problems, have triggered several price hikes and another is slated to take effect in October.
"We are looking at a number of options before us that can be done to address the resin situation," Crum said, adding that market prices have risen from about 32 cents per pound in April to 47 cents.
She did not elaborate on those options.
But analysts are not expecting the company to accelerate its restructuring, which already calls for intensive cost-cutting.
"I don't think there's any slash-and-burn strategy at this point," said one analyst who did not want to be identified.
