Long-troubled solid waste company Mid-American Waste Systems Inc filed for bankruptcy on Wednesday and said it signed an agreement to sell most assets to fast-growing rival USA Waste Services Inc.
The Ohio-based firm had suffered a string of financial losses stemming from a huge appetite for acquisitions and development projects, said people familiar with the company.
"They were highly leveraged and got into a situation where they were losing money," said Melville Cody of Williams MacKay Jordan &amp; Co Inc.  
In a statement, Mid-American said it would sell nearly all its assets to Houston-based USA Waste Services for $180 million in cash and stock. The transaction is subject to bankruptcy court approval.
Mid-American chief executive Gene Meredith was meeting with staff on Wednesday and was unavailable for comment.
The company was been trying desperately to cut costs, but was unable to stem the flow of losses, analysts said. It sold its Atlanta assets nearly a year ago to Republic Industries Inc, the diversified Florida company led by billionaire Wayne Huizenga.  
The sale of Mid-American's assets comes amid intense consolidation in the highly-fragmented solid waste industry.
For USA Waste, the transaction with Mid-American marks the latest in a string of acquisitions that has taken the company from annual revenue of about $4 million in 1990 to an estimated $2 billion in 1997.
"I think USA Waste has clearly shown they can maintain the momentum of consolidation at this juncture," said Michael Hoffman of CS First Boston, who rates the stock a buy and raised 1997 earnings estimates to $1.70 per share from $1.65 and increased 1998 estimates to $2.15 per share from $2.05.  
USA Waste anticipates the Mid-American acquisition will add $115 million in annualized revenues, according to analysts who participated in a telephone conference call with the firm.
USA Waste did not return a phone call and analysts said executives were involved with a sales and marketing pitch for an upcoming offering of 10 million common shares.
Analysts also said that USA Waste has targeted $400 million in acquisitions this year, excluding the Mid-American asset purchase and last week's announced $518 million acquisition of the Canadian assets of Allied Waste Industries Inc.  
Analysts also anticipate cost savings from some overlap of the Mid-American assets.
"They have been so effective in integrating large acquisitions," Cody said about USA Waste.
In September, USA Waste bought Sanifill Inc in a $1.6 billion stock transaction that solidified its position as the nation's third-largest waste management company. The two top posts are held by Allied Waste and Browning-Ferris Industries Inc.
"They're moving up fast and there are still a lot of acquisition opportunities," Cody said.
