When ITT broke into three companies in 1995, top executives said the move would increase value for stockholders, fuel growth and make the separate businesses more competitive.
But independence has come at a high price for the former conglomerate's hotel, casino and entertainment division known as ITT Corp. Industry competition is fiercer than ever before, a huge expansion plan has been unexpectedly difficult, and the company's stock price has eroded dramatically in the past few months.  
And now, rival Hilton Hotels Corp is prepared to launch a $6.5 billion hostile takeover of the company whose assets include some of the world's best-known properties - from the New York Knicks to Sheraton hotels to Madison Square Garden.
"ITT has always bought the highest-quality assets. When they go out and buy something, they always buy the best and they've always paid a lot of money for those assets - maybe too much - but the bottom line is they own some top quality assets," said Bruce Raabe of Collins &amp; Co.  
It is the appeal of those assets and the view that they should be contributing more to the company's bottom line that may make ITT vulnerable, industry experts said.
So far, ITT has said little about the Hilton offer other than it will consider it. A source familiar with ITT said its board has a regularly scheduled meeting next Tuesday.
An ITT spokesman could not be reached for comment.
But industry analysts widely believe the $55 cash and stock offer made by Hilton undervalues the company. Shares of ITT soared 14-1/4 to 56-7/8 on views that any transaction will come at a higher price than the Monday offer.  
Wall Street sources knowledgeable about ITT's operations admit the giant company has faltered in recent months even as it has pursued an aggressive path of expansion. The company, which has earmarked $2.5 billion for expansion, lost out to Hilton in a bid for Bally Entertainment Corp and has suffered construction project setbacks and losses from its high-stakes bacarrat tables in Las Vegas.
"Remember, this company has only been public for a year. The company gets a lot of attention and it doesn't shrink from doing aggressive things," said one Wall Street source who did not want to be identified.  
But others said the company's acquisition strategy is not well focused, the construction problems were avoidable and the company's management does not have a strong background in operating casinos. Chief executive Rand Araskog ran the conglomerate since 1979 and took control of the new ITT Corp after overseeing the three-way split. President Robert Bowman is considered to be an extremely savvy financier, but does not comes from the gaming industry.
"This is a team that isn't working very well together. Araskog is the behind-the-desk kind of CEO instead of the kind of guy who's out living and breathing his business. Bowman is working with intellect and energy, but without a good perspective of the business," said one industry expert who did not want to be identified.
ITT, which is expected to rebuff the takeover effort, is likely to tout its future plans as an enticement for shareholders.
"The less-than-favorable publicity, some of which has been unfair, that the officers of ITT have received, has overshadowed the fact that management is looking at long-term plans, but fast management is now more respected than long-term planning," said Bjorn Hanson, hospitality industry chairman at Coopers &amp; Lybrand.
