Chief executives of Conrail Inc., CSX Corp. and Norfolk Southern Corp. are expected to hold a crucial meeting this week that could help put a giant railroad merger back on track.
Although final details still had not been set by late Monday, sources familiar with the plans said the meeting of the three executives was likely to occur by the end of the week.
"They are working on a date to meet in the next few days," said one source close to the railroads who did not want to be identified.
Conrail's David LeVan, CSX's John Snow and David Goode of Norfolk Southern last week agreed to hold discussions about the planned $9.5 billion merger of Conrail and CSX.
First announced in October, the planned transaction has been fraught with troubles due to a rival $10.3 billion bid from Norfolk Southern. Philadelphia-based Conrail has rejected the Norfolk Southern offer, contending that the CSX deal was a better fit.
Earlier this month, however, Conrail shareholders rejected a key measure needed for the CSX transaction to move forward.
Sources said that attorneys for the three railroads over the weekend hammered out terms of draft confidentiality pacts.
Only LeVan, Snow and Goode are expected to participate in the meeting.
Two other sources familiar with the companies' plans said the three railroads may announce as soon as Tuesday that a meeting has been scheduled, but likely will not provide any Like most industry experts, the sources involved in the transaction warned that any agreement between the three railroads will not be quick.
"I don't think this is an easy thing to resolve. It's a long way from saying this is a done deal," said one.
"I think everyone agrees its resolveable, but certainly the parties are starting out far apart," said another.
Some Wall Street experts have speculated that the ultimate conclusion will call for a splitting up of Conrail's assets.
But one of the sources close to Conrail stressed that LeVan still opposes carving up the railroad and distributing the pieces to Richmond, Va.-based CSX and Norfolk, Va.-based Norfolk Southern.
Meanwhile, Norfolk Southern executives will be in New York on Wednesday for a quarterly meeting with Wall Street analysts.
