ITT Corp is expected to battle an unsolicited bid from Hilton Hotels Corp with an arsenal of defenses that include its well-known franchise name, its "poison pill" anti-takeover plan and the promise of future earnings power.
Wall Street takeover experts said the 29 percent premium offered by Hilton in its $6.5 billion offer for ITT is not enough to win the company.
"The franchise value alone is worth more than what they're offering," said one trader who did not want to be identified.  
Hilton earlier announced the cash and stock offer for ITT and kept open the possibility of a higher offer if it is permitted to look at ITT's financial data.
ITT could not be reached for comment.
Owner of properties such as Madison Square Garden, Caesar's World and the New York Knicks professional basketball team, ITT's stock price has been hurt recently by gaming construction disruptions and competition. Shares of ITT, which were trading at about 65 in June, closed Monday at 42-5/8.
But traders expect the stock price to rebound as a $2.5 billion capital expenditure program starts to pay off.  
"It's a company with a potentially very high value. Right now, the deck is stacked in favor of the target," said Eric Longmire of Wyser-Pratte &amp; Co Inc.
ITT is gambling much of its future on the $2.5 billion capital spending program, which will expand and update its casino operations. It opened the Las Vegas Desert Inn resort last month after a $160 million renovation.
In December, Standard &amp; Poor's downgraded its outlook on the company to negative from stable, saying that the capital spending plan would result in higher debt.  
"Since the break-up, they've been on an expansion binge. The excitement of the break-up is over and now the company has to perform," said the takeover trader.
Last week, chief operating offer Robert Bowman told Reuters in an interview that ITT may pursue hotel acquisitions this year. The company reportedly last year sought to buy Bally Entertainment Corp, but the hotel company eventually was sold to Hilton for $3 billion.
It also is expected this year to sell its $550 million stake in French telecommunications firm Alcatel Alsthom.
ITT was part of a huge conglomerate until 1995, when it spun off its manufacturing operations as ITT Industries and its insurance division as ITT Hartford Group Inc.
ITT Corp chief executive officer Rand Araskog has run the company since 1979 and took over as top executive of the entertainment and gaming company after the spin-off.
