The top executive of Norfolk Southern Corp admitted talks aimed at resolving a stalemate over the future of Conrail Inc will be difficult but said he remains optimistic about the outcome.
"I go prepared, on my own part, to negotiate hard, to negotiate fairly and to negotiate to reach a reasonable solution.  I am confident others will do the same," chief executive officer David Goode told reporters at a press conference after a meeting with Wall Street analysts.  
A $9.5 billion planned merger between Conrail and CSX Corp has been fraught with problems due to a rival $10.3 billion bid from Norfolk Southern.  Conrail has rejected the Norfolk Southern offer, saying the CSX deal is a better fit.
Conrail shareholders earlier this month defeated a key provision that would have permitted the planned merger to move forward.  At the same time, Norfolk Southern is in the process of buying 9.9 percent of Conrail's stock.
Speaking in a raspy voice, Goode said he would meet with Conrail and CSX on Friday.  
Goode was extremely tight-lipped about details of the meeting, declining to disclose the location or who would attend.  He also said it was premature to discuss a timetable for the possible resolution of the stalemate.
However, sources close to the companies earlier this week said that only Goode, Conrail chief executive David LeVan and CSX chief executive John Snow were expected to attend.
Goode reiterated that Norfolk Southern would not accept any type of settlement that values Conrail at less than its offer of $115 per share, but added "I'm going in with a completely open mind."  
Indications that negotiations were forthcoming developed last week when Goode offered to sit down with LeVan and Snow. The two executives quickly responded in a letter saying that they would be willing to meet.
Although he initially spoke only with Snow by telephone, Goode said at the press conference that he has since spoken with LeVan.  He did not discuss the nature of the conversation.
The meeting with analysts focused on Norfolk Southern's fourth quarter results, issued Wednesday, but most of the questions coming from the audience dealt with Conrail.
Conrail and CSX could not immediately be reached to comment on the meeting or to confirm that their executives would attend.
