The chairman of French holding company CGIP said Thursday he wants to sell a 20 percent stake in information technology company Cap Gemini and would consider several options for the proceeds of the potential sale, including a share buyback.
"We have known that we would not be a shareholder for the future. It is time for us to pass the baton," Ernest-Antoine Seilliere told Reuters in an interview.
CGIP has indicated a willingness to sell to Germany's Daimler-Benz AG, which holds 24.4 percent of Cap Gemini.  
Seilliere said CGIP has not held any discussions with the German company about the potential sale, but would be willing to entertain other offers if Daimler-Benz does not make a decision on its strategy.
CGIP has held the stake for 15 years.
"We cannot stay forever in this situation, but for the time being, it is wait-and-see. There is a limited time this can go on," he said, but declined to identify a timetable.
In November, CGIP sold four percent of its investment in Cap Gemini.  
Discussing the reasons that the holding company wants to sell the Cap Gemini stake, Seilliere noted CGIP's criteria to retain a strong role in its investments.
"We are not the powerful shareholder that can dedicate all its means to the company," he said.
CGIP would weigh several options for proceeds, including a share buyback, Seilliere said, adding the stock is trading at a discount despite a 51 percent jump since October.
The company would also consider expanding its 33 percent investment in private biological diagnostic firm BioMerieux Alliance.  
"It's a niche in the diagnostic world. It's a field where you can converge all sorts of information technology," he said.
Other considerations include building its current involvement in abrasive pellet firm  Wheelabrator-Allevard or quality control company  Bureau Veritas, he said.
Earnings for 1996, which are slated to be issued in early April, are expected to be strong, Seilliere said.
"They are going to be good because all the companies of the group are increasing their results," he said.
CGIP ended months of speculation in November when it signed a deal to acquire a 20 percent stake in French car parts maker Valeo SA from an investment company controlled by Italian businessman Carlo de Benedetti.
