The top executives of Conrail Inc., CSX Corp. and Norfolk Southern Corp. met Friday in a critical session aimed at resolving a stalemate in the three-month takeover battle for Philadelphia-based Conrail.
The three companies declined to comment on the session, but hinted that future meetings could be forthcoming.
"Conrail, CSX and Norfolk Southern have concluded their meeting and have agreed that no further details on this meeting or timing of future meetings will be announced," the railroads said in a joint statement.
The long-awaited meeting between chief executives David LeVan of Conrail, John Snow of CSX and David Goode of Norfolk Southern is viewed as critical to railroad consolidation on the East Coast.
Conrail has rejected a $10.3 billion cash offer from Norfolk, Va.-based Norfolk Southern in favour of a $9.6 billion cash and stock transaction with Richmond, Va.-based CSX.
The deal ran into trouble earlier this month when Conrail shareholders defeated a key provision that would have permitted the planned merger with CSX to move forward. Meanwhile, Norfolk Southern is now in the process of buying 9.9 percent of Conrail's stock.
The three executives agreed last week to hold a meeting to discuss competitive issues in the railroad industry. Conrail and CSX have stressed they are committed to their transaction and Norfolk Southern has said it would not accept any resolution that would value Conrail at less than its $115 per share offer.
Wall Street analysts expressed cautious optimism about the meeting, but warned that any end to the stalemate would be difficult and lengthy. On Wednesday, Goode also said that negotiations would likely be tough.
"We would suggest it is the first of many meetings, but it's a step in the right direction," said Thomas Galvin of Deutsche Morgan Grenfell, noting that East Coast railroad consolidation has been discussed for the past 10 years.
Separately, the head of the federal agency that oversees railroads, reiterated her support of private sector negotiations to resolve competitive access issues in railroad mergers.
"What history has shown us is that private sector negotiations do result in the benefit to the parties involved and the public at large," said Linda Morgan, chairwoman of the U.S. Surface Transportation Board, in a speech at the National Mining Association's annual transportation conference being held in Florida.
Although Morgan did not address the Conrail case specifically, she said the board would look to preserve competition in the nation's rail network.
Shares of Conrail dipped 12.5 cents to $107.25 on the New York Stock Exchange. CSX stock also fell 12.5 cents to $48.50 and Norfolk Southern shares fell 50 cents to $88.625, also on NYSE.
