The chairman of ITT Corp has rejected an offer to meet the top executive of Hilton Hotels Corp, which last week launched a $6.5 billion hostile takeover of the hotel, casino and entertainment giant, sources close to the companies said.
In a letter faxed to Hilton chairman Stephen Bollenbach on Saturday, ITT chairman Rand Araskog said it would be inappropriate for the executives to meet or for Bollenbach to address the ITT board on Tuesday as he had requested, the sources said.
The sources described Araskog's letter as brief and formal.
An ITT spokesman declined to comment and a Hilton spokesman in Los Angeles could not be immediately reached for comment.
Bollenbach's request to ITT was disclosed in a January 31 filing with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission.
Hilton, which is trying to buy ITT in a cash and stock deal valued at $55 per share, formally launched a hostile takeover of ITT on Friday. Hilton also has proposed acquiring about $4 billion of ITT debt for a total transaction worth $10.5 billion.  
Wall Street experts widely expect ITT to reject the offer, which is considered to be too low. Although its stock has declined sharply in recent months, most experts estimate ITT is worth at least $65 per share.
ITT's advisers have spent the past few days poring over the formal bid filed with the SEC on Friday. The advisers are expected to present an in-depth analysis of the offer when ITT holds a regularly scheduled board meeting on Tuesday.
The ITT board, which has until February 14 to respond to the Hilton offer, is not expected to make a decision at the Tuesday meeting.
Sources close to ITT told Reuters that the analysis was likely to focus on Hilton's proposed financing for the transaction and a preliminary agreement with HFS Inc to license the Sheraton franchise. Hilton, which has estimated it will need about $3.5 billion to buy ITT, said its offer is not conditioned on obtaining financing.
Hilton has estimated the proposed union would generate more than $100 million in cost savings.
Hilton also has said that while it would prefer to negotiate a transaction with ITT, it would be prepared to launch a proxy fight to replace the ITT board of directors.
