CVS Corp., the nation's fifth-largest chain of drug stores, said Friday it will acquire rival Revco D.S. Inc. for $2.8 billion in stock and the assumption of $900 million of debt.
The planned union will create the nation's second largest drug store chain, dominating the eastern half of the country. It will have about 4,000 stores and annual sales of $13 billion, making it the largest in terms of outlets and second-largest behind Walgreen Co. in terms of total sales.
While the announcement did not state how many jobs might be eliminated in the merger, the companies said that Revco's Twinsburg, Ohio, headquarters would be phased out. Sources familiar with the companies said that most of the 1,000 people employed at the headquarters were likely to lose their jobs.
CVS Chief Operating Officer Thomas Ryan did not dispute those estimates, saying "it's unfortunate," but he said the company will retain about 98 percent of Revco employees.
CVS said the new company, which will keep the name CVS, will be led by its existing senior management and retain the CVS headquarters in Woonsocket, R.I.
Revco Chief Executive Officer Dwayne Hoven will leave the company after the merger is completed.
"He will stay through the transition. He is intently interested in seeing to it that his people in Twinsburg are well taken care of," a Revco spokeswoman said.
The merger is the latest in the drugstore chain sector, which has seen intense consolidation in the past year.
The transaction will solidify CVS's position in the sector and allow it to expand significantly. Analysts said the companies have little geographic overlap and the combination is not expected to generate significant antitrust concerns.
CVS stores are located primarily in the Northeast and Middle Atlantic regions while Revco stores are mostly in Midwest and Southeast.
The merger calls for CVS to pay the equivalent of $40.64 in its shares for each share of Revco, based on Thursday's closing stock prices.
CVS stock closed Thursday at $44 a share and Revco at $38, both on the New York Stock Exchange, but moved higher Friday.
Revco added $3.375 to close at $41.375 in heavy trading while CVS gained $3.125 to $47.125, both on the New York Stock Exchange.
Ryan of CVS said the transaction would add to earnings slightly this year and would add another 10 cents to 15 cents per share in 1998.
"What we're trying to be is more than just a growth company -- a world-class healthcare retailer. And that's what I think this combination will do," he said in a telephone interview.
Analysts agreed.
"It's a great deal for CVS. The structure (of the deal) is going to allow it to be additive to earnings immediately," Eric Bosshard of Midwest Research-Maxus Group said.
"(CVS and Revco) are the two most dominant market share players in the industry and market share is really the name of the game," he said.
Both companies acknowledged last month that they were discussing a combination of their businesses. Ryan said that the two companies began holding discussions in October.
Ryan said CVS also had considered an acquisition of Eckerd Corp., but decided that Revco was a better fit. J.C. Penney Co. Inc., which owns Thrift drug stores, announced a $3.3 billion acquisition of Eckerd in November.
Two shareholders likely to prosper from the merger are Revco CEO Hoven and Revco co-Chairman Sam Zell. Zell's Chilmark Fund LP holds a 19.2 percent stake in Revco and Hoven also has large holdings in the company.
CVS said the new company plans to open or relocate 300 stores a year after the merger is completed.
Analysts said the CVS-Revco union likely marks at least a near-term end to big mergers in the industry, although dozens of small chains still exist and are expected to get scooped up or join forces with bigger operators.
Revco had agreed in November, 1995, to merge with Rite Aid Corp. in a $1.8 billion deal, but that merger collapsed last April after federal and state regulators raised antitrust concerns.
Analysts said the companies have little goeographic overlap, and the union of CVS and Revco was not expected to generate significant antitrust concerns.
"A number of companies in the sector are coming to us and asking us what they should do strategically," said Marty Murrer, managing director at Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette, which advised CVS in the Revco deal and has been a key player in the sector's biggest transactions.
Arbor Drug Inc., Genovese Drug Stores Inc. and privately held Duane Reade Inc. have been cited as likely candidates to participate in the consolidation sweeping the sector.
