The union of CVS Corp and Revco D.S. Inc creates a drugstore powerhouse that will dominate the U.S. Northeast and Southeast and likely marks the near-term end of mergers between the industry's biggest players.
But dozens of small publicly held and private chains still exist and are expected to get scooped up or join forces to combat industry leaders such as Walgreen Co, Rite Aid Corp, J.C. Penney's Thrift and the new CVS.  
"A number of companies in the sector are coming to us and asking us what they should do strategically," said Marty Murrer, managing director at Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette, which advised CVS in the Revco deal and has been a key player in the sector's biggest transactions.
Arbor Drug Inc, Genovese Drug Stores Inc and  Duane Reade Inc have been cited as candidates likely to participate in the consolidation sweeping the drugstore sector.
The union of Revco and CVS signals the final move in a tumultuous year for Twinsburg, Ohio-based Revco.  
A $1.8 billion friendly merger agreement between Revco and Rite Aid collapsed last April after state and federal regulators contended a combination would create antitrust issues and potentially drive up consumer prices.
Then in September, Revco launched a hostile offer for Big B Inc, which initially rejected its bid. But Big B, a southeastern chain, was unable to rebuff Revco for long, and the companies struck a friendly, $380 million deal in October.
Shareholders reacted positively to the Revco-CVS union, bidding Revco shares up 2-1/2 to 40-1/2 by Friday afternoon. The $2.8 billion deal values Revco at about 40 per share.  
The transaction will solidify CVS's position in the sector and allow it to expand significantly. Analysts said the companies have little geographic overlap, and the union is not expected to generate significant antitrust concerns.
On Friday, CVS also disclosed an aggressive growth plan that calls for 300 new stores or relocations each year.
"It's a great deal for CVS. The structure (of the deal) is going to allow it to be additive to earnings immediately. (CVS and Revco) are the two most dominant market share players in the industry, and market share is really the name of the game," said Eric Bosshard of Midwest Research-Maxus Group.  
Industry experts and Wall Street sources said Revco could have remained a viable company on its own. Revco and CVS last month confirmed their merger talks.
"I don't view this as a forced marriage. I view it as a marriage of great opportunity for the shareholders. Nobody has to do this," Murrer said.
Two shareholders likely to prosper from the merger are Revco Chief Executive Dwayne Hoven and Revco Co-chairman Sam Zell. Zell's Chilmark Fund LP holds a 19.2 percent stake in Revco. Hoven, who will not be joining the merged company, also has large holdings in Revco.
