ITT Corp. on Wednesday rejected Hilton Hotels Corp.'s unsolicited $6.5 billion takeover offer and said it would consider a plan to sell non-core assets in an attempt to boost shareholder value.
New York-based ITT said the potential sale of the properties -- which could include its 50 percent stake in the famed Madison Square Garden arena and the New York Rangers hockey and New York Knicks basketball teams based there -- would be put into effect in order to focus on its Sheraton hotel and Caesars casino businesses.
Wall Street sources immediately estimated ITT could generate some $3 billion from asset sales and use the proceeds to buy back stock or issue a special dividend to investors.
They also warned the plan might not be effective enough to pacify ITT shareholders who have seen the company's stock price eroded in recent months.
"The issue is creating shareholder value, both short- and long-term," ITT Chairman Rand Araskog said in a news release. "We plan to deploy our financial resources only to those assets that produce superior current and future earnings growth."
ITT said Hilton's offer of $55 per share did not reflect the inherent value of ITT, which owns and operates Sheraton hotels and Caesars casinos in Las Vegas, Reno, Nev., and Atlantic City, N.J.
ITT also said keeping the company independent would be in the best interests of its shareholders and other constituents, and that it would seek various options to increase the company's value.
In rejecting Hilton's offer, ITT also cited potential antitrust implications. It said there were "serious business conflicts which have always confronted a (potential) Sheraton/Hilton combination," adding that owning and managing multiple hotels under each brand in dozens of the same cities would create material conflicts of interest.
The ITT rejection came one day after Hilton announced plans to take control of ITT by ousting its board of directors. It proposed 11 candidates for ITT's current board seats, and named 14 others who could be added if ITT attempts to thwart Hilton's bid by boosting the number of board members.
Hilton said its plans would not be altered by ITT's rebuff, adding its $55 bid was a solid offer.
Wall Street analysts widely expect Hilton to raise its bid, perhaps by as much as $10 per share.
"If Hilton comes back with $65, I think ITT will have trouble making a strong case to its shareholders," said Bruce Raabe of brokerage Collins &amp; Co.
An ITT spokesman said the company had no comment on what it might do if Hilton sweetened its offer. "We will see what happens," he said.
Meanwhile, it appeared ITT was already moving forward with plans to sell some assets.
French telecommunications company Alcatel Alsthom said it has been approached by ITT for permission to sell some of its 5 percent stake before an agreed-on July deadline. ITT signed a shareholders agreement with Alcatel in 1992 that called for it to retain the stake until July 3.
An Alcatel spokesman declined to comment further, and an ITT spokesman could not be reached for comment on the issue.
Cablevision Systems Corp., which owns the other half of Madison Square Garden and has the first right to buy ITT's stake, declined to comment on speculation about a transaction. However, the company noted it previously has said it has an excellent relationship with ITT and Arkasog.
The Madison Square Garden properties include the New York Knicks professional basketball team, the New York Rangers professional hockey team, and other properties.
"It begs the question: why didn't they do it sooner?" said Daniel Davila of brokerage Rodman &amp; Redshaw Inc. of the potential non-core asset sales.
As part of its response to Hilton's offer, ITT also said it was filing counterclaims to litigation Hilton filed against it in a federal court in Nevada.
ITT said it was seeking to block the offer and seeking other relief because of Hilton's "misappropriation and misuse of confidential ITT information, including information obtained in violation of a 1996 confidentiality agreement between ITT and Bally Entertainment, now part of Hilton."
Alternatively, ITT said, it was seeking to compel Hilton to disclose information about its offer required under federal securities laws.
Hilton said Wednesday it believed ITT's legal charges were "without merit."
ITT's stock rose $1.625 to $57.625 on the New York Stock Exchange while Hilton shares slipped 50 cents to $27.625, also on the NYSE.
