ITT Corp will have a difficult time convincing investors that a sale of its non-core assets would be more valuable than a $6.5 billion hostile bid from rival Hilton Hotels Corp, Wall Street analysts said.
Although ITT would certainly be a better-focused company without assets like Madison Square Garden and world telephone directories, the move may come too late for shareholders who have seen the stock price erode in recent months.
"It begs the question:  Why didn't they do it sooner?" said Daniel Davila of Rodman &amp; Redshaw Inc.  
As expected, ITT earlier rejected Hilton's $6.5 billion takeover offer as inadequate and not in the best interest of shareholders.  The hotel, casino and entertainment giant will review options to increase shareholder value, including the potential sale of non-core assets.
Industry experts have estimated those assets could generate more than $2 billion that ITT could use to buy back stock or issue a special dividend to shareholders.
Meanwhile, Hilton is widely expected to raise its $55 per share offer for ITT, perhaps as much as another $10 per share.  
"If Hilton comes back with $65, I think ITT will have trouble making a strong case to its shareholders," said Bruce Raabe of Collins &amp; Co.
Shares of ITT jumped 1-3/4 to 57-3/4 in afternoon trading on views of a higher bid.
Analysts also said that stockholders will not want to wait for ITT to sell holdings while a Hilton offer is on the table.
Analysts and sources close to ITT have indicated the company would move quickly if it decides to sell assets and the stakes in Madison Square Garden and Alcatel Alsthom would be among the first to be sold.  
French telecommunications company Alcatel said it has been approached by ITT for permission to sell some of its five percent stake before an agreed-upon July deadline. ITT signed a shareholders agreement with Alcatel in 1992 that called for it to retain the stake until July 3.
And Cablevision, which owns the Madison Square Garden properties with ITT, reiterated that it has an excellent relationship with ITT and its chairman Rand Araskog.
Cablevision declined to comment on speculation that it would buy ITT's 50 percent of Madison Square Garden. It has rights of first refusal if ITT decides to sell the stake.  
Although the strategy may be a tough sell with shareholders, some industry experts noted that ITT's rejection was aggressive, well-planned and issued before Friday's response deadline.
"ITT has put the burden back on Hilton," said Bjorn Hanson of Coopers &amp; Lybrand, adding that ITT may still pursue an acquisition to stave off Hilton.
Meanwhile, Hilton had little reaction to ITT's rejection, saying only that the response does not change its plans or its intent.
