Hicks, Muse, Tate &amp; Furst Inc., a private investment firm, said Friday it has signed a definitive agreement to acquire the food business of American Home Products Corp. for about $1.3 billion.
The business, which will be renamed American Home Food Products, sells packaged convenience foods primarily in the United States, with projected sales of about $1 billion in 1996.
Its products include Chef Boyardee prepared pasta products, pizza mixes, and dinner kits; PAM cooking spray, Franklin Crunch 'n Munch glazed popcorn; Polaner fruit spreads and spices; Gulden's mustard; Ranch Style Brand beans; Dennison's chili; Luck's beans; Ro-Tel tomato and chilies products; Jiffy Pop popcorn; Maypo and Wheatena hot cereals; and G. Washington broth. It also has strong foodservice and private label businesses.
American Home Products will receive about $1.2 billion in cash and will retain 20 percent of the common stock of its food unit, Hicks Muse said.
"Consistent with our proven approach of acquiring and building quality companies with exceptional management teams, this transaction provides a superb platform to execute a buy-and-build strategy in the branded food products business," said Michael Levitt, managing director of Hicks Muse.
The seven-year-old company, which has been gobbling up food businesses for several years, plans to buy two Mexican food firms this year, CEO Thomas Hicks said in a telephone interview.
"Our plan is to use this as a platform. We intend to start with this and grow both internally and through additional acquisitions of branded products," Hicks said of the Dallas-based firm's latest and largest transaction.
Hicks Muse bought dairy firm Morningstar Group in 1991 and took the company public in 1992. It also owns Campfire marshmallows and Angela Marie's. In March, it bought Ghirardelli Chocolate Co. from Boston buyout specialist Thomas Lee.
"We like established brands because we think they offer the most ability of cash flow and long-term growth potential," Hicks said.
An American Home spokesman said the company will use money from the sale to pay down debt and provide funds for "future strategic uses." The Madison, N.J.-based company had said in May that it was seeking buyers for the food unit.
"In general it's going to help them focus more on their pharmaceutical business and help them raise their gross margin," said Rodman &amp; Renshaw analyst Mario Corso.
"For (American Home) to sell a business that's probably growing at 2-5 percent over the next several years, they did very well," said Cowen &amp; Co. analyst Ian Sanderson.
American Home Products' stock rose $1.125 to $60.125 on the New York Stock Exchange in late trading.
Sanderson said the food business was a "laggard," with an estimated pretax profit margin of 11 percent. This compared with 18 percent to 22 percent for the rest of American Home's businesses, which include drugs such as Premarin hormone replacement therapy, medical devices, and consumer healthcare products including Advil pain reliever.
The company has said it has six new drugs it expects can generate over $500 million each in peak annual sales, including Rapamune for preventing organ rejection, a bone growth hormone factor and the Effexor line of anti-depressants.
"A year down the road maybe they'll have to reassess things, and if the pipeline projects haven't worked out, then they have to think about another big acquisition or something like that," Salomon Brothers analyst Robert Uhl said.
