ITT Corp. said Thursday it sold nearly half of its 5 percent stake in Alcatel Alsthom, the big French telecommunications company, the first of several asset sales aimed at thwarting a $6.5 billion takeover bid from Hilton Hotels Corp.
The sale of the 2.2 percent stake to an unidenified U.S. investment fund came one day after ITT rejected Hilton's offer and announced a plan to consider the sale of non-core assets and focus on its Sheraton hotel and Caesars casinos.
ITT and Alcatel declined to discuss the sale price, but a source close to ITT estimated it to be near the market value of about $300 million.
For its part, Hilton launched a fresh attack on ITT's plan.
"A fire sale of these assets will bring significantly less value than an orderly sale process," Hilton Chief Executive Stephen Bollenbach wrote in a letter to ITT Chairman Rand Araskog.
Industry analysts said Hilton would probably have to raise its $55-a-share bid for its takeover attempt to succeed but that was not expected anytime soon.
While sources close to ITT said the company was in no rush to sell off non-core assets, Alcatel granted special permission for ITT to sell part of the stake before July 3, a date that had been part of the original agreement.
ITT still holds 2.8 percent of Alcatel, though it was unclear if the French company had given permission for the sale of that portion.
The Alcatel stake had been considered the easiest of ITT's non-core assets for it to sell. The next asset to be sold is likely to be its Madison Square Garden properties, which include the world-famous arena, the New York Knicks basketball team and the New York Rangers hockey team.
Sources said ITT has held high-level talks with Cablevision about a transaction but that no deal has been struck. ITT partnered with Cablevision in 1995 to buy the properties.
Cablevision is "the primary potential acquirer," said one source close to ITT who declined to be identified.
Cablevision declined to comment, referring to a statement Wednesday in which it said it does not comment on rumoured deals and noted it has a good relationship with ITT.
The ITT sources said it may take up to six months to sell the other non-core assets. Although ITT has held discussions with potential buyers about those properties, the talks are not in advanced stages, the sources said.
That was partly because ITT is not in a rush to sell non-core assets despite the looming Hilton bid, sources close to ITT said.
"The programme is to demonstrate to shareholders over the next couple of months that this management team and this plan will create greater value than the Hilton offer could provide," one source said.
"I don't think people should be looking for a single big bang here, but rather value creation over the course of the next few months," the source said.
ITT's other non-core assets include international telephone directories business.
Other people familiar with ITT's strategy said the company is unlikely to sell assets for less than a fair price.
"They're not going to give anything away. It's not their style," said one industry expert who did not want to be identified.
Meanwhile, sources also said ITT has hired Morgan Stanley to assist with the asset sales. ITT also is being advised by Lazard Freres and Chase Manhattan.
ITT declined to comment on the potential sales or the hiring of Morgan Stanley, which also declined to comment.
ITT's stock rose 62.5 cents to $58.25 in consolidated trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
