Hicks, Muse, Tate &amp; Furst Inc will soon own Chef Boyardee, Polaner fruit spreads and PAM cooking spray, but the leveraged buy-out firm still has a big appetite for food companies.
The Dallas-based group, which announced on Friday a $1.3 billion acquisition of American Home Products Corp's food unit, plans to buy two Mexican food firms this year and does not intend to stop there, Chief Executive Officer Thomas Hicks told Reuters in a telephone interview.  
"Our plan is to use this as a platform," he said of the American Home Products deal, the biggest ever for Hicks Muse. "We intend to start with this and grow both internally and through additional acquisitions of branded products."
Seven-year-old Hicks Muse has been digesting food businesses for several years. It bought dairy firm Morningstar Group in 1991 and took the company public in 1992.
In March it bought Ghirardelli Chocolate Co from Boston buy-out specialist Thomas Lee.
It also owns Campfire marshmallows and Angela Marie's.  
"We like established brands because we think they offer the most ability of cash flow and long-term growth potential," Hicks said.
He said his firm had been searching for a large food acquisition and was alerted to the American Home Products food business about six months ago. Most Wall Street analysts had expected the unit to be bought by another food company.
The devotion to the food industry by Hicks Muse comes as U.S. food companies undergo major cost-cutting and restructuring programs due to the maturation of key products and intense competition for supermarket shelf space.  
On Thursday Campbell Soup Co unveiled a plan to repurchase stock, cut jobs and expand overseas in an effort to boost profits in the mature industry. And Nabisco Holdings Corp announced in June that it would cut 4,200 jobs as part of a cost-cutting program.
Hicks said the buy-out firm will finalize plans to integrate American Home Products's food business by the time the deal closes in 60 to 90 days.
"We have a vision of what we are going to do," Hicks said, but declined to be specific.  
One of Hicks's savviest investments was in the 1980s when he and fellow Dallas investor Robert Haas built a beverage powerhouse through acquisitions of soda brands A&amp;W, Seven-Up, Dr. Pepper and Squirt.
But the Hicks Muse group ran into trouble with its 1994 $390 million purchase of G. Heileman Brewing Co, maker of Lone Star beer and other brands. In July it sold the brewer to Stroh Brewery Co for an estimated $275-$300 million.
Other Hicks Muse investments include radio stations and a foam company.
