Louisiana-Pacific Corp. said Monday it will close its Ketchikan pulp mill in southeastern Alaska next year after the failure of negotiations with the Clinton administration over timber supply.
The company said it planned to take a $350 million charge against third-quarter pre-tax earnings -- $215 million or $2 per share after taxes -- to reflect shutdown of the pulp mill and nine smaller plants nationwide as well as settlement of a shareholder lawsuit.
The closing of the controversial 48-year-old pulp plant, which had been expected, will idle about 500 workers in Ketchikan, a city of 15,000 in the heart of the sprawling Tongass National Forest where the mill has long been the biggest employer.
Company executives said the mill would close March 24, 1997, after the existing supply of timber is processed.
Under an agreement worked out by the White House and Alaska Sen. Frank Murkowski, Louisiana-Pacific said it expected to get enough timber to continue operating two sawmills in the region for two more years, employing 400 to 500 workers.
Portland, Ore.-based Louisiana-Pacific blamed the closure of the pulp mill, which lost an estimated $40 million in the first nine months of the year, on "the Clinton administration's opposition to any compromise that would allow the pulp mill to operate profitably."
In a conference call with reporters, Louisiana-Pacific Chairman Mark Suwyn spoke of forces outside Alaska who wanted to reverse years of development in the state.
"There clearly is a push by many people who have a significant amount of power to shut down all of Alaska, and I am assuming they're going to turn it into some great big national park whereby only tourists can visit," he said.
Environmentalists called Suwyn's charge an exaggeration and said they were satisfied by the closure of a mill they claim has benefited from "sweetheart" federal timber contracts while causing significant air and water pollution.
Buck Lindekugel of the Southeast Alaska Conservation Council called the mill closure a "business decision to jettison a money-losing mill that can't compete in world pulp markets."
But Suwyn blamed changes imposed by the U.S. Forest Service after passage of the 1990 Tongass Reform Act, aimed at protecting the 17-million-acre reserve of old-growth rainforest that sprawls over islands, mountains and glaciers.
Louisiana-Pacific has filed lawsuits in the U.S. Court of Federal Claims, seeking $200 million for breach of contract, and will be filing "significant additional claims in the very near future," Suwyn said.
He acknowledged what he called "stupid" environmental mistakes that resulted in Ketchikan Pulp Co.'s agreement last year to pay $6 million in civil and criminal penalties.
Louisiana-Pacific also said it planned to close or sell several plants that are no longer competitive or essential to its operations, including several structural panel plants being hurt by market overcapacity.
The company also said it has agreed to pay $65 million to settle shareholder lawsuits stemming from a drop in the company's stock price last year after revelations of civil and criminal actions.
Among them were class-action lawsuits over allegedly defective home siding developed by the company. Louisiana-Pacific agreed last year to pay up to $375 million to settle claims by homeowners in Florida, Oregon and Washington, among other states.
Suwyn said the shareholder lawsuits were the last major cloud over a company the he joined this year after the ouster of its longtime Chairman and Chief Executive Harry Merlo.
"We're simply trying to clean up all the things that are not going to contribute to moving this company forward," he said.
