Declaring their belief that the Internet will be the "next mass medium," Microsoft Corp. executives Thursday unveiled the new version of the company's MSN online service, with a heavy emphasis on entertainment programming.
Despite technical limitations that make true video impractical, many of the new MSN programs resemble daily and weekly television shows, with the service organized into six core "channels" aimed at specific demographic groups.
In little more than a year, MSN has become the No. 3 online service, with 1.6 million subscribers.
Company executives told a news briefing they expected to double that figure by mid-1997 and take market share from leader America Online Inc., relying in large part on a $100 million marketing campaign.
But the executives, conceding that the older America Online had a deeper and broader selection of content, said they planned to compete for new online customers, especially those under 30, rather than trying to persuade existing AOL customers to switch.
They were eager to heap criticism on the existing MSN service, launched along with the Windows 95 operating system in August 1995 but almost immediately overtaken by the rapid growth of the Internet.
"MSN was probably the worst of the bunch in terms of ease of use," said Laura Jennings, Microsoft vice president for the online service.
She also noted that the service had been gaining 100,000 subscribers a month despite virtually no advertising and problems, including a computer problem that has delayed bills to most customers for three months or more.
The new ad campaign will begin almost immediately with billboards and print advertisements followed by television commercials beginning in early November, when the service officially launches.
Microsoft also announced a new pricing scheme with an offer of unlimited access for $19.95 a month, instead of 20 hours for the same price under the current service. The minimum monthly fee will rise to $6.95 for five hours, in line with rival services and up from $4.95 for three hours under the current service.
Industry analysts said the new pricing probably would force America Online to follow suit and offer a package with unlimited service. Currently AOL offers heavy users 20 hours a month for $19.95.
David Readerman of Montgomery Securities pointed out that Microsoft has the advantage of a hugely profitable business in desktop software and operating systems, while rivals AOL and CompuServe Inc. are dependent on the online business.
"Microsoft has $8 billion in cash," he said. "That gives them the financial strength to make a long-term investment, and that's what they're doing."
Microsft stock ended down 75 cents at $133.75 and Compuserve lost 25 cents to $12, both on Nasdaq. America Online fell $1 to $25.75 on the New York Stock Exchange.
The heart of the relaunched MSN is an uncluttered browser interface dominated by a promotional "billboard" in the center of the screen and the six "channels" at the bottom corresponding to categories such as news, entertainment, education and children.
Clicking on the channels leads into programming developed by Microsoft and partners that ranges from the MSNBC news service to new interactive serial programs.
Among the programs demonstrated were quiz shows, a humorous daily news audiocast and magazine-type presentations such as "Underwire," produced by and for women.
The service also includes electronic mail, "chat" and a more traditional menu of online categories that leads users to areas within MSN or on the Internet.
Most content in the service will be restricted to subscribers using the company's Windows 95 computer operating system and Internet Explorer browser, and executives would not say whether they have plans to produce a version for the older Windows 3.1 system still used by tens of millions of computer owners.
Some features of MSN, including MSNBC news, electronic shopping and the planned Expedia consumer travel service, will be available at no cost to anyone with access to the Internet.
Patty Stonesifer, Microsoft senior vice president for interactive media, said the company's broad involvement in online consumer services was driven by "our belief that the Internet is the next mass medium."
By some estimates, only 10 million of the nation's 99 million households are currently online, though others say even that figure is high.
