Microsoft Corp. is expected to report a sharp slowdown in earnings growth Monday due largely to a sales surge last year when the software giant launched its Windows 95 operating system.
On average, industry analysts expect the company to post earnings of 90 cents a share for its fiscal first quarter, up 15 percent from last year's 78 cents, according to First Call, which tracks earnings predictions. In last year's fiscal first quarter Microsoft reported net income of $499 million.
Analysts generally said the Redmond, Wash.-based company would post revenues in the $2.3 billion range for the period that ended Sept. 30, up from $2.02 billion.
While Microsoft's growth rate is still healthy, and results are expected to be slightly higher than in the quarter ended in June, the company is facing difficult comparisons after last year, when revenues and earnings grew more than 46 percent.
"It's a tough comparison because in the September quarter last year was the initial release of Windows 95 and all the sell-in associated with that, so it was a great quarter," said Chris Galvin of Hambrecht and Quist.
But he and other analysts said Microsoft's business was continuing to expand steadily, benefiting from rising sales of personal computers and the increasing penetration of Windows 95 and the more lucrative Windows NT system.
Microsoft's already-high profit margins also are rising as the company sells a growing proportion of its software by preloading it onto new computers or selling licenses to large customers rather than shrink-wrapped boxes at retail stores.
Microsoft's business is expected to gain momentum through the fiscal year as the recently updated Windows NT wins more acceptance and the company rolls out a major new version of its Office software package beginning in December.
For the full fiscal year, analysts see earnings and sales up about 20 percent over last year.
"I think NT will really start ramping in the December quarter and in the first part of '97," said Scott McAdams of Ragen MacKenzie. "It's going to be a very powerful driver of earnings."
One cloud on Microsoft's horizon is the imminent arrival of a wave of "thin client" products such as the Network Computer championed by Oracle Corp. Chairman Larry Ellison.
Late this month, Sun Microsystems Inc. is expected to launch a line of products code-named "Mr. Coffee" based on the increasingly popular Java language, which is being positioned as an alternative to the "Wintel" combination of Microsoft Windows operating systems on Intel Corp. processors.
While corporate users are not rushing to desert their personal computer networks, the increasing publicity about alternatives could hurt Microsoft's stock price, which was off $1.25 Friday at $134.25 in afteroon trading on Nasdaq but still up more than 50 percent so far this year.
