Boeing Co defense and space group President Gerald King said he thought the company had a "better than 50-50" chance of surviving to the next round of the military's Joint Strike Fighter program.
He said in an interview he was "not quite as bullish" about the company's chances of surviving into the next round of competition to win a contract to develop a so-called Evolved Expendable Launch Vehicle for the U.S. Air Force. (corrects program from "...develop the next-generation space shuttle launch  vehicle.") 
In the joint strike program, Boeing is competing with McDonnell Douglas Corp and Lockheed Martin Corp to win a contract to build about 3,000 jets in the next century for the U.S. Air Force, Navy, Marine Corps and the British Royal Navy.
The Pentagon will eliminate one of the bidding companies next month in a "downselect."
"This is high on our priority, so we put a lot of effort into coming up with what we think is the right solution," King said in an interview. 
He said he thought Boeing had a good chance because of the high degree of commonality in its design, which should allow it to come up with a lower price for the single modular aircraft with three different configurations.
"I think our chances our better than 50-50 of going to the next phase because I think we've come forward with a very innovative solution," he said.  "The customer is almost obligated to give us an opportunity to demonstrate that we can in fact deliver what we've committed to." 
But he said he was concerned the Pentagon might favor the other bidders, particularly McDonnell Douglas, on the theory that a broad national "industrial base" needs to be maintained.
He said such an argument would make "absolutely no sense" because the United States already has excess capacity to build commercial and military aircraft.
If Boeing were eliminated the company would be "available" to partner with the surviving contractors, King said.
On the space shuttle program, the U.S. National Aeronautics and Space Administration is expected to select two finalists in December from among Boeing, McDonnell Douglas, Lockheed Martin and Alliant Techsystems Inc.
"Even though I think we have the best solution, I think the competition is extremely tough, with Lockheed Martin and McDonnell Douglas having present launch systems that they can evolve from," King said.
				   -- Seattle bureau 206-386-4848
