Boeing Co defense and space group President Gerald King said the company's planned acquisition of Rockwell International Corp's defense and space business was on track to close in early December.
In an interview, King also said he expected the defense and space group to remain "a significant part of the Boeing Co" with 30 to 40 percent of the company's total revenues "over time."  
King said he expected federal regulators to complete an antitrust review of the planned Rockwell deal early next month. The proposal also needs to be approved by Rockwell shareholders at a meeting set for Dec. 4 and should close within a few days after that, he said.
"Something could always happen to the merger to keep it from going through, I suppose, even though it looks like a slam dunk in comparison with some of the other things that have been done in this industry," King said.  
Last year defense and space revenues of $5.58 billion were 29 percent of the company's $19.52 billion in revenues, with commercial aircraft sales accounting for the rest.
This year defense and space revenues are expected to be nearly flat, while overall company revenues rise to about $22.6 billion, reflecting growth in commercial jet deliveries, said analyst Peter Jacobs of Ragen MacKenzie.
The Rockwell acquisition will add about $2.6 billion in revenue to the defense and space group next year, and King said the company has no immediate plans for further acquisitions.
"We're looking only to make this one work first," he said. "If there's a next step, we'll think about that later."
King said the defense and space group continues to pursue commercial opportunities, including the Sea Launch program, which he said was on track for initial satellite launch in mid-1998.
King also said the company and its partner, Textron Inc's Bell Helicopter division, are offering a nine-passenger civilian version of their V-22 Osprey tiltrotor aircraft that will be available in 2001.
				 -- Seattle bureau 206-386-4848
