A bankruptcy judge Monday cleared the way for Montana construction mogul Dennis Washington to take over storied engineering giant Morrison Knudsen Corp., rescuing the company from near-insolvency.
U.S. Bankruptcy Judge Peter Walsh, in Wilmington, Dela., approved the prepackaged reorganization plan under which Washington's main operating company will acquire the much-larger Morrison Knudsen for about $283 million in cash, stock and debt assumption.
Washington, 61, a billionaire through his interests in bridge and highway building, copper mining and shipping, will become non-executive chairman of the Boise, Idaho-based company when its merger with Washington Construction Group Inc. becomes effective Sept. 11.
Robert Tinstman, a company veteran appointed to be president and chief executive officer last year after the ouster of its high-flying former chairman, William Agee, will retain those titles in the new company.
The merger requires approval of Washington Construction Group shareholders, but that is a formality because Washington owns 68.5 percent of the shares.
The merged company will retain the Morrison Knudsen name and its Boise heaquarters, but shareholders of the old company -- known for such projects as the Hoover Dam and Alaskan oil pipeline -- will be left with little value.
A distribution of stock in the new company was valued by one analyst at about 15 cents a share, compared with nearly $30 before revelations of losses that stunned Wall Street and led to the ouster of Agee, whose lavish lifestyle had made him a lightning-rod for criticism.
"From a shareholder's point of view it's a pretty bad outcome," said the analyst, John Rogers of Jensen Securities.
Shareholders also get warrants to purchase additional shares in the new company at $12 a share, compared with Washington Construction's current price of $9.25. Bondholders will get from 93 to 95 percent of the $365 million they were owed, one banker said.
Executives say the new company will be profitable from the outset, with revenues estimated at $1.59 billion and net income at $31 million for its first full fiscal year beginning Dec. 1, according to bankruptcy court documents.
That compares with revenue of $2.72 billion and net income of $36 million in 1993, before the company reported losses that totalled more than $600 million over two years.
Analysts traced Morrison Knudsen's woes to a disastrous forway into railroads, including huge losses on bids to build new commuter transit cars, a business the company has exited.
Agee's ambitious plan to build new locomotives from the ground up never materialised, and its minority stake in MK Rail Corp. is being distributed to bondholders.
Agee himself, who once used a corporate jet to shuttle between Boise and his company-bought estate in Pebble Beach, Calif., was forced to give up some of his lucrative pension and severance benefits in a $63 million company settlement of class-action shareholder lawsuits.
The new Morrison will get about 90 percent of its revenues from three businesses -- industrial construction for Fortune 100 companies, heavy civil construction, and environmental remediation, mainly for government agencies, Tinstman said in an interview.
"Dennis very much wants this to be a well-balanced, diversified company," Tinstman said.
The remaining 10 percent of the company's business is mining.
Washington, who usually stays behind the scenes at his companies, will help set strategy at the new Morrison Knudsen but will not have a day-to-day role, Tinstman said.
Morrison Knudsen Chairman Robert Miller, who was brought in last year and is best known for helping to engineer Chrysler Corp.'s turnaround in the 1980s, will be vice chairman of the new company. The other vice chairman will be Washington aide Dorn Parkinson.
