Federal officials Sunday confirmed 29 cases of bacterial poisoning linked to fresh apple juice as investigators tested for contamination in samples pulled from Western U.S. and Canadian store shelves.
Bob Howard of the U.S. Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta said the agency had confirmed that 29 children and young adults had been infected with a potentially fatal strain of the E. coli bacterium after drinking Odwalla Inc. fruit juice in California, Washington, Colorado and the Vancouver area of British Columbia.
At least 36 additional cases are suspected or under investigation, state, county and provincial officials said.
State and federal officials continued to test Odwalla juice samples over the weekend but said they had not found any evidence of contamination.
"We're going to have to wait a few days to know for sure whether the samples are negative or positive," Arthur Whitmore of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration said. "It is quite possible we won't actually find anything, but we have a good selection of samples, including those from the company's library of samples."
Odwalla, a rapidly growing juice company based in Half Moon Bay, California, was able to provide samples from production runs of two weeks ago, when the first cases surfaced in the Seattle area.
Whitmore said he did not know of any cases in which illness set in after Oct. 23, although the disease can incubate for up to two weeks.
At least four children remained hospitalized because of complications caused by the E. coli O57:H7 bacterium, including a 2-year-old girl in critical condition in California. Tara Azizi was in critical condition "but improving slightly," Stephen Texeira of Children's Hospital in Oakland said.
Young children are most susceptible to the bacterium, which causes stomach cramps followed by bloody diarrhea. In severe cases the illness can lead to kidney failure, which is treated through dialysis but may cause brain damage and death.
The bacterium, which normally lives in the digestive system of cattle, can enter the food chain through fecal contamination, because of either improper slaughtering or contact with manure.
Health officials speculated that Odwalla may have used apples that had fallen onto the ground, although company officials say they do not use "ground apples" and all produce is thoroughly washed before processing at the company's Dinuba, California, plant.
Odwalla juices are not pasteurized. Heat processing kills bacteria but can also alter flavor.
The outbreak of E. coli O157:H7 is the biggest in the United States since 1993 when more than 500 people fell ill in the Pacific Northwest and three children died after eating tainted meat, mostly at Jack-In-The-Box hamburger restaurants.
The same strain of E. coli sickened 9,500 people and killed 11 in Japan last summer. No source was identified in that outbreak, though raw radish shoots were suspected.
The CDC's Howard said the agency recommended that people boil unpasteurized cider or juice.
