A federal appeals court on Wednesday overturned a jury verdict that ordered Nintendo Co. Ltd. to pay $253 million for patent infringement.
With interest, the company could have been forced to pay nearly $300 million to tiny Alpex Computer Corp. for a technology allegedly used in the hugely popular Nintendo Entertainment System game device, Nintendo of America Chairman Howard Lincoln said in an interview.
But in a 16-page decision, the U.S. Court of Appeals in Washington, D.C., overturned the jury's decision that the Alpex patent had been infringed.
"It's a complete victory," Lincoln said. "I think our nightmare with these folks is over."
Alpex, which Lincoln described as a bankrupt mining concern, filed suit in 1986, charging Nintendo's 8-bit game device used a patented "bitmapping" display technology patented by two Alpex engineers in 1977.
In 1994 a U.S. District Court jury agreed and ordered Nintendo to pay a 6 percent royalty on each of the more than 35 million game units sold in the United States.
But a three-judge panel of the appeals court in Washington, which handles patent cases, said in a 16-page decision it found a "lack of substantial evidence to support a finding of infringement either literally or under the doctrine of equivalents."
Alpex's technology was used in early generation video games made by Mattel, Atari and Coleco. The company later won patent infringement settlements from Sega Enterprises Ltd. and others.
But with the appeal victory Nintendo preserved what Lincoln said was a perfect record of fighting in court to protect its intellectual property rights.
Lincoln said the case "cries out for a change" in the patent litigation system because it required a jury of laymen to sit through an eight-week trial that hinged on complex technical details of data storage and image display.
"The problem is you ask these juries to in effect become electrical engineers, and quite frankly the jury was not composed of electrical engineers," Lincoln said.
He also said the case was kept alive by lawyers working on a contingency-fee basis who stood to make huge profits.
While Alpex could appeal to the full appeals court or the Supreme Court, Lincoln said he was confident Nintendo would prevail.
Lawyers for Alpex could not be reached for comment.
