Underdog Boeing Co., pitted against the nation's top two defence contractors, hopes to emerge as one of the winners next week when the Pentagon narrows the field to two competitors for the biggest weapons project of the early 21st century.
Boeing, Lockheed Martin Corp. and McDonnell Douglas Corp. are each leading teams bidding on a Pentagon contract to build 3,000 new joint strike fighters -- a deal that could be worth more than $170 billion over the next two decades.
Defence officials will announce on Nov. 18 the results of a hotly contested "down select" that will eliminate one of the three teams and leave the remaining bidders to build prototypes for a "flyoff" and final decision in fiscal year 2001.
"We have identified the joint strike fighter as our No. 1 new business opportunity," said Lee Whitney, a spokesman for Lockheed Martin, the nation's biggest defence contractor. "We have focused resources from throughout the corporation on our configuration and all the effort necessary to emerge as the winner."
The contract also is regarded as crucial for No. 2 McDonnell Douglas Corp., which recently announced its intention to reduce its commercial aviation efforts.
"Winning is more critical to Lockheed and McDonnell than it is to Boeing," said analyst Paul Nisbet of JSA Research.
But, he said, Boeing's entry was aggressive, promising up to 95 percent commonality among the three versions of the jet and a "flyaway" cost averaging less than $30 million for each plane, excluding billions in research and development.
"I think they're still viewed as being the dark horse, but if I really had to bet some money, I'd bet that Lockheed Martin is going to be the loser," Nisbet said. "They already have two-thirds of the F-22, and the other two proposals are at least as good or even better."
The joint strike fighter is aimed at cutting costs by serving the needs of the Air Force, Marines, Navy and the British Royal Navy with a single common airframe.
Some within the Pentagon chafe at the concept of a multi-purpose jet design with three versions -- including advanced air-to-ground strike capability for the Air Force and vertical "hover" landing capability for the Marines.
But the project appears to have the momentum to carry it forward into the 21st century, when it would replace four existing fighters after delivery begins in fiscal 2008.
In addition to the 3,000 jets being ordered by the four services -- including more than 2,000 for the Air Force -- industry executives believe another 1,000 could be sold for export to U.S. allies.
While Boeing has major roles in current projects, including the B-2 bomber and F-22 fighter, the Seattle-based company, best known for its commercial airliners, has not been the prime contractor on a tactical military jet since the Army's P-26 "Peashooter" of the 1930s.
But analysts say the company's innovative design for the joint strike fighter, which includes one engine type and one wing for all three versions, may well earn it a place among the two finalists.
"Boeing's design became much more credibly viewed because they're leveraging their derivative technologies that they've built up over years of commercial production," said Nick Heymann, an analyst at Natwest Securities.
Boeing has signalled its intention to remain a major player in the military arena with its planned purchase of Rockwell International Corp. 's defence and space properties for $3.2 billion.
"We've come forward with a very innovative solution," Boeing defence and space President Jerry King said. "The Pentagon is almost obligated to give us an opportunity to demonstrate that we can in fact deliver what we've committed to."
