Upscale apparel retailer Nordstrom Inc. Monday posted a 16 percent increase in earnings for its third quarter as it boosted sales and reduced markdowns.
For the fiscal third quarter ending Oct. 31, Nordstrom posted sales of $984 million, up 9 percent over last year's $907 million. Net income rose to $34 million, or 42 cents a share, from $29 million, or 36 cents a share, last year.
When certain one-time gains and costs were excluded, the company earned about 38 cents a share, compared with a Wall Street consensus forecast of 36 cents, said Piper Jaffray analyst Saul Yaari.
He and other analysts said they expected to raise their estimates.
"It was a great quarter," said Jennifer Black Groves of Black &amp; Co. in Portland, Ore.
She noted the company had a difficult summer because of an over-reliance on unpopular body-hugging fashions and a merchandise reconfiguration that confused customers and sales executives.
The result was heavy markdowns in July and August that ate into earnings, but company executives said the deepest of the markdowns appear to be behind them.
"They sacrificed the short term for what will be very beenficial for them in the long term," Groves said.
She said the merchandise reconfiguration, aimed at bringing the company's clothing selections more into line with its customer base, has "rejuvenated the company."
"I think you're going to see some great numbers in the year ahead," she said.
Nordstrom said comparable-store sales, a closely watched measure of industry performance, fell 0.3 percent in the latest quarter but were up 1.5 percent for the year to date.
And executives told analysts in a conference call that their plans called for comparable-store sales to rise at least 2 percent in the critical holiday quarter compared with a relatively weak 1995 period.
"We have plenty of ability to respond to sales above that," Nordstrom co-Chairman John Whitacre said in the conference call.
Comparable-store sales are adjusted to represent only that retail space that has been open at least a year.
Nordstrom has opened several new stores this year and plans to open three new department stores and several smaller stores next year, adding about 719,000 square feet of store space to its current total of 11.74 million, executives said.
