Sierra Semiconductor Corp.'s stock jumped more than 27 percent Thursday on expectations the company will emerge as a smaller but more profitable operation after it exits the computer modem business.
The San Jose, Calif.-based company's stock gained after its announcement Wednesday that it plans to pull out of the highly competitive modem-chip business and focus instead on the fast-growing market for computer networking equipment.
The stock rose $2.625 to $11.875 in late trading on NASDAQ.
"Certainly the company will be a much smaller company now, but it will be a more profitable business," said analyst Elias Moosa of Robertson Stephens &amp; Co.
But analysts noted that Sierra still has much painful work ahead of it, including cutting as many as 150 jobs from its work force, which currently has 500 people, and building up the business of its PMC-Sierra unit, which makes routing devices and chipsets for high-speed computer networks.
The company has announced plans to take a charge against earnings of $50 million to $80 million to write down the value of assets and inventories and cover severance payments.
Scott Randall of Soundview Financial Group said the company likely would have difficulty selling its modem-chip business.
"Once you announce your intention to exit a business, it becomes a complete buyer's market," he said.
He said that while the company is focusing on the fastest-growing part of its business, the market for networking chips has begun to attract the attention of much-larger players such as International Business Machines Corp
"As the market develops the question is, are they able to make that transition to be a much larger company?" Randall said.
Other analysts were more bullish, even though the company is expected to shrink to slightly more than half its current size in sales.
"It's a positive strategic move," said Miles Kan of Hambrecht &amp; Quist. "The modem business is a low-margin, commodity business," he said.
Sierra's PMC-Sierra unit generated $33 million of the company's $117 million in sales in the first half of the year, compared with $45 million in sales of modem chips, Kan said. But the PMC unit is far more profitable, he said.
Sierra's stock has fallen from a high of nearly $25 this year as the computer chip sector has been battered by falling prices and concern about slowing demand.
