Boeing Co, the world leader in commercial aviation, flew into the ranks of the top military contractors as well on Sunday when it announced its planned $13 billion acquisition of McDonnell Douglas Corp.
Boeing's increased resources should put competitive pressure on its commercial rival, Europe's Airbus Industrie. But industry analysts said the chief benefits for Boeing would be on the military side.  
"Historically Boeing's military business was something of an also-ran," said Cai von Rumohr, an analyst at Cowen &amp; Co. "With this transaction in one fell swoop they become a very major player."
One analyst said the combined company could get nearly 50 percent of its revenues from government contracts, up from Boeing's historical 25 to 30 percent.  
The deal follows by little more than a week the completion of Boeing's $3.2 billion acquisition of Rockwell International Corp's defense and space business and comes just a month after McDonnell Douglas was was eliminated from consideration to build the military's 21st century joint strike fighter plane.
Instead, the Pentagon chose Boeing and Lockheed Martin Corp -- the nation's largest military contractor -- to build prototype versions of the new fighter jet in a contract that could be worth $200 billion or more to the eventual winner.  
The addition of McDonnell Douglas' expertise makes Boeing "the team to beat" on that crucial program, said Paul Nisbet of JSA Securities.
Loss of the joint strike fighter was the final blow for McDonnell Douglas, said analyst Nick Heymann of Natwest Securities. McDonnell had already announced its intention to back away from the commercial aviation market, where it has been only a marginal player in recent years.  
"McDonnell Douglas just didn't have the resources to aggressively fund its development programs," he said. "They got stretched too thin on transports and fighters and commercial, and they underinvested."
Nevertheless the friendly all-stock deal does not necessarily mean that McDonnell Douglas executives failed in their effort to turn around the company, analysts said.
For one thing, the offer price of about $62.89 a share based on Friday's close is well beyond McDonnell's all-time high and about 10 times its level of the early 1990s, said Wolfgang Demisch of BT Securities.  
In addition, the merger is being done at the very beginning of an expansion cycle in the industry, meaning layoffs can be minimized and the companies have several years to rationalize their operations before the next expected downturn.
"It isn't a case that you're merging because you're starving to death," said Demisch. "It's a case that there's lots of opportunity. ... That's a much healthier basis on which to consolidate."  
Indeed, Boeing Chief Executive Phil Condit said the combined companies would have revenues of $48 billion next year, up more than 30 percent from a projected $35 billion this year.
"We are going to be going after $1 billion or more of savings a year, but we are going to be doing in it in an environment where the overall growth is occurring," Condit said at a news conference. "That's the advantage we have got right now."  
Company officials said any job losses would likely be minimal. There may be overlaps in some areas, Condit said, but he added: "I don't think those are going to be significant numbers."
Executives said the merger would cause "reassignments," and operations were expected to continue at existing major locations, including St Louis, where McDonnell Douglas is based.
Murray Weidenbaum, chairman of the Centre for the Study of American Business at Washington University and former chief economist for Boeing, said the deal could have benefits for St. Louis.  
Boeing has a better chance of landing the $200 billion U.S. fighter-jet contract, which is still up for grabs, with McDonnell Douglas on board, he speculated. That could mean more work for St. Louis.
"It's an opportunity and a threat to the St. Louis economy," he said.
Condit, who will become chairman and chief executive officer of the combined company, said final merger negotiations began Tuesday, the day after he was elected to become Boeing's chairman effective Feb. 1.
While Boeing does not currently need additional capacity to produce commercial jets, it will benefit from additional engineering strength, which will allow it to produce new models or variations of existing jets more quickly.
The merger will leave Airbus Industrie as the only other major player in the business of making large commercial aircraft. An Airbus spokesman said McDonnell Douglas has not been a competitor in the civilian aircraft business for a number of years "so it hasn't altered the equation in the commercial field at all for Airbus."
Analysts predicted the deal would win clearance from federal antitrust regulators, noting that no protests were raised this month when the two companies struck a deal to work together on engineering new wide-body jets.
They thought the deal would win approval from the Pentagon, which has encouraged industry consolidation and backed the deal that created No. 1 defense contractor Lockheed Martin in 1994.
Perhaps the chief concern for federal regulators will be Boeing's overwhelming size, which will be nearly twice that of its nearest rival Lockeheed Martin.
Major U.S. airlines said it was too soon to forecast the impact of the proposed merger on airliner prices or their airplane-buying strategies. "It is too early to tell," Delta Air Lines Inc spokesman Todd Clay said.
