Boeing Co's planned $13 billion acquisition of McDonnell Douglas Corp. will propel it to a leading position as a military contractor, matching its stature as the world leader in commercial aviation.
While Europe's Airbus Industrie is likely to feel competitive pressure because of Boeing's increased resources, industry analysts said the chief benefits for Boeing would be on the military side.
"Historically Boeing's military business was something of an also-ran," said Cai von Rumohr, an analyst at Cowen &amp; Co. "With this transaction in one fell swoop they become a very major player."
One analyst said the combined company could get nearly 50 percent of its revenues from government contracts, up from Boeing's historical 25 to 30 percent.
The deal follows by little more than a week the completion of Boeing's $3.2 billion acquisition of Rockwell International Corp's defence and space business.
And it comes just a month after McDonnell Douglas was eliminated from consideration to build the military's 21st century joint strike fighter plane.
Instead the Pentagon chose Boeing and Lockheed Martin Corp -- the nation's largest military contractor -- to build prototype versions of the new fighter jet in a contract that could be worth $200 billion or more to the eventual winner.
The addition of McDonnell Douglas' expertise makes Boeing "the team to beat" on the crucial programme, said Paul Nisbet of JSA Securities.
Analyst Nick Heymann of Natwest Securities said the loss of the joint strike fighter was the crowning blow for McDonnell Douglas, which already had announced its intention to back away from the commercial aviation market, where it has been only a marginal player in recent years.
"McDonnell Douglas just didn't have the resources to aggressively fund its development programmes," he said. "They got stretched too thin on transports and fighters and commercial, and they underinvested."
Nevertheless the friendly all-stock deal does not necessarily mean that McDonnell Douglas executives failed in their effort to turn around the company, analysts said.
For one thing the offer price of about $62.89 a share based on Friday's close is well beyond the stock's all-time high and about 10 times its level of the early 1990s, said Wolfgang Demisch of BT Securities.
In addition the merger is being done at the very beginning of an expansion cycle in the industry, meaning layoffs can be minimised and the companies have several years to rationalise their operations before the next expected downturn.
"It isn't a case that you're merging because you're starving to death," said Demisch. "It's a case that there's lots of opportunity. ... That's a much healthier basis on which to consolidate."
Indeed Boeing chief executive Phil Condit said the combined companies would have revenues of $48 billion next year, up more than 30 percent from a projected $35 billion this year.
"We are going to be going after $1 billion or more of savings a year, but we are going to be doing in it in an environment where the overall growth is occurring," Condit said at a news conference. "That's the advantage we have got right now."
Condit, who will become chairman and chief executive officer of the combined company, said final merger negotiations began Tuesday, the day after he was elected to become Boeing's chairman effective Feb. 1.
While Boeing does not currently need additional capacity to produce commercial jets, it will benefit from additional engineering strength, which will allow it to produce new models or variations of existing jets more quickly.
Analysts predicted the deal would win clearance from federal antitrust regulators, noting that no protests were raised this month when the two companies struck a deal to work together on engineering new wide-body jets.
And analysts said they thought the deal would win approval from the Pentagon, which has encouraged industry consolidation and backed the deal that created No. 1 defence contractor Lockheed Martin in 1994.
Perhaps the chief concern for federal regulators will be Boeing's overwhelming size, which will be nearly twice that of its nearest rival Lockeheed Martin if the deal goes through.
