Microsoft Corp stock is ending 1996 near where it began -- at slightly more than $80 a share.
But after adjusting for a stock split, the value of those shares is up a stunning 91 percent, and company chairman Bill Gates, the richest man in America, has seen his stake rise to about $23.6 billion from $12.4 billion.
While analysts are not predicting Microsoft will repeat that performance in 1997, the computer software giant carries a lot of momentum into the new year.
The company will start the year by launching the latest version of Office -- its biggest revenue producer -- and plans to flesh out its package of computer network software for the red-hot Internet market.
A new Internet browser due by midyear will change the look of the computer desktop, and upgrades to both of Microsoft's core Windows operating systems could be out by the end of the year.
Microsoft's high-end Windows NT system, which failed to catch on when it was launched in 1993, now forms the core of a business that could account for 25 percent of the company's estimated $10.6 billion in revenues in the current fiscal year ending June 30.
"The fundamentals are strong and getting stronger," said David Readerman, an analyst with brokerage Montgomery Securities.
On average, analysts expect Microsoft's earnings to rise about 20 percent to $2.06 a share in the current fiscal year from $1.71 last year and then another 20 percent in fiscal 1998 to $2.48 a share, according to the First Call service.
While that falls well short of last year's 51 percent earnings gain, it still represents a hefty increase for a $10 billion company, and Microsoft has a way of pleasantly surprising Wall Street with its earnings growth every quarter.
Analysts say Microsoft shows no signs of growing complacent despite holding a market share of 80 percent or more in its main businesses of personal computer operating systems and productivity applications.
In the past year alone the company virtually has tried to reinvent itself to focus on the rapidly growing Internet marketplace and beat back rivals led by Netscape Communications Corp.
"They've done a fabulous job. They've changed themselves from a company that was threatened by the Internet to one whose future is dependent on the Internet," said analyst Scott Winkler of the Gartner Group, a research and consulting company.
Virtually all Microsoft's upcoming products have strong Internet tie-ins: from the Office 97 upgrade, which makes word-processing and spreadsheet applications more compatible with Internet protocols, to server, or computer network, software in its BackOffice line that helps companies do business over the Internet.
Microsoft is spending some $500 million this year on media-related projects, including its relaunched Microsoft Network online service and MSNBC joint news venture with NBC.
While some of the projects could lose money for years to come, analysts say the media efforts represent a classic example of Gates' fondness for making big bets -- in this case, for a chance at a piece of online transaction fees that ultimately could be huge.
"If they are successful in pursuing their vision, this will be their core business five years from now," said Scott McAdams, analyst with brokerage Ragen MacKenzie.
"It's analogous to the early work they did with Windows itself," he said. "You start small and you keep chipping away."
