Airbus Industrie's preliminary restructuring agreement may help the consortium become more efficient, but poses no near-term threat to Boeing Co's market dominance, industry analysts said Friday.
Although details of the Airbus agreement were not revealed, it appeared to represent a step forward from last July's announcement that the four-nation consortium would be transformed into a single corporate entity by 1999.  
"I think it's a step in the right direction," said Wolfgang Demisch of BT Securities. "They have a good franchise and they are going to be a contender."
Pressure on Airbus to act has increased since last month's stunning news that Boeing plans to acquire McDonnell Douglas Corp, its last remaining U.S. rival in commercial jets.
Analysts say Airbus needs to streamline its unwieldy management structure to have any hope of competing with highly centralized and rapidly expanding Boeing, which has access to enormous resources and the ability to subcontract work around the world.  
"If they are much more like a private company than they are now, certainly it would be to their benefit," said Paul Nisbet, an analyst at JSA Research.
Officials at Boeing, which controls about 60 percent of the worldwide market for commercial jets, compared with some 35 percent for Airbus, said they welcomed the news.
"We welcome an Airbus reorganization that would make its financial arrangements agree with generally accepted accounting principles and become transparent to public scrutiny, which includes the publication of regular financial statements," a Boeing spokesman said.  
He added that Boeing officials expect any reorganization would "further remove Airbus operating decisions from government control and influence."
Demisch believed the latest Airbus agreement would enable the consortium to better integrate aircraft development, although manufacturing would still be done by the four member companies.
The consortium members are French state-owned Ste Nationale Industrielle Aerospatiale, British Aerospace Plc, Daimler-Benz AG's aerospace unit and Construcciones Aeronauticas SA (CASA) of Spain.  
He said Airbus's success as a multinational should position it to compete in areas beyond its core commercial jet market such as defense and space.
While the Airbus restructuring is aimed in part at raising the billions of dollars needed to launch its planned A-3XX jumbo jet, Boeing officials have aggressively disputed the market projections put forward by the consortium.
Boeing, which is mulling a possible stretch version of the 747, says the market for a super-jumbo jet is barely big enough for one player, much less two. And Boeing says an all-new jet would cost far more than the $8 billion Airbus projects.
Meanwhile, Airbus recently postponed a decision on a far cheaper plan to stretch its A340 model to compete with the sallest 747 and largest 777 models.
((-- Reuters Seattle bureau 206-386-4848))
