Microsoft Corp expects desktop applications led by its Office suite to bring in about $5 billion in revenues in the current fiscal year ending June 30, an executive said in an interview.
Richard Fade, vice president in charge of the desktop applications division, also said in the interview he expected 35 to 45 percent of users to upgrade to the new Office 97 version, although he declined to project a timeframe.  
Office has an installed base of some 24 million customers, and another 30 million use its component applications such as Word and Excel, which also are being upgraded.
Analysts estimate the software giant will post overall revenues of slightly more than $10 billion this year, up from $8.7 billion in fiscal 1996. With an expected spike in sales driven by Office 97, the productivity applications alone could account for $3 billion, analysts say.
Office 97 is "a huge release for us," Fade said.  
"It's probably the most significant thing aside from the browser work that we've done since the simultaneous introduction of Office 95 and Windows 95 a little more than a year ago," he said.
Fade said hundreds of person-years went into the new release, in the works since late 1994. He said virtually the entire Office division of nearly 1,000 people had been working on the product since August 1995.  
In addition to a new information management system called Outlook, the product includes better integration of applications and better compatibility with the Internet.
Fade said Microsoft plans to target different user types through four separate packages of the Office components and other Microsoft applications.
Office standard and professional versions will be available widely Thursday, while versions for small businesses and home users will be out within two months.
Fade expressed skepticism that an alliance of Corel Corp and Netscape Communications Corp announced this week would be able to achieve the tight integration of the Office suite.
But he said the plan by the two companies is an indication of the continuing tough competition in a category Microsoft has dominated for several years.
"It's a very competitive, alive category," Fade said.
((-- Reuters Seattle bureau 206-386-4848))
