Microsoft Corp is expected to report on Friday that it had modest earnings growth in the second quarter, despite tough comparisons with the year-earlier period and a sales slowdown ahead of an upgrade to its top-selling software bundle.
Industry analysts surveyed by First Call on average expect Microsoft to report earnings of $0.51 a share for its second quarter ended December 31, up about 16 percent from the $0.44 a share reported a year earlier. Revenues are expected to rise about 14 percent to more than $2.5 billion.  
Analysts consider that a strong performance against tough comparisons with the year-earlier period, the first full quarter of availability for the Windows 95 operating system.
In last year's second quarter revenues soared 54 percent and net income was up 48 percent.
"These guys are just incredibly strong now," said Rob Owens of Pacific Crest Securities in Portland, Ore. "They'll probably meet or beat the Street's estimate again."
Investors will have all weekend to analyze the results, which are due to be released after the close of trading Friday.  
Microsoft executives originally had scheduled the release for Thursday but decided to delay the report until a day after an event publicizing the launch of Office 97, its best-selling suite of business software.
Analysts estimate that revenues of Office and its component applications account for 20 to 30 percent of Microsoft's total, but the figure will be lower for the quarter just ended because of the impending upgrade.  
For much of the quarter Microsoft offered Office 95 buyers coupons good for a free upgrade, which will result in some revenues being deferred into future reporting periods.
But strong growth in personal computer sales and in acceptance of Microsoft's high-end Windows NT operating system continue to buoy the company's profits.
"The ongoing strength of the NT cycle is what's carrying the day," said Chris Galvin of Hambrecht &amp; Quist. "Countervailing that is the tough comparison last year with the Windows 95 release, so it's a mixed scenario."
Owen said that while sales of PCs to consumers were sluggish in the quarter that just ended, declining prices and increasing availability of 32-bit applications are sparking a new wave of corporate buying.
He said 30 percent or fewer of corporate desktops have made the transition to the Windows 95 or Windows NT systems.
"That's a tremendous opportunity for Microsoft," he said.
((-- Reuters Seattle bureau 206-386-4848))
