Microsoft Corp. Friday reported better-than-expected second-quarter profits on broad strength in sales of its personal computer software but warned of slower earnings growth next year.
The Redmond, Wash.-based software giant posted earnings of $741 million or 57 cents a share in the second quarter of fiscal 1997, a 29 percent increase over the $575 million, or 45 cents a share, in the year-ago quarter. Revenues rose 22 percent to $2.68 billion from $2.2 billion a year earlier.
The results, issued after the market had closed, beat analysts' highest forecasts, sending shares of Microsoft as high as $89 in after-hours trading, but the stock later fell to $85.50 due to the warning about slower earnings growth. In regular Nasdaq trading, Microsoft had gained $1.125 to $87.125.
"It was a terrific quarter," said Goldman Sachs analyst Rick Sherlund. "Compared with expectations, revenue was quite a bit stronger than expected, as was the earnings number."
Wall Street analysts on average had expected Microsoft to report earnings of 51 cents a share, with estimates ranging from 47 to 55 cents, according to First Call.
Microsoft's earnings in the quarter were driven by strong sales in virtually all areas, including its Windows computer operating systems, BackOffice server software and desktop applications such as Office, executives said.
Revenues from "OEM" sales through computer manufacturers rose 29 percent to $866 million, while revenues from countries outside the United States, Canada and Europe rose 32 percent to $424 million, with Japan a particularly strong performer.
But in the earnings statement and in a conference call later with reporters and analysts, Microsoft chief financial officer Mike Brown warned that the company's growth is likely to slow in fiscal 1998, which begins July 1.
"We are pleased with the current financial results and growth prospects for the next two quarters, particularly with the outlook for sales of Office 97," Brown said in the statement.
"However I do anticipate slower earnings growth in fiscal 1998 (beginning July 1997) due to lower revenue increases in our maturing businesses and margin pressure from continuing aggressive spending on research and development and new business ventures," Brown said.
In the conference call he went so far as to wonder aloud about Microsoft's high stock price compared with its anticipated earnings growth.
"It's not my purpose to second-guess the market," he said. "However I will say that our current EPS (earnings per share) multiple is cause for curiosty at least to me."
Sherlund said such cautionary comments were typical of the company's financially conservative nature.
"Directionally those comments were quite consistent with what we've heard before," Sherlund said.
Scott McAdams, an analyst at Ragen MacKenzie, said that while Microsoft's price-earnings multiple is higher than would be expected given its slowing growth, investors pay a premium for its ability to consistently beat earnings estimates.
In a sign of Microsoft's financial strength, the software giant said it ended the quarter with $9.16 billion in cash and short-term investments, up from $7.1 billion just three months earlier.
And the company's "unearned revenues," representing sales deferred to reflect costs incurred over the life of cyclical products such as Windows 95 and Office, rose to $1.013 billion from $651 million at the end of the previous quarter.
