Microsoft Corp Chief Financial Officer Mike Brown said he expected earnings and revenues to rise sequentially in the fiscal third and fourth quarters compared with the just-ended second quarter.
Brown said in an interview he expects the recent release of Office 97 to provide a "nice step" up in earnings in the third quarter from the $0.57 a share reported for the second quarter, and he sees a "small sequential step up" in the fourth quarter.
Brown also said he expected revenues and earnings growth in the 20 percent range for fiscal 1998 beginning July 1, 1997.  
"It doesn't seem wise to get beyond that with data we have today," he said.
Brown said he was pleased with the record results of the just-ended second quarter, which he said was strong "across the board."
But he said the company thought it was prudent to issue a warning about slower growth in fiscal 1998, when Microsoft will not enjoy the benefit of major revenue-enhancing upgrades such as Windows 95 last year and Office 97 this year.  
While the company does have an opportunity to boost its OEM revenue with the increasing penetration of the high-end Windows NT operating system, which generates more revenue per unit than Windows 95, Brown said he expected that to be more significant in fiscal 1999.
"It's just a good time to be a little bit realistic about '98," he said.
Brown said he expected research and development spending to continue to grow faster than revenues in fiscal 1998, although he declined to be specific. He noted that the company's R&amp;D spending now exceeds an annual rate of $2 billion, and he expected that to exceed $3 billion "at some point" in the future, putting pressure on profit margins.
He said while the company has reduced its cost of goods sold this year, it is unlikely to be able to reduce them much further next year.
But he said the company could continue to reduce its sales and marketing expenses as a percentage of revenues.
Brown also said the company's cash position spiked up in the second quarter, in part because of a hedging transaction connected with its stock option program. ((-- Reuters Seattle bureau 206-386-4848))
