The future of French electronics group Thomson SA could be decided later on Monday when the government will say whether Alcatel-Alsthom or the Lagardere Groupe can buy the group.
Sources close to the government said that the decision, prepared in close consultation with President Jacques Chirac, could be announced late on Monday, or at the latest on Wednesday after a cabinet meeting.
The timing of the announcement could be brought forward due to a planned journalists strike on Tuesday over tax increases.
At stake is more than the identity of the industrial group that can take an indebted and loss-making firm off the state's hands. The decision also has consequences for of France's defence industry and its consumer electronics sector.
French newspapers suggest that Alcatel-Alsthom, headed by former arms engineer Serge Tchuruk, stands a better chance of winning than the Lagardere Groupe and its foreign allies.
Thomson SA is 76 percent owned by the state while 20 percent is held by telecommunications operator France Telecom.
Thomson SA has full ownership of Thomson Multimedia, one of the world's leading television set companies, as well as a 58 percent stake in Thomson-CSF which is among the top five world defence electronics companies.
Thomson SA made a 1995 loss of 1.379 billion francs ($266 million) and has debts of some 25 billion francs, of which 14 billion are at the multimedia arm which made a 1995 loss of 1.09 billion francs.
Thomson-CSF returned to the black in 1995 with a profit of 1.01 billion francs. Thomson-CSF has a 20 percent stake in semiconductor group SGS-Thomson Microelectronics NV.
Both bidders have unveiled the main lines of their business plan for Thomson but neither has detailed the financial elements of their bids. French newspapers speculate the state may have to pump billions of francs into Thomson prior to the transfer.
Lagardere Groupe, led by its founder Jean-Luc Lagardere, is a conglomerate with interests spanning from the media business to its Matra defence business.
Lagardere plans to control Thomson-CSF while British Aerospace Plc, GEC Plc and perhaps Daimler-Benz Aerospace GmbH (DASA) could take minority stakes.
This deal, in which Lagardere would merge its Matra Defense Espace arm with Thomson-CSF, would be a major restructuring of Europe's sprawling defence industry.
Lagardere has lined up South Korea's Daewoo to run Thomson Multimedia. Daewoo's chairman said he saw synergies in components and he has promised to create jobs in France.
Alcatel-Alsthom unveiled its Thomson plans on September 18.
For Tchuruk, the acquisition of Thomson is part of a programme to make Alcatel a large French group capable of competing globally.
Tchuruk said he wanted to hoist Thomson-CSF to the number two spot of the world defence industry, behind Lockheed Martin but ahead of GM Hughes Electronics Corp.
For that, Tchuruk planned a "wide-scale partnership with another major industrial player" in Britain, Germany or both.
Tchuruk said he plans to restructure Thomson Multimedia and would seek an Asian partner to bring market access to the rapidly growing southeast Asian markets.
Despite the planned deals with unnamed foreign groups, Tchuruk said he did not want to be commited prior to a Thomson decision. ($1=5.182 French Franc)
