A decision on the fate of ailing airline Air Liberte is not due until the start of next week and no bidder has yet formally submitted an offer to acquire the company, the president of the Creteil commercial court said.
"At the moment, no bid has been submitted," Dominique Leveque told Reuters by telephone. He denied newspaper reports that there was a 1400 GMT deadline for the bids.
"Bids have to be in today. That can be this afternoon or this evening. We are not going to close the mailbox," Leveque said.
He said the court would on Tuesday afternoon at the earliest make a statement about the bid or bids. After that it would study the offers.
"According to the law we have six months to study the situation. But it is clear that the company's cash position cannot hold another six months," he said.
"We will do all we can but the court cannot decide in 48 hours," Leveque said, adding a decision was due at the start of next week at the earliest.
British Airways is preparing a bid for the regional airline, proposing to merge it with its French TAT unit.  
A spokesman for British Airways in London said the company feared the French government would like a French company to acquire Liberte to prevent BA or another foreign airline from obtaining the carrier and its valuable slots at Orly airport.
Air Liberte owns between 20 and 25 percent of the slots at Orly, Paris' second largest airport specialising in domestic routes, which represents 20,000 take-offs and landings per year.
Air Liberte lost 650 million francs in the first nine months of 1996 and has debts of 1.5 billion francs. The company was placed under bankruptcy protection on September 26 after merger talks with other French airline AOM failed.  
Jacques Maillot, head of French travel company Nouvelles Frontieres and charter airline Corsair, said he planned to bid for both Air Liberte and AOM.
AOM, formerly Air Outre-Mer, is being put on sale by the state agency Consortium de Realisation (CDR) which is divesting former Credit Lyonnais assets.
Richard Branson, chairman of Virgin Atlantic, said last week he might also bid for Air Liberte if BA did so. But a Virgin executive told Le Monde on Monday that the company was not yet sure whether a bid for Air Liberte was the best way to develop its business in France.  
Air Liberte is owned 32.3 percent by Groupe Rivaud. Banque Indosuez has 13 percent, International Lease Finance Corporation (ILFC) 12 percent, Euralair 10 percent, Club Mediterranee has 8.5 percent, Lyonnaise de Banque 6.2 percent and SAE five percent.
Chairman and founder Lotfi Belhassine has six percent and other interests have the remaining seven percent.
Air Liberte expanded its network rapidly in the past year, making full use of the opening up of the big national routes such as Paris-Marseilles, Paris-Toulouse, Paris-Nice and Paris-Bordeaux.
Air France unit Air Inter, renamed Air France Europe, previously had a monopoly over these routes.
Air Liberte, AOM, Eurolair, BA's TAT and others cut their prices in order to win market share on the routes prior to the complete opening up of the French -- and European -- air market in 1997.
But Air Liberte was unable to fill its planes and posted losses. The company also claimed it suffered from a forced regrouping of its activities to Orly Sud terminal, while Air France and Air France Europe remained based in Orly Ouest.
-- Paris newsroom +33 1 4221 5452
