France announced plans to create a major new force in the world defence industry on Wednesday, by selling state-owned defence and consumer electronics group Thomson SA to Lagardere Groupe, which owns missile maker Matra.
The government said in a statement it preferred Lagardere's bid to the rival offer of largely civilian industrial group Alcatel Alsthom SA.
Prime Minister Alain Juppe's office said the Thomson Matra giant thus created would be a leading force in the world military industry.
"The merger is an important stage in the reinforcement of the European professional electronics and defense industry," it said in a statement.
The government said it would pump 11 billion francs into loss-making Thomson, which is a leading maker of televisions under brand suchs as SABA and RCA, as well as a specialist in defence electronics such as missile guidance sustems.
The decision was a surprise as the stock market and the media had gambled Alcatel's no-nonsense chairman Serge Tchuruk would take the prize over self-made entrepreneur Jean-Luc Lagardere, 69, who is approaching retirement and soon to hand over power to his son, Arnaud.
Lagardere's conglomerate also owns publisher Hachette.
The government did not spell out exactly how it had reached the choice, but its statement stressed the importance of a merger between Lagardere's Matra and Thomson's majority-owned defence unit Thomson-CSF.
It said it was sending both offers for Thomson SA to the independent Privatisation Commission, which has an important say in the sale of state assets, while recommending Lagardere's bid.
After advice from this consultative body, which reviews the terms of bids, and clearance from European Commission, the sale is expected to be concluded before the end of the year.
The government said it would raise Thomson's capital by nearly 11 billion francs, blaming past Socialist administrations for leaving the group undercapitalised after nationalisation in 1982 and for the excessive debts of the early 1980s.
France will keep a golden share to safeguard defence interests, it said.
Thomson SA lost 1.379 billion francs in 1995 and has 25 billion francs of debt. Fully-owned Thomson Multimedia lost three billion in the first half of 1996, but Thomson-CSF is profitable and had 1995 earnings of 1.01 billion francs.
Political sources had said President Jacques Chirac was determined to pick a bidder who kept Thomson's key defence technologies firmly in French hands.
Lagardere has in the past said that British Aerospace Plc, with which is has a missiles joint-venture, and Germany's Daimler Aerospace could also be involved.
The government said Lagardere wanted to leave the share capital of microelectronics maker SGS-Thomson Microelectronics NV by selling to the other main shareholders.
Thomson-CSF has a 20 percent stake in SGS-Thomson which is controlled by an Anglo-Italian shareholder group including state entities such as CEA and IRI.
Thomson Multimedia, one of the world's leading television set and decoders makers with brands suchs as RCA, SABA, GE, will be sold to Daewoo Electronics of South Korea.
The government said Daewoo was a well known investor in France and had knowledge of mass production techniques. It said Daewoo has promised to maintain Thomson Multimedia jobs in France and even create new jobs.
Alcatel's shares rose sharply on Thursday morning on market relief. Analysts doubted its capacity to finance the Thomson deal. Lagardere shares were suspended for the day.
On Tuesday, Alcatel closed down 2.22 percent at 444.90 francs on rumours its bid would prevail while Lagardere closed up 2.94 percent at 133.10 francs.
