France announced plans to create a major new force in the world defence industry on Wednesday, by selling state-owned defence and consumer electronics group Thomson SA to Lagardere Groupe for a symbolic franc.
The government said it had preferred the bid by Lagardere, which owns defence company Matra, to the rival offer of largely civilian industrial group Alcatel Alsthom SA.
"The choice I made yesterday and which has been made public today is entirely based on a defence industrial logic," Prime Minisiter Alain Juppe told parliament
"We have opted for the offer which was the best to further our defence interest and which would constitute a world leading industrial group with strong export capacities," he said.
"The offers were comparable on a financial level. They both needed a capital increase," Finance Minister Jean Arthuis told a news conference. The state will make an 11 billion franc ($2.1 billion) cash injection to Thomson SA prior to the sale.
Challenged in parliament about the cash injection, Arthuis said that "Both Alcatel and Lagardere valued Thomson SA at minus 11 billion francs"
Loss-making Thomson SA owns 58 percent of defence electronics company Thomson-CSF and 100 percent of consumer electronics maker Thomson Multimedia which specialises in digital television and decoders and has Saba and RCA as brands.
Lagardere said it is bidding 156 francs a share, or 7.8 billion francs in total, to buy the minorities in Thomson-CSF which it will then merge with Matra. Lagardere will keep 60 percent of Thomson Matra while the French state will have a golden share to safeguard national security interests.
Lagardere will sell Thomson Multimedia to Daewoo Electronics of South Korea.
The government said Daewoo was a well known investor in France and had knowledge of mass production techniques. Daewoo has made commitments on jobs -- creating 3,000 new jobs in France -- technology and investments.
Thomson Multimedia management will remain French-based.
Arthuis said the European Commission would have to approve the cash injection and study competition issues. He said the sale would take place before the end of the year and the cash for the injection would come from other privatisations.
The independent privatisation commission, which has an important say in the sale of state assets, still has to give its advice on the sale. Arthuis said the government had not wanted to keep its choice secret, as would have been usual, until the privatisation commission's advice "to avoid insider trading".
The decision was a surprise as markets and the media had gambled Alcatel's no-nonsense chairman Serge Tchuruk would take the prize over self-made entrepreneur Jean-Luc Lagardere, 69, who is preparing to hand over power to his son, Arnaud.
Lagardere also owns publishers Hachette and Filipachi.
Thomson SA lost 1.379 billion francs in 1995 and has 25 billion francs of debt. Wholly-owned Thomson Multimedia lost three billion in the first half of 1996, but Thomson-CSF is profitable and had 1995 earnings of 1.01 billion francs.
The government said Lagardere wanted to leave the share capital of microelectronics maker SGS-Thomson Microelectronics NV by selling its 20 percent stake to the other main shareholders. France Telecom said it and CEA Industries were ready to buy that stake and keep French interests at the same level as the stake of Italian companies .
Alcatel's shares rose sharply on Thursday morning on market relief. Analysts doubted its capacity to finance the Thomson deal. Lagardere shares were suspended for the day.
