Jean-Luc Lagardere, chairman of Lagardere Groupe, said on Saturday that his group was not going to sell Thomson's prized digital television know-how to South Korea's Daewoo Electronics.
Lagardere, adressing students at the Sorbonne university during a weekend seminar on industry, said in his first public comments after winning the bidding for state-owned Thomson that he had selected Daewoo as partner because it was the best guarantee for jobs at Thomson's French production units.
The French government on Wednesday announced it had selected Lagardere to buy state-owned Thomson SA for one franc, after an 11-billion francs capital injection.
Lagardare had been bidding against telecommunication equipment and industrial engineering group Alcatel Alsthom.
Lagardere Groupe plans to merge its Matra defense business with Thomson's 58-percent unit Thomson-CSF, after buying out the minorities on the Paris Bourse, and has agreed to sell Thomson Multimedia to Daewoo -- also for a symbolic franc.
Lagardere heard the news that his group had won the bidding, -- against expectations as the French media expected Alcatel Alsthom and its no-nonsense chairman Serge Tchuruk to be the winners -- on Tuesday evening during an official dinner at the start of a Picasso exhibition in Paris.
"I did not feel like I received the golden medal," Lagardere said. "I felt like I was selected to play for France," the 69-year old businessman said.
"In four year's time, while I will then still be involved in our business, I hope that people like (Matra boss) Noel Forgeard can celebrate the award of a golden medal. We will have a good team in an industry where competition is without pity," he said.
Lagardere, a Gascogne farmer's son who built a worldwide books-to-missiles business empire from a small company he joined 32-years ago, is facing criticism by some French media and labour unions for selling the Multimedia business to Daewoo.
The critics blame him for selling French technology to a South Korean company and they also expect massive job losses.
Lagardere said these remarks were not true.
He said that back in February when President Jacques Chirac first mentioned the privatisation, he believed the state was only going to sell Thomson-CSF as part of a defence overhaul.
"But then the Finance Ministry came from behind and integrated Multimedia into the deal," Lagardere said.
"So I went to look for partners. I searched in Europe, the U.S., Japan and Korea. I choose Daewoo because I thought they were the best guarantee for jobs, " he said.
Daewoo Electronics plans to create 5,000 jobs in France at Thomson Multimedia, the world's fourth biggest maker of televisions which employs some 49,500 people world-wide.
"I give my personal guarantee to those (French) jobs. Daewoo has made commitments to the government and to us," he said.
While Daewoo is taking over the television and video recorder production activities. Thomson Multimedia's digital television know-how will be put into a special joint-venture.
"We took the technology out of the company and put it in a joint venture (with Daewoo) in which we have 51 percent," Lagardere said. While he used the past tense on Saturday, the French Privatisation Commission and European Commission still have to approve the deal, which is scheduled for completion at the end of the year.
