The 1,400 staff of ailing French regional airline Air Liberte, which is under bankruptcy protection, published a full-page newspaper advert on Sunday demanding that they be shown takeover bids made to the administrators.
"How is it possible that a company which has been fighting with success for eight years to improve the quality of air transport could disappear today," staff said in an "open letter" advert in the Journal du Dimanche main French Sunday paper.
British Airways Plc, Richard Branson's Brussels-based Virgin Express, a consortium headed by Nouvelles Frontieres chairman Jacques Maillot, and commercial pilot Fernand Denan have made offers for Air Liberte.
The commercial court of Creteil, a southeastern Paris suburb, is expected to decide early this week which of the options will be pursued. Air Liberte went into administration on September 26 with debts of about 1.5 billion francs.
In an ad paid for by the airline's works council, staff of Air Liberte blamed the French authorities for much of the companies' woes.
"By multiplying the obstacles to its development -- difficulties to obtain slots, difficulties to get ground handling services equal to those of the state airline (Air France /Air Inter ) -- the public authorities have pushed Air Liberte into a dead-end," the advert read.
They also blamed certain Air Liberte shareholders for "abandoning" the company at the eve of a recapitalisation and said they feared the final solution would be liquidation.
"We staff of Air Liberte, we cannot accept anymore to lose our jobs, put our families in distress nor to interrupt the service we have to give to passengers," the advert said.
The ad said the staff wanted to see the bids made for the company and were ready to take on responsibilities.
Ousted chairman and founder Lotfi Belhassine had been preparing a last-minute capital increase in which staff would put six weeks' pay into the company.
"Today, some people seem to wish the liquidation of Air Liberte rather than the arrival of a European company. Who has interest in seeing the return of a monopoly?," the ad asked.
British Airways plans to pay 25 million francs for Air Liberte and aims to merge it with its French TAT unit. The British airline said on Friday it had plans to spend 440 million francs on getting Air Liberte back into profit in three years.
Air Liberte owns about a quarter of the landing and take-off slots at Orly airport, Paris' second airport specialising in domestic flights, and this would dramatically boost BA's presence and competitiveness in France.
Air Liberte lost 650 million francs in the first nine months of 1996 due to an air fare war and insufficient passenger numbers. Since the start of the year the main French domestic routes are open to competition ahead of full liberalistaion in 1997. Air Liberte and other regional group AOM have been fighting to take market share from former monopolist Air Inter.
Jacques Maillot, also chairman of smaller airline Corsair, counts the Rivaud bank, travel group Club Mediterranee and Royal Air Maroc in his consortium.
Maillot has not given financial details but he plans to merge Air Liberte with AOM, which is for sale.
The Rivaud bank, a very secretive and influential financial group, is headed since last week by entrepreneur Vincent Bollore and the bank is close to the ruling RPR party.
The Le Monde newspaper said last week Prime Minister Alain Juppe was pushing for a domestic buyer for Air Liberte.
