France Telecom chairman Michel Bon said on Tuesday the French operator wanted to grow internationally in order to offset the impact of competition in France.
"We will not enjoy all the market growth in France," Bon told a news briefing.
From 1998, France Telecom will lose its monopoly position entirely and both Generale des Eaux and Bouygues have formed international alliances to take it on.
France Telecom officials said the group aimed to generate at least 10 percent of its sales abroad.
Bon, in Belgium for the inauguration of the country's second mobile telecommunications operator, Mobistar, said France Telecom's international policy was based on three main goals.
Firstly, the group wanted to answer the international needs of its clients. This is mainly done through the Global One joint venture with Deutsche Telekom and Sprint Corp of the United States.
Secondly, the group wants to use its know-how in building modern infrastructure networks and is setting up such networks in Latin America and Indonesia.
Thirdly, the group is looking for "new growth areas" to compensate for the impact on sales of the new competition in France, Bon said.
Mobistar, in which France Telecom has a majority stake, is part of this policy. The Beglian operator started six weeks ago and has 20,000 subscribers, aiming for a 25 percent market share in 2005.
France Telecom hopes to hear in November that a consortium it leads has won a GSM licence in Romania and the group is in negotiations with the government of Poland.
In Poland, France Telecom is operator of an analogue network but was excluded from getting a GSM digital licence. After a state visit by French President Jacques Chirac, the situation has improved for France Telecom, but negotiations are still continuing.
In Italy, France Telecom has no ambitions in mobile telecommunications, because of the presence of state-owned TIM Omnitel, which is run by Olivetti.
France Telecom is talking with Olivetti about co-operating in Infostrada, a fixed-line venture which is bidding for the network of the Italian railways.
