Daewoo Electronics on Tuesday tried to placate French critics of its planned purchase of Thomson Multimedia with job and investment promises while calling a counter-bid "not realistic"
But Bae Soon-hoon, chairman of the South Korean company, declined to discuss financial details of the proposed takeover until the French government's decision to sell the world's fourth-biggest television maker became final.
Both the French Privatisation Commission and the European Commission still have to approve the deal.
The French government announced last week it had selected Lagardere Groupe over Alcatel Alsthom to buy state-owned Thomson SA for one franc after an 11 billion franc ($2.12 billion) capital injection.
Lagardere plans to merge its Matra Defence Espace unit with defence electronics group Thomson-CSF and sell off Thomson Multimedia (TMM) to Daewoo, also for one franc.
The French financial newspaper La Tribune on Monday suggested a rival French bid for TMM could still emerge. The Liberation daily on Tuesday said Sagem, which fell out of the race earlier on, was preparing such a bid.
Sagem denied planning a bid, however, and the idea was dismissed by Bae.
"I saw the newspaper article. I thought it was a joke," he said. "We have been working with the government for six months and have been respecting the rules of the procedure. Unless the government changes the procedure, nobody can make a proposal at the present time."
Bae said he planned to make Thomson Multimedia, reported to have made a three billion franc first half loss and to have debts of at least 14 billion, "very profitable and prosperous."
He confirmed a pledge to create 5,000 French jobs at TMM in five years, saying French labour conditions were competitive.
The partnership between Thomson Multimedia and Daewoo, which will create the world's biggest maker of televisions, video recorders and cathode ray tubes, would allow a 13 billion franc worldwide investment plan between now and 2000.
Daewoo said that would create a total of 6,600 jobs in final assembly and 2,500 jobs in component production.
Bae declined to indicate how much of Thomson Multimedia's debt Daewoo would assume but said he expected some of the state capital injection to go to TMM.
"The Daewoo group will keep a significant part of the TMM debts and has the means to do so," said Michel Jacob, managing director of Daewoo's French financial advisers Rothschild's.
Daewoo said it would keep the Thomson identity and French headquarters and would continue research and development in the French city of Rennes. It said all the group's products would be sold under Thomson brand names in Europe and the U.S.
The digital television know-how of Thomson will be put in a special joint venture with Lagardere. Bae said the joint-venture would be 50/50 owned, while Jean-Luc Lagardere said on Saturday his group would have a 51 percent majority.
The government decision to sell TMM indirectly for one franc to Daewoo has attracted fierce criticism, with Socialist Party leader Lionel Jospin saying he was "shocked".
Jacques Delors, former president of the European Commission, said at the weekend: "I would have preferred to maintain a European pole in consumer electronics."
Some Thomson labour unions have also attacked the sale of "French technology" to a South Korean company. ($1=5.199 French Franc)
