The chairman of Daewoo Electronics on Tuesday tried to placate French critics of a planned acquisition of Thomson Multimedia with repeated job and investment promises and said a counter-bid was "not realistic"
But Bae Soon-hoon declined to discuss financial details of the proposed takeover until the government's decision to sell the world's fourth-biggest television maker to the South Korean company is final. Both the French Privatisation Commission and the European Commission still have to approve the deal.
The French government on Wednesday announced it had selected Lagardere Groupe over Alcatel Alsthom to buy state-owned Thomson SA for one franc after an 11 billion franc capital injection.
Lagardere plans to merge its Matra Defence Espace unit with defence electronics group Thomson-CSF while selling Thomson Multimedia (TMM) to Daewoo, also for one franc.
Bae said he would make Thomson Multimedia, reported to have made a three billion franc first half loss and to have debts of at least 14 billion francs, "very profitable and prosperous."
He confirmed a vow to create 5,000 French jobs at TMM in the five years, saying French labour conditions were competitive.
Bae said that the partnership between Thomson Multimedia and Daewoo would allow a 13 billion franc world-wide investment plan between now and the year 2000, creating 6,600 jobs in final assembly and 2,500 jobs in component production.
He declined to indicate how much of Thomson Multimedia's debt Daewoo would assume but said he expected some of the state capital injection to go to TMM.
"The Daewoo group will keep a significant part of the TMM debts and has the means to do so," said Michel Jacob, managing director of Daewoo's French financial advisers Rotschild's.
The Daewoo/Thomson combination would be the world's biggest maker of television, video recorders and cathode ray tubes.
Daewoo said it would keep the Thomson identity and French headquarters and would continue research and development at Rennes, France. It said all the group's products would be sold under Thomson brand names in Europe and the U.S.
The digital television know-how of Thomson will be put in a special joint venture with Lagardere. Bae said the joint-venture would be 50/50 owned while Jean-Luc Lagardere said on Saturday that his group would have a 51 percent majority.
The government decision to sell TMM indirectly for one franc to Daewoo has attracted fierce criticism. The leader of the Socialist Party, Lionel Jospin, said on Sunday he was "shocked" by the Thomson privatisation.
Jacques Delors, former president of the European Commission, said the same day, "I would have preferred to maintain a European pole in consumer electronics."
Some Thomson labour unions also attacked the sale of "French technology" to a South Korean company.
French financial newspaper La Tribune on Monday suggested a rival French bid was being prepared and newspaper Liberation on Tuesday said Sagem, who fell out of the race earlier on, was preparing such a bid. Sagem denied planning a bod.
"I saw the newspaper article. I thought it was a joke," Bae said. "We have been working with the government for six months and have been respecting the rules of the procedure. Unless the government changes the procedure, nobody can make a proposal at the present time," he said.
