British Airways Plc on Wednesday joined with French bank Groupe Rivaud to bid for ailing French regional airline Air Liberte, the airlines' administrator told Reuters on Wednesday.
"It's a bid to continue the company. British Airways will have 70 percent, Rivaud 30 percent. It's a bid which satisfies my conditions, assures the jobs and is also good for the creditors," Maitre Baronnie said by telephone.
Rivaud, headed by industrialist Vincent Bollore, had originally been part of a consortium of travel groups Nouvelles Frontieres, Club Mediterannee and airline Royal Air Maroc.
Nouvelles Frontieres chairman Jacques Maillot said he was now withdrawing his bid. The BA/Nouvelles Frontieres bid was the only one remaining, Nouvelles Frontieres said.
Bollore is also the chairman of a shipping and financial group with his name. He was made the chairman of bank Rivaud last Friday and the bank was increasing its capital especially for Air Liberte.
Rivaud, Club Mediterrannee and airplane leasing company ILFC were among the original financial backers of Air Liberte, founded eight years ago.
Baronnie said that creditors could chose to either get cash now with a discount to the outstanding amount, or wiat for a maximum of ten years to get fully paid.
Air Liberte has debts of some 1.5 billion french francs ($290.7 million).
He said there was no price attached to the bid, as was the case with the former TAT bid of 25 million francs, because it was a bid to continue running the company, instead of an offer to buy the assets.
He said that 1,250 jobs at Air Liberte were safeguarded.
He said that the Creteil commercial court would meet on Friday to discuss the offer and a meeting with creditors was schduled within a month.
Meanwhile Air Liberte could dispose of its cash funds.
"I think this is the best we could get for the company and the creditors," Baronnie said, speaking from Air Liberte headquarters.
Air Liberte founder and chairman Lotfi Belhassine will keep his post, he added.
Air Liberte went into administration on September 26 with debts of about 1.5 billion francs.
Apart from British Airways and Maillot there were bids from Richard Branson's Brussels-based Virgin Express, and commercial pilot Fernand Denan.
British Airways planned to merge Air Liberte with TAT and said last Friday it had plans to spend 440 million francs on getting Air Liberte back into profit in three years.
Air Liberte owns about a quarter of the landing and take-off slots at Orly airport, Paris' second airport specialising in domestic flights, and this would dramatically boost BA's presence and competitiveness in France.
Air Liberte lost 650 million francs in the first nine months of 1996 due to an air fare war and insufficient passenger numbers.
Since the start of the year the main French domestic routes have been open to competition ahead of full liberalistaion in 1997.
Air Liberte and other regional group AOM have been fighting to take market share from former domestic monopolyt carrier Air Inter, part of Air France. ($ = 5.16 French Francs)
