British Airways Plc (BA) on Wednesday boosted its position in France when French bank Rivaud joined its bid for ailing French regional airline Air Liberte.
Rivaud, a founding shareholder in Air Liberte and a former partner in a rival consortium, agreed with BA after marathon talks started on Tuesday afternoon and ending at this morning.
It is the only bid left on the table and the commercial court in Creteil is expected to approve the offer on Friday. Richard Branson's Brussels-based Virgin Express and commercial pilot Fernand Denan had also been working on takeover offers.
The BA/Rivaud proposal still needs the blessing of Air Liberte's creditors and French political authorities.
Air Liberte has a 12 percent stake of the domestic French market and BA's TAT unit eight percent. The market is still dominated by the state-owned Air France group.
"The situation is delicate," said Mark Rochet, chairman of TAT, adding he hoped the court would take a quick decision.
"Our partnership with the Groupe Rivaud offers the ideal solution for Air Liberte's very poor financial position. To save it requires quick action," BA chief executive Robert Ayling said in a statement.
"It's an excellent solution. We keep all the assets. I do not see another French solution, the last deadline was Friday," Air Liberte founder and chairman Lotfi Belhassine told Reuters.
British Airways will make a 440 million franc ($85.3 million) equity investment for a 70 percent stake in Air Liberte and Rivaud will put up 190 million for the remaining 30 percent. On top of that Rivaud will make a write down on 500 million francs of its old stake and also on some 60 million francs in loan stocks.
Both companies will pay the costs of running Air Liberte during administration, estimated at 150 million francs.
Rochet told a news conference Air Liberte's debt now stands at 800 million francs. Creditors can either get 20 percent of their money in cash or get fully paid over 10 years.
Rivaud, headed by industrialist Vincent Bollore, had originally been part of a consortium of travel groups Nouvelles Frontieres, Club Mediterannee and Royal Air Maroc.
Nouvelles Frontieres chairman Jacques Maillot said he and the Moroccan airline had withdrawn because of the "extraordinary disastrous financial situation" of Air Liberte.
Bollore is chairman of a shipping and financial group with his name. He was made the chairman of Rivaud last week and the bank is increasing its capital especially for Air Liberte.
A Bollore official said Rivaud had changed camps on Tuesday after Nouvelles Frontieres and other partners said they were unwilling to stump up the money needed for a two-third stake.
Rivaud, Club Med and airplane leasing company ILFC were among the original backers of Air Liberte eight years ago.
The BA/Rivaud plan is based on the three-year business plan for Air Liberte drawn up by BA. It will safeguard 1,250 out of 1,400 Air Liberte jobs and aims for break-even in 1999.
Belhassine will continue to run Air Liberte which owns about a quarter of the landing and take-off slots at Orly airport, Paris' second airport specialising in domestic flights.
It lost 650 million francs in the first nine months of 1996 due to an air fare war and insufficient passenger numbers in the run-up to full liberalisation of French airspace in 1997. ($1=5.157 French Franc)
