Jacques Maillot, the chairman of travel group Nouvelles Frontieres who dropped out of bidding for French regional airline Air Liberte, is planning to buy airline AOM and expects formal talks to start in weeks.
"I have had several talks with CDR executives and we have started to exchange information," Maillot said. "We have not talked about a price or anything. There is an old valuation by bank Warburgs and I have asked bank Paribas to look at the company," he told Reuters by telephone.
AOM, created in 1991 by the merger of Air Outre Mer and Minerve, is owned by the Consortium de Realisation (CDR), a state entity charged with selling former assets of the Credit Lyonnais bank.
Maillot announced on Wednesday he had withdrawn from talks on the rescue Air Liberte, in administration since September 26, because of the size of the financial commitment required.
A 780 million french franc ($151.2 million) bid by British Airways Plc French TAT unit and bank Rivaud is now the only remaining one on the table and expected to be approved by the Creteil commercial court on Friday.
Maillot had planned to buy Air Liberte with the help of Royal Air Maroc, the Moroccan national airline, holiday resorts group Club Mediterranee and Rivaud.
In a second stage he had planned to enlarge his consortium to acquire AOM and merge it with Air Liberte in a big French private company to rival the state-owned Air France group.
"First there will be talks between Paribas and Warburgs, then we will start official talks with CDR," Maillot said.
"Because CDR is part of the state there have to be discussions with Bercy (the Finance Ministry) and the privatisation commission," he added.
Maillot said Warburg had put a value of one billion francs on AOM but he noted the study was a bit outdated as much had changed in the market since.
A spokesman for the CDR confirmed that there had been informal contacts with Maillot but no formal sale procedure had been started.
"We have had informal contacts," Jean-Michel Raingeard, spokesman at the CDR told Reuters. "But we have not started a sale procedure, which is a very strict procedure," he added.
"The financial situation at AOM is better than at many other airlines," he said. CDR would only decide to start a sale procedure for AOM "When we feel that the time is ripe."
"We always planned to sell AOM at the time of the liberalisation of French airspace (in 1997)," Raingeard said.
"What we need now is a period of calm. A lot has happened recently and at a quick pace. We need to wait at least a few weeks to see the new lie of the land," he said.
This summer, AOM chairman Alexandre Couvelaire had been in talks with Air Liberte chairman and founder Lotfi Belhassine about a merger. But the deteriorating financial situation at Air Liberte led to a break-up of talks.
A spokeswoman for AOM said the company would now go it alone."There's British Airways, Groupe Air France and us. We have 10 to 12 percent of slots at Orly and we will go it alone," she said.
