Jacques Maillot, the chairman of travel group Nouvelles Frontieres who dropped out of bidding for Air Liberte, is now talking to acquire airline AOM, a spokeswoman for his travel group said.
Maillot on Wednesday announced that he and partner Royal Air Maroc had withdrawn their participation in talks to rescue Air Liberte, in administration since September 26, because of the size of the financial commitment required.
A 780 million franc bid by British Airways Plc French TAT unit and bank Rivaud is now the only remaining on the table and expected to be approved by the Creteil commercial court on Friday.
But Maillot, also chairman of small French airline Corsair, told La Tribune that his withdrawal did not mean he had given up his ambitions to create a private French airline group.
"I remain a candidate for the takeover of AOM, that remains my priority," he told the paper. He was not immediately available for comment on Thursday.
Maillot had planned to buy Air Liberte with the help of Royal Air Maroc, holiday resorts group Club Mediterranee and Rivaud. In a second stage he had planned to enlarge his consortium to acquire AOM and merge Corsair, Air Liberte and AOM in a big French group to rival the state-owned Air France group.
AOM, created in 1991 by the merger of Air Outre Mer and Minerve, is owned by the Consortium de Realisation (CDR), a state entity charged with selling former assets of the Credit Lyonnais bank.
AOM is worth about one billion francs, according to industry sources. Maillot said that talks with the CDR had already started but he added that no timetable had been fixed.
"Before anything, we need to know the price of AOM. That is not the case today," he told La Tribune.
This summer, former AOM chairman Alexandre Couvelaire had been in talks with Air Liberte chairman and founder Lotfi Belhassine about a merger.
But the deteriorating financial situation at Air Liberte led to a break-up of talks. The CDR has since fired Couvelaire.
Couvelaire had a 10 percent stake in Air Liberte and previously headed small airline Euralair. He was appointed in June 1996 to replace Mark Rochet who had jumped ship to TAT.
In his statement on Wednesday, announcing his withdrawal from Air Liberte, Maillot said his ambitions were unchanged.
"The first tourist group in France, Nouvelles Frontieres, which is active in air transport since many years through its Corsair subsidiary, the only airline in France with systemic postive results since the takeover in 1990, remains available to participate in the constitution of a a private group of which the necessity seems, at least as far as words are concerned, to be felt unanimously and which has become more urgent today than yesterday," he said in the statement.
"It is necessary not to compromise the success of such an ambition which implies the both restucturing of the Groupe AOM and, later, the privatisation of Groupe Air France," he said.
"It is totally clear that there is urgency and there is no more time for hesitations," he added.
