Analysts were mixed on the Rhone-Poulenc SA third quarter results and some said they might raise full-year forecasts while others left forecasts unchanged.
"The figures are better than we had forecast," said analyst Guy Phillips at BZW in London.
"Especially the operating profit at life sciences, pharmaceuticals pleased. It was an encouraging set of results," he said.
Phillips said he was considering raising his profit per share forecast from eight francs to 8.5 francs.
But Brokers Leven in Paris said there was no reason to adjust estimates.
Shaw Bridges at Merill Lynch said that while health care earnings were better than expected, the performance of fibres and chemicals had been weaker. He kept his forecast for 1996 net attributable profit of 2.7 billion francs, against 2.134 billion in 1995.
He also maintained his "hold" rating for the shares because they were "fairly valued". He said the company was an attractive long-term investment.
Bridges said he expected a full-year provision of 500 million francs at Rhone-Poulenc, mainly at chemicals and fibres. Rhone took 1.73 billion in provisions in 1995.
"The results are in line with expectations. They confirm that Rhone-Poulenc is a company pulled forward by its pharmaceuticals and agro," said Liliane Gauffre at Paris brokers BNP Du Bouzet.
Rhone-Poulenc reported a third quarter net income of 756 million francs versus 669 million at the same stage last year and an operating profit of 2.054 billion francs versus 1.828 billion previously.
Net sales were 20.468 billion francs versus 19.621 billion.
For the first nine months, net income was up 10.5 percent at 2.166 billion francs.
The operating profit at health sciences, which includes pharmaceuticals and animal health, jumped to 1.583 billion francs from 977 billion.
Finance director Jean-Pierre Tirouflet said the increase was in line with the company's forecasts about the synergy effects of the acquisition of Fisons in 1995 and was also due to new products.
He cited the anti-cancer drug Taxotere, Lovenox, Granocyte as well as Hepatitis A and B vaccines as examples.
Tirouflet also said there had been good sales in anti-fever vaccines in the United States.
But brokers Lehman Brothers said Taxotere and Rilutek were taking off slowly. It downgraded the share to neutral from outperform, after a good recent run.
Thierry le Francois of Massonaud said he expected a 1996 net income of 2.5 billion and further charges for the recall of albumin products. He re-itereated his buy advice on the share.
-- Paris newsroom +33 1 4221 5452
