French Finance Minister Jean Arthuis said on Monday the procedure followed in the planned sale of Thomson SA was beyond criticism.
France's independent privatisation commission, however, always had the right to block the deal, he added.
"It is my conviction that the procedure followed by the government is unassailable. The law has been respected," Arthuis told Reuters on Monday.
"The privatisation commission is an independent body. It has full authority and I cannot prejudge the decision it will take. It is sovereign," he said.
Thomson's planned privatisation has raised a storm of criticism in France. The opposition Socialists and Communists in the National Assembly have called for a committee of inquiry into the conditions of Thomson's privatisation.
The French privatisation commission, comprising seven "wise men", is currently assessing the value of Thomson SA and its proposed sale to Lagardere Groupe and Daewoo Electronics. The commission is expected to issue its decision early December.
Commission members are appointed by decree for five years during which they cannot hold any other function.
The commission is currently chaired by Pierre Laurent, a former section chairman at the country's highest constitutional authority, the Conseil d'Etat or State Council.
Its members are Pierre Alby, a honorary chairman of Gaz de France, Andre Blanc, Daniel Deguen, honorary chairman of bank Credit Commercial de France, Daniel Hua, honorary managing director of bank Societe Generale, Jean Serise and Jean Pineau.
The Bank of France's Francoise Pallo-Guillabert is the commission secretary general.
The commission has the task of determining the value of state assets which are being sold, and to express an opinion about the government's choice.
A spokeswoman for the Finance Ministry said that the goverment always made its preference clear to the commission but sofar has never publicly stated its preference.
In the case of Thomson, however, Arthuis judged it necessary to publish the government's preference to avoid insider dealing because both bidders, Lagardere and Alcatel Alsthom, are quoted companies.
There is only one case known where the privatisation commission did not agree with the government -- at the start of 1996 the commission opposed the sale of the state's 83.3 percent stake Radio Monte Carlo (RMC) because it considered the bids too low.
"The first thing the commission has to do is to establish the value of Thomson and see whether indeed it is worth minus 11 billion francs, as both bidders say," a ministry official said.
"After that they will have to express their opinion on the government's choice," he added.
If the privatisation commission's decision, expected by the end of the year, would be in line with the government's preference there still remain hurdles.
The European Commission in Brussels has to agree with the planned state capital injection of 11 billion francs and has to consider the competition aspects of the deal.
