French Prime Minister Alain Juppe said on Tuesday he wanted a public debate on the planned privatisation of electronics group Thomson SA after an outcry over an earlier government decision.
"Once the (privatisation commission) has delivered its ruling, and whatever its content, I will ask for a public debate on all the issues of this case, financial, industrial and social, so that we can have all the cards on the table before the government decides and everybody takes their responsibilities," Juppe told parliament during question time.
The government said on October 16 it wanted to sell loss-making and indebted Thomson SA to books-to-missiles conglomerate Lagardere Groupe instead of to industrial and telecommunications group Alcatel Alsthom.
The government planned to sell Thomson for a symbolic franc after an 11 billion franc ($2 billion) capital increase.
Lagardere plans to merge Thomson's 58-percent owned Thomson-CSF defence electronics group with its own Matra Defence Espace into the world's second-biggest defence electronics group.
As part of its plan, it agreed to sell Thomson's wholly-owned consumer electronics group Thomson Multimedia to Daewoo Electronics of South Korea, also for a franc.
Juppe told parliament on Tuesday that he personally made the decision to favour Lagardere because it was in the best interests of the country's defence industry and job market.
The Privatisation Commission, a body of seven independent experts, is currently studying both offers and has to state whether the bids reflect the true value of Thomson and whether it agrees with the government's preference.
Its decision is expected in early December.
Normally, a privatisation can go ahead if the commission agrees with the government preference, but the sale procedure has to be restarted if the commission does not agree.
The government normally does not announce its preference but Finance Minister Jean Arthuis said he decided to do so to avoid any insider dealing in shares of Lagardere, Alcatel or Thomson-CSF.
"I don't see them turning back on their decision," a share trader said about the debate. "I think they're doing this to allow them to respond to criticism and explain their decision."
Thomson Multimedia's labour unions are upset by declarations by Juppe that their company was not worth one franc, but minus 14 billion francs, the level of its debts.
Thomson Multimedia chairman Alain Prestat told Le Monde on Tuesday the company would be automatically profitable from 1998 due to technology licensing rights.
The company made a 2.8 billion franc loss in the first half of 1996, Prestat said.
Another criticism also emerged about the way the government announced its preference before the Privatisation Commission had studied the offers.
Lionel Jospin, first secretary of the Socialist Party and rival to Jacques Chirac in last year's presidential elections, openly wondered whether the government had acted illegally.
"I was shocked by the method, which was despicable and perhaps even illegal," he told a television interviewer on October 20.
($1=5.113 French Franc)
