South Korea's Daewoo Electronics on Thursday defended a proposed controversial deal to buy France's Thomson Multimedia by pledging to make investments in the company.
The head of Daewoo Electronics and the founder of its parent company tried to allay French fears through interviews in two leading French newspapers, promising hefty investment and a long term commitment to the country.
The chairman of Daewoo Electronics, Bae Soon-hoon, was trying to counter criticism about a South Korean company acquiring leading-edge French digital television technology cheaply. He said his company would spend at least 10 billion french francs ($1.9 billion) on TMM.
French Finance Minister Jean Arthuis meanwhile reaffirmed that the government was set on selling defence and consumer electronics group Thomson SA to Lagardere Groupe and Daewoo even if Prime Minister Juppe wanted a public debate on the sale of the state group.
Juppe told parliament on Tuesday he would call a debate on the sale, for one symbolic franc, after an 11 billion franc ($2.2 billion) capital injection, in reaction to a public outcry and criticism from opposition parties and also from within his own coalition.
Arthuis dismissed criticism on the government's decision to sell the company by way of a private placement instead of a public sale.
"This is a company that could not be privatised through a public offer," Arthuis told reporters at a press briefing on Thursday. "How could we ask several investors to bid on a company with a negative net value."
Thomson has debts of some 14 billion francs.
Lagardere wants to merge Thomson SA's 58-percent-owned and profitable defence group Thomson-CSF with its Matra unit and sell loss-making consumer electronics group Thomson Multimedia (TMM) to Daewoo Electronics.
The state's Privatisation Commission is currently studying both the preferred bid by Lagardere/Daewoo and one by Alcatel Alsthom and is expected to give its opinion in early December.
The chairman of Daewoo Electronics said his company would spend at least 10 billion francs on TMM in an effort to still the rising criticism about the deal.
"In total, the immediate cost of acquisition and recapitalisation of Thomson Multimedia for Daewoo is some 10 billion francs. But these 10 billion are only a first stage," Bae Soon-hoon told the La Tribune Desfosses newspaper, breaking his self-imposed silence on Daewoo's bid details.
He said South Korea and France had increasingly direct links, adding that French companies had sold the TGV high-speed train and nuclear power stations to his country and were planning to sell battle planes and other weapons.
France's trade minister Yves Galland is due to travel to South Korea on Monday to promote the country's economic interests during a trip lasting until Thursday.
France hopes to sell Dassault Rafale combat planes to South Korea to monitor its northern Communist neighbour.
Kim Woo-choong, chairman and founder of the Daewoo conglomerate, told France's Liberation newspaper in Seoul that big Japanese companies would want to see the Thomson deal fail.
"Certain big international electronics companies are against ths deal because they believe that the merger would make Daewoo too competitive," Woo-choong said, adding, "These big companies are perhaps busy lobbying the French government."
Liberation said he referred to Japanese companies.
"The French government cannot come back on its decision if there is not an important reason to do so," Woo-choong said.
($1=5.102 French Franc)
