South Korea's Daewoo Electronics staged a charm campaign on Wednesday with newspaper advertisements after fierce criticism about its plans to buy France's state-owned loss-making Thomson Multimedia.
Under a banner "Do you know the dwarf Daewoo?", the 34th biggest world company" the group tried to counter growing resentment in France that a "tiny" South Korean company was set to buy a "leading" French group for one symbolic franc.
France's Privatisation Commission will state in early December whether it agrees with a government plan to sell defence and consumer electronics Thomson SA to Lagardere Groupe for one franc after an 11 billion franc ($2.1 billion) capital injection.
Lagardere will sell Thomson Multimedia, a maker of televisions and video recorders and a leader in digital video technology, to Daewoo.
Prime Minister Alain Juppe, giving in a little to opposition from the Socialist Party and some members of his majority, last week said there would be a parliamentary debate before the final government decision on the deal. But the debate will not be followed by a parliament vote on the proposal.
In full-page advertisements in most French newspapers on Wednesday, Daewoo said that its electronics arm had about the same sales figure as Thomson Multimedia, at some 40 billion francs, although with a profit which the French company lacks.
It said that its global sales network, especially in Asia, would allow better market access for Thomson's new products such as flat screen television sets and televisions that can be connected to the Internet computer network.
The company also said that "Daewoo believes in France" and said it had made investments in the country and had close ties with a number of French companies.
"Contrary to all other competitors who have based themselves in or moved to neighbouring countries, Daewoo has chosen France. Simply because it believes in France".
Parliamentarians of the Communist Party are organising a seminar on the privatisation of Thomson on November 13. They want the promised parliament debate to be televised and joined a call by the Socialist Party for an inquiry commission to study the way the government came to its decision.
The European Commission, meanwhile, is studying the Lagardere bid as well as a rival offer by Alcatel Alsthom and could make its findings on competition issues and the state cash injection known by December 4.
Lagardere finance dirtector Philippe Camus said on Wednesday that a change in the government's decision would be a "total catastrophe in the international financial community".
Speaking to a seminar organised by brokers Ferri, Camus said he did not understand the hostility toward Daewoo.
"Daewoo has made commitments on jobs and people say to them, Out! France is going to have a big credibility problem," he said.
Camus said Lagardere had had "37 contacts in the whole world. Everybody ran away from the deal, except the Korean group Daewoo," he said. ($1=5.143 French Franc)
