South Korea's Daewoo Electronics staged a charm campaign on Wednesday with newspaper advertisements after fierce criticism about its plans to buy state-owned loss-making Thomson Multimedia.
Under a banner "Do you know the dwarf Daewoo?, the 34th biggest world company" the group tried to counter a growing resentment in France that a "tiny" South Korean company was set to buy a "leading" French group for one symbolic franc.
France's Privatisation Commission will state in early December whether its agrees with a government plan to sell defence and consumer electronics Thomson SA to Lagardere Groupe for one franc after an 11 billion franc capital injection.
Lagardere will sell Thomson Multimedia, a maker of televisions and video recorders and a leader in digital video technology, to Daewoo.
Prime Minister Alain Juppe, giving in a little to opposition from the Socialist Party and some members of his majority, last week said there would be a parliamentary debate before the final government decision on the deal. But the debate will not be followed by a parliament vote on the proposal.
In full-page advertisements in most French newspapers on Wednesday, Daewoo said that its electronics arm had about the same sales figure as Thomson Multimedia, at some 40 billion francs, although with a big profit which the French company lacks.
It said that its global sales network, especially in Asia, would allow better market access for Thomson's new products such as flat screen television sets and televisions that can be connected to the Internet computer network.
The company also said that "Daewoo believes in France" and said it had made investments in the country and had close ties with a number of French companies.
"Contrary to all other competitors who have based themselves or moved to neighbouring countries, Daewoo has chosen France. Simply because it believes in France".
Parliamentarians of the Communist Party are organising a seminar on the privatisation of Thomson on November 13. They want the promised parliament to be televised and join a call by the Socialist Party for an inquiry commission to study the way the government came to its decision.
The European Commission, meanwhile, is studying the Lagardere bid as well as a rival offer by Alcatel Alsthom and could make its findings on competition issues and the state cash injection known by December 4.
Dutch Philips Electronics has sounded out Commission officials about the posibility of lodging a complaint agaisnt the capital injection for its rival Thomson Multimedia but a spokesman in Eindhoven said the company was at the moment not planning such a complaint.
French media keep speculating that some minisiters, mainly Industry Minister Franck Borotra, are hoping for the Privatisation Commission to declare the bid void because of the size of the capital injection.
Le Nouvel Economiste, a two-weekly paper, said that Philips, Samsung and Toshiba had all turned down offers from Lagardere to acquire Thomson Multimedia.
In the case of Philips this was because of competition concerns, the paper said.
