France's state-owned electricity utility Electricite de France (EDF) said on Wednesday it had made a 850 million franc asset gain selling its 10 percent stake in Sweden's Sydkraft AB to Norway's Statkraft SF.
"It allows us to realise a big asset gain and the deal is also the start of an alliance with Statkraft," EDF chairman Edmond Alphandery told a news conference.
EDF officials said the alliance with Statkraft, also a state-owned utility, would mainly be in the form of cooperation in hydroelectric projects in southeast Asia.
EDF is selling its 6.808 million class A and 12.395 million class C shares in Sydkraft AB to Statkraft for a sum of 2.130 billion francs. This allows the Norwegian firm to increase its stake in Sydkraft to 15 percent. The formal transfer of ownership will take place in November.
EDF took its stake in Sydkraft, Sweden's biggest power firm, two years ago but it changed its strategy in April when its Northelec unit obtained a 25 percent stake in Graningeverkens AB, Sweden's number six power group. It later raised the stake.
Northelec is a joint venture with Skanska.
"It's better to have a big stake in a small company than to have a small stake in a big company," Alphandery said.
"At Sydkraft we did not even have a seat on the board, at Graninge we have a shareholders' pact allowing us to effectively control the company," he added.
EDF has a shareholders pact with Sweden's industrial family Versteegh and jointly they own 54 percent of Graninge.
"We saw the strategic value of the Nordic market and we have been able to cash in on the asset gain because the value of Sydkraft shares has risen a lot," he said.
Alphandery, a former economics minister named to EDF in November to replace Gilles Menage who was an appointee of the former Socialist government and an aide to Francois Mitterand, said the sale was proof of EDF's willingness to "realise an asset gain when there is one."
He did not expect further sales from EDF's international portfolio. The French utility in 1996 alone has made commitments totalling 4.6 billion francs in foreign stakes and Alphandery said EDF would continue its expansion mainly in the Mercosur area in Latin America and in southeast Asia including China.
EDF obtained a stake in Brazil's Rio de Janeiro power utility Light and Edenor in Argentina. Last year, it obtained stakes in two Hungarian companies. It als has investments in Italy, Spain, Portugal, Ivory Coast and South Africa.
"We can use the asset gain on Sydkraft to finance our international expansion," Alphandery said.
"This refocusing of Northern European strategy shows EDF's desire to be a major international and industrial operator, actively managing its investment portfolio," EDF said.
EDF's decision to leave Sydkraft makes Germany's Preussen Elektra AG, a unit of Veba AG, the biggest shareholder with 17.6 percent of shares and 27.1 percent of votes. The city of Malmo is second biggest with 11.8 percent of shares and 18.9 percent of votes, followed by Statkraft and some pension funds.
Sydkraft has a 20 percent stake in Graninge and Veba's Preussenelektra 12.4 percent.
