The French government has started a wide consultation on one of the thorniest issues in the future liberalised telecommunications sector -- the costs of interconnection charged to operators by France Telecom.
With Germany's Deutsche Telekom starting share trading on Monday, France is taking a further step in preparing its own telecommunications operator for the share market.
Francois Fillon, minister for Post and Telecommunications, has written to the main current and future players in the field soliciting their comments before November 30.
In a statement, the ministry said it was preparing two decrees to be published at the start of 1997.
One will set up the general conditions and tarification principles for interconnection agreements and another will set the time limit for the litigation procedures. The ministry is proposing a period of three months, which could be extended to six months if the complaining party agrees.
Both decrees concern the new French telecommunications regulatory authority, which will be in place in early 1997 but has not yet been named.
Under the French plans for market liberalisation, France Telecom will keep running the national infrastructure and will be responsible for the public service of telephone access for all French people.
While other operators can use alternative networks, there needs to be agreement on the prices of interconnection for a call from a subscriber to one operator to the receiver who subscribes to another operator, or the price for carrying this call over a stretch of the territory.
This price for interconnection is very important for the business models of new rivals in fixed telecommunications such as the Cegetel venture of Generale des Eaux, Mannesmann, SBC and British Telecommunications and the grouping of Bouygues and Italy's STET.
At the moment, Generale des Eaux's SFR mobile telecommunications operator says it is the biggest client of France Telecom.
For France Telecom, currently France's most profitable company, the pricing decision is also of the biggest importance for its future profit streams and therefore for the market valuation for its pending partial privatisation in April.
The French government is expected to float a first tranche of 25 percent in France Telecom in April.
By deciding on the interconnection costs in early 1997, the ministry takes away a major uncertainty for financial analysts in calculating their cash flow models for France Telecom and, thus, its value.
Brokers Barclays de Zoete Wedd, in a June report on France Telecom, estimated that interconnection revenues for France Telecom could rise from an estimated 311 million francs ($61.1 million) in 1996 to 2.024 billion francs in 1998 and 4.598 billion francs in 2000.
-- Paris Newsroom +331 4221 5452 ($ = 5.086 French Francs)
