Cie Generale des Eaux on Tuesday launched its bid to become the main rival to state-owned France Telecom with the start a fixed-line telephone network in a residential area in this southern city.
"Local telecommunications are for CEGETEL a major strategic axis," Philippe Glotin, managing director of Generale's telecoms unit CEGETEL, told a news conference.
He said the group aims to have a market share in 2003 yielding 40 billion francs ($7.9 billion) in annual sales, of which more than half would come from mobile communications.
In mobile telecommunications, Generale already competes with France Telecom with its SFR unit and it is allied to British Telecom Plc and MCI for business services.
SFR expects to have one million customers by March 1997, Glotin said, against some 725,000 at the moment.
The local residential market is expected to grow at a moderate pace but nevertheless represent 55 billion francs in annual sales by 2003.
Glotin said he aimed at gaining a 40 percent share in mobiles, 20 percent in long-distance and 10 percent for so-called local loops, or small networks.
CEGETEL, which counts BT, Mannesmann and SBC of the United States among its owners, has received permission from the French authorities for a telecoms experiment in Nice and from the start of 1997 it will offer residential telecoms services, using DECT technology.
The version of DECT, digitally-enhanced cordless telephone, applied in Nice uses radio waves to connect buildings to a telephone switch while the connections inside the building are of the classical type using a telephone socket.
DECT is also available in totally wireless versions.
The Nice experiment is small, with Glotin expecting 1,000 to 3,000 subscribers by the end of 1997, but it is a precursor of CEGETEL's assault on France Telecom and the company would invest three billion francs in local loops with radio links in the coming years to hone its skills ahead of market liberalisation in 1998.
A DECT service in Paris is expected to be ready in 1998 as the biggest part of an initial series of 30 towns which will add up to a population of some 10 million inhabitants.
In Nice, subscribers pay between 20 and 50 francs per month for a subscription, get a 10 percent discount on calls using the France Telecom network and pay about 0.22 francs per minute for local calls.
The CEGETEL shareholders will inject 6.8 billion francs at the start of 1997 to fund investments. Glotin said that the final make-up of CEGETEL's sharecapital would be known by year-end but he said it would be very close to the October agreement with BT taking 25 percent, SBC 15 percent and Mannesmann 10 percent.
"Changes are within the five percent limit," he said.
Glotin said that the success of CEGETEL, or any other rival to France Telecom in France, depended to a large extent on the interconnection costs and other payments telecom operators have to make to France Telecom to use its installations.
Telecommunications minister Francois Fillon has started a wide consultation, set to end on November 30, in order to establish in early 1997 a price list of the services France Telecom can provide to its rivals.
"The level of the interconnection costs for us means either the right to live of the right to die," Glotin said.
Another future rival to France Telecom is building and communications group Bouygues which has teamed up with Italy's STET.
