Several thousand employees of French consumer electronics company Thomson Multimedia held protest marches in Paris and other towns on Wednesday against the planned sale of the group to South Korea's Daewoo.
Workers of the state-owned company came in busloads to Paris to demonstrate in front of the group's headquarters in the centre of the capital before heading to the parliament buildings. There were also protest marches in Rennes, Bordeaux, Nice and Grenoble.
Thomson staff are angry that they have not been involved in the decision and say they do not understand the economic logic behind it.
"The sale of Thomson Multimedia to the Korean group Daewoo is unacceptable," said a protesting Thomson worker in Rennes, the capital of the western Britanny region where police said 1,200 people marched.
"This company is running fine and makes top quality products, we do not want to make low quality products," he added.
In Grenoble in the east about a thousand people marched, some shouting "Daewoo, mechant loup" (Daewoo, big bad wolf).
Industry Minister Franck Borotra told parliament during question time that privatisation was the only way to secure the future of Thomson Multimedia.
"This company is in a situation of a serious financial disaster," he said about the loss-making and indebted French state-owned group.
Workers, however, maintain the company is fundamentally profitable.
"Thomson is sold for one franc and the buyers will hit a 20 billion franc jackpot," said a slogan carried in the Rennes march.
The French government said last month it planned the sell the Thomson SA group to Lagardere Groupe for one franc after an 11 billion franc ($2.17 billion) capital injection.
Lagardere will keep Thomson SA's 58 percent stake in defence electronics group Thomson-CSF and sell television set and video recorder maker Thomson Multimedia to Daewoo Electronics, also for one franc.
France's Privatisation Commission and the European Commission still have to approve the deal.
"What we want is a halt to the privatisation procedure and the start of serious discussions about the future of the electronics industry in this country," a labour union spokesman told France 2 television.
The Communist-led CGT wants to see a public sale of the Thomson Multimedia company on the market, with Lagardere taking a big stake.
Soon-hoon Bae, chairman of Daewoo Electronics, told a French parliamentary commission on Tuesday that the South Korean group could float part of Thomson Multimedia on the share market when it had returned to profit.
He said Daewoo planned to invest 13 billion francs in Thomson Multimedia, of which five billion would be invested in the next five years in France.
