French computer maker Cie des Machines Bull now has the freedom to deal with any other computer group in Europe following the sale of some five percent of its shares held by the government.
Thierry Breton, managing director of Bull, told Reuters in a telephone interview that the company still planned to be part of a restructuring of the European computer industry.
"With the support of our private shareholders, we can do that either by a market operation, by a merger or acquisition or by both," he said.  
"Rather than to wait for when the opportunity presented itself before doing anything, the shareholders decided to put us in a position so that we can act as a private company when the time is ripe."
Breton said others involved in the restructuring of the European computer industry included Italy's Olivetti, Philips Electronics of the Netherlands and Siemens AG of Germany.
"There are also the European units of U.S. companies that may be interested in participating in the restructuring," he added.  
Jean-Marie Descarpentries, the former McKinsey consultant who became chairman in 1993, earlier this year said Bull wanted the state to sell 20 percent to a fourth industrial partner, preferably European, and to financial investors.
Bull returned to profit in 1995 after posting combined losses of 22 billion francs since 1990.
The French government has said it plans to privatise Bull before the end of 1997.
Breton said the state share sale would take place after a capital increase amounting to "several hundreds of millions of francs."  
The state will subscribe to its portion of the capital increase, but resell its shares to private investors.
Motorola of the U.S., NEC of Japan and France Telecom, which each have a 17 percent stake, are expected to subscribe to their part.
"They are on our strategic commission. They come here every three months for two days. I think I can say that we have the support of our shareholders," Breton said.
IBM, which has 1.6 percent, is not expected to join in the capital increase. It has passed up two previous opportunities.  
Japan's Dai Nippon Printing, with 3.3 percent, has been invited to join the capital increase.
Bull in February effectively withdrew from the personal computer market by merging its Zenith Data division with Packard Bell Electronics Inc.
Breton said the company was standing by its profit forecast of higher profits in 1996 compared with a 306 million profit in 1995, but he declined to confirm the group was aiming for more than 600 million.
"We keep our forecast, we are on line to deliver on our promise," Breton said.
-- Paris newsroom +33 1 4221 5452
