The French government said on Tuesday it was to complete the privatisation of computer-maker Cie des Machines Bull by selling another stake of at least five percent.
The sale, after a capital increase of "several hundreds of millions of francs" will reduce the government's share in the company, both directly and through the national telecoms company France Telecom to below 50 percent.
The Paris Bourse said it had suspended Bull's shares, which last traded at 33 French francs ($6.36), at the company's request until after completion of the operation which will take several weeks.
Japan's NEC, Motorola of the U.S. and France Telecom have a 17 percent Bull stake each and are expected to subscribe to the capital increase.
The state, with a 36 percent stake, will first subscribe to the capital increase and then sell the shares to private investors.
IBM, which has 1.6 percent, is expected not to join in the capital increase. It had also passed at two previous occasions. Japan's Dai Nippon Printing, 3.3 percent, has been invited to join in the capital increase.
The Finance Ministry said in a statement it will decided on the issue price and the identity of the buyers after advice by the independent Privatisation Commission.
Interested parties have 15-days to express their interest in blocks of at least 1.4 million shares, or one percent of Bull.
Thierry Breton, managing director, told Reuters the operation would give Bull the freedom to decide on any mergers or acquisitions while it played its role in the restructuring of the European computer industry.
"With the support of our private shareholders, we can do that either by a market operation, by a merger or acquisition or by both," he said.
Jean-Marie Descarpentries, the former McKinsey consultant made chairman in 1993, said earlier this year that the company wanted the state to sell a 20 percent stake to a fourth industrial partner, preferably European, and financial investors.
"Rather than to wait for when the opportunity presented itself before doing anything, the shareholders have decided to put us in a position so that we could act as a private company when the time is ripe," Breton said when asked whether today's announcement meant the industrial plans had changed.
Breton said the other companies invloved in the restructuring of the European computer industry were Italy's Olivetti, Philips Electronics of the Netherlands and Siemens AG of Germany. "There are also the European units of U.S. companies that may be interested in participating in the restructuring," he said.
Bull came back to the black in 1995 after combined losses of 22 billion francs since 1990. Breton said the company kept its profit forecast of higher 1996 profits, after 306 million in 1995, but he declined to confirm the group aimed at more than 600 million.
"We keep our forecast, we are on line to deliver on our promise," Breton said.
Bull in February effectively withdrew from the troubled personal computer market by merging its Zenith Data division with Packard Bell Electronics Inc of the U.S. ($1=5.190 French Franc)
