There is a discreet battle raging in France over whether future competitors of a privatised France Telecom will be able to make a living or whether the playing field will be tilted against them.
With billions of francs at stake, analysts are scutinising the abstruse technical details of interconnection charges and the cost of public service.
The government expects to dispose of about 20 percent of France Telecom next April and plans eventually to selloff 49 percent of the state-owned-company.
French telecommunications minister Francois Fillon said on Tuesday that French interconnection charges would have to be "comparable to other countries, in particular countries where there is already competition."
Interconnection charges are the payments telecom rivals have to pay to France Telecom for the use of its network.
France Telecom confirmed a leaked document showing it planned a charge of 0.16 francs per minute for local calls, 0.18 francs for regional calls and 0.26 francs for national calls.
France Telecom says these are among the lowest in Europe, with only Britain having cheaper local interconnection charges.
But its future rivals, however, say these prices are still too high and claim they are higher than what the state-owned company uses as internal charges.
On top of the interconnection charges comes the cost for the "public service" -- telecoms available to everyone, everywhere in France. By law, France Telecom will run this public service and its rivals will have to share the costs.
The newspaper Les Echos recently cited a study by the Analysis research bureau showing the the costs of such a service would be nine billion francs ($1.76 billion) per year.
France Telecom's rivals, using another research bureau, arrive at a figure of 4.5 billion francs at most.
"The total interconnection charges and public service payments for a local call would be some 0.21 to 0.22 francs per minute, or some 80 percent of the current price and nearly two to three times as high as in other countries where there is competition," a confidential document said.
The new French telecommunications regulator, ART, which will be in place in January 1997, is expected to decide on the charges in February.
And during the first three months of the year the future telecommunications operators will apply for their licences in order to be ready for competition in 1998.
Two groups have announced intentions to become national operators. One is CEGETEL, a joint venture of Generale des Eaux, British Telecom Plc, SBC Communications Inc, and Mannesmann of Germany. The other is headed by Bouygues in association with Italy's STET and Germany's VEBA.
AT&amp;T also wants to be active in the French market, with the help of a partner, but a spokesman for the U.S. group in France declined to comment whether it was in talks with Bouygues or preparing a fourth consortium.
AT&amp;T is in talks to combine it forces in Europe with Unisource -- a joint venture of the Dutch PTT, Telia of Sweden, Swiss Telecom PTT and Spain's Telefonica.
Unisource had previously teamed up with Generale des Eaux but the latter preferred BT.
Other companies will operate on a smaller scale, targetting either a region or a specific market. Eurotunnel's Trans Manche has received a licence for Paris to London lines. Fillon said he would sign in the next few days telecom operating licences for railroad company SNCF, Colt of Britain and MFS Ltd.
($1=5.118 French Franc)
