The former long-time head of Britain's General Electric Plc said in a newspaper interview on Wednesday the group was ready to deal with whoever won ownership of state-owned Thomson SA.
The comments to the Les Echos newspaper by Lord Weinstock, GEC's chairman emeritus since September, followed a statement by Alcatel Alsthom chairman Serge Tchuruk that he was ready to make a new offer for the state electronics group if a December 31 validity deadline for current offers passes.
Tchuruk added he was willing to adjust his company's bid to recent developments and suggested the state might want to spread the privatisation of Thomson SA out over time.
In October, the French government decided to sell Thomson SA for one franc to Lagardere Groupe after a 11 billion franc ($2.1 billion) cash injection, instead of to Alcatel.
This decision awaits approval of the European Commission (EC) as well as France's Privatisation Commission.
While the EC decision could be due in the first half of December, the Privatisation Commission will not render its decision until after the Brussels' stance is known.
The French Finance Ministry has conceded that the entire operation may not be finished before December 31, a date after which theoretically both the Lagardere and Alcatel bids expire.
The announcement of a possible new Alcatel bid caused a slide in the company's shares, down 1.5 percent at 455.20 francs at midday, because investors did not like the new uncertainty.
Lagardere plans to merge Thomson's 58 percent-owned defence unit Thomson-CSF with its Matra Defence Espace unit while selling consumer electronics group Thomson Multimedia to Daewoo Electronics of South Korea for one franc.
The second sale has caused a public outcry and thousands of Thomson employees have protested in France's main cities, fearing for their jobs and severe Korean working conditions, despite job creation promises by Daewoo.
A group of Thomson workers in the western town of Angers are currently walking to Paris in a protest action, aiming to arrive in the capital in time for a December 6 shareholders meeting.
Part of Alcatel's plans were to combine the Thomson-CSF business with its own defence activities and then merge these with GEC's Marconi to create a defence electronics giant.
Weinstock said that neither Lagardere's plan to merge Matra with Thomson-CSF, nor Alcatel's defence activities with Thomson-CSF, would give spectacular effects.
"Only a merger between Thomson-CSF and Marconi would produce the necessary economies of scale and a good combination of products," he said, adding the combined company would have about $11 billion of annual sales.
Alcatel had said it intended to find a European industrial partner for Thomson-CSF. While the company has long standing links with GEC through GEC-Alsthom, Tchuruk did not want to exclude a link with Germany's Deutsche Aerospace.
In a statement, Foreign Affairs minister Herve de Charette formally denied his staff would have handed a report to President Jacques Chirac about an alleged dinner conversation between Weinstock and GEC chief executive George Simpson in which they allegedly planned to seize control of the new defence grouping.
Weinstock told Les Echos such a conversation had not taken place but said a report which contained a summary of the alleged conversation existed.
"Yes, that report exists and has been very damaging for the Alcatel position, people told us," Weinstock said.
