The French Industry Minister on Wednesday angrily reminded the chairman of Britain's General Electric Co Plc of his conditions for an Anglo-French nuclear merger on the day the plan was set to go ahead.
Franck Borotra issued a statement saying French interests needed to keep a majority in a merged combination of the GEC Alsthom joint-venture and state-controlled Framatome in reaction to the publication of an interview with GEC chairman Lord Weinstock in which he said he wanted at least 50 percent.
In a supervisory board meeting on Wednesday, Framatome shareholders are set to appoint Dominique Vignon as chairman and chief executive, replacing Jean-Claude Leny who had openly criticised the plan.
"The Minister of Industry, Post and Telecommunications, Franck Borotra, would like to recall that the study of a merger of GEC-Alsthom and Framatome, undertaken at the behest of GEC and Alcatel, can only be completed if five conditions are respected," the Industry Ministry said in a statement.
The conditions are that the state keep control of strategic decisions concerning nuclear activities, the continuation of Franco-German cooperation on the future EPR power station, preservation of the identity of Framatome's nuclear activities, the predominance of French interests in the new combination and clear provisions for nuclear risks.
Framatome has a technical alliance with Siemens to develop the future European nuclear power station.
"These conditions are non-negotiable because they constitute French control over its nuclear activities. They (the conditions) should notably lead to a shareholders' pact between the French parties," the statement said.
Weinstock told French financial daily Les Echos the merger talks should not change the balance of power in the joint Anglo-French venture with Alcatel Alsthom.
"The operation concerns mainly the relations within GEC-Alsthom...the balance in the company should not be changed," he said. "We should have the same stake as Alcatel Alsthom. Not more and not less. Even if we have to pay a dowry for it."
Alcatel has a 44 percent stake in Framatome and its chairman Serge Tchuruk has said in the past that he expected French interests to have a majority in the new enlarged group.
In a second phase, Tchuruk wanted to float a part of GEC-Alsthom Framatome on the share market in order to focus the venture's management on financial performance.
The French state gave a green light to the planned merger in August after years of opposition to Alcatel taking a majority stake in Framatome.
"Framatome is an important operation because nuclear power will become an alternative again. There are going to be new nuclear construction programmes even though there are none at the moment. GEC Alsthom will have a good card to play with Framatome," Weinstock said.
Framatome is currently controlled by the government through state owned energy holding group CEA-Industrie, with 36 percent, electricity utility EdF with 11 percent and the Consortium de Realisation (CDR) with four percent.
Asked by Les Echos whether he accepted the French idea of a shareholders' pact, Weinstock said, "No. We want to maintain our partnership. We do not want to become a minority that can be manipulated."
