European governments and industry on Thursday launched a high-technology programme aimed at staying among the leaders of the world technology race.
Microelectronic Developments for European Applications (MEDEA), a two billion ecu programme for the 1997-2000 period, takes over from the Joint European sub-micron semiconductor initiative (JESSI).
Horst Nasko, Austrian chairman of JESSI and now MEDEA, said that while Europe had closed the technology gap in the past eight years, the new programme was aimed at forging ahead.
"In terms of concrete results, the technology gap that had been growing at the end of the 80s at an alarming rate between Europe and the rest of the world has been substantially closed," Nasko said.
"The most important thing is that we can't be complacent. The race is getting faster and fiercer, new countries like Korea and Taiwan have joined and sitting still means falling behind," he told Reuters at the launch of MEDEA.
MEDEA, which will be based in Paris, will coordinate industry research programmes in six main areas. Three of them, getting half of the funds, are applications in the areas of multimedia, communications, and automobile and traffic systems.
The other three are more basic technologies, as covered by JESSI, in semiconductor design and manufacturing techniques. At stake is a frontline industry on which eight milllion jobs in Europe depend and in which the technology changes with a new generation of chips every three years and a doubling in processing power every 18 months.
"When we started in 1988, Europe was running two generations behind," said Jurgan Knorr of the Siemens AG semicondiuctor group. "We are now among the leaders."
Arthur van der Poel, chairman of Philips Semiconductors which is part of Philips Electronics, said that the three large European chip groups -- Seimens, Philips and SGS Thomson Microelectronics NV -- were among the most financially healthy in the world.
Asked whether Europe needed to continue to put money into an industry that has become strong, Nasko pointed out that the United States, Japan and other regional blocs spend "at least the same, and probably more" on the strategic semiconductor industry, be it through defence programmes or tax breaks.
With JESSI, Europe managed to become independent as far as its chip requirements was concerned. With MEDEA, Europe wants to go further, making even finer chips and bigger silicon wafers to cut costs per chip.
"There is one area where we lag, that is microprocessors. But that situaiton is the same for everybody whose name is not Intel," Nasko said.
