French Telecommunications Minister Francois Fillon has granted a telecoms operating licence to state-owned railroads group Societe Nationale des Chemins de Fer (SNCF) as a further step towards the sector's liberalisation.
In a decree published in the Official Journal on Monday, Fillon said he was granting a 15-year licence to SNCF's Telecom Developpement unit to offer telecommunications services in an alternative to the France Telecom network.
SNCF still has to detail what assets it is going to put in the Telecom Development unit and also needs to get vetting for its tariffs. The operating licence sets technical standards, privacy issues and interconnection obligations.
The SNCF licence is the second such licence for a so-called "alternative infrastructure" in France. The first, for Eurotunnel unit TransManche to offer telecom links between London and Paris, was granted late last month.
A spokesman for the ministry said that "in the next few days" licences would be granted to MFS Communication Co of the U.S. and Colt Telecom Group of Britain, owned by financial group Fidelity Investments.
MFS and Colt will specialise on business networks in highly-populated areas but the SNCF licence covers the railroads' existing network of 8,000 kilometres of optic fibre all over the country, as well as radio links, which will be expanded to some 12,000 kilometres in the next six years, SNCF sources said.
The licence also allows Telecom Developpement to use other means beyond its own network.
SNCF aims to decide before the end of the year which company will operate the network. It has at least three offers from interested companies.
One is from CEGETEL, the Generale des Eaux unit in which British Telecommunications Plc and Mannesmann of Germany have a stake and which aims to become France's second biggest operator. It already runs the SFR mobile network.
Another is Bouygues which teamed up with Italy's STET for the SNCF offer and is also talking with Germany's VEBA.
A third offer is by the Unisource consortium of Dutch KPN, Telia AB of Sweden, Swiss Telecom PTT and Spain's Telefonica.
AT&amp;T of the U.S. is keeping silent about its intentions but the operator, aiming to play an important role in France, is rumoured to be playing several cards at the same time -- industry sources said it bid both with its usual European ally Unisource as well as on its own account and there are also rumours it is in talks with Bouygues.
Bouygues and AT&amp;T had no comment on the rumours.
SNCF declined to name the bidders and said it had recently asked them for more details on their bids before taking a decision.
The SNCF network could be a vital part in any operator's plans, cutting the time to set up a network in time for the 1998 start of competition as well as reducing investment needs.
Telecom Developpement, like any future rival to France Telecom, will have to contribute to the costs of running the public service of telecommunications which will remain assured by the national operator.
A first tranche of 20 percent in France Telecom is expected to be floated on the share market this spring.
