A Hong Kong member of the Chinese committee handling the territory's return handed a letter to Chinese Foreign Minister Qian Qichen on Friday protesting against Beijing's plan to dilute civil liberties laws.
Frederick Fung, chairman of the Hong Kong Association for Democracy and People's Livelihood, handed the letter to Qian just before the start of a two-day plenary session of the 150-member Preparatory Committee in Beijing's Great Hall of the People.
"I gave a document to him in the hope he will study it," Fung told reporters. "I have a different view on the Preparatory Committee proposal to repeal several provisions of the Bill of Rights."
Beijing's plans to repeal or amend a list of 25 Hong Kong laws and ordinances, including parts of its Bill of Rights, will be debated at the session of the caucus responsible for shaping Hong Kong's future in the countdown to the handover this year.
The announcement this month from Beijing, which said the laws contradicted Hong Kong's future mini-constitution the Basic Law, has sparked outrage in the British colony and forceful objections from London and its allies.
"I feel if it doesn't violate the Basic Law it should not be retracted," Fung told reporters.
"If the Preparatory Committee abolishes the provisions of the Bill of Rights it will create unnecessary worries and be detrimental to Hong Kong's prosperity and stability after 1997," Fung said in his letter, a copy of which was seen by Reuters.
Fung's protest followed an attack on Thursday by Hong Kong Governor Chris Patten who lashed out at what he called China's repugnant proposal to dilute Hong Kong's civil liberties after it recovers the British colony at midnight on June 30.
"On the Bill of Rights, not only does it not contradict the Basic Law, but is necessary for implementing... the two regulations on adapting human rights conventions to Hong Kong," said the letter by Fung, who is also a member of the territory's Beijing-appointed provisional legislature.
"I believe the abolition of the above bill will bring instability to the rule of law in the future special region," he said. Fung's group advocates democracy for Hong Kong but through cooperation rather than confrontation with Beijing.
Fung also voiced opposition to China's decision to repeal recent Hong Kong regulations formally allowing political parties, warning that Beijing's decision to return to the British colonial era system would affect Hong Kong stability as well as its credibility.
"I believe that to restore these provisions is totally against developing toward the casting off of colonialism and against the principle of Hong Kong people governing Hong Kong," he said in the letter.
Hong Kong's post-colonial leader Tung Chee-hwa, who is attending the crucial committee meeting in Beijing, argued in defence of Beijing's move that the international community had misconstrued the situation.
U.S. President Bill Clinton has expressed concern. Britain summoned the Chinese ambassador in London order to lodge a protest and Foreign Minister Malcolm Rifkind plans to pursue the issue in a meeting with Qian next month.
Qian has insisted the transition process is going well.
