The China-appointed committee handling the handover of Hong Kong voted on Saturday to support Beijing's decision to roll back civil liberties after the British colony returns to Chinese rule this year.
Just one of the 150 members of the Preparatory Committee voted against the motion to approve Beijing's plans to rewrite sections of Hong Kong's statute book after it regains control of the colony on July 1.
A further 10 committee members abstained from the vote, which was held at the close of a two-day session in Beijing.
"I do not agree with the abolishing of some of the ordinances, which include the Bill of Rights ordinances and the public order ordinance," said Frederick Fung, chairman of the Hong Kong Association for Democracy and People's Livelihood, who cast the sole dissenting vote.
"They were talking about striking out the laws, which I could not agree to because I could not find anything that is contradictory to the Basic Law," said Allen Lee, chairman of the pro-China, pro-business Liberal Party, who abstained.
China says its Basic Law, a mini-constitution for Hong Kong, will fully protect the colony's future autonomy and its residents' political and civil rights.
Beijing's plans to repeal or amend 25 of Hong Kong's laws and ordinances, including parts of the Bill of Rights as well as regulations on public assembly, have prompted protests from Britain and democracy activists in the colony.
Hong Kong Governor Chris Patten slammed the plan on Thursday as a repugnant proposal to dilute the territory's civil liberties.
China has defended the move, accusing Western media of distorting the nature of the proposed changes and saying that only those provisions that contradict laws dealing with international affairs or national defence will be removed.
Hong Kong's post-colonial leader Tung Chee-hwa, who is attending the crucial committee meeting in Beijing, has supported Beijing, saying the international community has misconstrued the situation.
"I think things are being done in a very orderly, proper manner," Tung said on Saturday. "The Basic Law explicitly provides freedom and our rights."
Following the Preparatory Committee's motion to recommend Beijing's planned legal changes for the colony, the proposals would now go to China's National People's Congress for a final decision, Tung said but gave no timetable.
Some of the 25 laws and articles set to be repealed or altered include some that are the product of recent British-led reforms while others are the trappings of the colonial era.
