The Beijing-appointed committee handling Hong Kong's return to Chinese rule wrapped up a two-day session in Beijing on Saturday with an endorsement of China's plans to scrap some civil liberties after the takeover.
Just one of the 150 members of the Preparatory Committee voted against the motion to approve Beijing's plans to scrap or rewrite sections of Hong Kong's statute book after it regains control of the British colony on July 1 this year. A further 10 members abstained.
"I do not agree with the abolishing of some of the ordinances, which include the Bill of Rights ordinances and the public order ordinance," said Frederick Fung, chairman of the Hong Kong Association for Democracy and People's Livelihood, who cast the sole dissenting vote.
On Friday Fung had handed a letter to Chinese Foreign Minister Qian Qichen protesting against Beijing's proposed changes, such as rolling back on rights and on public assembly.
"They were talking about striking out the laws, which I could not agree to because I could not find anything that is contradictory to the Basic Law," said Allen Lee, chairman of the pro-China, pro-business Liberal Party, who abstained.
Hong Kong's post-colonial leader Tung Chee-hwa, who attended the crucial committee meeting in Beijing, supported the moves, saying the liberties of the territory's 6.3 million people were already enshrined in its mini-constitution, the Basic Law.
"I think things are being done in a very orderly, proper manner," Tung told reporters on Saturday. "The Basic Law explicitly provides freedom and our rights."
However, Tung stressed Hong Kong's right to make its own decisions after it elects a legislature in 1998.
"After 1998 we are masters of our own house, we can decide what is right for ourselves, what is right for our community."
Beijing's plans to repeal or amend 25 of Hong Kong's laws and ordinances, including parts of the Bill of Rights as well as regulations on public assembly, have prompted protests from Britain and democracy activists in the colony.
Hong Kong Governor Chris Patten called the committee's decision to back the measures "disturbing".
"Once again we have the impression of legal arguments hastily thrown together, policies made up as we go along," Patten said in a statement following the vote.
Washington has expressed concern over the proposed changes. Britain has summoned the Chinese ambassador to lodge a protest and Foreign Minister Malcolm Rifkind plans to pursue the issue at a meeting with his Chinese counterpart Qian next month.
China has defended the move, saying only that those provisions that contradict laws dealing with international affairs or national defence will be removed.
Following the Preparatory Committee's motion to recommend Beijing's planned legal changes for the colony, the proposals will now go to China's National People's Congress, its rubber-stamp parliament, for ratification, Tung said. He gave no timetable.
The 25 laws and articles to be repealed or altered include some that are the product of recent British-led reforms while others are the trappings of the colonial era.
The committee also voted to legitimise Tung's pre-handover official work and that of the controversial provisional legislature, hand-picked by Beijing to replace an elected body.
It supported a measure granting Tung the authority to decide whether some incumbent civil servants would serve after the handover and the power to appoint more members to municipal and district bodies, a move critics say will dilute the voice of Hong Kong's pro-democracy camp.
