Negotiators from China and the United States resumed last-ditch talks on Saturday to hammer out a new textile accord and a deal on market access after extending for a day the deadline for a cross-Pacific trade war.
Chief U.S. textile negotiator Rita Hayes said she was confident of an agreement on Saturday in a fifth day of talks with officials of China's Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation.
"We felt like we had made tremendous progress and we are looking to complete negotiations today," she told Reuters before leaving for the ministry. "You're always positive you can reach an agreement but you have to balance it out."
Hayes and Chinese officials wrangled late into Friday night to try to iron out problems in renewing a 1994 textile accord and to resolve a dispute over U.S. penalties on Chinese exports.
The United States had extended by a day the deadline for agreement on a new textile accord with China, Hayes said.
"I felt like it was important to extend it, the deadline, for one day... so we could get a fresh start this morning," Hayes said as she left for the eleventh-hour talks.
"We did not complete the agreement... so we felt like we'd have one extra day to complete it," she said. "We didn't finish last night so we are re-evaluating where we are and will continue negotiations this morning."
She said the U.S. side was still focusing on two major demands -- its market access package and a level playing field for the textile industry.
"The two main things that we have been consistently concerned about are the market access that China has to the United States... and also making sure that it is balanced, that we have a market access package from China," she said.
Disagreement over market access in China appeared to be a major stumbling block, industry representatives said earlier.
However, they said hopes for a deal were high, with Hayes and her team believed to be putting the finishing touches to the text of an agreement.
"I expect the reason for the talks not wrapping up is market access," said National Retail Federation vice-president Robert P. Hall said on Friday. "This is an issue that is not traditionally part of apparel bilaterals."
Washington slapped $19 million worth of penalties on imports of Chinese textiles last September, saying Beijing was shipping textiles through third countries to evade quota restrictions.
China has threatened to retaliate by temporarily banning imports of some U.S. textiles, farm goods and alcoholic drinks but has delayed such action to allow time for further talks.
Washington could make significant cuts to China's textile quotas if agreement could not be reached before the previous deadline of January 31, Hayes has said. The United States would not give China another extension of the deadline, she said.
Washington and Beijing were also seeking to ease tensions in a dispute over Chinese exports of textiles via third countries.
