China and the United States have made headway in talks on Beijing's accession to the World Trade Organisation, with Washington keen to move ahead at the start of President Bill Clinton's second term, diplomats said on Monday.
Visiting U.S. trade official Lee Sands held talks with his Chinese counterparts last week on Beijing's long-stalled application for entry to the WTO and a Beijing-based diplomat said there was a sense of optimism both sides were making progress.
"We have not fixed any deadline yet but things are really moving with some momentum here and we very, very much want to have China in the organisation," the diplomat said.
"There is...at their highest levels a recognition again that this is important to both of our interests," another diplomat said.
China now had a golden opportunity to resolve the continuing dispute over its WTO entry because U.S. trade officials wanted to kick off Clinton's second term with a major victory, the diplomat said.
"The more sort of politically savvy (Chinese) that we've conversed with on WTO recognise that there is a year of real opportunity here," the diplomat said.
"These are moments that China would, in its own self interest, be well-advised to seize," he said.
China's entry into the global trade body has been an issue of intense bilateral debate, with Beijing seeking membership under the favourable terms accorded developing countries and Washington arguing its economy is too big for such special treatment.
"We can perhaps during the course of the next year work constructively to try and come up with something which would end this process and bring China into the WTO," the diplomat said.
China failed in its bid to gain WTO membership at the inception of the world body in 1995 because of stiff resistance not only from the United States but also from Europe and Japan.
Washington has said Beijing must comply with a "road map", and issues still on the negotiating table included removal of non-tariff barriers, standardisation of customs procedures and elimination of subsidies to domestic industries, diplomats said.
"What you have to do is provide opportunities for industries to be able to trade fairly and on a level playing field," the second diplomat said.
China's trade surplus with the United States had swollen to about $38.9 billion in 1996 from about $34 billion in 1995, he said. Beijing says its figures show a net trade deficit with Washington.
The growing trade gap has increasingly become a source of cross-Pacific friction, with U.S. industries demanding more access to the huge Chinese market as China's economy continues to boom, the first diplomat said.
While many senior Chinese officials were becoming more aware of the benefits WTO membership could bring to China, Beijing would have to be prepared to shoulder the responsibilities that came with being a world trade power.
"They become big players on a big stage, but you don't do that irresponsibly," the first diplomat said.
