China is growing more aware of the importance of human rights in Sino-U.S. ties, but Washington still plans to sponsor a U.N. resolution slamming Beijing unless further progress is made, diplomats said on Monday.
A visiting team of U.S. officials that held talks last week on a range of issues including human rights had left feeling confident Beijing was aware of the importance of rights in the cross-Pacific relationship, one Beijing-based diplomat said.
"The Chinese correctly identify human rights as an area where there's a continuing danger that the relationship's momentum could be negatively affected," the diplomat said.
Unless Beijing improved its handling of fundamental freedoms, Washington expected to co-sponsor a United Nations draft resolution in Geneva condemning China's record, he said.
Beijing has succeeded in quashing such resolutions for the past six years with the support of developing nations, many of which have faced criticism from Washington over human rights.
The United States was pressuring China to release political prisoners, allow Red Cross inspection of its prisons and abide by U.N. covenants on civil, political and economic rights, the first diplomat said. "If we do not see discernible progress in the areas... we will go ahead with the resolution," he said.
The U.S. State Department last week released its annual human rights report, which slammed Beijing for abuses of basic freedoms, saying all active dissidents had either been jailed or driven into exile.
Such pressure and calls by Western nations for Beijing to lighten its heavy-handed treatment of political dissidents had helped achieve release of several prisoners of conscience, a third diplomat said.
Beijing last month released on parole Hong Kong journalist Xi Yang, jailed in 1994 for stealing state secrets, and last November freed leading dissident Chen Ziming to receive medical treatment.
"Those people probably would not have been released were it not for international expressions of human rights concerns over the long term," the diplomat said.
Strict limits remained on personal and political freedoms in China but the liberalisation of the economy was steadily eroding Beijing's authoritarianism, the first diplomat said.
"The average Chinese person enjoys a range of personal freedoms that is far, far greater than any of us or them would have imagined 15 years ago," he said.
New U.S. Secretary of State Madeline Albright had vowed to fully engage the Chinese on human rights while not allowing Sino-U.S. ties to fall prey to bickering over any one issue, he said.
"This is an administration that really is committed to full, across the board engagement with China on as many tracks as we can move the relationship," he said.
A series of high-level visits this year would help keep on track Sino-U.S. ties, which have been plagued by rows over such issues as human rights, trade and Taiwan, he said.
Albright is expected to visit China in late February and Vice President Al Gore is to come in late March. U.S. President Bill Clinton and his Chinese counterpart Jiang Zemin have agreed to an exchange of state visits, the first since 1989.
The diplomats said U.S. officials would continue to raise the human rights issues with the Chinese at every opportunity.
"It is a kind of conversation we have with China and other countries that is going to be there as far ahead as we can possibly see," the first diplomat said.
