"Don't puff up an ox skin," Chinese say to braggarts, but in the Year of the Ox, China expects to have much to puff about.
"It is a good time to settle domestic affairs and put your house in order," says a horoscope in The Handbook of Chinese Horoscopes by Theodora Lau for the year that begins on Friday.
China's communist rulers have already started to make sure their house is in order for the arrival of the ox, but they will have to toil like farm beasts to push through their ambitious agenda.
China's leaders have already taken the theme that 1997 will be one of the most significant years in the history of the People's Republic -- founded by Chairman Mao Zedong in the Year of the Ox in 1949 -- as their signature tune for the year.
Hong Kong reverts to Chinese sovereignty at midnight on June 30 after more than 150 years of British colonial control, and a crucial Communist Party congress that will chart China's path for the next five years is to be held later in the year.
"The Year of the Ox will be an auspicious year," Foreign Minister Qian Qichen recently predicted.
He invoked bovine metaphors to try to soothe worries over the change of sovereignty in Hong Kong amid protests against Beijing's plans to roll back civil rights in the territory.
"With lowered heads we are working as hard as oxen," said Qian, who heads the committee handling Hong Kong's return.
Many Chinese bureaucrats have already been yoked into the task of preparing the enormous document that will be issued when China's most powerful officials gather late in the year for the five-yearly Communist Party congress that will reshuffle top jobs and set policy into the 21st century.
The new party line and who will get what job are matters for intense speculation among Chinese, but the horoscope book is unequivocal in its advice for the new year.
"Better stick to routine and support conservative policies," it says.
China analysts say it is unlikely that party chief and state president Jiang Zemin -- born in the Year of the Tiger -- would risk anything other than a cautious and conservative approach in a year that could see confirmation of his supremacy as paramount leader Deng Xiaoping passes from the scene.
For those born in the Year of the Ox, the arrival of one's birth animal can herald inauspicious events, one Chinese analyst said.
"To have the year of your birth come around is not always good luck," the Chinese analyst said.
The 1949 genesis of the communist state was an ox year, and officials have said political stability is key to ensuring Beijing can accomplish its goals without a hitch this year.
"For the rebels, it may be worthwhile to point out that although the stoical Ox is soft-spoken, he carries a big stick, and this is his year," says Theodora Lau's handbook.
Average Chinese may be more concerned about where the beef is with the dawning of the Year of the Ox, the second year in the 12-animal Chinese lunar cycle.
China's booming economy and greater exposure to Western culinary habits has fuelled demand for beef and milk among urban hip Chinese who grew up on a diet of pork.
Beef output has seen double-digit growth for several years and the number of dairy cows in Beijing has doubled to 60,000 from 10 years ago.
Business is booming at 100 outlets of U.S. hamburger giant McDonald's nationwide, with many Chinese parents likely to take their children for a burger as part of new year festivities.
One traditional Chinese delicacy not likely to be found on the fast-food chain's menu is ox penis, a dish said to confer upon the diner the bull's reputed sexual stamina.
