Chinese authorities have imposed a curfew on a town in the mainly Moslem region of northwestern Xinjiang after at least 10 people were killed in a separatist riot last week, officials and local residents said on Monday.
At least 10 people were killed and many wounded last Wednesday when 1,000 Moslem separatists of the Uighur ethnic minority rampaged through Yining, smashing cars, burning shops and beating up Han Chinese to protest against Beijing rule.
"Both Han Chinese and Uighurs were killed or injured," a propaganda official said by telephone from Yining in the Yili Kazakh Autonomous Prefecture near the border with Kazakhstan.
A Chinese source with close links to the government said the separatist riot was among the most violent for many years in Xinjiang, where Moslems are in the majority and ethnic Han Chinese make up just 38 percent of the population.
"A circular has been issued and broadcast on television ordering people not to go out after dark," said one local resident, a Han Chinese. "We don't go out after the sun sets. There is a curfew every night."
Local officials described the riot as a small incident fuelled by unidentified "foreign hostile forces" and refused to say how many people had been killed or injured.
However, the Chinese source said at least 10 people had been killed, including one police officer, and many wounded and arrested.
"One police officer was stabbed to death," said the source, who declined to be further identified.
The Hong Kong-based Ming Pao newspaper said rioters set fire to the bodies of those killed. About 100 were wounded, it said.
The rioters attacked ethnic Han Chinese on sight, smashed cars and set fire to shops, forcing local authorities to send out about 1,000 police and paramilitary People's Armed Police to quell the riot, one Han resident said.
"They said they wanted the Han out of Xinjiang," he said.
The riot erupted after a Chinese policeman tried to arrest a man of the ethnic Uighur minority, the Chinese source said.
"The police tried to arrest a Uighur criminal suspect but the suspect and his family resisted arrest," the source told Reuters by telephone.
"The scene attracted neighbours and onlookers and the crowd swelled to more than 1,000 and turned into rioting," he said. "The police were called in and fired teargas to dispel the crowd."
The demonstrators, shouting anti-Chinese slogans, had marched on a government building and police had asked them to disperse, said the propaganda official in Yining, about 700 km (440 miles) northwest of the Xinjiang capital, Urumqi.
"There was a demonstration and they shouted slogans calling for Han Chinese to be driven out of Xinjiang and for Xinjiang to be split from the motherland," he said, adding that the rioters had "used the pretext of religion".
The festival to mark the end of Ramadan, the Moslem month of fasting, fell at the weekend, overlapping with China's celebration of the biggest holiday in its calendar, the lunar new year, last Friday.
Xinjiang, considered by many Chinese a wild frontier territory, has a long history of ethnic clashes between the native population of mainly Moslem ethnic minorities and the ruling Han Chinese.
