Chinese authorities have imposed a curfew on a town in the restive northwestern Xinjiang region after at least 10 people were killed in a separatist Moslem riot last week, officials and local residents said on Monday.
At least 10 people were killed and many wounded when about 1,000 Moslem separatists of the Uighur ethnic minority rampaged through Yining last Wednesday, smashing cars, burning shops and beating up Han Chinese to protest against Beijing rule.
"Both Han Chinese and Uighurs were killed or injured," a propaganda official said by telephone from Yining in the Yili Kazakh Autonomous Prefecture near the border with Kazakhstan.
A Chinese source with close links to the government said the riot was among the most violent for many years in Xinjiang, where Turkic-speaking Uighurs are in the majority and ethnic Han Chinese make up just 38 percent of the population.
"A circular has been issued and broadcast on television ordering people not to go out after dark," said a Han resident.
"We don't go out after the sun sets. There is a curfew every night."
"We don't dare to go out," said a Han businessman, adding that Yining was rocked by a similar, smaller riot in August.
Officials described the riot as a small incident fuelled by "foreign hostile forces" and refused to say how many people were killed or wounded. Yining is 50 km (30 miles) from the border with Kazakhstan, where many exiled Uighur separatists live.
However, the Chinese source said at least 10 people had been killed, including one police officer, and many wounded and arrested.
"One police officer was stabbed to death," said the source, who declined to be further identified.
The riot erupted after a Chinese policeman tried to arrest a Uighur, he said. "The police tried to arrest a Uighur criminal suspect but the suspect and his family resisted arrest."
"The scene attracted neighbours and onlookers and the crowd swelled to more than 1,000 and turned into rioting," he said.
"The police were called in and fired teargas to dispel the crowd."
Rioters attacked ethnic Han Chinese on sight, smashed cars and set fire to shops, forcing local authorities to send out about 1,000 police and paramilitary People's Armed Police to quell the violence, the Han businessman said.
"Many people died," he said. "Probably some 100 people were wounded."
Hong Kong's Ming Pao newspaper said rioters set fire to the bodies of those killed.
The demonstrators, shouting anti-Chinese slogans, had marched on a government building and police had asked them to disperse, said the propaganda official in Yining, about 700 km (440 miles) northwest of the Xinjiang capital, Urumqi.
"There was a demonstration and they shouted slogans calling for Han Chinese to be driven out of Xinjiang and for Xinjiang to be split from the motherland," he said, adding that the rioters had "used the pretext of religion".
Xinjiang, considered by many Chinese as a wild frontier territory, has a long history of ethnic clashes between the native population of mainly Moslem ethnic minorities and the ruling Han Chinese.
Xinjiang authorities last year stepped up a crackdown on separatists and underground religious activity after a series of violent clashes, bombings and assassination attempts on officials and Moslem leaders regarded as pro-Beijing.
Last May, Beijing ordered tighter controls along Xinjiang's lengthy border to block the smuggling of weapons and subversive materials from nearby central Asian states.
