Chinese police cordoned off a South Korean embassy compound on Thursday and North Korean diplomats lurked outside as an official from Seoul met the most senior North Korean to defect from the Stalinist state.
But Beijing officials, apparently angered by Seoul's decision to export its latest row with Pyongyang into China, avoided meeting Kim Ha-jung, a special adviser to South Korean Foreign Yoo Chong-ha, South Korean sources said.
South Korean embassy officials had earlier said the Seoul Foreign Ministry envoy was meeting Chinese officials to discuss the fate of the defector, Hwang Jang-yop, a senior aide to North Korean leader Kim Jong-il.
Chinese police blocked streets to Seoul's consular section in the sedate, tree-lined diplomatic district of Beijing, and embassy officials said Hwang and his assistant were inside.
Hwang, 73, is one of the chief architects of North Korean communism, and the highest ranking official from the world's last Stalinist state to seek asylum in the South.
Kim met Hwang in the consular office, South Korean sources said. No other details were available.
China avoided direct comment after finding itself in the eye of a diplomatic storm involving its old communist comrade and a new commercial ally and major source of investment, choosing instead to appeal for calm.
"Regarding the transit through Beijing by Hwang Jang-yop, we were not notified in advance," a Foreign Ministry spokesman said, in a signal of China's anger.
"We hope the parties concerned can deal with this matter calmly and on the basis of the overall circumstances, and appropriately handle this to safeguard the peace and stability of the Korean peninsula," the spokesman added.
Previous, low-profile defectors from the North have made their way quietly through China, apparently after making contact with the South Korean embassy, but Seoul did not publicise their journey until they were out of China.
Seoul announced Hwang's defection on Wednesday.
South Korean Foreign Minister Yoo Chong-ha was to meet his Chinese counterpart Qian Qichen in Singapore on Friday morning at 9 a.m. (0100 GMT) to discuss the diplomatic crisis.
In a sign of the suspicion that underscores dealings between North and South, South Korean embassy officials accused North Koreans of trying to force their way into the consular office and called for Chinese police protection.
Diplomats from Pyongyang sat in parked cars outside the consular compound and waited outside the embassy, watching from behind police cordons.
"Last night, North Korean people who we believe were from the embassy tried to enter our consular section," embassy spokesman Chang Moon Ik told reporters. Chinese police on guard prevented the North Koreans from entering, he said.
"We have asked the Chinese government to protect our embassy compound... against North Koreans and any unexpected (incidents)," he said.
He dismissed Pyongyang's charges that Hwang, one of 11 secretaries on the powerful secretariat of North Korea's ruling Workers' Party, had been kidnapped by the South, saying Hwang had arrived in a taxi and voluntarily sought asylum.
North Korean diplomats stood by the kidnapping charge.
"I think South Korea has kidnapped these two officials," said one of several North Korean officials waiting in the office tower housing Seoul's embassy. "The impossible has happened."
"We expect that the Chinese side will take appropriate measures in this regard," a North Korean official said.
South and North Korea were separated at the end of World War Two and fought a war from 1950 to 1953. China fought on North Korea's side in the conflict.
