Chinese police cordoned off a South Korean embassy compound and North Korean diplomats waited outside as a senior Seoul official was due for talks with Beijing on the apparent defection of a top Pyongyang official.
Dozens of Chinese police blocked streets to South Korea's consular section in the sedate, tree-lined diplomatic district of Beijing, and embassy officials said Hwang Jang-yop, a senior aide to the North's leader Kim Jong-il, was holed up inside.
China remained silent as it found itself at the centre of a diplomatic crisis involving its old communist comrade, Pyongyang, and new commercial ally, Seoul.
South Korea sent Kim Ha-jung, a special adviser to Foreign Minister Yoo Chong-ha, to Beijing on Thursday morning for talks with Chinese officials on the fate of Hwang who it said had sought asylum along with his assistant Kim Dok-hong.
In a sign of the suspicion that underscores dealings between North and South, South Korean embassy officials accused North Koreans of trying to force their way into the consular office.
Diplomats from Pyongyang sat in parked cars outside the consular compound and waited outside the embassy, watching from behind the police cordons.
"Last night, North Korean people who we believe were from the embassy tried to enter our consular section," embassy spokesman Chang Moon-Ik told reporters.
Chinese police on guard around the compound had prevented the North Koreans from entering, he said.
He dismissed Pyongyang's charges that Hwang, one of 11 secretaries on the powerful secretariat of North Korea's ruling Workers' Party, Jong-il, had been kidnapped by the South, saying Hwang had voluntarily sought asylum.
"He came by taxi without any notice," the spokesman said.
North Korean diplomats stood by the kidnapping charge.
"I think South Korea has kidnapped these two officials," said one of several North Korean officials waiting in the office tower housing Seoul's embassy. "The impossible has happened."
An official at the North Korean embassy repeated a Pyongyang Foreign Ministry statement that accused Seoul of kidnapping Hwang and urged Beijing to sort out the mess.
"If it is brought to light that the South Korean authorities kidnapped him and describe him as seeking 'asylum', we will regard it as a serious incident without precedent and take due countermeasures," the Korean Central News Agency quoted a Pyongyang Foreign Ministry spokesman as saying.
"We expect that the Chinese side will take appropriate measures in this regard," the spokesman added.
Beijing is caught in the wrangle between North Korea, one of its last remaining socialist allies, and the capitalist South, which has become an important trading partner and source of investment.
Hwang, 73, is one of the chief architects of North Korean communism, and would be the highest ranking Pyongyang official ever to seek asylum in the South.
He is credited with playing a leading role in shaping the policy of Juche, a brand of fanatic self-reliance providing the ideological underpinning for the world's last Stalinist state.
South and North Korea were separated at the end of World War Two and fought a war from 1950 to 1953. China fought on North Korea's side in the conflict.
