Chinese police cordoned off a South Korean embassy compound and North Korean diplomats waited outside as a senior Seoul official began talks in Beijing on the apparent defection of a top Pyongyang official.
Kim Ha-jung, a special adviser to South Korean Foreign Minister Yoo Chong-ha, arrived in Beijing and sat down at once for talks with Chinese officials on the diplomatic crisis, South Korean embassy officials said.
Chinese police blocked streets to Seoul's consular section in the sedate, tree-lined diplomatic district of Beijing, and embassy officials said Hwang Jang-yop, a senior aide to North Korean leader Kim Jong-il, and his assistant were inside.
Hwang, 73, is one of the chief architects of North Korean communism, and would be the highest ranking official from the world's last Stalinist state to seek asylum in the South.
China avoided direct comment after finding itself in the eye of a diplomatic storm involving its old communist comrade, Pyongyang, and new commercial ally, Seoul, and chose instead to appeal for calm.
"Regarding the passage through Beijing city by Hwang Jang-yop, we were not notified in advance," a Foreign Ministry spokeswoman said.
"We hope the parties concerned can deal with this matter calmly and on the basis of the overall circumstances, and appropriately handle this in the interests of the peace and stability of the Korean peninsula," she said.
In a sign of the suspicion that underscores dealings between North and South, South Korean embassy officials accused North Koreans of trying to force their way into the consular office and had called for Chinese police protection.
Diplomats from Pyongyang sat in parked cars outside the consular compound and waited outside the embassy, watching from behind the police cordons.
"Last night, North Korean people who we believe were from the embassy tried to enter our consular section," embassy spokesman Chang Moon Ik told reporters. Chinese police on guard prevented the North Koreans from entering, he said.
"We have asked the Chinese government to protect our embassy compound... against North Koreans and any unexpected (incidents)," he said.
He dismissed Pyongyang's charges that Hwang, one of 11 secretaries on the powerful secretariat of North Korea's ruling Workers' Party, had been kidnapped by the South, saying Hwang had voluntarily sought asylum.
"He came by taxi without any notice," Chang said.
North Korean diplomats stood by the kidnapping charge.
"I think South Korea has kidnapped these two officials," said one of several North Korean officials waiting in the office tower housing Seoul's embassy. "The impossible has happened."
An official at the North Korean embassy repeated a Pyongyang Foreign Ministry statement that accused Seoul of kidnapping Hwang and urged Beijing to sort out the mess.
"If it is brought to light that the South Korean authorities kidnapped him and describe him as seeking 'asylum', we will regard it as a serious incident without precedent and take due countermeasures," the Korean Central News Agency quoted a Pyongyang Foreign Ministry spokesman as saying.
"We expect that the Chinese side will take appropriate measures in this regard," the spokesman added.
South and North Korea were separated at the end of World War Two and fought a war from 1950 to 1953. China fought on North Korea's side in the conflict.
