More and more Chinese suitors are using Valentine's Day as an excuse to open their hearts to the ones they love but rose merchants reaping huge profits may be even more passionate about the traditional lovers' day.
Banned as bourgeois decadence in China's ultra-leftist 1966-76 Cultural Revolution, Valentine's Day has since emerged as an opportunity for shy lovers to make public expressions of affection -- and as a red-letter day for flower sellers.
The Beijing Flower Supermarket, which supplies the capital with 80 percent of its fresh flowers, expects to see sales jump 400 percent on Valentine's Day this year, said one salesman with a company affiliated with the market.
"I estimate the market will sell about one million flowers," Kong Li of the Beijing Huaxianzi Flower Delivery Co said in an interview. "Valentine's Day is our most lively day."
FROM RED BOOKS TO RED ROSES
Scenes of fanatical Red Guards waving little red books of Chairman Mao Zedong's quotations have given way to a growing army of amorous youth bearing red roses, who are more passionate about the opposite sex than about the latest political pronouncements from Beijing.
"The Chinese love excitement and a reason to get worked up. Valentine's Day is an excuse to do that," Kong said.
"When there were no flowers, Chinese used other ways to express their feelings. Now that we have fresh flowers more people like to give them as gifts," Kong said.
Nearly two decades of market-oriented reforms launched by paramount leader Deng Xiaoping have mixed the forces of the market with those of the heart, with lucrative results for pedlars of petals.
A budding flower industry emerged in China in the mid-1980s but it wasn't until Deng put his seal of approval on the country's capitalist-style reforms in 1992 that the sector really started to bloom, Kong said.
"Flowers have become more popular mainly because of the reforms and opening up," he said.
A ROSE FOR HALF A WEEK'S INCOME
Fresh roses for Valentine's Day are flown to wintry Beijing mainly from major growing areas around the southern boomtown of Guangzhou in Guangdong province and Kunming in the temperate southwestern province of Yunnan, Kong said.
Many roses are also imported from the Netherlands, he said.
Demand for roses on Valentine's Day can send the price of a single flower soaring to 50 yuan ($6.00), or half a week's income for an average urban resident.
Beijing's flower dealers normally purchase domestic roses for around five yuan each from southern growers but the price can jump as high as 15 yuan in the run-up to Valentine's Day, Kong said.
Retail prices can be more than double that by the time the flowers hit the stalls in Beijing.
"We can sell a Chinese rose for 25 yuan on Valentine's Day. Imported ones can sell for 50 yuan," he said. An average city dweller made about 420 yuan a month in 1995.
Flower sellers who rent stall space at the state-run flower market reap huge profits from the mark-ups.
"I can make 10,000 yuan in profit on a good day like Valentine's Day," said Liu Cheng, manager of one stall.
FASHIONABLY HIP YOUTH ARE GENEROUS LOVERS
Whereas institutional buyers such as hotels and corporations made up the bulk of business in the past, ordinary residents with more money in their pockets are increasingly becoming the mainstay of the industry, Kong said.
"One guy last year bought 900 roses for Valentine's Day," stall manager Liu said.
Trend-conscious young people were sending more flowers to friends and relatives for birthdays and at the new year as well as on Valentine's Day, Kong said.
"It's mostly young people in their 20s," Kong said. "Most of those who buy flowers are well-educated and cultured."
Kong predicted the Beijing flower market would double within three years, but hefty prices could be a thorn in the side for less well-off Chinese hoping to send their sweethearts a token of their affection.
"Fifty yuan a rose? I think I'd give some chocolates instead," one Beijing resident said when asked if he would purchase flowers for his wife on Valentine's Day.
($1 = 8.3 yuan)
