Police sealed off South Korea's embassy and consular office in China's capital Beijing on Thursday after one of North Korea's top officials was reported to have sought asylum from Seoul.
Dozens of police were posted along the quiet, tree-lined streets around the South Korean embassy's consular section in the diplomatic district of Beijing and had sealed roads leading into the area.
"No one is allowed to come through here," one policeman told a Chinese trying to reach the consular section, housed in a two-storey building in a garden compound, to apply for a visa.
Police declined to say whether the area had been sealed off after Seoul announced on Wednesday that Hwang Jang-yop, a senior aide to the North's leader Kim Jong-il, had sought asylum at its embassy in Beijing, along with his assistant Kim Dok-hong.
At the main South Korean embassy in a glass and concrete office block in central Beijing, Chinese police prevented anyone approaching the fourth floor office.
"This is Chinese territory, you are not on embassy ground so you have to leave," one Chinese police officer said.
South Korean embassy officials were unavailable to comment, and secretarial staff said they were all in meetings.
China's Foreign Ministry said it had no immediate statement on the situation.
An official at the North Korean embassy in Beijing repeated allegations by Pyongyang that Hwang, one of 11 secretaries on the powerful secretariat of the Workers' Party, must have been kidnapped.
The official refused to comment further, saying the statement by North Korea's Foreign Ministry on Wednesday that Hwang's defection was "inconceivable and impossible" was correct.
"If it is true that Hwang Jang-yop is in the South Korean 'embassy' in Beijing, it is obvious that he has been kidnapped by the enemy. We are seeking information from the Chinese side through relevant channels," the Korean Central News Agency quoted the Pyongyang Foreign Ministry spokesman as saying.
"If it is brought to light that the South Korean authorities kidnapped him and describe him as seeking "asylum," we will regard it as a serious incident without precedent and take due countermeasures," he said.
"We expect that the Chinese side will take appropriate measures in this regard," the spokesman added.
A South Korean unification ministry spokesman in Seoul said on Thursday the North's claim was "preposterous". He said South Korea aimed to step up diplomatic efforts to grant Hwang's wish to seek asylum.
Hwang, 73, is one of the chief architects of North Korean communism, and would be the highest ranking Pyongyang official ever to seek asylum in the South.
He is credited with playing a leading role in shaping the policy of Juche, a brand of fanatic self-reliance providing the ideological underpinning for the world's last Stalinist state.
South and North Korea were separated at the end of World War Two and fought a war from 1950 to 1953. China fought on North Korea's side in the conflict.
