China urged calm on Friday as it negotiated with South Korea on the fate of a top North Korean asylum-seeker stranded in Seoul's mission in Beijing and waiting Pyongyang officials said they wanted to lure the turncoat home.
China warned of a drawn-out standoff after it was dragged unwillingly into the squabble between the two bitter enemies and found itself faced with making a decision that must anger either an old communist comrade or a new friend and wealthy investor.
Hwang Jang-yop, the leading North Korean ideologue who has said he wants to leave a country run as a dictatorship, spent a third day with an aide in Seoul's consular office as a Chinese bullet-proof car waited at the door and dozens of police surrounded the building.
Chinese Foreign Minister Qian Qichen met his South Korean counterpart Yoo Chong-ha in Singapore but the talks failed to break a deadlock over the 73-year-old defector, the most senior Pyongyang official to flee the North.
"This incident happened all of a sudden, so we need more time to investigate," Qian told reporters after the meeting.
Qian urged both Koreas "to treat this matter with a cool and calm manner, to keep peace and stability".
"It can't be solved so quickly as imagined," Chinese spokesman Guo Chongli told reporters in Singapore.
Seoul's Yoo said Friday's talks were "good".
South Korean officials said talks would resume through diplomatic channels in Seoul and Beijing,
Diplomats say China may have little choice but to give in to the defector's wishes, thus angering one of its last remaining socialist allies and raising fears of new tensions on the divided Korean peninsula, where two of the world's largest armies face each other.
Seoul sees the highest-level defection from the Stalinist North as a major coup that could produce a treasure trove of intelligence on a secretive government it fears is plotting its destruction.
For Pyongyang, the loss of the chief architect of its national ideology of Juche, a doctrine of fanatic self-reliance, is another blow on top of destabilising food shortages.
It is a slap in the face for Pyongyang's top leader Kim Jong-il, whose 55th birthday party on Sunday was intended to smooth the way for his formal accession to the posts of state president and general secretary of the ruling Worker's Party.
Hwang was a close adviser to Kim Jong-il and one of 11 secretaries on the powerful secretariat of the Workers' Party.
In the sedate, tree-lined diplomatic district of Beijing, dozens of Chinese police cordoned off Seoul's consular section, where Hwang reportedly spent the day reading.
Hwang, who could face summary execution or a lifetime in the gulag if he goes back to the North, was in good health and sleeping well, a South Korean embassy spokesman said.
A North Korean official standing outside the police cordon said Pyongyang had no plans to storm the compound to recover a countryman Pyongyang had said was kidnapped.
"We are waiting here for him to come out and then ask him to come back," said the official who declined to identify himself.
"If China allows him to go to South Korea then we will be disappointed," said another North Korean, one of about 10 waiting beyond the police cordon, trademark badges of the late North Korean leader Kim Il-sung pinned to their lapels. "It will be regrettable."
South and North Korea were separated at the end of World War Two and fought a war from 1950 to 1953 which ended with a truce, not a peace treaty. China fought on North Korea's side in the conflict.
