A North Korean embassy official warned on Sunday that Pyongyang would respond with force if the South compelled the highest-level defector from the Stalinist state to go to Seoul.
"If the South uses force to move him to South Korea we will respond with force," said a North Korean diplomat standing outside the heavily-guarded South Korean mission in Beijing where Hwang Jang-yop took refuge last Wednesday.
"We are determined to prevent them from taking him to the South," said the official, who declined to give his name.
"If he really defected why don't they let journalists interview him so he can say it for himself?" the official, one of several keeping vigil outside Seoul's consular office in the sedate, tree-lined diplomatic district in Beijing, told Reuters.
Tensions between the two Koreas have heightened further since two suspected North Korean agents on Saturday shot and seriously wounded a defector, who is a relative of Pyongyang leader Kim Jong-il's ex-wife, in Seoul.
The South Korean government called an emergency meeting of security-related ministers to discuss the attack later on Sunday, officials said.
Korean police said the victim, Li Il-nam, known in South Korea as Lee Han-yong, is the nephew of Sung Hye-rim, former wife of Kim Jong-il.
In Beijing, Chinese police have surrounded the South Korean embassy building, laying spikes on roads to the mission to prevent cars approaching and bringing in a huge water cannon truck in case of trouble.
A bullet-proof car was parked outside the door of the mission where Hwang, Pyongyang's top ideologue and a senior aide to leader Kim Jong-il, sought asylum along with an assistant.
The North Korean diplomat repeated charges that Hwang was kidnapped by Pyongyang's arch-rival, South Korea.
Seoul has dismissed the accusation as "preposterous", saying Hwang turned up at South Korea's consular office in a taxi.
Hwang was expected to remain marooned in the mission for a fifth day, with Beijing was unlikely to give in to his request for asylum in Seoul until after North Korea celebrates the 55th birthday of its top leader, Kim Jong-il, on Sunday.
The Pyongyang diplomat said he was certain Hwang would never forget such an important day in the North Korean calendar.
"Hwang, deep in his mind, will be thinking of this day and we believe he will celebrate it as well," the diplomat said.
In a letter reported to be written by Hwang and released by the Seoul authorities, the man who ranked 24th in Pyongyang's hierarchy has charged that his homeland has become a dictatorship racked by famine.
Hwang, the scholarly architect of North Korea's national ideology of Juche, or self-reliance, was reported to be adamant he wanted to go to South Korea -- and nowhere else.
"I will die here if my determination to go to South Korea cannot be realised," Hwang said in a statement released by Seoul authorities.
Hwang has become the focus of a Cold War tussle between the two Koreas, arch-enemies since their 1950-53 war ended only in a truce -- and a severe embarrassment to China.
China played for time as it agonised over a diplomatic quandary -- how to usher Hwang out of Beijing without offending its old socialist comrade or its new capitalist friend.
Beijing has appealed for calm on the Korean peninsula, where two of the world's largest armies face each other, while it investigates.
South Korea appeared to fall in with Beijing's approach after a meeting between its Foreign Minister Yoo Chong-ha and his Chinese counterpart Qian Qichen in Singapore on Friday failed to break the deadlock.
"I think we have started a good discussion with China and we have to wait and see," Yoo said in Singapore on Saturday. "I dont think that it's right now to make any judgment on this."
China has appealed for calm and warned that it may take some time to decide what to do with Hwang. Diplomats said China may have little choice but to follow Hwang's wishes.
