China has sounded an alarm over local authorities who kidnap and extort to protect regional interests, saying such actions are forms of corruption that are eating away at the power of the ruling Communist Party.
Beijing, already in the throes of a fierce anti-corruption drive, would launch a nationwide crackdown on abuse of local power from April to June this year, said the weekly magazine Outlook in an edition issued in Beijing on Monday.
The official magazine lashed out at regional authorities who protect local companies, who kidnap and extort and falsify books to safeguard local earnings.
Many courts and law authorities give favourable judgments to local firms or offices in cases involving parties from other regions of China, it said.
"Most often their goal is to protect the interests of a local party to the case and some aim to obtain greater legal costs or financial returns," the magazine said.
Such phenomena were a form of corruption and a result of growing "individualism" that threatens Communist Party rule.
"The nature of it is departmental selfishness, a mountain stronghold mentality and cliquism, and in the end it is closely linked to the everything-for-profit mentality of extreme individualism," the magazine railed.
Such actions resulted in obstruction of central government decrees and seriously weakened both ruling Communist Party and state, it said.
Chinese President and party chief Jiang Zemin has tried to stamp out abuse of official power, saying corruption is a virus that threatens the party's 47-year grip on power.
Analysts say the results of his anti-graft drive have been patchy at best, hampered by local officials who run virtual fiefdoms far from the centre of power in Beijing.
Many regional authorities had illegally seized the bank funds or assets of firms from other regions operating in their localities. Some had even resorted to kidnapping to extract money from outsiders, the magazine said.
"Most glaring is the method of illegally detaining hostages to demand payment of debts. Some methods are abominable and the results extremely serious," Outlook said without elaborating.
Lawyers and legal offices had committed serious ethical offences in bowing to the demands of local bosses by mishandling or pigeon-holing cases or by providing false evidence, it said.
"Some lawyers do not use facts as a foundation or the law as their yardstick and provide legal services for local departments trying to obtain illegal benefits," it said.
Banks and other financial organs had often hindered legal investigations by creating false accounts or receipts to help local units evade inspection or debt, it said.
Local firms or units that violated tax or customs laws could expect to be let off easy by officials, paying fines instead of facing criminal punishment or being slapped with more lenient penalties, it said.
"Some industrial, commercial and tax offices refuse to give information about local firms to other areas, or sometimes give out false information or supply fake evidence to help local enterprises evade responsibilities," it said.
