China on Tuesday played down fears over the health of paramount leader Deng Xiaoping that were fuelled after Communist Party chief Jiang Zemin cut short an out-of-town trip to visit the ailing patriarch.
"There has been no big change in Comrade Deng Xiaoping's health," Foreign Ministry spokesman Tang Guoqiang told a news briefing, but he gave no details of what would constitute a major change in the health of the fragile 92-year-old patriarch.
Tang declined to say if there had been a small change.
Officials of the State Council, or cabinet, who usually answer queries about Deng's health with the official line that he is as well as can be expected for a man of his age, could say only they were investigating the situation. Chinese sources said on Monday that Communist Party chief Jiang Zemin and Premier Li Peng both cut short provincial trips last weekend to return to Beijing to visit Deng.
Officials declined to comment directly on a tide of rumours washing around the Chinese capital concerning Deng's condition but diplomats said his health had likely deteriorated recently.
"It's been clear for a while that things have been...going downhill," said one Western diplomat.
One indication of Deng's worsening state was that officials and family members had backed off from forecasts that Deng would travel to Hong Kong to witness Beijing's resumption of rule over the British colony at midnight on June 30, the diplomat said.
"Clearly things are a bit on shaky ground," the diplomat said.
Taiwan's United Daily News quoted the island's top official on mainland affairs, Chang King-yuh, as saying Deng's condition was serious. Officials said they were closely monitoring his health.
Diplomats have said one barometer of Deng's health in China's highly-secretive political system is the travel of top leaders and close family members, with few considered willing to be caught out of town or abroad if Deng were close to death.
Chinese officials in the Philippines said visiting Defence Minister Chi Haotian would not change his travel plans there and Beijing's mission in Israel said Vice-Premier Li Lanqing would not interrupt his current trip to Israel and Iran.
Deng, whose pragmatic policies transformed a backward Stalinist state into an economic powerhouse, lives in a tightly-guarded central Beijing compound close to the Forbidden City, home for centuries to China's emperors.
A Hong Kong newspaper reported at the weekend that the architect of China's sweeping economic reforms was rushed to hospital last Thursday after a massive stroke that followed an earlier, mild stroke.
Doctors said that if Deng's stroke had been a haemorrhage he could have died within hours. If it was the formation of a blood clot, he could last days or weeks, they said.
Rumours about Deng's health surface periodically and often have a direct impact on China-related bourses, where Deng's demise is seen by some as a potentially destabilising factor.
Worries over Deng's health helped to push shares on Shanghai and Shenzhen stock exchanges sharply lower by their close on Tuesday and also rocked share prices in Taiwan and Hong Kong.
Deng has not been seen in public since the 1994 Chinese Lunar New Year festival when he appeared frail and faltering. He is thought to be in fragile health and with fading lucidity.
