China on Tuesday played down fears over the health of paramount leader Deng Xiaoping that were raised after Communist Party chief Jiang Zemin cut short an out-of-town trip to visit the ailing patriarch.
"There has been no big change in Comrade Deng Xiaoping's health," Foreign Ministry spokesman Tang Guoqiang told a news briefing, but gave no details of what would constitute a major change in the health of the fragile 92-year-old patriach.
Tang declined to comment when asked if there had been a small change.
Officials of the State Council, or cabinet, were unable to give their usual official response to queries about Deng's health -- that he is as well as can be expected for a man of his age -- saying merely they were investigating the situation.
Chinese sources said on Monday that Communist Party chief Jiang Zemin and Premier Li Peng both cut short out-of-town trips last weekend to return to Beijing to visit Deng.
Officials declined to comment directly on a tide of rumours washing around the Chinese capital that Deng's physical condition has deteriorated or that he suffered a stroke.
In Taipei, the mass circulation United Daily News quoted the top policymaker on mainland affairs, Chang King-yuh, as describing Deng's condition as serious. Officials said they were closely monitoring the Chinese leader's health.
Party chief Jiang, who is also state president and head of the army, returned at the weekend, cutting short an unpublicised visit to the communist revolutionary base of Ganzhou in central Jiangxi province, said one Chinese source close to the party.
Premier Li Peng also flew back to Beijing at the weekend, abruptly curtailing a tour of the booming southern province of Guangdong because of Deng's deteriorating health, said the source, who asked not to be identified. Officials in Guangdong confirmed Li had left early.
The two leaders returned to Beijing where they visited Deng, the source said.
Deng, whose pragmatic policies transformed a backward Stalinist state into an economic powerhouse, lives in a tightly-guarded central Beijing compound close to the Forbidden City, home for centuries to China's emperors.
Diplomats have said one barometer of Deng's health in China's highly-secretive political system is the travel of top leaders and close family members, with few considered willing to be caught out of town or abroad if Deng were close to death.
Vice-Premier Li Lanqing was abroad on a visit to Israel and Iran, and Defence Minister Chi Haotian was in the Philippines, where officials said he would not change his travel plans.
A Hong Kong newspaper reported at the weekend that the architect of China's sweeping economic reforms was rushed to hospital last Thursday after a huge stroke that followed an earlier, mild stroke.
Doctors said that if Deng's stroke had been a haemorrhage he could have died within hours, while if it was a thrombosis, or formation of a blood clot, he could last days or weeks.
Rumours about Deng's health surface periodically and often have a direct impact on China-related bourses, where Deng's demise is seen by some as a potentially destabilising factor.
Worries over Deng's health helped to push shares on Shanghai and Shenzhen stock exchanges sharply lower by their close on Tuesday and also rocked share prices in Taiwan and Hong Kong.
Deng has not been seen in public since the 1994 Chinese Lunar New Year festival when he appeared frail and faltering on a visit to Shanghai. He is now believed to be in fragile health and with fading lucidity.
Deng retired from his last official position in 1990, but China's elderly leaders exert great influence after their retirement in a society where age is revered and in a communist system in which officials spend years building up a power base.
