Chinese paramount leader Deng Xiaoping's death paves the way for his anointed heir Jiang Zemin to assume the reins of power after seven years of waiting in the wings for his patron to pass away.
President and Communist Party chief Jiang who takes full power with Deng's death is a technocrat and career communist with a sure grasp of Chinese politics but a personal history that has little in common with that of his revolutionary predecessors.
Jiang, who combines the largely symbolic title of president with the really powerful roles of Communist Party general secretary and chairman of the Central Military Commission, was widely seen as a bland compromise candidate when he shot to power from relative obscurity in 1989.
The former tractor factory manager has fought to emerge from the shadow of patriarch Deng, who died of respiratory failure at the age of 92 late on Wednesday.
Until his death, there was little doubt that Deng, ageing and wracked by Parkinson's disease, was the final arbiter of Chinese policy.
Jiang was dismissed at first by foreign analysts as a powerless transitional figure whose rule would end with Deng's death. But he has in recent years promoted allies and dominated the middle ground on policy to bolster his position as the favoured successor.
He has shown himself an astute politician, edging his way through a minefield of enemies and rivals to consolidate a grip on power that appeared unshakable as Deng's influence waned.
He was appointed party chief after Zhao Ziyang, a reformist closely associated with Deng, was toppled by hardliners who accused him of supporting the 1989 democracy movement that swept China until crushed by the army in Beijing on June 4, 1989.
Unlike Deng or his predecessor Chairman Mao Zedong, Jiang has no experience of war or the military, which impairs his standing with China's three million-strong army.
When Jiang became the party's third leader in as many years in 1989, he was a dark-horse candidate little known outside Shanghai, where he had served as mayor and then local party boss.
"Brought to power in the wake of the events of 4 June, 1989, he is someone who was 'neither here nor there' in the opinion of many observers, and therefore was the ideal man for the job," Laurence Brahm of Naga Group Ltd wrote in a profile.
Thickset and bespectacled, Jiang speaks to visitors in a soft-spoken manner and radiates little aura of power, Westerners who have met him said.
"He speaks like a factory manager, not the leader of a country," said one.
But whatever his manner, when Jiang speaks China listens.
He used a highly publicised 12-part television documentary on the life of Deng last month to portray himself as Deng's anointed, and actual, heir.
His tough stand on Taiwan, an island Beijing regards as a renegade province, when he mobilised the army to hold war games off the island before its March 1996 presidential elections, boosted his stature at home.
He has also nurtured his image as an international statesman, chatting in English with President Bill Clinton and overseeing a thaw in ties in 1996 that appeared set to culminate in his long-held dream of a state visit to Washington.
Born in July 1926, Jiang graduated in electrical engineering from Shanghai's Jiaotong university in 1947, and worked as deputy head of first a food factory and then a soap factory.
After being trained at Moscow's Stalin Automobile Factory from 1955 to 1956, Jiang was appointed deputy chief mechanic responsible for power supplies at the Number One Car Plant in Changchun, in China's northeast.
He went from there to administrative posts at engineering factories and research institutes in several cities.
Jiang held a number of posts in state bureaux related to electronics, culminating as Electronics Minister from 1983 to 1985.
His rise to party prominence began in 1982 with election to the party's Central Committee. Members of the policy-making Politburo and its elite standing committee are drawn from the 175-strong Central Committee.
Jiang became a member of the powerful Politburo in 1987, but only entered the standing committee with his elevation to General Secretary in June 1989.
Becoming mayor and deputy party secretary of Shanghai in 1985, Jiang moved into the city's top party job in April 1988, and from there was catapulted to Beijing to take up China's top job.
Jiang is married and has two grown sons, one of whom studied for a graduate degree in the United States.
An English speaker who enjoys painting and classical Chinese poetry, he has been shown in state-controlled media as trying to relax after work by playing an upright piano.
Official photographs of Jiang at his piano show him still wearing a dark Western suit with his red tie pulled tight.
He is known to enjoy singing karaoke, and joined Philippine President Fidel Ramos in a rendering of Elvis Presley's Love Me Tender in a relaxed moment at the end of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum in Manila in November, 1996.
