Talks between South Korea and China have failed to resolve the fate of a senior North Korean defector holed up for an eighth day in Seoul's mission in Beijing, Seoul officials said on Wednesday.
The impasse came despite signals from the Stalinist North that it might be ready to give up Pyongyang ideologue Hwang Jang-yop without a fight.
"Unfortunately, we have not made any real progress in our talks with China," South Korean Foreign Ministry spokesman Lee Kyu-hyung said of the drama centred on Hwang, who has sought asylum in Seoul's heavily-guarded consular compound in Beijing.
Lee denied a report by Japan's Yomiuri newspaper that China and South Korea had basically agreed that Hwang could leave Beijing for asylum in South Korea as early as this week.
The newspaper said Beijing had demanded a meeting with Hwang to confirm his desire to defect and had insisted on a signed promise from South Korean President Kim Young-sam pledging not to use the incident for political gain.
"It is too early to talk about when Hwang could leave Beijing," Lee said in Seoul.
South Korean officials in Beijing said talks with Chinese officials were still going on but declined to comment on the content of the negotiations, saying only that a solution was expected to take some time.
"We haven't got any results so far," embassy spokesman Chang Moon Ik said. Embassy officials had not met counterparts from the North, he said.
China had insisted Hwang's case be resolved through dialogue between rivals South and North, a Seoul Foreign Ministry official said.
"We are telling the Chinese that there's no dialogue channel and it is impossible to resolve a sensitive defection issue in direct talks with the North," said the official, who asked not to be identified.
"But with North Korea changing its attitude, we hope there will be progress in our negotiations," the official said.
The Stalinist North has hinted it may be ready to give up attempts to win back Hwang, ranked 24th in the Pyongyang hierarchy and architect of its governing ideology of Juche, or strict self-reliance.
North Korean leader King Jong-il appeared to indicate Pyongyang's less hardline approach when he was quoted by state radio on Tuesday as saying "cowards" should get out.
Another Japanese newspaper reported that a top North Korean official visiting Beijing had said Pyongyang would not fight the defection of Hwang, who sought refuge in Seoul's Beijing mission last Wednesday.
China, dragged as an unwilling third party into the latest crisis in the world's last Cold War standoff, has repeated its plea to both countries to act with restraint to resolve the affair.
Beijing is in a quandary over how to usher Hwang out of China without angering an old communist comrade or a new capitalist friend.
China appeared nervous about Pyongyang's intentions, sending three armoured personnel carriers, a crowd control truck and armed police to guard the sedate streets around the mission while officials seek an end to the impasse.
