Talks to try to resolve the fate of a high-level Pyongyang defector who has taken refuge in Seoul's mission in China entered an eighth day in Beijing on Wednesday amid signs the North may let him go.
"Negotiations in various channels are going on," South Korean embassy spokesman Chang Moon Ik said of the crisis centred on North Korean ideologue, Hwang Jang-yop, who is marooned at Seoul's heavily-guarded consulate in Beijing.
Chang declined to reveal whether China, dragged as an unwilling third party into the latest crisis in the world's last Cold War standoff, was involved in the discussions.
He also hinted at doubts over reports that the Stalinist North was ready to abandon attempts to recover Hwang, ranked 24th in the hierarchy of the Stalinist state and a senior aide to top leader Kim Jong-il.
A major Japanese newspaper reported that a top North Korean official visiting Beijing had said Pyongyang would not fight the defection of Hwang, who sought refuge in Seoul's Beijing mission last Wednesday.
Kim Jong-u, head of North Korea's Overseas Economic Cooperation Committee, indicated at a meeting with international investment groups in Beijing that Pyongyang was ready to let Hwang go, the economic daily Nihon Keizai Shimbun said.
"That is what the government has decided," it quoted Kim as saying. "The matter is already closed. He has already been dismissed.
"Betraying the people when the country is in great difficulty is an unforgiveable act. Because of his old age we will not pursue him," the newspaper quoted Kim as saying.
South Korean embassy officials said they were aware Kim Jong-u was in Beijing but could not confirm his statements.
"We don't know about his intentions or activities in Beijing," the embassy's Chang said.
Seoul officials were still analysing a statement released by Pyongyang's Foreign Ministry on Monday hinting that the enigmatic country was softening its hardline stance on the betrayal by one of its top ideologues, Chang said.
In a sign that Pyongyang could be coming to terms with the Hwang's loss, the Foreign Ministry had said North Korea would take strong action if Hwang was kidnapped, but that he would be fired if he had spurned his Stalinist homeland.
"It will take time to clarify the real meaning of the statement," Chang said.
Pyongyang officials had steadfastly maintained that the South abducted the scholarly architect of North Korea's governing ideology of Juche, or strict self-reliance. Seoul has dismissed the charge as preposterous.
The new tone on Hwang's departure appeared to be backed by comments by North Korean leader Kim Jong-il broadcast on state radio that "cowards" should get out.
However, China appeared nervous about Pyongyang's intentions, stationing three armoured personnel carriers in the sedate streets around the mission where Hwang is marooned.
A crowd control truck armed with water cannon and a bullet-proof car have been parked outside the mission for days while officials seek an end to the impasse.
Beijing, in a quandary over how to usher Hwang out of China without angering an old communist comrade or a new capitalist friend, has repeated its plea to both to act with restraint to resolve the affair.
