Residents of China's capital voiced emotions ranging from shock and sadness to cold indifference after waking on Thursday morning to news of the death of paramount leader Deng Xiaoping.
Extra police on Beijing's sunlit lanes and the bright red national flag flying at half-mast in Tiananmen Square were the only hints of a break from a routine after the early morning announcement that the greatest communist reformer of the 20th century was dead.
"My first reaction is great shock," said Liu Hongxin, a 21-year-old student waiting for a train in the pre-dawn chill at Beijing's main railway station.
Deng, the gravel-voiced mastermind of 18 years of reform that turned China from a backward Stalinist state into an emerging economic superpower, died of respiratory failure in an advanced stage of Parkinson's disease late on Wednesday. He was 92.
"I feel a great sadness," said snack vendor Xie Weicai as he prepared his pavement stove for the morning's business, but his regret was not universal among the capital's residents.
But others had quite different reactions.
"I would consider losing 100 yuan ($12) much sadder than the death of Deng Xiaoping," said one taxi driver on an early morning shift. "It has nothing to do with me."
It was business as usual on the capital's streets, with residents busy opening shops and crowding onto buses to go to work, in stark contrast to the paralysis that gripped China with the passing of Chairman Mao Zedong in 1976.
"Then we cried like we lost our father and mother," said one driver parked near Deng's central Beijing residence. "Now everyone is indifferent."
Analysts said the initial calm would probably be matched by a period of low-key political activity as China's leadership adjusted to the post-Deng era.
"There is going to be a lull," said Tai Ming Cheung, an analyst at Kim Eng Securities in Hong Kong. "There may be a certain amount of policy paralysis... but beyond that I don't see any great changes."
Deng's death would prompt a surge in jockeying for political position among China's communist leaders, who are already preparing their positions for the crucial 15th Party Congress to be held in October, he said.
Deng's anointed heir, Communist Party chief Jiang Zemin, is considered favourite to assume the senior revolutionary's mantle of leadership, but analysts say Deng's death will also give rival pretenders to power a chance to boost their influence.
Police, some carrying assault rifles, stood guard at the end of the nearby lane in central Beijing where Deng had lived and patrolled the lanes around the Zhongnanhai government compound near the Forbidden City, former abode of China's emperors.
In Tiananmen Square, focus of pro-democracy protests in 1989 that were crushed on Deng's orders, residents and visitors gathered to see the dawn raising of China's flag.
The bright red flag emblazoned with five gold stars was raised to half-mast by a soldier of the People's Liberation Army, one of a squad that had marched up from the Forbidden City with bayonets at their shoulders.
While most bystanders were still unaware of Deng's passing, a few who braved the morning chill on the square -- still festively decorated for the Chinese Lunar New Year this month -- had heard the news and had come to say goodbye.
"I saw the news on the television this morning and came over to watch the flag-raising," said one factory worker from China's central Anhui province. "I wanted to pay my respects."
