Deng Xiaoping was an avid bridge player who relished a croissant and a glass of milk, loved playing at the seaside with his grandchildren and did not balk at sending in the army to crush unarmed, rebellious students.
Chain-smoking until his fingers were stained brown and fond of keeping a spittoon at his feet in meetings with foreign dignitaries, the diminutive ruler possessed a personality as peppery as the cuisine of his native Sichuan province.
"Unsentimental and humorless, he seemed to have few qualms of conscience, and little compunction to ingratiate himself with others through convivial chatter," wrote Orville Schell in his book "Mandate of Heaven".
He was a "nasty little man", former U.S. Secretary of State Henry Kissinger said of the man who ruled China for the 1980s and much of the 1990s and stood just 1.50 metres (5 ft) in the white socks he preferred.
He failed equally to charm Britain's Margaret Thatcher.
But Deng was a man who didn't seem to care about what people thought -- even when it cost him his political career.
In 1966, as Chairman Mao Zedong was setting in motion a devastating campaign to weed out opposition to his leadership, Deng flaunted expected codes of loyalty by evading mandatory attendance of a series of revolutionary operas.
Finally coerced into making an appearance, he dozed off in mid-performance, unconcerned that he was making a lifelong enemy of Mao's wife, Jiang Qing, who designed the operas and had Deng banished far from Beijing in ensuing political purges.
Unrepentant and unfazed, Deng busied himself with a small garden in central Jiangxi province, growing cabbages, potatoes and garlic to supplement the meagre salary he drew as a worker at a tractor repair factory.
It was in internal exile that Deng grew to love the game of bridge, honing his skill by playing all four positions alone and carefully studying the intricacies of strategy.
It became a lifelong passion -- many of his favoured aides were bridge partners. But he never played for money, requiring only that the loser crawl around on all fours under the table.
Alhough Deng had shed all his official posts by 1990, he still retained one title at the time of his death on Wednesday -- honorary chairman of the China Bridge Players Association. Bridge was, in his words, "a game for great personalities".
A youth spent in France in the 1920s instilled in the young revolutionary a lifelong penchant for croissants and milk.
Hoping to acquire some of the pastries on a visit to a United Nations meeting in 1974, Deng took advantage of a stopover in Paris to buy 100 croissants, returning to share them with premier Zhou Enlai and other friends from his Paris days.
He also smoked two packs a day of Panda-brand cigarettes -- a half-filter, half-tobacco cigarette available only to China's top leaders. He gave up the habit in 1989.
He was also not averse to a swig of the fiery white Chinese liquor that is de rigeur for toasting at banquets. Unable to afford spirits when in the political wilderness, he drank beer.
He kept fit with daily walks around his spacious compound down a narrow, leafy alley in central Beijing and swam each summer at the seaside resort of Beidhaihe, where he would take a dip in the ocean for an hour every day, come rain or shine.
Always mindful of puritan communist values of frugality and modesty, Deng never appeared dressed in anything other than an austere Mao suit of blue or grey.
He relaxed on his 1979 tour of the United States when he endeared himself to his hosts by accepting a pair of cowboy boots from singer John Denver, donning a 10-gallon cowboy hat and riding around a Texas rodeo in a stagecoach.
Deng was also an ardent fan of soccer -- China's most popular sport -- and watched 50 of the 52 matches in the 1990 World Cup.
Deng set himself apart from Mao, who was worshipped in a frenzied personality cult, preferring to keep a low, private profile.
He cherished his role as a husband and father, finding time to spend with his five children, bringing his grandchildren along on official tours and playing with them at the beach.
"He is rather philosophical on the question of personal fate... optimistic in the face of adversity," Deng's daughter Deng Rong once wrote of her father.
