Weeping crowds mourning the death of Deng Xiaoping swamped the hamlet where China's political patriarch was born, prompting authorities to send armed police to keep order, officials said on Friday.
Thousands of mourners flocked to Paifang village in Guang'an county in the southwestern province of Sichuan, some falling to their knees and weeping, said an official at Deng's former residence, now a museum.
"There are a lot of people crying, some of them young, but most of them are older," the official said by telephone.
"Some old people have knelt on the ground and wept. Their faces were covered in tears," he said.
Deng, architect of market-oriented reforms that transformed China into a rising superpower, passed away on Wednesday night aged 92.
Officials at Deng's old courtyard abode, which normally saw some 100 visitors a day, were unable to handle the flood of people that broke over the hamlet after Deng's death was announced early on Thursday.
"About 3,000 people came here yesterday," the official said. "Today there will be more."
"It's extremely crowded in here," he said. "Anywhere there is room to stand is crowded with people."
Officials sent the paramilitary People's Armed Police to maintain order at the museum, which had been converted into a makeshift shrine to Deng, he said.
"Although there are a lot of people, everything is orderly," the official said, adding that no incidents had been reported.
A large photograph of Deng hung over the courtyard entrance, crowned by a black banner with white characters reading "Mourn Deng Xiaoping With Sorrow", he said.
"One young fellow cried and said 'Without Deng there would not be the happy life of today'," the official said.
Mourners, many wearing black armbands and holding white, handmade paper flowers, filed past the photograph, bowing or kneeling in front of a table heaped with cypress branches symbolising uprightness and longevity.
Some of those paying their last respects to Deng had come from distant Guangzhou and Shenzhen in the southern province of Guangdong, a booming region that owed its prosperity to his ambitious capitalistic reforms, another museum official said.
"Taxis, shops, hotels...and those who have come to Guang'an for business or as tourists are displaying white flowers to show their grief over Deng Xiaoping," the China News Service said.
The outpouring of sadness and reflection in Paifang contrasted with the bustling streets of Beijing, where flags flying at half-mast on the second day of official mourning were the only sign of a break from routine.
The Supreme People's Court, China's top judicial body, ordered all courts to ensure strict law enforcement and to safeguard social stability, the official Xinhua news agency said.
Political transitions in communist China in the past have been fraught with difficulty and the deaths of some previous senior leaders have triggered mass protests.
