Busy Chinese took the death of Deng Xiaoping in their stride on Friday, praising the patriarch for the economic miracles he created but blaming him for social ills such as corruption and unemployment.
The day after the announcement of the passing of the man whose reforms gave Chinese unprecedented freedom, residents in Beijing bustled off to work, street markets buzzed with activity and factories churned out their goods.
"Deng was a great man, people will miss him and appreciate him for greatly improving their living standards in such a short time," a retired factory worker said in her home in Beijing.
"It's not something we common people can worry about," said a Beijing taxi driver of Deng's passing. "I still need to make money."
Deng's 18-year rule, which transformed China from a backward hermit nation into an economic powerhouse, ended on Wednesday night when he died from complications linked to the advanced stages of Parkinson's disease. He was 92.
"Deng was a man who changed China's history and guided China into the world from being an isolated country," said a former official in the southern boomtown of Shenzhen who abandoned his government post to go into business.
An editor in a state-run publishing house in Beijing said her company would hold an informal discussion session on Deng's ideology on Friday afternoon.
"Just for half a day we will take a look at his spirit and study the thoughts of Deng Xiaoping," the editor said.
However, some Chinese said Deng's achievements in freeing China from the collectivist shackles clamped on it by the late Chairman Mao Zedong would be overshadowed by the social ills unleashed by his policies.
"I don't want to totally reject Deng, but Deng set a bad example for China's rulers in the aspect of corruption," said a 30-year-old musician in Beijing.
"Deng's family members all get good treatment in society. There must be great changes in China in the future," he said.
Market competition created by Deng's reforms had forced the closure of state-run industries in many regions, swelling the ranks of the jobless.
"Many state firms here have collapsed and their officials have no capacity to manage them," said one girl, a high school student in Daixingganling in the northeastern province of Heilongjiang, a stronghold of socialist industry.
"My parents and I just feel some uncertainty, some worry. We feel no confidence," she said by telephone.
Another legacy of Deng, the bloody June 4, 1989, crackdown on student-led demonstrations centred on Beijing's Tiananmen Square, would leave a stain on later assessments of the diminutive patriarch.
"They shouldn't have fired their guns on the common people. They should have used peaceful means to solve the situation," the publishing editor said.
"History will deliver an accurate judgment," she said.
Some doubted that President Jiang Zemin, picked by Deng to assume the mantle of power, had the political mettle to lead China into the 21st century.
"China really needs a powerful leader like Deng to guide it forward," said a government clerk in the Tibetan capital Lhasa.
"Although the third generation of leaders is becoming more sophisticated...I'm worried that new leaders may not be so determined in making decisions," another businessman in Shenzhen said.
