For ordinary Chinese, the era of Deng Xiaoping was one in which the government lifted its heavy hand from their daily lives and gave them freedom to move house, change jobs, dress as they pleased and say what they wanted.
Much of the intimate and intrusive control built up under the late chairman Mao Zedong disappeared.
"Getting the government 'off the backs' of average Chinese, in order to free their essential commercial instincts, will be one of Deng's most enduring legacies," wrote sinologist David Shambaugh in "Deng Xiaoping - Portrait of a Chinese Statesman".
One of the most obvious revolutions was in fashion.
The ubiquitous blue and grey Mao suits that were a symbol of revolutionary purity have been replaced by a rainbow of colours and designs.
Mini-skirts, body-hugging T-shirts, high-heeled shoes and make-up are among the new looks -- fostered by almost racy fashion magazines -- that Chinese women have taken up.
In the years of Maoist fervour a woman risked public criticism, at the very least, if she looked anything but as plain and unexceptional as possible. Perms were banned.
On the cultural front, a diet of revolutionary television soap operas, propaganda movies and anodyne songs about loving the party was spiced up.
Television viewers were offered a taste of foreign soap operas. The U.S. show "Baywatch" with its scantily clad female life guards won a following, while home-made films touched on the taboo issue of sex and the stars began to kiss -- although nudity remained off-limits.
Shopping was transformed from a complicated chore in which permits or ration cards were required to buy anything from rice and cakes to a bicycle.
Under Deng, money bought almost anything.
Even housing, for decades one of the most tightly held of state monopolies, came on to the market.
Tens of millions of people began to travel, flooding into cities from the countryside in search of jobs and to set up businesses, living in houses they found for themselves and forcing the police to relax curbs on household registration.
After years of bans and red tape, people just went ahead and moved, throwing themselves on the marketplace to find a job and a home.
A law that banned unmarried couples from staying with each other overnight became a thing of the past.
The intrusive interrogation, and possible punishment, that accompanied a request for an abortion was replaced by a more pragmatic approach. Doctors didn't bother to ask questions.
Divorce became a personal matter and no longer an excuse for employers to call in sparring spouses for lengthy sessions to counsel against breaking up the marriage.
A Chinese unhappy with his work under Mao knew that his was a job for life. Under Deng, an employee could resign and find another job of his choice.
The personal file that charts the life of every Chinese still follows him from post to post. But now, a Chinese has the freedom to place the file with a personnel exchange centre, for a fee, thus expanding the freedom to swap jobs without begging permission from whoever holds the file.
A Chinese can crack jokes at the expense of once sacrosanct leaders without the risk of prison. Freedom to express an opinion exists -- at least in the privacy of one's own home.
But even under Deng these new freedoms have their limits.
One of Deng's slogans was "seize with both hands".
While one hand held economic liberalisation in its grasp, the other gripped political control, particularly intolerance of opposition as manifested in the crackdown on student-led protests in June 1989 that exposed the popular threat to the Communist Party's hold on power.
Deng's message was clear: stay out of politics, don't challenge the party and you can do pretty much as you want.
"Under Mao, the rule was: anything that is not permitted is forbidden. Under Deng, it was: anything that is not illegal is allowed," said one banker.
