The South Korean flag on Friday flew at half-mast at Seoul's mission in Beijing where a senior Pyongyang defector is holed up, talks on his fate stalled by the death of China's paramount leader Deng Xiaoping.
Chinese and South Korean officials had met on Thursday despite the death of Deng the previous night over what to do with high-level Pyongyang ideologue Hwang Jang-yop, who sought refuge in Seoul's consular compound last week, a Seoul embassy official said.
However, signs emerged that the meeting was aimed at keeping open a channel for dialogue in case of emergency rather than seeking to find a swift solution on the fate of Hwang, Pyongyang's highest level defector, who has been marooned in the mission for 10 days.
The embassy official declined to comment on whether the talks had focused on resolving Hwang's fate and said a solution to the Cold War drama in the Chinese capital was unlikely to come soon due to the death of Deng late on Wednesday.
"It is very hard to say when the situation will be over," said an embassy official who declined to be identified.
The death of the North's revolutionary ally Deng was the second blow to Pyongyang from Beijing in a week after Hwang, a senior aide to North Korea's top leader Kim Jong-il, arrived at Seoul's consular office on February 12.
China on Thursday declared six days of mourning for Deng and officials in Seoul said they would temporarily refrain from raising the defection issue with Chinese officials.
"China and South Korea share the same Asian tradition and you just don't want to disturb mourning people," a Seoul foreign ministry official said.
The defection of Hwang, ranked 24th in the hierarchy of the secretive Stalinist state, has forced China to walk a diplomatic tightrope between communist ally North Korea and new business partner South Korea.
Officials in Seoul have said a short-term delay in the talks over Hwang would not seriously affect his fate since his departure from Beijing was not imminent.
"The dialogue with China is always operating and we can contact the Chinese side anytime," the embassy official said.
A hint at change in Pyongyang's stance on Hwang's flight came on Monday when its Foreign Ministry said it would dismiss Hwang if he defected.
The North had earlier persisted in its claim that South Korea had abducted Hwang, charges dismissed by Seoul as preposterous.
Another official in South Korea said a videotape of Hwang confirming his defection had been passed to Chinese officials before hints emerged that North Korea might be ready to walk away from its fight to get Hwang back.
China appeared wary of Pyongyang's intentions, setting up a police cordon around Seoul's compound and sending three armoured personnel carriers and a riot control truck to guard the approaches to the mission.
On Wednesday, China announced to its people for the first time that Hwang had entered the embassy of South Korea in Beijing, signalling that the Chinese government believed he had gone there of his own free will.
South Korea, in an apparent bid to encourage Pyongyang to end the confrontation, announced on Thursday it would send $6 million in food aid to the North, which is suffering chronic food shortages made worse by devastating floods.
