An actor who played Deng Xiaoping in a recent movie release says he wants to avoid being typecast in the golden role now that the Chinese patriarch has exited the earthly stage.
Beijing actor Shi Xin debuted as the late paramount leader in "Battles for Glory over Taihang Mountains", an action-packed tale of the diminutive ruler's World War Two exploits which premiered in December.
Since then he has been offered Deng roles in five other films. "My teachers, classmates and friends all say I'm going to get stuck in this one role," Shi, 25, told Reuters.
"I don't think that's right. If the day comes that I can play another role, I will be hardworking and earnest in my acting," Shi said.
Deng, one of Chinese communism's greatest revolutionaries as well as its most spectacular reformer, died aged 92 last Wednesday. That was also Shi's 25th birthday.
"At first I really didn't believe it," Shi said. "I feel connected to him in some way."
Plucked from the Central Drama Institute at age 23 to act the part of Deng, Shi said he found it tough to play the pint-sized patriarch, who despite his larger-than-life status as China's de facto emperor stood just 150 cm (five feet) tall.
"Deng Xiaoping was an incredible, a great man," Shi said. "So when I got this role my heart was very heavy.
"To make the transition to playing such a great man was very difficult and gave me a lot of pressure, because I am so young," Shi said.
"My biggest challenge was losing weight," the 170-cm (5 ft 8 inch) Shi said. "For the filming I didn't eat any staple foods. I mostly ate tomatoes and cucumbers."
To prepare for the most important role of his career, Shi holed up in a classroom where he pored over books and photo albums to glean every detail about Deng's life and times.
"Although everyone felt I did a pretty good job, I still think I lacked a lot," he said, but added that the complexity of Deng's peppery persona could entice him into future films.
"Deng Xiaoping is not an average character. Playing him is something I will work on my whole life," he said.
Released last December, "Battles for Glory" failed even to recoup its shooting costs of just nine million yuan ($1.08 million), one-ninth of which came from central government coffers, said director Qin Yan.
Qin said she hoped Deng's death would rekindle interest in the man who helped lead the Communist Party to victory in 1949 and whose reforms sparked one of the fastest economic booms the world has seen.
Beijing had ordered cinemas across China to interrupt their normal fare of Hong Kong kung fu films and Hollywood blockbusters and instead roll over six films about Deng, including "Battles for Glory", Qin said.
"This film now has a mythological aspect to it," Qin said. "We can cherish his memory and remember him through this film."
Managers at several theatres in the capital were not so sure. They took Deng off their marquees on Saturday in the face of poor customer response to tales of his exploits.
"We sold one ticket," one manager said, noting that the same films had been running almost continuously on television since Deng's death was announced.
