In a show that Deng Xiaoping may not have wanted, China's state television gave his 1.2 billion people a lingering last look at the body of their deceased patriarch on Monday as official mourning moved into high gear.
Draped with the crimson hammer-and-sickle flag of Chinese communism and showered with flower petals, the body was shown lying in state at Beijing's 301 Military Hospital as grim-faced leaders and weeping relatives filed past.
Deng, who died on Wednesday aged 92, had expressly forbidden the elaborate public grieving that has attended the deaths of top Chinese leaders in the past.
But China Central Television's main evening newscast, the most widely watched broadcast in the country, effectively overruled him by devoting its main evening news to emotional scenes of farewells to his body before its cremation on Monday.
Pale and puffy, the body was repeatedly shown lying on a bier surrounded by grieving members of China's elite and elaborate funeral wreaths of plastic flowers.
Soviet-trained technocrat President Jiang Zemin, Deng's hand-picked successor, led an official group of mourners that included all members of the ruling Communist Party politburo and other senior government and party leaders.
Jiang, looking ill at ease, shook hands with Deng's weeping family but said nothing. He led the mourners in the three traditional bows of respect to the body and is expected to read the eulogy at official memorial rites in Beijing's Great Hall of the People on Tuesday.
After a slow and stately funeral cortege to the Babaoshan cemetery where revolutionary veterans are traditionally cremated, Deng's body lying in a glass-topped bier was carried into a final anteroom by an honour guard of eight soldiers..
Sonorous music played in the background as Deng's grey-haired wife, Zhuo Lin, and other family members were shown sobbing and wailing.
One of his three daughters, Deng Nan, bent down to embrace and kiss her father's forehead, clinging to his body. Another daughter, Deng Rong, cried out "You are not dead!"
The television pictures seemed clearly aimed at stirring an emotional response among the 1.2 billion people Deng ruled for 18 years, but who have shown little open grief at his death last week at the age of 92.
People lining the funeral courtege's route from the hospital to the cemetery -- most of whom were marshalled to attend by their work units -- were shown crying quietly and tenderly affixing white paper flowers of mourning to their jackets.
In sobbing interviews, one after another pledged to honour Deng's memory and to forge ahead with his ideals.
"Scatter Hot Tears for Comrade Xiaoping" read one banner held by mourners along the route.
