A funeral cortege bearing the body of paramount leader Deng Xiaoping arrived at Beijing's Babaoshan cemetery for cremation on Monday as China began paying last respects to the man who transformed the nation.
A white van bedecked with black and yellow ribbons, the colours of mourning, carried Deng's body at a stately pace on its last journey to the cemetery in western Beijing where Chinese communism's heroes are traditionally laid to rest.
"Scatter Hot Tears for Comrade Xiaoping," read a banner with black characters and held up by a group of people outside the military hospital where Deng's body has lain since he died last Wednesday aged 92.
Hundreds of armed police, a fraction of the huge security force activated as China treads carefully along the road of political transition, lined streets along the 2.5-km (1.5-mile) route to the cemetery.
The cortege moved at a pace slightly faster than walking to allow thousands of mourners lining the route a last glimpse of the man who ruled China for 18 years with a unique mixture of capitalist-style policies under communist control.
"I have come to say goodbye to Deng Xiaoping," said one young man.
As the cavalcade moved past, people stood on roofs of nearby buildings or climbed up lamp posts for a better view.
But some local residents did not know Deng's body was to be moved on Monday and were upset that their routine was disrupted.
"Hey, move it, some of us have to go to work," grumbled one middle-aged woman pushing her bicycle through the crowd.
Outside Babaoshan stood hundreds of workers bused in from from the nearby steel works.
One manager of the giant state-run enterprise, Yue Wenhui, 44, asked why he was willing to wait outside on a wintry day, said: "The weather is good. It is as cloudy as our hearts."
Deng, an early opponent of the leadership cult around his predecessor Chairman Mao Zedong, made clear he wanted his death to be followed by more restrained mourning than the near-hysteria that followed Mao's demise in 1976.
No foreign dignitaries have been invited to attend Tuesday's memorial rites, to be held in Beijing's Great Hall of the People. Deng's ashes will be scattered at sea.
State media publicised a request by Deng's family that his body not be put on display, his corneas be donated to an eye bank and his body offered for medical dissection before cremation.
China has sought to present an image of stability and continuity in the aftermath of Deng's death, painfully aware of the tumult that has often followed the death of strongmen throughout China's history.
Since his death authorities have heightened their security watch around the capital and especially in Tiananmen Square, the vast central space where, in 1989, student-led protests were crushed by troops and tanks at Deng's behest.
So far, the public has seen a display of unanimity at the top of China's communist power structure, with the supreme leader's hand-picked successor, Jiang Zemin, vowing to keep China on the road of economic reform.
But Chinese political analysts said cracks were appearing in the facade and Jiang, who holds the top state, party and military posts and is now the most powerful man in China, may be trying to throw his weight around too soon.
