A funeral cortege bearing the body of paramount leader Deng Xiaoping arrived at Beijing's Babaoshan cemetery for cremation on Monday as China began paying last respects to the man who transformed the nation.
The cortege was led by four black cars followed by a white van bedecked with black and yellow ribbons, the colours of mourning in China, that served as the hearse for Deng's body. The van was flanked by two Red Flag limousines.
Hundreds of armed police lined the streets along the 2.5 km (1.5 mile) route to the cemetery from a military hospital, where Deng's body has lain since he died last Wednesday aged 92.
The cortege of about 30 vehicles moved at a pace slightly faster than walking to allow thousands of mourners lining the route a last glimpse of the man who ruled China for 18 years.
"I have come to say goodbye to Deng Xiaoping," said one young man as the cavalcade moved past.
China has sought to present an image of stability and continuity in the sensitive aftermath of the passing of Deng, who transformed China by pursuing capitalist-style reforms while maintaining Communist Party control.
Since his death, authorities have heightened security around the capital and especially in Tiananmen Square, the vast central space where the country will commemorate Deng with official memorial rites at the Great Hall of the People on Tuesday.
No foreign dignitaries have been invited to the funeral. Deng's ashes will be scattered at sea.
Deng, an early opponent of the leadership cult around his predecessor the late Chairman Mao Zedong, made clear he wanted his death to be followed by more restrained mourning than the near-hysteria that followed Mao's demise in 1976.
Chinese sources said the military had been placed on alert to deal with potential ethnic unrest or any other threat to stability as China negotiates the delicate first days of political transition.
So far, the public has seen a display of unanimity at the top of China's communist power structure, with the supreme leader's hand-picked successor, Jiang Zemin, vowing to keep China on the road of economic reform.
But Chinese political analysts said cracks were appearing in the facade and Jiang, who holds the top state, party and military posts and is now the most powerful man in China, may be trying to throw his weight around too soon.
State media have publicised a request by Deng's family that his body not be put on public display, that his corneas be donated to an eye bank and that parts of his body be offered for medical dissection.
