Chinese President Jiang Zemin, who assumed supreme power when Deng Xiaoping died last week, on Tuesday delivered the eulogy for the patriarch before 10,000 of the nation's elite in Beijing's Great Hall of the People.
His voice breaking, Jiang wiped tears from his eyes. "The people of China love Comrade Deng Xiaoping... we miss comrade Deng Xiaoping."
Jiang stood in front of a huge portrait of Deng, beneath which lay a casket containing his ashes, covered with a crimson hammer-and-sickle Communist Party flag.
As the funeral began, sirens and whistles sounded nationwide for three minutes as a mark of respect for the man who brought unprecedented prosperity to the world's most populous nation while keeping tight communist control.
"Grieve in silence," Premier Li Peng said, calling the three minutes of mourning as the thousands of Communist Party and government leaders stood to attention, heads bowed.
On the trading floor of the Beijing commodities exchange, traders stood silently with their heads bowed in front of an electronic screen showing live coverage of the funeral, which began at 10 a.m. (0200 GMT).
Chinese police cleared Beijing's Tiananmen Square soon after dawn, throwing a security net over the vast arena that is a potent symbol of China and a focus for expressions of grief as well as demonstrations of anger.
Chinese authorities were determined to prevent a repeat of the student-led demonstrations that convulsed Beijing in 1989 after the death of another Communist Party luminary.
No foreign dignitaries have been invited to the funeral but all eight Chinese television channels beamed the memorial live.
On Monday, television showed China's millions indelible images of their dead leader lying in state, his face pale and puffy, in the presence of solemn political leaders and grief-stricken relatives.
It was just the sort of lingering display of his remains that Deng -- contemptuous of the personality cult around his predecessor Mao Zedong -- had forbidden.
"Deng looked at peace," the Xinhua news agency said.
Political analysts questioned however whether the patriarch would have been at ease with the way his successors have handled the delicate transition period.
Funerary music played as China's elite and his grieving family bowed their heads before a huge portrait of Deng on the stage in the main hall.
"Eternal Glory to Comrade Deng Xiaoping who enjoys the love and esteem of the people of the whole party, the whole army and people of all ethnic groups throughout China," read a streamer hanging from one huge balcony.
Beijing streets were virtually deserted as citizens watched the ceremony on state television.
