Three time-bombs planted on buses blew up in rapid succession in China's restive far west, killing at least four people and shattering the nation's calm in the delicate aftermath of the death of patriarch Deng Xiaoping.
Police patrolled streets and checked suspicious bags and packages on Wednesday in Urumqi, capital of the mainly Moslem region of Xinjiang, following the blasts in the city on Tuesday afternoon.
"I think at least four to five people were killed, including one child who died instantly," said a Xinjiang television station official, who declined to be identified.
"People are full of fear, and the city is on high alert," said the TV station official.
The blasts, which officials said injured at least 60, occurred within minutes in separate parts of the city, which is the centre of Chinese control over the region and its ethnic Uighur population.
The explosions occurred on the same day as the final rites were being observed in far-off Beijing for Deng Xiaoping, the paramount leader who strictly enforced the integrity of China against separatist threats.
In an ironic twist, one bomb went off on Tuanjie (Unity) Street. A fourth was found before it detonated, a local government official said without elaborating.
Despite the widespread fear of further unrest, state media in Urumqi and elsewhere in the county have not reported the incidents.
"Everybody knows about it but nothing has been said officialy," said a local resident contacted by telephone.
It was the first known violence in Xinjiang, a region that Moslem separatists call East Turkestan, since anti-Chinese riots in Yining on February 5 and 6 left nine people dead.
No one has claimed responsibility for Tuesday's blasts. Xinjiang, bordering Afghanistan, Pakistan and three mostly Moslem Central Asian states, was shaken last year by attacks on officials and Moslem leaders regarded as pro-Beijing.
Chinese leaders have expressed concern over the threat from Islamic fundamentalism, visiting Israeli Foreign Minister David Levy said in Beijing.
"I think we have a very similar view on this," he said.
"Every attempt to turn religion into a weapon becomes extremely dangerous, it is something that knows no boundaries," Levy said. "It is like sand, it can be transported by the wind from one place to another."
Tuesday's bombs exploded at around 6.40 p.m. (1040 GMT). "People in Urumqi usually finish work at seven, so not too many people were injured or killed," the TV official said.
Urumqi residents recounted Tuesday's few minutes of terror.
"The Number 44 bus exploded near the Agricultural Bank," said a young Uighur woman. "A trishaw driver was killed, he was lying on the ground covered with blood.
"All the windows of the bus were broken. Several minutes later, police sealed the spot. Policemen, riot police and armed police could be seen everywhere," she added.
"Residents were ordered to stay at home or at their (work) units. We are terrified. Many people go to work by taxi or buses provided by the units," she said.
Another bomb wrecked a Number Two bus, tearing off the roof. The third explosion was on a Number 10 bus, but no details were available.
"When I heard the explosion, I felt as if the sky had collapsed," said a Uighur witness. "Many people in the store rushed out to look. I was too terrified to go out.
"Today buses are running again, but there are policemen at every station, they check people and bags," the witness said.
"I hate the people making the explosions. Our life is much better than before. I don't understand why they destroy stability and make trouble for ordinary people."
Number Two buses have been a target before.
"This kind of explosion happened in 1992, I think, as the Number Two bus runs on the major route through downtown," said a bus station worker.
