A powerful earthquake struck northwest China on Saturday, killing at least two people and injuring three in an area where about 50 people died in a tremor in January, officials said.
The earthquake measuring 6.0 on the open-ended Richter scale jolted Jiashi county in the northwestern region of Xinjiang at 2.04 p.m. (0604 GMT), an official with the local office of the State Seismological Bureau said.
"It is now known that two people have died and two have been seriously injured," the official said. A seismological official in the regional capital of Urumqi said a total of three people had been injured.
The tremor badly frightened the district's residents, many of whom are sheep herders or cotton farmers, and sent people spilling out into the streets, said one official with a local television station.
"It was really strong. Our building and everything in it was rattling, the building shook really fiercely," the television official said.
"Everyone ran out of their houses in terror, but most went back inside when it stopped shaking," she said, adding that many buildings around her office building had cracked, though none had collapsed.
Many of the area's residents lived in earthen houses that are easily damaged by earthquakes and the casualty toll could rise, the Urumqi official said.
"We're not yet sure how many houses have collapsed. We only know initially that there were maybe more than 1,500 houses," the Jiashi official said. "Houses that are a bit shoddy might be done for now and are not fit to live in," she said.
Authorities in Jiashi had started relief activities and aid teams from other parts of Xinjiang were preparing to move in to help, the official in Urumqi said.
"Relief activities are just getting under way," he said.
Government officials in Jiashi could not immediately be reached for comment.
The tremor was one of several aftershocks from an earthquake of 6.4 magnitude that caused widespread damage and killed up to 50 people in Jiashi on January 21, the Jiashi seismological official said.
"This one was much smaller than the last earthquake," she said, adding that an aftershock of 5.0 that jostled Jiashi last week had barely been felt.
That aftershock was from a tremor measuring 5.3 earlier in February, she said. No casualties were reported in either of the smaller quakes.
The January earthquake caused widespread damage and killed up to 50 people in the area and the district has since been rocked by hundreds of aftershocks. More aftershocks were expected, officials said.
