Premier Li Peng said on Saturday China would pursue a foreign policy of opening to the world pioneered by late leader Deng Xiaoping, citing ties with the United States and Europe as of particular importance.
Li, speaking at the start of the annual session of China's National People's Congress, or parliament, placed less emphasis on relations with Japan, China's neighbour and biggest trading partner.
He delivered his speech in Beijing's Great Hall of the People, a Maoist-era auditorium evocative of an earlier, less outward-looking period in communist China's foreign policy.
"China will unswervingly pursue the policy of opening to the outside world...," Li said after he and 2,800-odd parliamentary deputies had observed a brief silence for Deng, who died on February 19 aged 92.
"We wish to see further improvement in Sino-U.S. relations and the strengthening of Sino-European relations," he said, without going into detail.
China this week marked the 25th anniversary of the Shanghai Communique -- the starting point for the process of normalising Sino-U.S. relations -- by criticising Washington for failing to honour the terms of its agreements.
Relations between China and the United States deteriorated in 1995 and early 1996 due to disputes ranging from Taiwan to pirated software and illegal garbage shipments, and have improved only in recent months.
Both sides seemed happy with this week's visit to Beijing by new U.S. Secretary of State Madeleine Albright.
Li referred to ties with Japan briefly.
"Sino-Japanese relations were once obstructed. We wish to see a normal development of relations between the two countries," he said.
Recent strains between the World War Two foes have included a flare-up in a long-standing dispute, also involving Taiwan and Hong Kong, over ownership of islets called Diaoyu in Chinese and Senkaku in Japanese.
Li said China opposed interference in the internal affairs of other countries -- an apparent jab at outsiders who take China to task over its human rights record.
China is to announce on Sunday a 14.7 percent incrrease in its defence budget for 1997, Chinese sources said, but Li said China had no aggressive intentions.
"A developed China will not constitute a threat to any other country," he said.
Beijing defends its large increases in military spending by saying the base figure is still low and inflation cuts purchasing power.
China denies charges it is becoming a threat in Asia or to the rest of the world, but its military build-up has caused anxiety among neighbours.
The three-million-strong People's Liberation Army , the biggest in the world, ruffled feathers in the region in March 1996 when it held missile tests and war games close to Taiwan just before the island's presidential election.
