South Korea on Monday hinted that talks with China over the fate of a senior North Korean defector sheltering in Seoul's mission in Beijing could drag on while Beijing is busy with its annual parliament session.
"We didn't get any resolution from the Chinese government so far," South Korean Embassy spokesman Chang Moon-ik said of the negotiations over Hwang Jang-yop, the Stalinist nation's top ideologue.
Hwang has been holed up in Seoul's consular compound in Beijing since February 12, surrounded by Chinese police with assault rifles, an anti-riot truck and armoured personnel carriers.
Chang declined to say when a resolution to the Cold War standoff being waged in the Chinese capital could be expected, saying Chinese officials were preoccupied with the annual session of the National People's Congress (NPC), or parliament.
"I think they are very busy because the national assembly is going on," he said, adding that Seoul officials were continuing to maintain contacts with their Chinese counterparts.
In his annual government work report made to the opening session of the congress on Saturday, Chinese Premier Li Peng made no mention of the crisis, but said Beijing hoped for stability on the Korean peninsula.
"The Chinese government has all along attached importance to and worked hard for the maintenance of a stable situation in the Korean peninsula," Li said.
The NPC opened on Saturday and is to meet for two weeks.
The new interruption comes shortly after the talks were stalled when China observed six days of mourning for the death of paramount leader Deng Xiaoping.
Beijing has found itself entangled in the showdown between the rival Koreas and now is trying to resolve the crisis without offending an old communist comrade or a new business partner.
Analysts say China is almost certain to grant Hwang safe passage to Seoul, but wants to help its hermit neighbour save face by being seen to give Pyongyang's concerns due attention.
The defection of Hwang, a senior aide to top leader Kim Jong-Il and the architect of the North's ideology of strict self-reliance, further strained ties between the Koreas. But there have been signs in recent days the crisis may be easing.
Pyongyang, which at first insisted Hwang had been kidnapped by South Korean agents, has since vowed to dismiss the ideologue if he had in fact defected.
Near famine conditions in North Korea and apparent disaffection among some members of the ruling elite has prompted a string of defections in recent months.
In another daring flight from North Korea, a man whose family reportedly fell foul of Pyongyang's communist government arrived at Seoul international airport on Sunday after hiding out in China since October 1992.
Last Thursday, a North Korean woman in her 20s fled barefoot to the South through the heavily mined and guarded Demilitarised Zone that has split the Korean peninsula since the end of the 1950-53 Korean War.
Adding to an impression of instability, the country's defence minister and his deputy died in quick succession last month, and the prime minister was replaced.
