Chinese President Jiang Zemin, seeking to ensure his grip on power after the death of paramount leader Deng Xiaoping, called on the army on Tuesday to obey only the ruling Communist Party.
The People's Liberation Army, whose backing Jiang needs to ensure political control, should toe the party line, Jiang told a meeting of army delegates to the National People's Congress, or parliament.
"On this vital political issue that concerns the future and destiny of the party, the state and the nation, there must not be the slightest ambiguity or vacillation," the official Xinhua news agency quoted Jiang as saying.
Jiang, who also holds the posts of Communist Party chief and chairman of the powerful Central Military Commission, never served in the armed forces and has tried hard to win army support to bolster his position as Deng's political heir.
Deng died on February 19 aged 92.
Jiang has since moved to cement his position as China's supreme ruler, urging the nation to rally around the party with him at its core.
On Tuesday, Jiang called on army members of parliament to "seek no fame, status and promotion (and) give priority to the party", Xinhua said.
"Our army has always followed what the party says," he told the meeting, which was attended by generals Liu Huaqing, Zhang Zhen, Zhang Wan'nian and Chi Haotian. All of them are vice-chairmen of the military commission while Chi also serves as defence minister.
Jiang told his audience that the party's leadership had enabled military victories of the past and made the armed forces stronger.
But he said the drive to modernise the three million strong army had created a range of problems and warned officers not to step outside the law while performing their duties.
"Cadres at various levels must run the army with strict discipline and according to law and do their routine ideological and managerial work in a meticulous way," he said.
The army that ushered in nearly five decades of communist rule has benefited immensely from capitalist-style reforms launched by Deng in the late 1970s, running luxury hotels, factories and dealing in real estate.
Told by Beijing to make money for itself to supplement its budget, the army has also been widely accused of smuggling and other official abuses of power in its drive to do so.
China has set a defence budget of 80.6 billion yuan ($9.7 billion) this year, a rise of 12.7 percent over actual spending for 1996.
Western military analysts say total defence spending is considerably higher than the published figures.
Beijing defends its hefty increases in military spending by saying the base figure is still low and inflation has cut buying power.
