China on Thursday hinted at ethnic unrest in Moslem Xinjiang as a senior official called for unity in the western region that was rocked by separatist bomb attacks last week.
"Xinjiang ...must further improve ethnic unity, protect social stability and do a better job of building up Xinjiang," the official People's Daily quoted Vice-Premier Li Lanqing as saying.
Li made no direct reference to the series of deadly bombings in Xinjiang's capital Urumqi on February 25, the day Beijing held funeral rites for late leader Deng Xiaoping.
The Chinese vice premier's remarks to Xinjiang delegates at the National People's Congress, or parliament, were one of the few signs in the national media that the region had once again been shaken by ethnic unrest.
Chinese police have arrested at least 20 ethnic Uighurs in Urumqi and Yining near Xinjiang's border with Kazakhstan, exiled Uighur nationalists said from the Kazakh capital of Almaty.
"At least 20 ethnic Uighurs have been arrested...but the real number may be even higher because we have no information whether new arrests took place last night," Kakharman Khozhamberdi, head of a local Uighur association, told Reuters in Almaty.
Officials and residents in Urumqi and Yining, contacted by telephone from Beijing, were unaware of the total number of people arrested in the attacks.
Three bombs hidden on public buses blew up within minutes of each other in Urumqi on February 25 in an apparently coordinated attack. A fourth bomb failed to explode.
The Xinjiang Daily said on Wednesday that authorities had arrested several people suspected of planting bombs and of selling detonators used in the attacks that killed nine people and wounded 74.
Police were interrogating the suspects and had launched a manhunt for others still at large, the regional newspaper said.
China's official media outside the Moslem region ignored the incident.
Moslem separatists say they want to set up an independent "East Turkestan" in Xinjiang, a region that is home to many Turkic-speaking people such as the Uighur ethnic minority.
Exiled Uighur nationalists have claimed responsibility for the latest attacks.
Parliament's vice-chairman Wang Hanbin on Thursday introduced revisions to China's criminal law setting stiffer punishment for stirring up ethnic hatred and making it a capital crime to use race or religion to endanger state security.
"People in some places are stirring up hatred among ethnic groups in an attempt to undermine unity among them," Wang told parliament.
In early February, an anti-Chinese riot erupted in Yining, about 50 km (31 miles) from Xinjiang's border with Kazakhstan. Chinese officials said nine people were killed.
The riot was one of the largest, most violent demonstrations for independence in Xinjiang since the 1949 communist takeover.
Beijing, unnerved by the spectre of turmoil along its borders, had put the Lanzhou Military Region, which oversees Xinjiang, on alert against further unrest, Hong Kong's Sing Tao Daily newspaper said on Wednesday.
