China on Thursday hinted at ethnic unrest in Moslem Xinjiang as a senior official called for unity in the western region that was rocked by separatist bomb attacks last week.
"Xinjiang ...must further improve ethnic unity, protect social stability and do a better job of building up Xinjiang," the official People's Daily quoted Vice-Premier Li Lanqing as saying.
Li made no direct reference to the series of deadly bombings in Xinjiang's capital Urumqi on February 25, the day Beijing held funeral rites for late leader Deng Xiaoping.
Li's remarks to Xinjiang delegates at the National People's Congress, or parliament, were one of the few signs in the national media that the region had once again been shaken by ethnic unrest.
Three bombs hidden on public buses blew up within minutes of each other in Urumqi in an apparently coordinated attack. A fourth bomb failed to explode.
The Xinjiang Daily said on Wednesday that authorities had arrested several people suspected of planting the bombs and of selling detonators used in the attacks that killed nine people and wounded 74.
Police were interrogating the suspects and had launched a hunt for others still at large, the regional newspaper said.
Official media outside the region ignored the incident.
Parliament's vice-chairman Wang Hanbin on Thursday introduced revisions to China's criminal law setting stiffer punishment for stirring up ethnic hatred and making it a capital crime to use race or religion to endanger state security.
"People in some places are stirring up hatred among ethnic groups in an attempt to undermine unity among them," Wang told parliament.
In early February, an anti-Chinese riot erupted in Yining, about 50 km (31 miles) from Xinjiang's border with Kazakhstan. Chinese officials said nine people were killed.
The riot was one of the largest, most violent demonstrations for independence in Xinjiang since the 1949 communist takeover.
Moslem separatists say they want to set up an independent "East Turkestan" in Xinjiang, home to many Turkic-speaking people such as the Uighur ethnic minority.
Exiled Uighur nationalists in neighbouring Kazakhstan on Tuesday claimed responsibility for the latest attacks.
Beijing, unnerved by the spectre of turmoil along its borders, had put the Lanzhou Military Region, which oversees Xinjiang, on alert against further unrest, Hong Kong's Sing Tao Daily newspaper said on Wednesday.
