At least two people were killed and about 30 taken to hospitals when a bomb exploded on a public bus in Beijing during rush hour on Friday, Chinese sources and officials said.
The explosion occurred in Beijing's western shopping district of Xidan at around 6:30 p.m. (1030 GMT), engulfing a bus in flames and sending passengers scrambling to escape, a witness said.
"There was a great flame and a 'boom' sound and then people jumped out of the bus," a young man who was working nearby at the time of the blast said.
"One woman came out with her hair on fire."
A Chinese source said at least two people were killed in the bomb blast.
Workers at an emergency centre near the bustling commercial area said they had picked up about 30 injured people and sent them to various hospitals for treatment.
A young man who said he saw the explosion blow the windows out of the back of the bus reported seeing about nine people seriously hurt.
A police official said that some people were suffering from burns but he declined to give further details.
The motive was not immediately known and it was unclear if police had made any arrests.
China's state media regularly report on bombings, arson and other violent attacks by disgruntled workers or jilted lovers.
The bombing followed a string of similar attacks by Moslem separatists in the far western region of Xinjiang.
Three bombs planted on buses blew up within minutes of each other on February 25 in the region's capital of Urumqi in an attack apparently coordinated to coincide with funeral rites in Beijing for paramount leader Deng Xiaoping.
A fourth bomb failed to explode.
Authorities had arrested seven suspects in the attacks that killed nine people and wounded 74, according to a pro-Beijing newspaper in Hong Kong.
One Beijing resident said witnesses told him police, ambulances and fire trucks had rushed to the scene of the explosion on Friday.
The wreckage of the bus was quickly towed away, and police cordoned off the area for about one hour.
Several hours later, broken glass was still scattered on the street as uniformed and plainclothes police patrolled nearby.
Police had set up check points around the capital and were stopping cars, checking identification of drivers and searching vehicles.
Exiled Uighur nationalists in neighbouring Kazakhstan claimed responsibility for the Xinjiang bombings and for a similar, previously unreported attack near the Kazakh border on Monday.
Moslem separatists want to set up an independent "East Turkestan" in Xinjiang, home to many Turkic-speaking people, including the Uighur ethnic minority.
