China has vowed to smash plots aimed at disrupting stability in Xinjiang after a spate of bomb attacks which shook the far western region last month.
Illegal religious groups and ethnic separatists were the main forces working to undermine social stability in the mostly Moslem region, said a commentary in the Xinjiang Daily seen in Beijing on Tuesday.
"We must maintain a high degree of vigilance for that very small number of bad people who endanger the security of the state and the public, jeopardise social stability and engage in violent terrorist activities," the commentary said in the official newspaper's March 5 edition.
"Just let them show their heads and we will... foil their plots and strike at their puffed-up arrogance," it said.
The prominent front-page commentary followed a series of bomb attacks that killed nine and wounded 74 in the restive region last week.
Three bombs planted on buses blew up within minutes of each other in the regional capital Urumqi on February 25 in an attack apparently coordinated to coincide with funeral rites in Beijing for paramount leader Deng Xiaoping.
A fourth bomb failed to explode.
Another bomb blew up a bus in Beijing last week during rush hour, killing at least two people and injuring 30, but Chinese officials said on Monday there was no evidence linking the deadly blast with the Urumqi attacks.
The newspaper made no mention of any bombings but quoted a senior central government official from Xinjiang as saying authorities would win the battle against those who sought to destroy national unity.
"We have resolute faith in our victory over ethnic splittist activities," the newspaper quoted Ismail Amat, Minister of the State Nationalities Affairs Commission, as saying.
"There is no opportunity for splittist activities, which go against the tide of history and the wishes of peoples of all ethnic groups," Amat said. "Failure is inevitable."
The Xinjiang Daily said last Wednesday an unspecified number of suspects were in custody for having made and planted the bombs, while others were thought to have sold detonators for the explosives.
Exiled Uighur nationalists in the Central Asian state of Kazakhstan claimed responsibility last week for the bombings and said Chinese police had arrested at least 20 ethnic Uighurs in Urumqi and Yining near Xinjiang's border with Kazakhstan.
Chinese officials declined to comment on the arrests in the Xinjiang bombings, saying only that authorities were investigating.
"We are in the process of solving it," Foreign Ministry spokesman Cui Tiankai told a regular news briefing on Tuesday.
Moslem separatists want to set up an independent "East Turkestan" in Xinjiang, home to many Turkic-speaking people, including those of the Uighur ethnic minority.
In early February, an anti-Chinese riot erupted in Yining in Xinjiang. Chinese officials said nine people were killed in the riot -- one of the largest, most violent demonstrations for independence in Xinjiang since the 1949 communist takeover.
