Talks in Beijing on the fate of a senior Pyongyang defector have made progress but have not clinched a deal despite a personal bid by North Korea's foreign minister to break the deadlock.
"There has been some headway. Negotiations are still going on," Chang Moon-ik, spokesman for the South Korean embassy in Beijing, said on Tuesday about talks on Hwang Jang-yop, who sought refuge in Seoul's Beijing consulate four weeks ago.
Hwang, a senior North Korean ideological theoritician and top aide to supreme leader Kim Jong-il, has been stranded in the consular compound since February 12 while the three nations negotiate his fate.
Officials in South Korea said on Monday they expected a breakthrough this week in talks with China aimed at securing Hwang's passage out of Beijing, but Chang said it was unlikely he would be moved in the next few days.
"Final arrangements have yet to be done... There has been no final decision," Chang said by telephone.
China said on Tuesday that North Korean Foreign Minister Kim Yong-nam visited Beijing last Saturday in what analysts said was an apparent bid by Pyongyong to break the three-way deadlock.
Hwang, chief architect of Pyongyang's ruling ideology of Juche, or self-reliance, is the highest North Korean official to flee the Stalinist state.
Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Cui Tiankai played down Kim's visit, saying he was only passing through the Chinese capital on his way to Africa and his trip "did not touch on any special problem".
Weeks of talks over Hwang's fate, interrupted by the death of China's paramount leader Deng Xiaoping last month, have failed to produce an accord as Beijing finds itself torn between an old communist ally and a new capitalist friend.
Analysts say Hwang will likely end up in Seoul but Beijing is anxious to help North Korea save face by being seen to give due consideration to the hermit nation's concerns.
"We want to bring Mr Hwang to Seoul directly but if that is not possible we can make other arrangements," embassy spokesman Chang said. Korean sources have said Hwang may be whisked away to another country, possibly in Southeast Asia.
Armed Chinese police backed by armoured personnel carriers and a crowd control truck maintained a tight security cordon around Seoul's consular compound, in Beijing's normally sedate diplomatic quarter, where Hwang is holed up.
Beijing has appealed to North and South Korea to stay calm during attempts to end the diplomatic standoff sparked by Hwang's defection.
Chinese Foreign Minister Qian Qichen said last week Beijing was still investigating Hwang's case and hoped for a solution as soon as possible.
North Korea initially accused the South of kidnapping Hwang, then changed its hardline stance by saying that if he really had defected he was a traitor and would be dismissed.
Beijing, which sent its armies to fight on Pyongyang's side during the 1950-1953 Korean War, established diplomatic links with Seoul only in 1992.
