A South Korean official on Tuesday said progress had been made in talks with China over the fate of the most senior leader to flee Pyongyang but terms of his departure from Beijing were still undecided.
Hwang Jang-yop, a senior North Korean ideologue and top aide to supreme leader Kim Jong-il, has been stranded in Seoul's mission in Beijing since February 12 while the three nations negotiate his fate.
"There has been some headway. Negotiations are still going on," said Chang Moon-ik, spokesman for the South Korean embassy in Beijing.
Officials in South Korea said on Monday they expected a breakthrough this week in talks with China aimed at securing Hwang's passage out of Beijing but Chang said it was unlikely he would be moved in the next few days.
"Final arrangements have yet to be done first. There has been no final decision," Chang said by telephone.
Weeks of talks over Hwang's fate, interrupted by the death of China's paramount leader Deng Xiaoping last month, have failed to produce an accord as Beijing finds itself torn between an old communist ally and a new capitalist friend.
"We want to bring Mr Hwang to Seoul directly but if that is not possible we can make other arrangements," Chang said. Korean sources have said Hwang may be whisked away to another country, possibly in Southeast Asia.
Analysts say Hwang will likely end up in Seoul but Beijing is anxious to help North Korea save face by being seen to give due consideration to the hermit nation's concerns.
Hwang, chief architect of Pyongyang's ruling ideology of Juche, or self-reliance, is the highest North Korean official to flee the Stalinist state.
His defection has placed extra strains on ties between the two Koreas, arch-enemies since the 1950-53 civil war ended in an uneasy ceasefire.
Armed Chinese police backed by armoured personnel carriers and a crowd control truck maintained a tight security cordon around Seoul's consular compound where Hwang is holed up in Beijing's normally sedate diplomatic quarter.
Beijing has appealed to North and South Korea to stay calm during attempts to end the diplomatic standoff sparked by Hwang's defection.
Chinese Foreign Minister Qian Qichen said last week Beijing was still investigating Hwang's case and hoped for a solution as soon as possible.
North Korea initially accused the South of kidnapping Hwang, then changed its hardline stance by saying if he really had defected he was a traitor and would be dismissed.
Beijing, which sent its armies to fight on Pyongyang's side during the Korean War, established diplomatic links with Seoul only in 1992.
