Undeterred by the woes of Japan's debt-laden finance industry, foreign investors have flocked to a new share offering by the nation's fourth-biggest bank.
The strong interest in the preferred shares issued last month by Sakura Bank Ltd, despite the institution's relatively weak financial strength rating, points to greater confidence among foreign investors than domestic ones about the state of the industry, market sources say.
"We received nearly two trillion yen ($18 billion) worth of demand for 150 billion yen ($1.35 billion) of preferred shares," said Kazuya Johno, assistant general manager at Sakura Bank's Planning Division.
"Foreign investors are properly assessing each Japanese bank and it seems to me they have acknowledged that the worst of the bad loan problem (at Japanese banks) is over."
Last month Sakura issued 75 million shares of preferred stock at 2,000 yen ($18) each, becoming the fourth big Japanese bank to launch a convertible offering to boost its capital base in the past year. All of the offerings have been well-received by foreign investors, market sources say.
Payment for Sakura's five-year preferred stock issue was on September 30. Holders of such shares do not get voting rights but generally receive higher dividends than for common shares.
Market sources said foreign investors have grown more positive about Japan's big banks than domestic investors, who are concerned about the idea of banks issuing shares to improve capital adequacy ratios. An official at a major life insurance company said: "We will not buy new shares even if banks issue them. We are worried about the negative impact of new share issues on bank stocks and the markets."
Sakura's Johno said that the bank's preferred stock had been repackaged through an overseas trust for selling abroad.
In Japan, issuers cannot force investors to convert preferred stock to common stock during the term period. Through repackaging, Sakura wanted investors to convert preferred shares to common shares in a way that would not jeopardise the bank's stock price or the stability of the overall market.
"If investors converted preferred stock at one time, it could bring some 150 million common shares into the market and have an enormous impact on share prices," Johno said.
In the scheme, investors must convert part of their holdings to common stock in stages, with one-third converted three years after the issue and a similar amount four years after the issue. All the preferred shares must be converted by October 1, 2001.
To attract investors, the bank also promised to review the conversion price every year to minimise risks stemming from stock price fluctuations. Under the formula, the lower the conversion price the more common shares investors can have.
The initial conversion price was set at 1,122 yen ($10) with an annual dividend of 15 yen. The conversion price will be reviewed on December 8, 1997, and every October 1 after that. Sakura was trading at 1,070 yen on Tuesday.
Johno said about 70 percent of foreign buyers of the preferred stock were long-term holders such as pension funds.
Sakura aimed to boost its core capital through the stock issue to help its restructuring after it disposed of about 950 billion yen ($8.55 billion) of problem loans in the last fiscal year, which cut its capital adequacy ratio by 0.35 percentage point to 8.37 percent. Under international rules, banks operating internationally are required to hold a minimum eight percent of capital against risk-weighted assets.
Sakura is Japan's fourth-biggest bank in terms of risk-weighted assets. Its financial strength rating of "D+" assigned by credit rating agency Moody's Investors Service Inc is among the lower gradings for major Japanese banks. ($1=111 yen)
