Japan will set up a panel on Tuesday to tackle the after-effects of the nation's problem loans -- collection of bad loans in the form of land collateral, government sources said on Monday.
The panel will discuss wide-ranging steps to increase liquidity in the real estate market to facilitate collection of such problem loans, a government source said.
"The central issue for the panel will be studying measures to collect problem loans in the form of land collateral run up by (failed) 'jusen' mortgage firms,"  he said.
"We think securitisation of the problem loans is one effective measure to collect problem loans," he also said.
Officials from the ministries of finance, construction and justice and the National Land Agency will join the panel, along with officials from the Deposit Insurance Corp of Japan, a semi-governmental body set up to protect depositors from bank failures.
The Housing Loan Administration Corp (HLAC), in charge of recovering the problem loans of failed mortgage firms, known as "jusen", and the Resolution and Collection Bank (RCB), which will perform a similar task for troubled credit unions, will also send officials to join the panel.
Officials are now finally aware they must take steps to stimulate the real estate market from a budgetary standpoint, said Yoshinobu Yamada, analyst at Merrill Lynch Japan.
HLAC was set up in July to recover the problem loans of seven failed mortgage firms over the next 15 years. But the government says further losses may arise and that half of any future losses will be covered by public money.
In June, the government adopted a controversial scheme that allows for the use of 685 billion yen ($6.17 billion) in taxpayers' money to help wind up the failed mortgage firms.
The government has also committed itself to meeting any potential shortfalls at the Resolution and Collection Bank with government funds.
The bank was established last month to manage the holdings of failed credit unions and collect their problem loans. The government has given the bank a 10-year period to bail out credit unions and aims to disband the bank thereafter.
Some analysts said, however, that it would be tough for the ministries to agree on steps to boost the sagging real estate market, now in a five-year-long slump following the bursting of the 1980s "bubble economy" of inflated asset prices.
For instance, Japan may have to allocate budget funds for public utilisation of assets put up as collateral for problem loans, analysts said. The government should also adopt a flexible taxation system to help securitise problem loans backed by real estate, they said.
Securitising the loans involves selling property to a new special-purpose company, which in turn will issue bonds backed by these assets to procure money. Investors in the bonds would profits from any rise in land prices and from rent income.
The number of investors in Japan is still limited due to fears of further drops in land prices, and financial institutions themselves are reluctant to sell collateralised land at the currently cheap market prices, analysts said.
But Yukiko Ohara, an analyst at UBS Securities, said the setting up of a panel to discuss this dilemma is an important first step. "It is better than nothing."
Securitisation worked well in the United States when the U.S. Resolution Trust Corp tried to recover bad debts following the savings and loan crisis of the 1980s. ($1=111 yen)
