Japan's rule-bound markets must be fully deregulated to ensure that the nation does not fall further behind in the global finance business, an influential reform panel said on Thursday in an interim report.
Establishing markets to effectively manage 1,000 trillion yen ($8.92 trillion) of individual assets through deregulation is particularly important ahead of a rapid rise in the proportion of old people, key panel member Kazuhito Ikeo said.
"Unless Japan speeds up restructuring of the financial system, it will be left behind in global competition even more than now, particularly asset management services," Ikeo, a professor at Keio University in Tokyo, told reporters.
The proposal includes abolition of all rules on the range of businesses which units of banks and brokers are allowed to engage in by the end of fiscal 1997/98 year in March.
It also recommended a fundamental revision in the Securities and Exchange Law and liberalisation of commissions on stockbroking, as well as lifting an almost 50-year ban on holding companies, which control one or more companies, often through a majority stake.
Ikeo said the panel, made up of private-sector figures and academics, focused on benefits for consumers and put aside an expected negative impact on existing financial firms.
Although the panel was urging total deregulation in the financial industry, Ikeo said, if there was a need for rules in exceptional cases, they should be clearly written in financial laws so bureaucrats would not need to intervene.
In the past, deregulation plans were drawn up by bureaucrats in powerful ministries such as finance, trade and construction, which have carefully guarded industries they surpervise. But these have been slow in getting results, and criticism from the United States and other major trading partners has continued.
Prime Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto's government has wanted to step up efforts to cut bureaucratic red tape to boost the fragile economy, because its high-cost structure is making the country less attractive to investors.
The panel, set up in July by the Economic Planning Agency, comprises six subcommittees focusing on finance, information technology, distribution, land, employment and medicine.
The subcommittees on land, distribution and medicine presented proposals last week and the two on employment and medicine unveiled recommendations separately on Thursday, all of which called for sweeping reform in each field.
The proposals will become an outline for the advisory council's final recommendation to the prime minister, which will be made in December after the council hears the opinions of bureaucrats on each issue.
Panel chairman Koichi Minaguchi told a news conference that he wanted to ensure that the panel's efforts would not be a "total waste of energy".
"The ministries concerned all agree that they are heading in the direction outlined in the reports, but when it comes to specifics, they said they still have different opinions," Minaguchi said.
EPA officials were also cautious about the future of the proposals by the panel, however, as any action taken may hinge on the outcome of general elections set for October 20.
"It is not clear how ministers in the new government to be formed will treat those proposals," an EPA official said.
Haruo Shimada, also a key member of the panel, said, however, that any delay in overhauling laws relating to employment would be "suicidal".
While the number of workers would rapidly fall after 2010, Japan still uses employment laws established half a century ago. "If we don't start (reform and deregulation), immediately, it would be suicidal," Shimada said. ($1=112 yen)
