Japan's biggest life insurer, Nippon Life Insurance Co, plans to set up a joint venture in the Philippines, becoming the first Japanese company to sell life insurance policies abroad.
A spokesman for Nippon Life said on Monday that it and the Yuchengco group of the Philippines' would sign a contract by the year-end to establish a joint venture by next March.
"Japanese insurers have not gone abroad to sell life insurance policies. We plan to sell policies in the Philippines to people in the medium to high income bracket, and also target Japanese firms that have already entered the country," he said.
Nippon Life will own 50 percent of the joint venture, which will be based in Manila. The rest will be owned by two Yuchengco group firms -- 30 percent by Great Pacific Life Assurance Corp and 20 percent by Rizal Commercial Banking Corp.
The size of the capitalisation and the number of staff at the new company have not yet been decided, but Nippon Life is expected to send several executives to the venture, he said.
Nippon Life is also looking to tap lucrative markets elsewhere in Asia as the domestic insurance business approaches saturation point, the spokesman said.
The president of Nippon Life, Josei Itoh, said earlier this year that it wants to help build up the life insurance market in the rest of Asia in collaboration with local firms.
Only an estimated five to 10 percent of people in Southeast Asia have life insurance policies, Itoh said, adding that China's biggest insurer, the People's Insurance Co of China (PICC), could be a candidate for a joint venture.
Nippon Life is a giant in the Japanese insurance business and one of the world's top providers of life cover, with assets of about 39 trillion yen ($348 billion), nearly one-fifth of the value of assets held by Japan's 31 life insurers.
Analysts say the insurance business in emerging Asian countries will grow rapidly in the coming decades. Purchase of life insurance policies is closely tied to an individual's affluence and disposable income, they say.
"While Japan's insurance market is reaching maturity, the prospects for growth are enormous in the rest of Asia as countries there have just begun to build up a pool of their own capital," said Nikko Research Centre analyst Kouya Hasegawa.
"Japanese banks and other financial institutions are already targeting Asian markets for future opportunities. Nippon Life took action in the region as the first Japanese life insurer to do so, indicating other big life insurance firms will follow," he said. ($1=112 yen)
