Japan's biggest brokerage, Nomura Securities, posted a hefty half-year loss on Tuesday but other "Big Four" brokers turned in handsome profits due to improving business on the nation's stock market.
Nomura suffered a net parent loss of around $3 billion in the six months to September 30 after ploughing large amounts of money into helping an ailing finance firm in the Nomura group.
However, the three other big brokers posted healthy profits generally in line with their performance for the same period last year, helped by rising turnover on the Japanese stock market. The brokers have troubled affiliates too but have yet to work out detailed strategies for tackling the problem.
Executives at Daiwa Securities, Nikko Securities and Yamaichi Securities all said their firms had benefited from increased stockbroking fees and commission income from bond and stock underwriting.
Despite the net losses, analysts said Nomura was on track for better-than-expected profits this year, which would make it easier to resolve financial woes in the Nomura Group.
In the first half, Nomura's parent current profit stood at 69.87 billion yen ($618 million), more than double its 32.16 billion yen ($284 million) first-half profit a year earlier.
However, it reported a loss of 337.54 billion yen ($2.98 billion) on a net basis after providing financial support worth 371 billion yen ($3.28 billion) to the non-bank affiliate.
Parent current profit is pre-tax, and includes losses and gains on non-operating activities. Net profit is after-tax and includes extraordinary profits or losses.
Nomura's Vice President Atsushi Saito said there were no complaints from customers and shareholders about its decision to support the affiliate. Credit rating agencies have been positive about the decision as it shows a willingness to confront the problem, he said.
Nomura wants to boost its operating profits for the latter half of 1996/97 to offset the half-year net loss, he added.
Meanwhile, Hiromitsu Sogame, vice president of Japan's second-biggest broker Daiwa, said that the company wants to provide support to its non-bank affiliate in the current business year on a lump-sum basis and was working on a plan with tax officials and accountants.
In the first half, Daiwa's parent current profit rose 3.7 percent to 28.55 billion yen ($252 million). It was also in profit on a net basis. Sogame said the affiliate needs to write off more than 100 billion yen ($884 million) worth of bad assets and Daiwa will use profits from sales of shareholdings, internal reserves and current profits to provide the aid.
Masao Yuki, the vice president of third biggest broker Nikko, said the company was also considering financial support to several non-bank affiliates. However, he said one of the troubled units was jointly owned by Asahi Bank and it would take time to work out a plan.
Ryuji Shirai, deputy president at Yamaichi Securities, said his firm is expected to revise an existing restructuring plan for its non-bank financial affiliate to cut the period covered by the scheme from the current 10 years.
Nikko's parent current profits fell slightly to 22.23 billion yen ($196 million) in the first half from 25.53 billion yen ($225 million) in the year-earlier period.
Parent current profits at Yamaichi, the last of the "Big Four", rose 23 percent to 6.44 billion yen ($56.9 million) in the April-September period. Its net profit also rose.
Nomura and Daiwa did not give earnings forecasts but Nikko said that it expected a parent current profit of 60 billion yen ($530 million) in 1996/97, and Yamaichi said it projected a profit totalling 19 billion yen ($168 million).
