Major Japanese non-life insurance company Yasuda Fire &amp; Marine Co Ltd announced on Monday that it plans to take a majority stake in the Japanese unit of U.S. life insurance giant CIGNA Corp.
Terms of the deal, which would be the first time a Japanese non-life insurance company has purchased a life insurance subsidiary, were not disclosed.
Yasuda said it would boost its business cooperation with CIGNA Corp of the United States by taking a majority stake in CIGNA's Japanese unit, INA Life Insurance Co.
"It is the first time a Japanese non-life insurance company has taken over a life insurance company. We have cooperated over the past 15 years and that experience made this possible," Yasuda president Koichi Ariyoshi told a news conference.
Ariyoshi said the relationship between CIGNA and Yasuda was an example of private-sector cooperation between Japanese and American companies even though Washington has protested Tokyo's newly revised insurance law, which it says violates a U.S.-Japan trade agreement.
The companies began cooperating in 1981 and Yasuda acquired 10 percent of INA in July 1993, and now plans to boost that stake to more than 50 percent within the next year or two, Ariyoshi said.
Under Japan's new Insurance Business Law, which took effect on April 1, non-life insurers and life insurers are allowed to enter each other's business sectors through subsidiaries.
Japan and the United States have been at odds over the entry of Japanese insurance firms' subsidiaries into the so-called third-sector market, a lucrative niche market that covers accident insurance products, among others.
Japan's Finance Ministry is likely to put conditions on the entry of domestic insurance companies' subsidiaries into the third sector, industry sources said.
Ariyoshi did not disclose the cost of the planned purchase of INA shares. However, he added the cost was similar to what it had cost non-life insurance companies to establish life insurance subsidiaries.
Japan's 11 other non-life insurers set up life insurance subsidiaries earlier this month with share capital ranging from 10 billion yen to 30 billion yen ($92.5 million to $277 million).
The life insurance subsidiaries are expected to begin operations in October.
($1=108 yen)
