Overseas subsidiaries of Japan's top brokerage, Nomura Securities Co Ltd, virtually doubled their combined profits in the half year to September, energised by strong earnings in Europe.
An official of Nomura told Reuters its 66 subsidiaries abroad made a total of 17.7 billion yen ($158 million) in pre-tax profit in the six months, the first half of Japan's fiscal year, almost double the approximately nine billion yen ($80.36 million) in the same period a year earlier.
The main reason was a more than five-fold profit surge at Nomura's European subsidiaries, while results in the Asian and American regions were generally flat, the official said in a telephone interview.
Nomura released its half-year parent and group earnings results on Tuesday but did not give details of earnings in the regions.  Despite the buoyant business overseas, the brokerage tipped into the red on a parent and a group net basis after deciding to put large sums of money into helping an ailing financial affiliate.
In the business year that ended on March 31, 1996, pre-tax profits at Nomura's consolidated subsidiaries overseas totalled 47.1 billion yen ($420 million).
In the April-September period, European subsidiaries led by London-based Nomura International Plc posted current profits of 9.8 billion yen ($87.5 million), more than five times the amount a year earlier, the official said.
Hitoshi Tonomura, a new chairman who arrived at Nomura International in London in the spring of last year, helped to bring operations there back into profit, he said.
Current profits at Asian units were 1.5 billion yen ($13.3 million), slightly up from a year earlier, while those at subsidiaries in the American region totalled 6.4 billion yen ($57.1 million), little changed from a year earlier, he said.
The official said successful asset securitisation business by Nomura International fuelled the sharp increase in the profits there, and profits in the United States came largely from the asset-backed and mortgage-backed securities business.
As for business in Asia, he said: "We are still in the stage of investment and not getting returns yet, although we are allocating our human and other resources there."
Nomura used to announce its group results about a month after the parent earnings but has brought the group statement forward to provide more timely information for investors.
In the first half, it posted parent current profit of 69.87 billion yen ($623 million), while group current profit stood at 74.76 billion yen. However, it posted a hefty half-year net loss on both a parent and consolidated basis after providing financial support of 37.1 billion yen ($331 million) for an ailing non-bank financial affiliate in the Nomura group.
The parent net loss was 337.54 billion yen ($3.01 billion) and the group net loss 332.01 billion yen ($2.96 billion).
Current profit is pre-tax, and includes losses and gains on non-operating activities. Net profit is after-tax and includes extraordinary profits or losses.
($1=112 yen)
