Investors in Asian countries are turning to Tokyo's property market, formerly notorious for its high prices, says Richard Mandel, managing director of the Japanese unit of U.S. real estate firm Kennedy-Wilson Inc.
Mandel told Reuters in a recent interview that his California-based company could bring foreign investors into Japan's real estate market, currently suffering from a five-year tailspin, and reactivate trade.
This should also help ease one of the Japanese financial industry's biggest headaches -- selling off land collateral to recover something from the huge bad loans run up by Japan's seven failed "jusen" mortgage firms, he said.
"We are probably the only foreign company participating in the Japanese real estate market... Many foreign investors from Asia are coming over here, working with us to try to buy Japanese real estate," he said.
Asian investors see Tokyo as a powerful world business centre and believe that real estate prices here have come down to attractive levels after plunging 75 percent from the peak reached in the early 1990s, he said.
Japanese property prices went into a tailspin in the early 1990s when the nation's "bubble economy" era of soaring stock market and real estate prices came to an end.
Mandel said that while Kennedy-Wilson has not concluded any deals since it started operations in Tokyo in 1995, negotiations are going on with Asian investors, focusing on commercial buildings and apartment buildings in central Tokyo with values of less than 10 billion yen ($89.2 million).
"You can buy prime Japanese real estate much lower than you can buy in Hong Kong and Singapore," he said.
Real estate industry sources say big Japanese investors such as life insurers and developers, which were aggressive buyers of land in the bubble era, are finding it hard to allocate new money for land transactions because they carry huge problem assets left from the collapse of the bubble.
Meanwhile, they say banks and construction firms are reluctant to sell their real estate at current prices, and this has greatly decreased market liquidity.
He said Japan should take a look at taxes on capital gains. Japan's real estate market needs many investors from all over the world to become a truly healthy market, but a major drawback is its capital gain tax on land transactions, he said.
The company took part in helping the Resolution Trust Corp in the United States recover debts following the 1980s crisis at "savings and loan" mortgage associations, using its auction-marketing system. Mandel believes the system would be useful for selling jusen property.
Mandel will soon leave Japan for New York. Ryosuke Homma, who will take over the Tokyo operation, said making use of the Internet could be a method of soliciting investors.
In July, Japan set up the Housing Loan Administration Corp to recover, over the next 15 years, more than six trillion yen ($53.5 billion) worth of the jusen firms' problem loans in the form of real estate collateral.
Earlier this month, several Japanese ministries set up a joint panel to work out measures to boost liquidity in the property market to facilitate collection of debt through collateralised real estate.
Mandel said real estate sales by the Housing Loan Administration Corp would happen from the start of fiscal 1997, beginning on April 1, "and this will firmly set market prices" ($1=112 yen)
