A Japanese regional bank said on Wednesday that it could lose up to $26 million due to suspected misuse of bank funds by an employee.
Before Biwako Bank Ltd's announcement, rumours had swirled in Tokyo's markets that the bank was having financial problems, jolting stock and bond prices.
The bank allayed these fears somewhat when it said the suspected fund misappropriation, totalling about 3.4 billion yen ($29.8 million), would do only limited damage to its financial health.
However, analysts said the market jitters highlighted lingering nervousness about the health of Japan's financial industry, which is groaning under the weight of huge problem loans.
The bank said it expects to be able to recover about 400 million yen ($3.50 million) of the misappropriated funds and that it would write off the remaining expected losses in the current financial year ending next March.
The bank, based in Ohtsu City, western Japan, has yet to file a complaint against the former employee but plans to do so on completing an internal investigation, a bank official said.
Some analysts said the news about Biwako shocked markets because the bank had been considered financially healthy.
"The feeling of unease spread rapidly because it was talk about (financial) problems at a bank whose name had never been mentioned among the list of troubled banks before," said Yoshinobu Yamada, an analyst at Merrill Lynch Japan Inc.
"If the name was one included in the list, the impact would have been minimal," he said.
Fears about Biwako's financial health helped push down the Tokyo stock market's benchmark Nikkei average, which ended the morning session 1.20 percent lower than the previous day close.
The Nikkei ended the day down 276.41 points, or 1.32 percent, at 20,681.67.
The rumours pressured Biwako's share price, which had fallen to 491 yen by the midday close after closing at 549 yen on Monday. It was untraded on Tuesday and the Osaka Securities Exchange (OSE) suspended trading in it on Wednesday afternoon.
The drop in stock prices supported the Japanese government bond (JGB) market and the key December JGB futures contract rose to 125, a record high for any benchmark.
Analysts said the market was particularly nervous about talk about the health of a financial institution after Japanese financing company Nichiei Finance Co Ltd filed for liquidation last week with huge debt liabilities.
Japan's financial industry is still reeling in the aftermath of the late 1980s "bubble economy" of soaring stock and property prices.
When asset prices began to plunge in the early 1990s, many companies which had borrowed aggressively to invest during the bubble economy were unable to return the money and their lenders were left saddled with huge problem loans.
While big Japanese banks are expected to clean up their problem loan woes over the next one year or so, many others are likely to be plagued by the problem for longer period, said Katsuhito Sasajima, an analyst at Nikko Research Centre.
However, failures of financial institutions would not jeopardise the system now that Japan had established a framework for handling such problems, he said.
