Japan's financial industry is gradually recovering from the bad-debt hangover left by the economic "bubble" years, but the pain lingers on for smaller banks and loan institutions.
Analysts say the industry has got over the worst of the bad loan mess after vigorous efforts by the government and major banks over the past year to tackle the problem. Any further serious damage to the system is therefore unlikely, they say.
But the picture is darker for small institutions that lack the financial might of the big banks but were similarly saddled with soured loans from the late 1980s lending boom.
Analysts say it will take years to restore confidence in the banking sector given the lingering problems and exposure to the troubled real estate and construction industries.
The nervousness was highlighted last month by the collapse of financing firm Nichiei Finance Co Ltd with huge debt liabilities, and revelations of losses at a regional bank because of suspected misuse of funds by an ex-employee.
Both these incidents jolted financial markets. In the case of Biwako Bank, the markets were unsettled by vague rumours of dire trouble before the bank said it had lost money due to the suspected misappropration but remained in sound health.
A new restructuring programme unveiled two weeks ago by Tobishima Corp, a contractor and engineering company, also fuelled concerns that banks would face new burdens as ailing firms seek further support while trying to reshape themselves.
Katsuhito Sasajima, an analyst at Nikko Research Center, said the banks are dealing with the problem in stages -- first with their own bad loans, then the problems of affiliated firms and, finally, the issue of other debtors.
"Banks are trying to dispose of problem loans to independent non-banks after mostly completing write-offs of debt held by their non-bank affiliates," he said.
Failures of troubled non-banks are already anticipated and it may take one or two years for the big banks to fully recover from the mess, he said.
Non-banks are financial firms which do not take deposits but rely mostly on loans from banks and other deposit-taking bodies such as agricultural credit cooperatives.
Like the "jusen" mortgage firms, which were wound up this year, many non-banks are in trouble. They lent to golf-course and resort companies that joined hands with developers looking for easy profits during the free-wheeling "bubble" years.
When asset prices began to plunge in the early 1990s, many firms which had relied on borrowed funds for investments were unable to repay the money, causing a ripple effect of bad debt.
The Finance Ministry said this week that outstanding loans by Japan's 249 non-banks fell 4.4 percent to 50.74 trillion yen ($449 billion) at the end of March from a year earlier.
Analysts said Nichiei's main creditors -- Dai-Ichi Kangyo Bank (DKB), Asahi Bank and the Bank of Yokohama -- are expected to give up their claims after the company filed for restructuring under court guidance, a category of business failure under Japan's bankruptcy laws.
As of March, DKB had 56 billion yen ($495 million) ($495 million) in loans to Nichiei Finance, while Asahi had 32 billion yen ($283 million) and Bank of Yokohama 20 billion yen ($176 million) in loans, they said.
James Fiorillo, a ING Baring Securities (Japan) analyst, said the amount these three write off for Nichiei will only be about a fifth of their total disposals this fiscal year.
DKB has predicted an operating profit for 1996/97 to next March of about 320 billion yen ($2.83 billion) and current profit, a form of pre-tax profit including non-operating activities, of 40 billion yen ($353 million). This suggests DKB may use the difference -- 280 billion yen ($2.47 billion) -- to write off problem loans.
Japan's 20 big banks are already planning to dispose of 3.5 trillion yen ($30.9 billion) to 4.0 trillion yen ($35.3 billion) of problem loans in 1996/97 after writing off nearly 11 trillion yen ($97.3 billion) in 1995/96, analysts estimated.
It will, however, take some time for creditor banks to solve the problem of the non-banks including Nichiboshin Ltd and Apollo Leasing Co Ltd.
The search for a solution is complicated by the fact that the non-banks are part of a web of lending, having borrowed from more than 100 creditors including financially weak agricultural credit unions.
"People say that the problem is that losses (stemming from the non-bank liquidation) may break the back of weak agricultural financial institutions," one analyst said. ($1=113 yen)
