Japan's financial industry suffered another blow on Tuesday when a court was asked to start bankruptcy proceedings against a major realtor which has estimated liabilities of almost $5.5 billion.
But analysts said that while the collapse of Osaka-based Sueno Kosan could affect some individual financial institutions, it was unlikely to have any major negative impact on the overall financial industry.
The Housing Loan Administration Corp (HLAC), a semi-governmental body set up to collect problem loans run up by seven failed mortgage companies, said on Tuesday it had asked the Osaka District Court to start bankruptcy proceedings against Sueno Kosan and two of its affiliates.
If Sueno Kosan, an unlisted real estate company which borrowed heavily from the "jusen" mortgage firms, is declared bankrupt, it could become one of Japan's biggest ever business failures, analysts said.
The HLAC said it has claims totalling 347 billion yen ($3.07 billion) on Sueno Kosan and the two units. The claims were transferred from the failed jusen firms to the body.
In total, Sueno Kosan group's liabilities are estimated at 620 billion yen ($5.48 billion), said Tokyo Commerce and Industry Research Co, a private credit research body.
Japan's banking industry was also jolted last month when a major financing company, Nichiei Finance Co Ltd, filed for liquidation with huge debt liabilities. Like the jusen and Sueno Kosan, Nichiei was a casualty of the property-related lending boom in the late 1980s "bubble era" and the subsequent dive in asset prices.
The Osaka court has taken steps to seize the assets of Sueno Kosan and its affiliates in response to the application, the HLAC statement said. There was no immediate comment from Sueno Kosan on the moves.
Although the overall damage to the financial system may be slight, analysts said individual non-bank financial institutions with outstanding loans to Sueno could suffer. A non-bank financial institution makes loans but does not take deposits, raising funds by borrowing from banks.
"Should Sueno be forced into bankruptcy and its assets distributed, many of the other lender non-banks will be forced to absorb huge losses relative to their size," said James Fiorillo, ING Baring Securities (Japan) analyst.
"This will probably force many of them (creditors) into distress or bankruptcy, so the outcome...should be closely watched," he said.
Finance Minister Wataru Kubo did not appear to be that worried, although he told reporters the Sueno Kosan problem might spread to financial firms that had lent it money.
"However, such an impact will be resolved among related financial institutions in accordance with our financial system," he said.
Noboru Matsuda, governor of the Deposit Insurance Corp of Japan (DIC), which supervises the HLAC, said in a statement that it was inevitable such action would be taken against some "malignant" borrowers like Sueno, which he said had repeatedly attempted to hide assets.
In June, Japan adopted a controversial plan that allowed for the use of 685 billion yen ($6.06 billion) in public funds to help wind up the jusen.
The HLAC inherited assets totalling 6.5 trillion yen ($57.5 billion) from the failed firms after 6.4 trillion yen ($56.6 billion) worth of unrecoverable loans were written off with the help of financial institutions and public money. ($1=113 yen)
