The collapse of a major real estate company which borrowed heavily from Japan's "jusen" mortgage firms would be unlikely to have any major negative impact on the financial industry, analysts said on Tuesday.
Earlier on Tuesday, a semi-governmental body set up to collect problem loans run up by the "jusen" companies said it was seeking the involuntary bankruptcy of unlisted real estate firm Sueno Kosan.
The Housing Loan Administration Corp (HLAC) made the request to an Osaka court.  
"The action has been already factored in (to the financial markets)," said Takakazu Nakamori, an official at credit research firm Teikoku Databank.
He said the Finance Ministry appeared to have recognised the problem and given the go-ahead for the forced bankruptcy.
Yushiro Ikuyo, first vice president at Smith Barney International, said the loan body was taking the right course of action, given the severity of the Sueno Kosan problem.  
Banks which had loans to the failed jusen firms and related companies like Sueno Kosan have mostly made loan loss provisions, as well as forgiving loans under the government's scheme to wind up the firms, he said. Those creditors will not have any problem from the expected insolvency, he said.
The HLAC said in a statement that it had also asked the Osaka District Court to start bankruptcy proceedings for two of Sueno Kosan's affiliates. The court has taken steps to seize their assets in response to the application, it also said.
The application also sought bankruptcy proceedings against three individuals associated with the firm, including president Kenichi Sueno, the HLAC said in its statement.  
The HLAC said it has claims totalling 347 billion yen on Sueno Kosan and two of its group firms. The claims were transferred from the failed jusen firms to the body, it said.
In June, Japan adopted a framework that allowed for the use of 685 billion yen of public money to help wind up the jusen.
The HLAC inherited assets totalling 6.5 trillion yen from the seven failed firms after 6.4 trillion yen worth of unrecoverable loans were written off with the help of financial institutions and public money.
Katsuhito Sasajima, a Nikko Research Centre analyst, said the action by the body was good news.  
"The insolvency of Sueno is not a matter of damage to the financial system... Rather, the market would probably appreciate the action as such legal procedures are transparent," Nikko's Sasajima said.
An HLAC official quoted a senior official of the Deposit Insurance Corp of Japan (DIC) as telling reporters in Osaka that the decision to seek the insolvency was taken after consultation with the Finance Ministry and that the move would not greatly affect the financial system as a whole.  
But although the overall damage to the financial system may be slight, analysts said individual non-bank financial institutions with outstanding loans to Sueno could suffer.
"Should Sueno be forced into bankrutpcy and its assets distributed, many of the other lender non-banks will be forced to absorb huge losses relative to their size," ING Baring Securities (Japan) analyst James Fiorillo said.
If Sueno Kosan is declared bankrupt, it would be one of the biggest Japanese insolvencies on record, analysts said.
"This will probably force many of them (creditors) into distress or bankruptcy, so the outcome...should be closely watched," Fiorillo said. In total, the Sueno Kosan group has liabilities of about 600 billion yen, he added.
Several analysts said that a non-bank institution, Apollo Leasing Co Ltd, may be affected. An official at Apollo said that the company has loans to Sueno Kosan and will try to figure out the impact of its collapse. He did not give further details. Non-bank financial institutions make loans but do not take deposits, borrowing money instead from banks.
There was no immediate comment from Sueno Kosan itself about the move by the loan-collecting body.  
A survey by the Tokyo Commerce and Industry Research Co, a private sector research arm, said Apollo Leasing had 21.13 billion yen in loans to Sueno as of the end of December 1995.
Other major creditors to Sueno at the end of last December included Inter-Lease Corp with claims of 5.35 billion yen, All Corp with 6.0 billion yen and Crown Leasing Corp with 17.6 billion yen, the research body said.
Analysts said the non-bank financial institutions had undertaken restructuring programmes by asking creditors to do such things as cut interest payments on loans and delay principal payments.
