A loan-collecting body said on Tuesday it was seeking the involuntary bankruptcy of a major real estate firm, the latest shock to the country's financial system from the long-running "jusen" mortgage firm scandal.
If Osaka-based Sueno Kosan were declared bankrupt it would be one of the biggest Japanese business failures on record, financial industry sources said. The firm has estimated total liabilities of 670 billion yen ($5.87 billion).
The sources said the bankruptcy could lead to problems at financial firms that have loaned money to Sueno Kosan.
The bankruptcy request was made to the Osaka District Court by the semi-governmental Housing Loan Administration Corp (HLAC), set up to collect problem loans run up by the "jusen" group of home loan firms.
Sueno Kosan is a major borrower from the "jusen" mortgage firms, which collapsed under the weight of rash property loans made during the "bubble" economy of the 1980s.
Finance Minister Wataru Kubo also said the Sueno Kosan problem was likely to spread to financial firms that had lent it money. "However, such an impact will be resolved among related financial institutions in accordance with our financial system," he said.
Jitters about problems in the banking industry helped push up the price of Japanese government bonds to record levels on Tuesday.
The filing was somewhat expected. Kohei Nakabo, president of the HLAC, told reporters recently the body was considering taking such action.
Japanese media reported recently that the corporation was considering such a move because of alleged attempts to transfer Sueno Kosan assets to affiliates.
In September, Sueno Kosan chief Kenichi Sueno pleaded guilty in the Osaka District Court to charges that he and some aides hid assets to prevent them being seized by creditors.
The Sueno group was the second-largest borrower from the mortgage firms.
Media reports have said it borrowed 236.7 billion yen ($2.07 billion) from five of the seven jusen and about 300 billion yen ($2.63 billion) from 10 other financial institutions.
Noboru Matsuda, governor of the Deposit Insurance Corp of Japan (DIC), which supervises the loan-collecting body, said in a statement that DIC has no intention of seeking the bankruptcy of every borrower from the jusen firms.
But he said that taking such action would be inevitable for some "malignant" borrowers like Sueno which he said had repeatedly attempted to hide assets.
Sueno Kosan officials were not immediately able to comment.
Japan's financial industry has made progress in tackling the problem of bubble-era loans gone bad, but analysts say some smaller loan institutions heavily exposed to the real estate and construction industries remain vulnerable.
The collapse of a major financing company last month, Nichiei Finance Co Ltd, with huge debt liabilities also highlighted the continuing fallout from the bad loan problem. ($1=114 yen)
