Japan is expected to lift controls on stock-related derivatives as part of a drive to free up its financial markets, but industry sources have doubts about whether the products can really take off here.
The securities industry sources said Tokyo was lagging so far behind overseas rivals, including Singapore and Hong Kong, that it would be extremely difficult to make a viable and attractive market for stock-based derivatives in Japan.
On Monday, Prime Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto announced a five-year "Big Bang" plan to liberalise the nation's markets and catch up with reforms carried out years ago in rival financial centres like London. The aim is to make Japanese markets "free, fair and global".
As part of that push, Hashimoto asked for a review of laws relating to derivatives transaction, which currently restrict stock options to those based on indices, rather than on individual stocks.
But even before the "Big Bang" announcement, Japan's Ministry of Finance (MOF) had already been looking at lifting restrictions on stock options and equity swap transactions.
A trader at a foreign brokerage said that Japanese participants are already used to offshore trading in derivatives, avoiding the tightly regulated Japanese markets, and it may be hard to generate interest here.
"It is too late to induce market enthusiasm," he said. "Even if the finance ministry deregulates (stock-related) derivatives trading in Japan, it might be difficult to make Tokyo markets attractive," he said.
An official at the ministry told Reuters recently that it plans to decide whether to allow the introduction of a variety of stock-related derivatives transactions after an advisory panel delivers its recommendations next spring.
While Japan introduced stock index futures and options in the late 1980s, the ministry has taken a particularly cautious approach to derivatives of individual stocks in order to concentrate equity-related deals on stock exchanges.
Options, which are usually used to hedge against losses due to price fluctuations, allow the holder to buy or sell a specified amount at an agreed price during a set time period.
An analyst at a big brokerage said that the securities industry and the Osaka and Tokyo stock exchanges have made preparations to list individual stock options and are ready to start as soon as the ministry gives the go-ahead.
Such options on individual stocks were introduced in the early 1970s in the U.S. and European markets.
Big Japanese brokers also want to offer stock options which can be traded directly between investors and traders without any stock exchange involvement, he said.
Up until now, trading of individual stock options and equity swap transactions was banned as this was judged to violate the Criminal Code outlawing gambling.
This has pushed lucrative business offshore to less regulated markets, where brokers are able to trade options or warrants based on Japanese stocks if they wish. Market sources say Japan may have to revise the law to clear the way for such derivatives trade.
