Japan's Finance Ministry pledged on Thursday to lift its controls on management of employee pension funds, a key member of an advisory panel to the prime minister said.
At a meeting of the Administrative Reform Council's subcommittee on deregulation, the ministry clearly stated it would abolish restrictions on where employee pension funds managed by trust banks could be invested, Yoshihiko Miyauchi, chairman of the subcommittee, told reporters.
Under current rules, each trust bank must invest at least half of the funds it manages in fixed-income assets, such as Japanese government bonds, no more than 30 percent in Japanese stocks, no more than 30 percent in foreign currency-denominated shares and bonds, and no more than 20 percent in real estate.
Miyauchi said the Finance Ministry said it would work out details on lifting its regulations on asset allocation by the end of the year.
Japan's corporate pension system is divided into employee pension funds, which are supervised by the Welfare Ministry, and Tax-Qualified Retirement Pension (TQP) plans, which are supervised by the Finance Ministry.
The Welfare Ministry abolished its restrictions on asset management by trust banks in April.
Industry sources currently estimate assets in employee pension funds at about 42 trillion yen ($378 billion) and those in TQPs at about 18 trillion yen ($162 billion).
However, Miyauchi quoted Finance Ministry officials as saying the ministry was still considering whether it would allow investment advisory companies to manage TQP plans.
At the moment, only trust banks and life insurers are allowed to manage them.
The Welfare Ministry has already lifted the rules it had to prevent investment advisory companies managing employee pension funds, although some restrictions remain on the firms.
Japanese corporations have been urging the government to reform Japan's rigid corporate pension system in the face of low returns on investment and to help maintain the international competitiveness of Japanese firms.
Employers participating in the corporate pension system are required to maintain specified yields, currently 5.5 percent a year, to guarantee pre-determined benefits.
However, the actual return on pension funds' investments is now about three percent, due to Japan's record-low interest rates and weak economic recovery, industry sources say.
Miyauchi said the Finance Ministry told the sub-committee it was studying ways to relax specified yields but had not given details.
Securities industry sources said the abolition of restrictions on asset management would encourage fund managers to pump more money into Tokyo's stock market in order to boost returns on investment. ($1=111)
