Japan's Finance Ministry, which has long resisted calls from employers to reform the country's rigid corporate pension system, has finally decided to relax its tight grip.
However, industry sources say its proposals fall short of what is needed to cope with Japan's rapidly "greying" society and the poor financial state of employee pension funds resulting from record-low interest rates and a weak economic recovery.
"Unless Japan undertakes a drastic overhaul of the corporate pension system, it will remain out of step with the rest of the world," said an official at an overseas-based investment advisory company.
In the past, the amount of money Japanese corporate pension funds held was so small that authorities could regulate them without too much difficulty. But the amount has grown to about 60 trillion yen ($540 billion) and unless the current system is changed, it will hurt corporate balance sheets, he said.
Yoshihiko Miyauchi, a key member of an advisory panel to the prime minister, said on Thursday that the Finance Ministry had stated in a subcommittee meeting on deregulation that it would abolish restrictions on where employee pension funds managed by trust banks could be invested.
Under the current rules, each trust bank must invest at least half of the funds it manages in fixed-income assets, no more than 30 percent in Japanese stocks, no more than 30 percent in foreign currency-denominated shares and bonds, and no more than 20 percent in real estate.
Japan's corporate pension system is divided into employee pension funds, which are supervised by the Welfare Ministry, and Tax-Qualified Retirement Pension plans (TQPs), which are supervised by the Finance Ministry.
Miyauchi said the Finance Ministry was still considering whether to allow investment advisory firms to manage TQPs. It also told the subcommittee that it was studying whether to allow variable yields and flexible benefits, he said.
The Welfare Ministry has steadily lifted its restrictions on the management on employee pension funds, which have assets estimated at 42 trillion yen ($378 billion), and allowed investment advisory firms to manage the funds.
However, the Finance Ministry has barred investment advisory firms from managing TQPs, which have assets totalling 18 trillion yen ($162 billion). Only trust banks and life insurers are allowed to manage TQPs.
Employers participating in the corporate pension system are required to maintain specified yields, currently 5.5 percent a year, to guarantee predetermined benefits. But the actual return on investments is now only about three percent.
Because of the poor investment environment, many corporate pension funds are facing a shortage of funds to pay benefits to pensioners in the future, industry sources said. If pension funds fall short of meeting future payments, sponsoring companies must cover the shortfall.
Industry sources said that investment advisory firms, especially foreign companies, are keen to manage TQPs.
"Generally speaking, fund managers at Japanese companies are conservative," said the official with the investment advisory company.
"They tend to avoid investment risks because they see the risks, which are short-term volatility, as something dangerous. But experienced foreign advisors are well-qualified to manage pension funds as they take reasonable risks in long-term pension fund management over 20- to 30-year periods," he said.
He said British pension funds invest about 90 percent of their assets in equities, including about 15 percent in foreign stocks.
Ken Okamura, a strategist at Dresdner Kleinwort Benson (Asia) Ltd, said in a recent report that if Japan completely abolished restrictions on asset management of corporate pension funds, it was likely to see more investment in local stocks.
He estimated that at the moment, life insurers and trust banks put an average of about 20 percent of the pension assets they are entrusted with into local stocks.
"If corporate pension funds increase the weighting of local stocks to 30 percent, about six trillion yen ($54.0 billion) of funds will come to Japanese stock markets." ($1=111 yen)
