An influential Japanese government panel on Thursday called for a fundamental change in the nation's land policies, arguing that the old concept of trying to hold down land values was out of date.
Real estate values have plummeted since the bursting in the early 1990s of Japan's "bubble" of inflated asset prices.
The panel called for an "appropriate" tax on landholdings in line with balanced assessments of value.
To promote more liquidity in real estate holdings it recommended securitisation and promotion of joint ventures.
It also called for steps to encourage small landowners to sell their land or cooperate in development projects in order for large-scale development to take place in big cities.
Analysts and real estate industry sources said, however, that the panel failed to make specific proposals that would help end the long slump in the real estate market.
"Nobody in the government or politicians have yet formed a clear policy to solve the slump in the real estate market and falling land prices," said a real estate industry source.
Some experts said a change in taxation is the most important step that needs to be taken.
"While the panel makes wide-ranging proposals, it is somewhat disappointing that the panel did not make specific proposals on taxes on land (holdings and transactions)," said Keiko Otsuki, a senior analyst at UBS Securities Ltd.
It is Japan's first review of land policy in five years.
The panel said in its proposals to Prime Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto that land prices had fallen to a point where the price surges in the latter half of the bubble had been offset after a five-year slump.
Emergency intervention measures to curb land prices adopted in 1991 are no longer needed as they are still falling, it said.
Banks and non-bank financial institutions have been reeling from property-related bad loans, a factor blocking a smooth supply of funds to the real estate market and strong economic recovery.
The proposals follow a request by Hashimoto in April for a review of Japan's land policy to cope with structural changes such as falling land prices, growing numbers of people leaving the Tokyo metropolitan area and a rapid rise in the proportion of old people in the population.
