Japan's major commercial banks on Friday said they had returned to the black in the first half of the current business year after many of them posted losses in the previous fiscal year.
Analysts said that aggressive problem loan write-offs in the second half of the previous fiscal year which ended in March led to the losses after the 10 banks posted record profits in the first-half of that business year.
They added the results were close to the previous earnings' forecasts made by the biggest banks, showing that the banks are on schedule in steadily writing off their problem loans.
"The earnings results in the first half of the last business year were extraordinarily good...Interest rates were falling and anybody could earn profits if they sold bonds," said Katsuhito Sasajima, an analyst at Nikko Research Centre.
"While operating profits have declined from a year earlier, the business environment is not bad due to the low interest rates, and they will probably post handsome profits for the whole business year," he said.
Many of the big banks had losses in the previous business year due to the massive disposal of problem loans, including those to failed "jusen" mortgage firms, he said.
The 10 banks said that combined operating profits -- profits from the banking business before loan loss provisions -- totalled 1.19 trillion yen ($10.7 billion) in the first half, down from 1.87 trillion yen ($16.8 billion) a year earlier.
Combined parent current profits -- pre-tax profit including losses and gains on investments -- totalled 391.9 billion yen ($3.53 billion) in the first half, down from 463.2 billion yen ($4.17 billion) a year earlier.
Sasajima said the 10 banks had projected 1.16 trillion yen ($10.4 billion) in combined operating profits and 334 billion yen ($3.00 billion) in combined parent current profits.
Some of the bankers, however, remained cautious.
Akishige Okada, senior managing director at Sakura Bank Ltd, told reporters that a narrowing in the loan spread, which was a main reason for the decline in operating profits, was likely to continue in the second half of the year to March 31.
"I expect the business environment will not be so good, as the current interest rate situation is not expected to change in the latter half," Okada said.
The loan spread is the spread between the rates paid on deposits and for other fund-raising, and the rates charged on lending. Japan's interest rates fell to record low levels in the last fiscal year and have remained there.
Of the 10 banks,  Hokkaido Takushoku, Sakura, Fuji, Daiwa, Sanwa, Tokai and Asahi posted current losses in 1995/96.
The 10 banks -- including the Bank of Tokyo and Mitsubishi Bank which merged into the Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi on April 1, Dai-Ichi Kangyo Bank, and Sumitomo Bank -- disposed of 6.31 trillion yen ($56.8 billion) worth of problem loans in 1995/96.
Bankers said that they would continue to dispose of problem loans in the latter half of 1996/97 after doing so in the first half by setting aside loan-loss provisions and selling them to a joint problem loan liquidation body.
For instance, Fumio Akanuma, senior managing director at Dai-Ichi Kangyo, said: "We disposed of 134.6 billion yen ($1.21 billion) of problem loans in the first half...We plan to dispose of a total of 330 billion yen ($2.97 billion) in the full year (to March 31)." ($1=111 yen)
