Seven of Japan's eight biggest life insurers said on Wednesday that they experienced a drop in assets in the first half of the current fiscal year, the first such fall in many years.
Executives attributed the decline to a cancellation of pension fund management contracts after the firms cut their guaranteed rate of return in April.
"It was the first time we have seen a drop in assets since we started announcing our interim business reports (six years ago)," said Taichi Ohtaki, managing director of Asahi Mutual Life Insurance Co. "It would probably be the first time we have experienced a decline in our assets since World War Two."
Combined assets at the eight firms totalled 142.8 trillion yen ($1.26 trillion) at the end of September, down 1.2 percent from 144.6 trillion yen ($1.27 trillion) at the end of March.
Only Nippon Life Insurance Co, the biggest life insurer in Japan, increased its assets -- to 39.44 trillion yen ($349 billion) from 39.03 trillion yen ($345 billion).
The other firms are Meiji Life Insurance, Sumitomo Life Insurance, Dai-ichi Mutual Life Insurance, Mitsui Mutual Life Insurance, Yasuda Mutual Life Insurance and Chiyoda Mutual Life Insurance.
Assets of the eight account for about 75 percent of the total assets held by all Japanese life insurers.
The executives said that some corporate pension funds and the Pension Welfare Service Public Corp (PWSPC) -- an affiliate of the Welfare Ministry -- had cancelled fund management contracts in the first half of 1996/97, due to a cutback in the guaranteed rate of return offered by life insurers to 2.5 percent from 4.5 percent.
The PWSPC said earlier this year that it had cancelled about five trillion yen ($44.2 billion) worth of fund management contracts with 18 life insurers.
However, some insurers were optimistic and said the decline in assets was only a temporary phenomenon.
"I think the cancellation of pension funds peaked out in the first half and assets at the end of next March will likely recover to the same level as at the end of last fiscal year," said Minoru Mochida, senior managing director at Meiji Life.
Analysts said that despite the decline in assets, the profitability of the insurers was improving.
A serious headache for the insurers has been the negative spread between current low investment yields and already promised payouts, they said. Since the cancellation of pension fund management contracts, the gap has been narrowing.
The payouts are calculated based on prospective investment yields at the time insurance policies were written.
Meiji Life's Mochida said the overall average guaranteed rate of return offered by life insurers would fall to about four percent in 1996/97 from about five percent in 1995/96, while investment yields would remain low at around three percent.
The eight firms also announced a combined 2.15 trillion yen ($19.0 billion) of problem loans as of the end of September, the first time they had revealed such statistics.
They said that at the end of September the amount of this total classified as "bad loans" -- loans to bankrupt companies and those on which interest payments are in arrears of six months or more -- was 1.06 trillion yen ($9.3 billion).
An official at Sumitomo Life said the firm would this fiscal year dispose of about 500 billion yen ($4.42 billion) of problem loans made to its non-bank affiliates in an effort to cut them back to a manageable level. At the end of September Sumitomo had 789.9 billion yen ($6.99 billion) of problem loans, more than any of the eight insurers. ($1=113 yen)
