Japan faces a number of regional bank failures over the next few years but the nation's financial system should not suffer any major damage, a leading U.S. rating agency said on Tuesday.
Senior executives from Standard &amp; Poors Corp said weaker Japanese regional banks will go to the wall as liberalisation triggers a shake-out in the Japanese financial sector.
They were speaking to reporters after the agency issued ratings on a small number of top Japanese regional banks, which were mostly judged to be a reasonably safe investment.
"We will see some (Japanese) regional bank failures," Ernest Napier, an S&amp;P director, told a news conference.
But he said that as long as the process was well-managed, the failures should not cause a crisis of confidence in the financial system.
The credibility of Japan's debt-burdened finance industry has been rocked by a string of banking failures, including the forced closure last month of Hanwa Bank, a second-tier regional bank based in western Japan.
Naoko Nemoto, an associate director at S&amp;P, said it would be hard for some other second-tier regional banks to stay afloat. While some of Japan's top regional banks enjoy higher credit ratings than big commercial banks, smaller regional banks continue to be plagued by poor asset quality and structural problems, she said.
When Japanese authorities stepped in to close Hanwa, it was the first such forced halt of a bank's operations since World War Two, and only the third bank failure since then -- although several small credit unions have folded.
At the time, the authorities said such swift action was essential for the recovery of the financial system.
Nemoto said that this could become a standard method of dealing with future bank failures.
Japan's other two post-war bank failures were dealt with by creating new bodies to take over their business.
James Fiorillo, an analyst at ING Baring Securities (Japan), echoed the S&amp;P view. Second-tier regional banks are likely to be at the sharp end of industry restructuring in the next few years, he said.
"We believe that there are a number of other 'tier two' banks that appear to be equally shaky (as Hanwa)," he said.
However, the Finance Ministry is honouring a promise it made a year ago to intervene at an earlier stage to close down poorly managed financial institutions, he added.
To meet strong capital market interest in financial institutions, S&amp;P gave public information (pi) ratings to seven first tier regional banks on Tuesday. These are unsolicited credit ratings based on information available to the public rather than lengthy consultations with the issuer.
S&amp;P plans to rate more Japanese banks on a "pi" basis, including some of the nation's 20 biggest banks and second-tier regional banks, over the coming months.
Of the seven regional banks given "pi" ratings by S&amp;P, Kiyo Bank Ltd got the lowest rating of BBpi while Hachijuni Bank Ltd got the highest at Api. BBBpi ratings were given to five regional banks -- Bank of Yokohama Ltd, Hyakujushi Bank Ltd, Iyo Bank Ltd, Nanto Bank Ltd and Suruga Bank Ltd.
Ratings in the "AAA", "AA", "A" and "BBB" categories are considered investment grade, while the "BB" category is regarded as having speculative characteristics.
