Japan, worried about being isolated in global capital markets, is working to harmonise its domestic accounting standards with international methods.
Finance Ministry (MOF) officials and analysts say Japan must comply with international accounting methods amid growing criticism that it is difficult to calculate how much risk a Japanese firm holds.
"To raise funds in international capital markets, financial statements of Japanese firms must be accepted by foreign investors," said an official in MOF's securities bureau.
Naruaki Sonoda, Nikko Research Centre's senior analyst, says: "It is needed to harmonise Japanese standards with international ones as it is costly for Japanese firms which want to raise funds overseas to have to make two financial statements based on domestic and international standards."
Last month, an advisory body to the ministry started a two-year discussion into whether and how far mark-to-market accounting should be used for companies' financial products holdings, such as securities and derivatives, as well as corporate pension fund accounts.
In mark-to-market accounting, unrealised gains or losses from financial products holdings must be stated in balance sheets and included in income statements.
In Japan, financial products are fundamentally appraised according to the cost of purchase, and only realised gains or losses need to be posted when positions are closed, regardless of the size of the open position a corporation is holding.
Growing financial assets at Japanese corporations and a series of trading fiascos by Japanese firms in the past year has prompted Japanese authorities to set tougher accounting rules.
At the end of March 1995, securities holdings at Japanese corporations, excluding financial industries, totalled 50.11 trillion yen ($463 billion) based on book value, accounting for 16 percent of their total assets, NRC's Sonoda said.
This compared with 21.15 trillion yen ($195 billion) of securities holdings at the end of March 1985, which accounted for 11 percent of their total assets.
Huge losses stemming from securities and derivatives trading have raised criticism for lax Japanese corporate risk management and accounting methods.
Earlier this year, Japanese trading house Sumitomo Corp announced it had lost $1.8 billion through unauthorised trading in copper futures.
Last November, Daiwa Bank said it lost $1.1 billion in unauthorised bond trading at its now-closed New York office.
The MOF also announced last month that it would tighten rules on corporate disclosure, highlighting that corporations will have to disclose unlisted derivatives trading such as swap trading, based on market prices, beginning in April 1998.
Listed derivatives, which are already calculated at market values, cover futures and options traded at the securities exchanges. Unlisted derivatives include swap trading such as interest-rate swaps.
The new rules do not affect corporate balance sheets, but disclosing the data is a step towards introducing mark-to-market accounting for financial products holdings.
Japan is working toward using international standards, said Hirokazu Moriyama, general manager at Yamaichi Research Institute of Securities &amp; Economics.
"I expect Japan to introduce international accounting standards by the end of the fiscal 1998/1999, as the European Commission, and the Securities and Exchange Commission of the United States have stated their support for the IASC process in setting international accounting standards," Moriyama said.
IASC, the International Accounting Standards Committee, has been working out principles of international accounting rules that can be applied in consistent ways in different countries.
It is expected to complete the process by March 1998.
The International Organisation of Securities Commissions, comprised of governmental securities authorities, including Japan, decided in July last year that it would take steps towards accepting IASC accountancy proposals.
Sonoda said, however, it was still unclear how far Japan would go in adopting mark-to-market methods in securities holdings and derivatives trading.
The United States basically uses the mark-to-market appraisal for securities holdings.
Sonoda says if international accounting standards follow the U.S. method, the impact would be enormous on Japanese corporations.
"Japanese companies own huge amounts of stocks in unique cross holdings, and they have massive unrealised profits on those holdings as they bought the shares a long time ago at cheap prices."
If those hidden profits are appraised in balance sheets, the boost in assets would deteriorate the return on equity (ROE) at Japanese companies.
ROE is a common financial yardstick, showing how efficiently a company is using its capital.
"This may reveal how poorly Japanese companies make use of shareholders' capital..." Sonoda said.
Currently, the ROE for Japanese companies is about 3.8 percent, compared with more than 10 percent for U.S. companies.
