A bill to lift a 50-year-old ban on holding companies is expected to be submitted to Japan's next parliament, with passage almost assured because of the government's "Big Bang" deregulation plans, economists say.
They added the financial industry would likely be the one which benefits first as the lifting of the ban would help it restructure and bail out troubled financial institutions.
Political haggling has delayed a decision on the holding companies ban for almost a year.
But the economists said Prime Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto's plans to liberalise the financial markets by 2001 and the proposed breakup of telecommunications giant Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corp (NTT) mean the ban will likely be lifted.
A holding company is a firm which controls one or more companies, often by having a majority of shares in them, but does not engage in a specific business.
Big business has demanded for years that the ban be lifted, and the pressure on the government has increased recently as many companies push for deregulation to help them streamline and compete with overseas rivals.
The plan to break up NTT calls for it to be restructured into three firms under a holding company. The firm had resisted the break-up plans until the holding company option was offered.
U.S. occupation forces introduced the ban on holding companies in 1947 to break up powerful conglomerates, known as "zaibatsu", which the United States said had contributed to Japan's war effort.
"I am sure the ban will be relaxed broadly in line with ideas the Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) has been advocating," said Hideo Fujiwara, senior research fellow at LTCB Research Institute Inc.
The Fair Trade Commission (FTC), the anti-monopoly watchdog, said last week it plans to submit a bill to end the ban to the session of parliament which starts in January.
Last January, the FTC sought to revise the Anti-Monopoly Law to broadly remove the ban, which had the backing of the pro-business LDP.
But that failed when the Social Democratic Party, a member in the then-ruling coalition, called for only a partial lifting of the ban.
If the bill passes next year, the ban would be relaxed by October 1997 at the earliest.
"Even if the ban is lifted, not many companies will make use of the new corporate structure immediately," Fujiwara said.
Companies such as Sony Corp, Canon Inc and Asahi Glass Co Ltd may be able to establish holding companies as they have already split their operations, he said, but many other companies have not.
But financial companies are in a better position to take advantage of the change, some economists said.
"Holding companies will enable banks, brokers and insurers to break down barriers between them," said Yushiro Ikuyo, a first vice president at Smith Barney International Inc.
Ikuyo said a holding company would make it easy for a big financial institution to streamline its corporate group, in particular, bailing out an ailing financial firm in the group.
The economists also said regional banks which tie up under a holding company would be able to boost their coverage areas.
Some warn, however, that financial holding companies would not solve all the problems facing the financial industry, in which too many deposit-taking institutions are competing.
"Like the recently collapsed Hanwa Bank, not all failed financial institutions can be bailed out through a holding company," LTCB Research's Fujiwara said.
The Finance Ministry last month suspended most operations at Hanwa and will eventually wind down the regional bank, which collapsed under the weight of its problem loans.
