One year after the peak of Japan's banking crisis, financial institutions are still reeling from the shock, and some have not escaped bankruptcy, analysts say.
Bankers say the worst of the bad loan nightmare is over, but analysts believe Japan's financial industry remains vulnerable.
"It will take some time for confidence in Japanese banks to be restored -- at least until real estate transactions are reactivated," said Yushiro Ikuyo, first vice president at Smith Barney International.
Bad loans largely take the form of land collateral.
"Even for big banks, it will take a few years to write off most problem loans and this will hurt their earnings," he said.
Financial analyst Hideichiro Nishimura at Yamaichi Research Institute of Securities and Economics said that despite vigorous efforts by the government and banks to clear the bad loan mess in the past year, confidence in Japanese financial institutions has not improved in international markets.
Currently stable share prices and low interest rates are helping banks dispose of problem loans steadily and on schedule, but their efforts to restructure operations still fall short of boosting their declining asset quality, he said.
August 30 last year saw Japan's first bank failure since World War Two. The financial system was jolted as major regional bank Hyogo Bank and the country's biggest credit union, Kizu Shinyo Kumiai, collapsed due to adventurous lending during the "bubble economy" of the late 1980s.
Ahead of that dark day, the biggest credit union in Tokyo, Cosmo Shinyo Kumiai, had collapsed, and then this year, second-tier regional bank Taiheiyo Bank went under.
Several analysts expect more bank failures.
"Everyone knows what has to happen (more financial failures), but no one knows when and how and who pays," an analyst at a foreign securities firm said.
To dispose of 10.7 trillion yen ($99.0 billion) of loan losses, many of Japan's biggest banks posted net losses in the fiscal 1995/96, ended March 31.
But counting all deposit-taking institutions, on that date there were still 8.3 trillion yen ($76.8 billion) of loan losses which need to be written off, the Finance Ministry said.
In June, parliament passed bills to clean up the nation's bad loan mess and deal with bank failures, along with a scheme to wind up failed mortgage firms, using taxpayers' money.
Analysts are cool about such efforts, however.
A spokeswoman at international credit-rating agency Moody's Investors Service said it has not much changed its BFSR (bank financial strength rating) since August last year, when it unveiled the BFSR for major Japanese banks for the first time.
Moody's last week warned that some of Japan's seven major trust banks may need external support in order to survive growing competition and the burden of bad debts.
Moody's gave Chuo Trust &amp; Banking and Yasuda Trust &amp; Banking an "E" ranking, meaning that they suffer from very weak intrinsic financial strength, and gave only a slightly better "E+" rating to Mitsui Trust &amp; Banking and Nippon Trust Bank.
It also kept Hokkaido Takushoku Bank and Nippon Credit Bank at the "E" it gave them last August.
"We expect banks with very weak financial fundamentals to ultimately require assistance either from the authorities or from their respective corporate group members," Moody's said.
