The deal with the United States to open Japan's insurance market will create some convulsions in the industry, but analysts said it will help make way for the deregulation of Japan's financial sector.
A final agreement was reached on Sunday, ending a dispute that U.S. President Bill Clinton had called the biggest trade barrier between the two nations.
While it focuses on such esoteric issues as who can sell cancer healthcare policies and whether auto insurance can be purchased through the mail, the issue had become a major political dispute.
U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher even got in on the act, calling his Japanese counterpart to apply some last-minute pressure ahead of the Sunday deadline. Japanese Prime Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto said he was relieved that the whole thing was over.
The United States, in a statement issued by the embassy here, said the measures "represent fundamental change in the Japanese insurance market, making it more open and competitive."
Insurance trade groups were less than thrilled, however, saying the agreement ignores the needs of consumers and keeps their firms out of some fast-growing parts of the business.
Under the agreement, Japanese companies will be allowed -- in stages -- to enter the niche "third sector" that includes cancer, healthcare and accident coverage. This is the area where foreign firms have gained a foothold.
Foreign firms are expected to benefit from a deregulation of rates in the non-life insurance sector, including fire and auto insurance, to take place by the end of 1998.
Analysts say that even without the U.S. pressure, the changes were coming as part of Hashimoto's drive to revitalise Japan's financial sector.
"It was a matter of when," said Kouya Hasegawa, an analyst at Nikko Research Centre.
He said that as with most deregulation, smaller firms will find it tougher to compete in the new world.
"The liberalisation of premiums is a major blow to the non-life insurance industry, particularly medium- to small-sized firms," Hasegawa said
Takehito Yamanaka, an analyst at SBC Warburg (Japan) Ltd, agreed: "It is inevitable that non-life insurers will compete by cutting premiums."
Medium and small insurers must streamline their network of sales agents to cut costs, he said.
It was not until October that Tokyo removed a ban on mail-order auto insurance under U.S. pressure. Without a network of agents, insurance by mail was seen as an important step for foreign firms.
Income from auto insurance policies account for 40 percent to 50 percent of income at non-life insurance companies, analysts say.
Last month, American Home Assurance Co announced plans for what it says will be Japan's first mail-order car insurance service.
Analysts said the liberalisation of the premiums would eventually result in the disappearance of some financially weak firms and an increase in mergers.
To cope with deregulation, major non-life insurance firm Yasuda Fire &amp; Marine Co Ltd recently announced it would take a majority stake in the Japanese unit of U.S. life insurance giant CIGNA Corp within the next year or two, the first time a Japanese non-life insurer has purchased a life insurance operation.
Under Japan's new Insurance Business Law, which took effect on April 1, non-life and life insurers were allowed to enter each other's business sectors for the first time.
Some in the industry argue that deregulation could create huge problems. They say that higher rates will lead to more uninsured drivers and jeopardise the protection of accident victims.
But no one is predicting that the concerns will stop a deregulation drive across the financial sector that comes to Japan a decade after it hit most industrialised nations.
