Two Nomura Securities group asset management firms said on Wednesday that they would merge next October to create a top player with a competitive edge on rivals in Japan's rapidly growing market.
The planned merger of Nomura Investment Management (NIM) which manages corporate pension funds and other large funds, and Nomura Securities Investment Trust Management (NSITM) which manages investment trusts for individuals -- similar to mutual funds -- would yield one of the world's biggest asset management companies, with total assets of 15 trillion yen ($132 billion) under its care, analysts said.
NIM president Tadashi Takubo told a news conference that overlapping operations at the two firms would be streamlined to sharpen the new company's competitive edge as Japan implements broad financial reforms targeted for completion by 2001.
Last month, Prime Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto unveiled plans for a five-year "Big Bang" to liberalise Japan's financial markets and recoup Tokyo's status as the key financial centre.
Among Hashimoto's proposals was a call to make effective use of individual financial assets which now total some 1,200 trillion yen ($10.61 trillion).
"We would like to form an internationally competitive system because regulations on asset management are being lifted (in Japan), Takubo said.
Getting good returns on those assets is increasingly vital as Japan confronts a rapid rise in the proportion of elderly people in its population, analysts said.
Foreign rivals are also keen to cash in on the expected growth in Japan's pension fund and investment trust markets. Andrew Simmonds, president of BZW Securities (Japan) Ltd, said last month, "One of the things I think is exciting is the potential mutualisation of the savings base in Japan.  We're not alone there -- everyone else is excited by that."
U.S. mutual fund giant Fidelity Investments also plans to enter the Japanese market in a big way next year and hopes to lure Japanese investors now fed up with ultra-low returns by making available its unique U.S.-style services.
An industry source said that outstanding mutual funds in Japan total only about 50 trillion yen ($442 billion) in Japan compared to nearly 200 trillion yen ($1.76 trillion) in the United States.
"The figures show Japan's investment trust market has the potential to grow much bigger," the source said.
Some analysts dubbed the planned merger a natural attempt to boost efficiency, but others warned that achieving that goal was not necessarily assured.
"Nomura's asset management companies have already been big compared with competitors, and it is questionable whether they will be able to boost performance through the merger," said an official at an overseas-based investment advisory firm.
"Generally speaking, fund managers at Japanese companies are conservative," he said. "They tend to avoid investment risks because they see the risks, which are short-term volatility, as something dangerous. But experienced foreign advisors are well-qualified to manage pension funds as they take reasonable risks in long-term pension fund management."
Toru Tsuchida, president of NSITM, meanwhile, said the merged company would not cut jobs and in fact might increase its workforce later to improve the quality of asset management and research. ($1=113 yen)
