Japanese banks, still struggling under the weight of massive problem loans, now face tough decisions on how to adapt to expected structural changes to the country's economy and financial system, analysts say.
They say it is inevitable the banks will need to shift their focus towards creating new business and offering specific services to boost profits as demand for loans weakens.
Prime Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto's "Big Bang" financial reform plans unveiled last month to liberalise Japan's financial markets by 2001 will also accelerate competition.
"To increase profitability, Japanese banks must change the sources of their profits," said Koyo Ozeki, a director at international credit rating agency IBCA Ltd.
On Thursday, the Finance Ministry announced sweeping plans to deregulate Japan's foreign exchange market in 1998.
Eisuke Sakakibara, director-general of the ministry's International Finance Bureau, warned that Japanese banks will face intensified competition as a result of the deregulation.
"I hope Japanese financial institutions will be well prepared for severe competition in the future," he said.
Tight regulation, dating back to the end of World War Two, has protected Japanese banks from competition and has made them less efficient than Western rivals, analysts say.
And because of that, some analysts such as Shinji Okabe, senior credit officer at rating agency Moody's Japan, are pessimistic about the future of Japanese banks.
"It seems to me that Japanese banks cannot judge which business is profitable... It looks like the banks all think they can do everything with unlimited resources," he said.
Since the early 1990s, Japanese banks have written off problem loans resulting from their adventurous lending policies in the late 1980 "bubble economy" of inflated asset prices.
But as of the end of September, 20 major banks were still carrying 23 trillion yen ($201 billion) worth of problem loans.
Analysts say it will take two more years on average for the top 20 banks to cut the loans to manageable levels, giving foreign banks further chances to to nudge into the market.
"Foreign banks have expanded and strengthened their business base in the past decade, but Japanese banks were not able to do anything because they had to dispose of the problem loans," said IBCA's Ozeki.
Japan's 20 biggest banks, down from 21 after a merger in April between Bank of Tokyo and Mitsubishi Bank, posted 22.85 trillion yen ($200 billion) in parent operating profits in an eight-year period to the end of March this year.
During that time they also disposed of 21.7 trillion yen ($190 billion) in problem loans, Ozeki said.
Even profitability at Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi, which many analysts agree is the strongest Japanese candidate to become an internationally competitive bank, is low.
The bank's return on equity, a gauge to show the efficiency of the use of capital, is only about 7.2 percent, compared with Barclays Plc's 13.09 percent and Bankers Trust's 18.32 percent, an IBCA study showed.
Analysts say they expect more bank failures in Japan, particularly among smaller regional banks and credit unions.
In November, Japanese authorities ordered the regional Hanwa Bank to halt business, the third regional bank failure since the end of World War Two. Eleven smaller credit unions and associations have also gone under since December 1994.
Analysts said uncertainty over how to deal with troubled banks has not been entirely removed in Japan, and there remains some concern that larger and stronger banks may be drawn into the support mechanism at some cost to themselves.
Japanese banks to which Moody's has given a bank financial strength rating (BFSR) of "E" are financially weak, Okabe said.
Chuo Trust &amp; Banking and Yasuda Trust &amp; Banking, Hokkaido Takushoku Bank and Nippon Credit Bank are the E rated banks.
"There are no U.S. banks which received an E rating. Banks with E ratings are those which have been supported (in Japan's regulated system) despite their inefficiency," he said. ($1=114 yen)
