Share trading on the Tokyo Stock Exchange could more than triple to a billion shares a day, once deregulation is decided and implemented, a senior official of the Finance Ministry said.
Atsushi Nagano, director general of the ministry's securities bureau, said he is resolved to make Tokyo a more attractive place to do securities business.
"It is not just a dream to boost the volume on Tokyo's stock market to one billion shares if we make the Tokyo market more attractive," Nagano told Reuters in an interview.
Nagano declined to discuss details of possible changes in regulations, but financial industry sources said some of the measures on the agenda are: - deregulation of brokers' commissions on smaller lots, - further breaking down the wall separating banks and securities houses, - allowing sales of investment trusts at bank counters.
On Friday, turnover on the exchange's first section was about 381 million shares, compared with a scant 225 million on Thursday. Daily turnover has averaged 300 million to 400 million in the past two years.
Nagano, whose bureau is responsible for overseeing the nation's securities markets and industry, said the industry has no choice but to open up to all investors from around the world in line with global standards.
Now recovering a little from a slump in business after the collapse of the "bubble" economy of inflated stock and asset prices of the late 1980s, the securities industry has begun to consider its future, although it is still somewhat vulnerable, he said.
In the past when turnover on the stock market dwindled, the government had thought of remedies such as increasing public spending, but this would not work any more, he said.
Share trading on the exchange was worth $889 billion last year, while that in New York stood at $3.08 trillion, data from the Finance Ministry show.
Trading volume of Nikkei 225 index futures on the Osaka Securities Exchange (OSE) plunged to 7.22 million lots or contracts in 1995 compared with 21.64 million in 1991, while that on the Singapore Mercantile Exchange (SIMEX) surged to 3.16 million lots from only 361,000 in 1991.
Market sources said declining turnover of Nikkei 225 index futures was attributable to tougher trading rules the Finance Ministry imposed after the bubble burst in the early 1990s.
In June, an advisory panel to the Finance Minister, the Securities and Exchange Council, established a special committee to debate reform in the securities markets, the industry and securities policy management.
Nagano said he wanted the committee to discuss wide-ranging issues which have impeded development of Japan's securities markets. "I believe there is a lot of room to expand for this (securities) industry. While investors and borrowers need each other, there are some obstacles to matching (the needs of the two sides)."
Nagano said he did not want the committee to go into individual measures hurriedly without deep discussions about the problems facing the markets and the industry.
"It may take one or two months from now before discussions of individual issues start," he added.
The committee is expected to make proposals next June.
