More Japanese finance firms braced for the bitter pill of court-protected liquidation on Thursday, but analysts said Japan's banking sector still faces a long road to recovery from its bad loan headaches.
The announcements were no surprise and more were considered likely as the banking sector struggles to get rid of troubled finance firms and regain its credibility.
The collapses highlighted, however, the growing worries that unexpected bad news may lie ahead and that Japan's slumping stock market could set back the recuperation further.
The latest victims were All Corp, with debts on borrowings worth 274.5 billion yen ($2.36 billion), Sanwa Tatemono Sogo Finance Co with debts of 66.4 billion yen ($572 million) and CS Sogo Service with debts of 71.3 billion yen ($614 million).
Ubumi Sagara, president of Tokyo-based non-bank All Corp, told reporters the firm would hold a shareholders' meeting by the end of March to seek approval for a liquidation filing.
The firm's major creditor banks -- Tokai Bank Ltd, Sakura Bank Ltd and Chuo Trust Banking &amp; Co Ltd -- were accepting its special liquidation plan, he said.
All Corp's cumulative debt exceeded its assets by 195.4 billion yen ($1.68 billion) as of September 1996 and it would be hard to improve its business despite recent restructuring efforts, he said.
"All Corp has been well-known as a troubled non-bank," said Yoshinobu Yamada, a financial analyst at Merrill Lynch Japan.
"Main creditor banks have already set aside loan loss provisions to prepare for the failure and the liquidation will have no major impact on earnings of those banks," he said.
Japan had at least five non-bank failures in 1996, including the collapse of Nichiei Finance Co, which filed for liquidation with debt liabilities of around one trillion yen ($8.6 billion). By one measure, this made Nichiei the largest such insolvency case in Japan in the postwar period.
Katsuhito Sasajima, an analyst at Nikko Research Centre, said banks in general have been well-prepared for possible failures of non-bank companies in recent years.
Banks are major lenders to non-bank institutions, which do not take deposits and largely depend on bank loans as sources of funds for their own lending.
"All Corp is not the end of the problem loan mess at credit firms and people know that. Rather, worries have grown that banks may have to write off bigger problem loans to general contractors than earlier expected," Sasajima said.
A new restructuring programme unveiled late last year by Tobishima Corp, a contractor and engineering company, fuelled concerns that banks would face new burdens as ailing firms seek added support in attempting to reshape themselves, he said.
The failures at Sanwa Tatemono Sogo Finance and CS Sogo Service were not surprising, either, as the two firms were subsidiaries of failed parent companies, banking sources said.
Banking sources said that while the impact of All Corp's liquidation would be limited, they were much more concerned about jitters in the Tokyo stock market. The closely watched Nikkei average lost about 11 percent of its value last week.
Declining stock prices whittle away unrealised profits from banks' shareholdings, reducing the amount of money available to write off problem loans and thus protracting the mess in the banking industry, they said. ($1=116 yen)
