Japanese banks, already groaning under problem loans, are dangerously exposed to the volatile Tokyo stock market and a further drop in the market may finally force them into a blood-letting reorganisation, analysts say.
They say that if the weaker banks are to survive, they must trim the size of their less-profitable assets, including those overseas, cut their stock portfolios and reduce the number of their employees.
"Weak banks may be thrown into the sector-wide reorganisation unless they take a serious look at reality -- that the market is urging an aggressive restructuring, even if they have to cut the number of employees," said Yushiro Ikuyo, first vice-president at Smith Barney International Inc.
"If share prices in (weak) banks fall to very cheap levels, it might be easier for big banks to bail out those weaker banks through cheap mergers," he said.
Market sources said the recent Japanese share price plunge has been led by active selling of shares in the banking sector, which represent one-quarter of the Tokyo Stock Exchange's market capitalisation.
On Monday, the key Nikkei average of 225 leading shares closed down 609.70 points, or 3.37 percent, at 17,480.24.
Even though the market recovered slightly last week, the Nikkei is still down close to 2,000 points since the beginning of this year on worries about the economy and a lack of government measures to prop it up.
Japanese banks have traditionally held large chunks of shares in other companies, many of them customers. In the past, the unrealised profits on these holdings have helped burnish the banks' balance sheets and have provided a useful way of getting some of their problem loans off their books.
But the failure to tackle the problem more aggressively has in turn fueled scepticism about the soundness of the Japanese banking system, triggering more selloffs in the stock market, analysts said.
The analysts said banks should try to raise their profitability by focusing on specialised business fields, by developing new financial instruments and by lending to smaller firms with prospects for future growth.
Katsuhito Sasajima, an analyst at Nikko Research Centre, said: "To convince investors, banks must take the extra step to restructure, but they have made no such effort so far."
In the three business years to the end of March 1996, Japan's then top 21 banks used 8.01 trillion yen ($68.4 billion) in net capital gains from the sale of equities to help dispose of 18.96 trillion yen ($162 billion) of property-related problem loans, a legacy from the late 1980s economic "bubble" era of inflated asset prices.
But the top banks still had 17.4 trillion yen ($148 billion) of problem loans at the end of last September, the Finance Ministry said.
Moody's Investors Service said on Friday that the sharp fall in Japanese shares will affect financially weak banks.
Moody's said while it is confident Japanese authorities will keep the top 20 banks from failing in the short term, it is concerned about a growing gap between the bailout cost and the limited resources available for the protection of depositors and senior debt holders. ($1=117 yen)
