Weak Japanese regional banks face a scramble to clean up their bad loan problems before oversight standards are tightened next year, but their room for manoeuvre may be limited by a sagging stock market.
This squeeze on the struggling players in the banking sector could cause more financial collapses and forced liquidations down the road, analysts and banking sources say.
The introduction of formal capital adequacy standards in April next year means banks must deal with non-performing assets or risk being taken to task or closed down by the authorities for failing the new financial health test.
Banking sources and analysts say this is putting pressure on the banks to raise capital in order to bring their ratio of capital to risk-weighted assets to an acceptable balance.
But a weak stock market raises the chances of institutions flunking the capital adequacy test, as it makes it hard for them to raise capital by issuing new shares.
"Smaller banks with a weak capital base must take measures to raise capital before the new system is introduced," said Katsuhito Sasajima, a Nikko Research Centre analyst.
One option which has already proved popular with banks is to issue new shares to existing shareholders at a price pitched midway between the market value and face value. But this is getting harder amid the stock market gloom, Sasajima said.
The slide in the stock market is hurting the banks in a number of ways, eroding the paper profits on their share portfolios that they were using to tackle bad loans, as well as narrowing their options for raising fresh capital.
The new adequacy standards, known as the prompt corrective action (PCA) system, are being introduced to bolster confidence in Japan's banking sector by keeping a closer watch on firms' health and preventing problems spinning out of control.
Under the new system, banks are strictly required to set aside loan loss provisions in line with the global accounting standards. To be classed as "adequately capitalised", financial institutions operating only in Japan must have an adequacy ratio of four percent or more, while internationally active banks must have a ratio of eight percent.
A bank can be ordered to take action to improve its health, and can be liquidated if its capital adequacy ratio falls below zero percent and inspectors pinpoint inadequacies.
At the moment there are no clear Finance Ministry standards, which has been cited as one factor in the ballooning bad loan problem after the collapse of the 1980s asset bubble.
"The imposition of a strict write-off system (via the PCA)...would force a large number of  smaller, weaker banks to the wall," said Yukiko Ohara, an analyst at UBS Securities Ltd, in a recent report.
At the end of last September, problem loans at Japan's deposit-taking financial institutions totalled 29.23 trillion yen ($247 billion), of which 7.3 trillion yen ($61.8 billion) was estimated to be uncovered loan losses, according to Finance Ministry data. But analysts believe the scale is actually much bigger than that.
To boost capital ahead of the new system, about 10 regional banks announced last year that they would issue new shares by the end of March priced halfway between the market and face value. Among them are Hokuetsu Bank Ltd, Hokkoku Bank Ltd, Miyazaki Bank Ltd, Yamagata Bank Ltd and Awa Bank Ltd.
However, analysts say that there are several regional banks with a more urgent need to increase their capital.
Japan's Nihon Keizai Shimbun reported last week that there were 10 regional banks whose capital adequacy ratio was below four percent at the end of March, 1996.
Among them was Hanwa Bank, whose operations -- except for withdrawals -- were suspended by Finance Ministry last November as it was unable to recover bad loans.
Tokyo-based regional bank Tokyo Sowa Bank Ltd has said it had a capital adequacy ratio of 3.8 percent as of March 31, 1996, compared with 4.35 percent a year earlier after going into the red to dispose of a swathe of problem loans, eroding its capital. It disposed of 130 billion yen ($1.10 billion) in problem loans in 1995/96, much more than its competitors and Tokyo Sowa said the problem was now under control.
In order to clear the four percent hurdle by April 1998, the bank will take such steps as procuring subordinated debts and issuing new shares, a bank spokesman said.
Analysts have said that before the PCA system is introduced, the Finance Ministry may have to pull down the shutters at some ailing banks that are unable to break free of bad loans and cannot boost their capital. ($1=118 yen)
