Japan's third biggest securities house, Nikko Securities Co, will focus on cutting personnel and other costs as it braces for "Big Bang" financial reforms, executive vice president Masao Yuki said on Friday.
"The Big Bang reforms will mean the survival of the fittest," he told Reuters in an interview.
"The (Japanese) financial sector must correct its high-cost structure to cope with the Big Bang. If it doesn't, we will lose out to our Western rivals," he said.
The most important and urgent issue for Nikko is how to cut personnel costs while raising the salaries of talented young workers and maintaining overall morale, he said.
He acknowledged this would be a very difficult task and he had no specific ideas at this time, but Japan's manufacturers had already made impressive progress in this area.
"(Japanese) manufacturers say that brokerages and financial institutions have been living the good life. That's why they say it will be difficult for us to restructure," he said.
Tinkering with personnel practices is widely considered taboo at large Japanese companies.
Prime Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto unveiled plans in November for a five-year "Big Bang" set of policy moves to liberalise Japan's financial markets and catch up with reforms carried out more than a decade ago in Europe and North America.
Market sources said that since late last year the Tokyo stock market has focused on the negative impact of the Big Bang reform on Japanese financial institutions, as they would heat up the competition and create losers as well as winners in the financial markets.
On Friday, the key Nikkei average of 225 leading shares ended down 220.10 points, or 1.23 percent, at 17,689.36. The index has shed nearly 2,000 points since the beginning of this year, led by the banking and brokerage sector.
Yuki said that, while Tokyo's Big Bang would eventually provide business opportunities for brokers and help revitalize Japan's financial markets, it would also pressure brokers' earnings in the near term.
"It is inevitable that we'll face a tough fight for profits in the near term," he said. "Such a severe business environment may result in an industry-wide shakeout including mergers and acquisitions."
Last week, Moody's Investors Service issued a grim rating outlook for Japanese brokerages, noting that the securities industry was faced with the dual challenges of operating in volatile markets and strategically repositioning itself in a deregulated landscape.
The likely elimination of fixed commission rates on stockbroking was cited as one move likely to undermine profitability at many brokerages, it said.
Yuki said that there would be no quick remedies to boost currently sagging bank and brokerage stocks, but policies were need to ensure Japan's economic recovery and implement drastic reforms of the nation's economic structure.
He added that the abolition of Japan's securities transaction tax, as urged by some politicians and business leaders, would also help Japan's stock market.
Japan is the only country with a securities transaction tax.
"I don't advocate any government moves to artificially prop up stock prices ... but announcing the abolition (of the tax by the end of March) would have a good effect on stocks," he said.
He said that, since Japan has already announced a sweeping deregulation of foreign exchange transactions beginning in 1998, failure to abolish the transaction tax would encourage institutional investors to go abroad to trade Japanese stocks due to higher costs here.
