Japan's big securities houses have come to accept that deregulating commissions on stock transactions is essential if they are to keep their major customers, industry sources say.
"Many Japanese brokers oppose liberalisation, but it is unavoidable if they want to keep the status of the Tokyo stock market from falling," one industry source said.
The sources cited an increase in "black-eyed" foreigners -- Japanese who buy Japanese stocks through brokers overseas to avoid higher commissions charged by domestic brokers.
However, the sources also said deregulation should be done gradually so as not to jeopardise small brokerages depending on commissions for most of their revenue.
"Big Four brokers will be able to withstand the impact of liberalisation, but smaller brokers will not," the source said.
Japan's "Big Four" -- Nomura Securities, Daiwa Securities, Nikko Securities and Yamaichi Securities -- are preparing for the liberalisation of broking fees as they fear they will lose customers, who are becoming more aware that it is cheaper to place orders abroad for Japanese stocks than it is in Japan, the sources said.
Japanese brokers charge 535,000 yen ($4,908) for buying or selling a contract worth 500 million yen ($4.58 million), the sources said, while fees overseas would be less than half that.
The Big Four depended on commissions for about 30 percent of their revenue in the fiscal year to March 31, 1995.
But commissions accounted for more than 70 percent of revenues for many of Japan's 230 smaller brokerages, they said.
Earlier this year, the Pension Welfare Service Public Corp (Nenpuku), which manages about 23 trillion yen ($211 billion) in public pension funds, commissioned investment advisory companies to manage its funds.
"Those investment advisory companies set up so-called limited partnerships abroad and placed orders in London," said another industry source.
"By trading in the over-the-counter market in London, they saved money as stockbroking fees there are cheap and there is no securities transaction tax."
This triggered interest from other institutional investors, the sources said.
While no statistics are available, purchases by the so-called black-eyed investors had recently inflated figures for purchases of Japanese stocks by foreigners, they said.
Atsushi Nagano, director-general of the Japanese Finance Ministry's Securities Bureau, told Reuters the ministry was aware of the situation.
"Watching such cases, I feel like there is something wrong in the Tokyo market," he said.
When Japan liberalised broking fees for contracts of more than 1 billion yen ($9.1 million) in April 1994, the Finance Ministry said it would consider deregulating fees on smaller lots of stocks after seeing the impact of that liberalisation.
Industry sources said further deregulation would be one of the main topics at a special committee of the Securities and Exchange Council -- an advisory panel to the Finance Minister -- which is supposed to present proposals on how to reform Tokyo's securities market next June.
The second source said that even though no time frame had been set for the complete liberalisation of commissions, abolishing the securities transaction tax would help boost the Tokyo exchange.
Japan lowered the tax to 0.21 percent of the value of a sale from 0.3 percent, except for sales by securities houses, on April 1.
Broking fees were liberalised in New York in 1975 and in London in 1986. ($1=109)
