Faced with persistent market rumours that it is on the verge of collapse, Nippon Credit Bank Ltd went public on Wednesday to say that any such talk is "totally groundless".
"In the markets, unsourced rumours such as the suggestion that our bank is practically on the verge of collapse are circulating and are prompting sales of our shares and debentures," NCB vice president Shoji Nishikawa told a hastily convened news conference.
"Such rumours are totally groundless and our bank would like to declare that these rumours are not true," he said.
Finance Minister Hiroshi Mitsuzuka also came out in support of long-suffering Nippon Credit, whose failure could spark a crisis in the banking industry.
He said the government will fully support the bank, although he added that the ministry is not worried about the financial health of Nippon Credit, the smallest of the nation's three long-term credit banks.
"The ministry has had no worries about the bank. It (the bank) is doing its utmost to improve its management. We don't believe that the bank will collapse as some media reports have said," Mitsuzuka told reporters at his regular news conference.
Nippon Credit's latest ordeal began early Wednesday when traders began to sell its shares on vague talk that NCB would hold an emergency news conference. There was also a vague rumour about a possible merger involving NCB, they said.
The dumping of the bank's shares ignited renewed selling throughout the banking sector. The sharp fall in banking shares has been largely to blame for the tumble in the Tokyo stock market since mid-December.
Nippon Credit shares fell 35 yen (28 cents) to close on Wednesday at an all-time low of 181 yen ($1.47).
In the bond market, NCB's latest debentures are selling at a yield of 4.1 percent, a full 2.5 percentage points above bonds issued by other banks, reflecting the perceived risk in its debts.
Nishikawa said the sell-off was influenced by exaggerated media reports which hyped concerns over the health of Japan's financial system.
"We believe the market condition has deviated greatly from the realities of the bank. We hope market participants will calm down," he said.
He also said the bank would be able to post a current profit in 1996/97 even after disposing of problem loans as it had planned -- if Tokyo stock prices remain at their current levels.
Like other banks, NCB relies on its own share holdings to help provide needed cash so as the stock market tumbles, its situation worsens. That has created a vicious circle for the Tokyo stock market.
The bank plans to write off problem loans of 130 billion yen ($1.05 billion) in the current fiscal year ending March 31. As of the end of September, such problem loans totalled 1.39 trillion yen ($11.3 billion).
Some analysts said that it is unclear whether the news conference by NCB and the finance ministry's pledge to support the bank would help regain confidence in Japan's banking sector.
"In the long-term, the banking sector will remain under pressure until Japan completes its 'Big Bang' financial reforms," said Katsuhito Sasajima, an analyst at Nikko Research Centre. ($1=123 yen)
