The vulnerability of Japan's banking sector shares to rumour-led selloffs shows that investor confidence in the sector is still thin, brokers and analysts said on Wednesday.
Bank shares tumbled after vague market talk, later denied, that Nippon Credit Bank Ltd (NCB) would hold an emergency news conference reignited worries about Japan's financial system, they said.
"We cannot say that the negative trend in the banking sector has finished," Masaaki Higashida, a strategist at Nomura Securities, said. "Markets are still sensitive about rumours, and this shows that investors remain concerned about the financial health of banks," he said.  
It was hard to predict how far bank shares will fall, analysts said, adding that there are no quick remedies to regain the lost confidence in the sector aside from improving asset quality by disposing of problem loans.
Katsuhito Sasajima, an analyst at Nikko Research Centre, said: "In the long-term, the banking sector may remain under pressure until Japan completes its Big Bang financial reforms."
"It is also difficult to become positive on the sector near-term, particularly if looking at interest rate prospects," he said, adding that interest rates have nowhere to go but up, as they have already fallen to a historically low level.  
Yoshinobu Yamada, an analyst at Merrill Lynch Japan Inc, said that the market's view of banks' financial health may further erode because land prices remain under pressure and this has cast doubts over the economic recovery.
"Financially weak banks must try harder to regain the confidence from investors by cutting non-performing loans and less-profitable assets," another analyst said.
One bright factor which may emerge is a move within parliament by some opposition politicians calling for the use of fresh public money to deal with problem loan issue, analysts and brokers said.
"If a system to use public money to bail out big banks is established, it will ease the nerves in the stock market and selective buying of strong banks will emerge," a market source said.
Last month, Moody's Investor Service lowered its ratings outlook for NCB and three other Japanese banks -- Hokkaido Takushoku Bank Ltd, Yasuda Trust &amp; Banking Ltd and Chuo Trust and Banking -- to negative from stable.
It attributed the downgrading to serious asset quality problems, and said that their respective earnings, existing capital and reserves might not provide a sufficient cushion to absorb new loan-loss provisions.
