One year after its dramatic expulsion from the United States, scandal-hit Daiwa Bank is finding its misfortune may in some ways have been a blessing in disguise, analysts say.
The painful fall-out from its $1.1 billion bond-trading loss in the United States, they say, forced the bank to take some of the bitter but necessary restructuring measures that other Japanese banks have been reluctant to swallow.
"Following its expulsion from the United States and inspections by Japan"s Finance Ministry and the Bank of Japan, Daiwa was able to eliminate management risks from its corporate structure," said Yukiko Ohara, a financial analyst at UBS Securities Ltd.
"It (Daiwa) could be a model for restructuring at other banks, which still lack a sense of crisis despite the recent fall in their share prices," she said.
By the end of March, 2000, Daiwa"s restructuring efforts are likely to help boost its annual operating profits above 100 billion yen ($800 million), despite the negative impact of asset reductions overseas, Ohara said. In the year to March 1997 Daiwa forecast operating profits of 80 billion yen ($640 million).
A Daiwa official agreed that the harm done by the bond-loss scandal was not as great as initially expected.
"We feared that we might suffer substantial damage from the withdrawal from U.S. markets," Daiwa bank director Akiyoshi Otani told Reuters in a recent interview. "But the damage was not great.... Our customers stayed calm and have been supporting us."
"The strategies we have taken (since the withdrawal from the United States) have not been wrong," he added.
In November 1995, two months after news broke that a Daiwa trader in New York lost $1.1 billion on unauthorised deals, U.S. bank regulatory authorities ordered Daiwa to shut down its U.S. operations. Daiwa pleaded guilty to charges including conspiracy and fraud and paid a record $340 million in fines.
Japan"s Finance Ministry also placed temporary restrictions on Daiwa"s operations and ordered the institution, Japan"s ninth largest commercial bank, to work out a drastic streamlining programme.
Last April, Daiwa announced a two-year plan to focus on its three strengths: the Kansai area around Osaka in western Japan, where it has a strong customer base, the Asian market, and the trust business, which includes pension fund management. Daiwa manages more pension fund money than any other Japanese bank.
It also decided to shut about 36 offices, including 16 overseas, by March 1999, and by the end of last September had cut its assets to 16.30 trillion yen ($130 billion) from 19.36 trillion yen ($154 billion) a year earlier. Daiwa also plans to reduce the number of its employees by about 2,000 by March 2000, from 9,151 last September.
But some analysts insisted the bank"s restructuring had not gone far enough, noting it was still saddled with 790 billion yen ($6.32 billion) in problem loans, or 7.4 percent of loans outstanding, as of last September.
Yushiro Ikuyo, first vice president at Smith Barney International Inc"s Tokyo branch, added that the expulsion from the United States was bound to damage Daiwa"s future business.
"I doubt whether Daiwa can continue to manage its international business without U.S. operations," he said. "The business environment surrounding Japanese banks will become much tougher and Daiwa must make extra efforts to streamline its business, even halving its assets."
Several analysts have suggested that Daiwa"s woes may force it to combine with another financial institution. Last month, Moody"s Investors Service said Daiwa Bank and Nomura Securities, its largest shareholder, may join under the same holding company.
But Daiwa"s Otani dismissed such talk for now.
"We should not forget that we are still in the process of recovering our creditworthiness.... Although there is talk about mergers or a holding company, this is not an issue for us at the moment," he said. ($=125 yen)
