Japan's depressed real estate market is unlikely to get much immediate help for its problems despite market euphoria over possible state purchases of land once owned by troubled financial firms, analysts said.
Tokyo's key stock index surged on Thursday, led by property-related issues, after a newspaper report saying the government was considering using public funds to buy collateralised land formerly owned by failed mortgage firms and other troubled financial firms.
The index, the Nikkei 225, ended up 2.43 percent at 19,051.71, its first close above 19,000 points for more than a month.
A Finance Ministry official told Reuters a government panel was considering using funds already set aside in the next state budget to buy land formerly owned by troubled financial firms.
Vice Finance Minister Tadashi Ogawa later confirmed the possibility, telling a news conference it was possible public-sector firms may purchase such land.
He said the plan would help ease the liquidity crisis affecting real estate.
A government panel, whose members include officials from the ministries of finance, construction and justice and the National Land Agency, was set up last October to tackle the tough issue of collecting problem loans for which land is being held as collateral.
At present, firms cannot afford to sell at market levels since they would realise their huge losses caused by the collapse of the "bubble" economy early this decade.
This has led to stagnation in the real estate market and kept the massive problem hanging over the whole financial sector.
"The panel has been discussing how to increase liquidity in the real estate market to facilitate collection of such problem loans," said an official at a bank involved in the discussions.
"But we have not talked about any details yet."
However, he said that if the government decided to buy such collateralised land, it would have a positive impact since the private sector remained reluctant to buy land.
Jesper Koll, an economist at JP Morgan Securities Asia, said public land buying was not a new initiative and no new funds were likely to be allocated for the purchases.
However, he said that more important than any public purchases was Hashimoto's promise to speed up the process of turning real estate into equity assets.
"The faster banks and real estate companies are allowed to securitise property assets, the greater their prospects for increased income generation," he said. "Prime Minister Hashimoto is getting serious about fixing Japan's real estate problem sooner, not later."
Yoshinobu Yamada, a financial analyst at Merrill Lynch Japan Inc, said that while the move by the government panel on land was not a new initiative, it would have a positive impact in the long-term.
"The government is well aware that it must take steps to stop falling land prices," he said, adding that a lack of land liquidity was at the core of Japan's bad-loan mess.
"If the government buys collateralised land formerly owned by jusen, this is likely to give psychological support to the the real estate markets and help the markets bottom out."
However, he said no concrete policy steps would be available until March so that the current euphoria on the Tokyo's stock market could be only a passing fancy.
