Japan's top banks are touting a plan to lift a 50-year-old ban on holding companies as the cure for what ails their industry, but analysts say it will take more than that to solve their problems.
"We doubt that a simple change in ownership structure will result in aggressive restructuring of financial institutions," said Kathy Matsui, a strategist at Goldman Sachs (Japan).
She said restructuring was dependent on the will of managements, and it was doubtful if holding companies alone would spur the necessary changes in the troubled industry.
The banks, groaning under massive bad loan problems, fear that Japan's "Big Bang" reforms will lead to a bloodletting that could end in the collapse of financial institutions which are in poor financial health.
Many bank officials see the holding company route as the key to coping with the reforms, which are designed to liberalise the nation's financial markets by 2001.
Under a holding company, barriers between banks, brokers and insurers could be broken down and major banks could streamline their financial groups and bail out weaker affiliates.
The umbrella companies would also allow huge, inefficient corporate giants to split into several leaner operations.
But most analysts are unconvinced about the banking industry's willingness to tackle large-scale streamlining.
"The market has been becoming more critical of Japanese banks in the past one or two months as they have delayed their disclosure of problem loans," said Yushiro Ikuyo, a first vice-president at Smith Barney International.
Banks still appear to be hoping for a soft landing scenario and they lack a sense of crisis control, Ikuyo said.
Bankers, meanwhile, say they need a freer hand to establish financial holding companies.
"Concern is growing about Japanese banks' declining international competitiveness, so I would like (the government) to make sure that nothing will be done to reduce the effectiveness of holding companies," Shunsaku Hashimoto, the chairman of the Federation of Bankers' Associations of Japan, told reporters this week.
If all goes as planned, Japan will overturn the ban next year. It was imposed by U.S. Occupation forces five decades ago to break up powerful conglomerates known as "zaibatsu".
Japan's ruling Liberal Democratic Party and its policy partners are in last-ditch talks on to issue, and if they agree the government will submit a bill to parliament in March.
The Finance Ministry has also begun to work out necessary revisions in financial laws to enable the establishment of financial holding firms.
The corporate structure of a holding company will also make it easier and less costly to combine poorer-performing banks than a corporate merger, banking officials said.
In a merger, Japanese banks find it difficult to smooth relations between two distinct corporate cultures, and layoffs are also hard to justify when two banks merge, they said.
A holding company system would also allow big city banks to team up with regional banks. Regional markets offer the promise of new business for the big banks, they added.
Katsuhito Sasajima, an analyst at Nikko Research Center, said many banks saw holding companies as a tool to give them greater management flexibility. "I expect big commercial banks will benefit most from holding companies," he said.
Analysts and bankers say, however, that there are a number of obstacles involving tax, commercial and securities rules which must be addressed before holding companies can be practically implemented.
Unless Japan introduces a new corporate tax system in which tax is calculated based on the combined profits or losses of group companies, there will not be many cost benefits in setting up a holding company, they said.
