Japan's ruling Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) and its allies agreed on Tuesday to lift a ban on holding companies put in place by U.S. Occupation forces shortly after World War Two.
The repeal of the ban will help Japanese firms restructure and boost their international competitiveness, party members said.
"The three parties agreed to lift the ban, as a diversified corporate management is seen as a prerequisite when we consider international competition known as mega-competition," said Taku Yamasaki, chairman of LDP's policy-setting committee.
While the anti-monopoly law had played a major role in helping develop Japan's economy in the past 50 years, changes were needed to carry out economic and financial reform, he said.
The agreement among the three parties -- the LDP, the Social Democratic Party (SDP) and the small Sakigake party -- will enable the government to work out necessary changes to the anti-monopoly law and submit them to the current session of parliament in March.
Yamasaki said the revised law could go into effect within a year, possibly next January.
Lifting the ban is also needed to allow implementation of a plan unveiled late last year to restructure telecom giant Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corp (NTT) into several companies under a holding-company umbrella.
A holding company is a firm which has control of one or more other companies, often by having a majority of shares in each subsidiary, but does not engage in a specific business.
U.S. Occupation forces introduced the ban in 1947 to break up powerful conglomerates known as "zaibatsu", which the United States believed had contributed to Japan's war effort.
In the United States and many European countries, however, a holding company is a common corporate structure.
Yamasaki said certain types of holding companies would be banned to avoid an excessive concentration of business strength and to avoid a rebirth of zaibatsu.
Under the agreement reached by the three parties, a holding company that would have assets of 300 billion yen ($2.45 billion) or more would have to notify the Fair Trade Commission, Japan's anti-monopoly watchdog, of its establishment.
The establishment of a holding company which would have total assets of 15 trillion yen ($122 billion) or more would require prior government approval.
Yamasaki said 315 firms in Japan had assets exceeding 300 billion yen ($2.45 billion) on a group basis, while even big firms such as NTT and Tokyo Electric Power Co Inc did not have assets exceeding 15 trillion yen ($122 billion).
Hideo Fujiwara, senior executive research fellow at LTCB Research Institute, said even if the ban was lifted not many firms are expected to change their corporate structure immediately.
Big companies such as Sony Corp and Canon Inc which had already split their operations were likely to set up holding companies soon, but many others were not, he said.
Many bank officials have said that holding companies could be a key to coping with "Big Bang" financial reforms, which are designed to liberalise Japan's financial markets by 2001.
Yamasaki said the government still has to work out changes in finance-related laws to enable financial institutions to establish holding companies once the amended anti-monopoly law takes effect. ($1=122 yen)
