A Wal-Mart store in Canada is set to become the first-ever unionized outlet for the world's largest retailer.
The Ontario Labour Relations Board decided late on Tuesday to certify the retail/wholesale division of the United Steelworkers of America at the store in Windsor, Ontario, across the U.S.-Canada border from Detroit.
The ruling came despite a May 10, 1996 vote by Windsor store employees rejecting a union drive by 151-43.
But the tribunal, which administers labour laws in Canada's most populous province, ruled that Wal-Mart executives used unfair labour practices by refusing to tell employees if they would shut the store if it became unionized.
Van Horne said the board rejected a second vote at the store because it felt workers would still be reluctant to vote freely because of a perceived threat to their jobs or benefits.
Bentonville, Ark.-based Wal-Mart Stores Inc., which has 136 stores in Canada and more than 3,000 worldwide, has defeated every drive to unionize its stores since its founding in 1962.
Wal-Mart came to Canada in 1994 and is now the country's biggest discount retail chain.
United Steelworkers representative Pat Van Horne said the board's decision could pave the way for more unionized Wal-Marts in Canada. "Obviously this is a good precedent for us," Van Horne said.
But Wal-Mart Canada spokesman Ed Gould disagreed, saying: "Many people will take a look at the process by which the expressed will of individuals can be denied and think twice" about unions.
Van Horne said the next step was to negotiate a contract with Wal-Mart.
"The proving ground for the union will be our ability to get a collective agreement that satisfies the employees," Van Horne said.
Wal-Mart's Gould said the company might appeal the ruling.
"We're going to review the reasons and then we're going to consider the next steps and that could include obviously an appeal," Gould said.
Gould ruled out abandoning the Windsor outlet. "We are not in business to close stores."
Windsor employees earn about C$8.30 ($6.14) an hour plus profit-sharing and performance-based bonuses, Gould said.
