iStar internet inc's new chief executive Craig Wallace said on Wednesday that the Internet service provider would post a reduced third-quarter loss on Friday, following a heavy second-quarter loss.
"Earnings will be in better shape than Q2 and will even be better in Q4," Wallace told Reuters in an interview.
iStar's net losses widened to C$10.5 million or C$0.50 a share in the second quarter ended November 30 from a first-quarter loss of C$8.1 million or C$0.43 a share. It did not give previous year comparisons because aquisitions changed the firm's make-up.
Wallace, who took the helm in January after joining the company last June, declined to elaborate. Before moving to iStar he was director of marketing at Microsoft Canada Inc.
Analysts and investors have been less optimistic. One analyst, who declined to be identified, noted that iStar has not posted a profitable quarter since going public in November 1995 and said the performance could not get much worse.
iStar's shares have tumbled as low as 2.06 on the Toronto Stock Exchange after soaring to 22 at their opening in late 1995. On Wednesday they slipped 0.15 to 2.55.
Last year iStar was busy snapping up Internet providers across Canada, but the company has now shifted its focus to providing Intranet software solutions for corporations.
The Ottawa-based firm, which has about 65,000 personal and corporate subscribers across Canada, is now concentrating on growing revenue and containing costs, Wallace said.
Soon after Wallace took over from founder Rainer Paduch, who became chief technology officer, iStar chopped about 20 percent of its staff, or 45 employees.
The lay-offs cut C$500,000 from iStar's monthly expenses and came on top of 100 layoffs last year.
Wallace said revenue will rise but costs will fluctuate instead of increasing as iStar's infrastructure is already in place. "We have significant improvement in our gross margin percent in Q3 and it will only get better in Q4," he said, again declining to elaborate.
He forecast that iStar will reach profitability in fiscal 1998.
However, the analyst disagreed, citing a lack of credibility on the street. "It doesn't really matter what their margins are," he said. "If they do manage to get their act together, it'll be too late."
Wallace said iStar is not actively seeking new acquisitions, but he would be willing to have discussions with any firm. He dismissed past rumors that iStar might merge with rival HookUp Communication Corp.
Wallace also brushed aside suggestions that iStar could be swallowed by larger companies, saying that he believed iStar would emerge on top from a consolidation in the industry.
((lydia.zajc@reuters.com, Reuters Toronto Bureau (416) 941-8109))
