Canadian department store retailers, rocked by the invasion of U.S. giant Wal-Mart, now face the specter of another U.S. buyout after Thursday's bankruptcy protection filing by the venerable Eaton's chain.
Although some analysts bet that Eaton's would shed up to half of its 90-odd stores, others speculated that a U.S. retailer might acquire all or part of the 127-year-old chain owned by one of Canada's richest families, the Eatons.
Toronto-based T. Eaton Co. Ltd., Canada's fifth largest department store chain with annual sales of C$1.67 billion ($1.22 billion), received court permission on Thursday to continue the operations of its retailing unit while negotiating a restructuring plan.
Eaton's arranged financing of C$555 million ($405 million) from General Electric Capital Canada Inc..
Canadian department stores have bled market share in recent years due to a weak economy and the 1994 arrival of Bentonville, Ark.-based discounter Wal-Mart Stores Inc.
Wal-Mart has quickly seized the lead in Canadian retailing market share, with 43 percent. Amid this onslaught, several Canadian retailers have declared bankruptcy.
One analyst, who declined to be identified, said publicly owned Canadian retailers such as Hudson's Bay Co. and Sears Canada Inc. would be especially hard hit if a second major U.S. retailer emerged in Canada.
"If a U.S. guy doesn't come in, it'll be positive for Hudson's and Sears," he said. If not, "that's the worst of all worlds...it makes it much tougher." Sears Canada is 61 percent-owned by Chicago-based Sears, Roebuck and Co..
Another analyst estimated a revamped Eaton's would be worth about C$275 million ($201 million).
The list of rumored suitors includes J.C. Penney Co. Inc., Dayton Hudson Corp., Dillard Department Stores Inc., Federated Department Stores Inc. and Nordstrom Inc..
Duncan Muir, spokesman for Plano, Texas-based J.C. Penney, declined to comment specifically on Eaton's, saying: "We from time to time look at Canada, like other countries," he said.
Minneapolis-based Dayton Hudson spokeswoman Susan Eich said, "We really don't have any plans to expand internationally. We think we have more than enough opportunities in the U.S."
Seattle-based Nordstrom spokeswoman Amy Jones said, "We currently have nothing on our schedule for Canada."
Some Canadian discount retailers were also seen possibly acquiring some of Eaton's unwanted locations, analysts said.
Eaton's President George Eaton, whose great-grandfather Timothy opened Eaton's first store in Toronto in 1869, did not disclose how many stores would be closed or how many of its 15,000 employees would be let go.
Analysts have estimated 25 to 40 stores in some of Canada's smaller towns would be shuttered.
In court documents, Eaton's said it lost an estimated C$151 million ($110 million) in fiscal 1997 ended Jan. 25 on revenues of C$1.67 billion ($1.22 billion).
