Venerable Canadian retailer T. Eaton Co. Ltd. filed on Thursday for court protection from its creditors and said it would close some of its department stores as it tried to restructure its operations.
"We will have to vacate a number of stores over time. But it is too early to predict the future of specific stores or any other measures that may be taken," Eaton's President George Eaton said.
The 127-year-old Toronto-based firm, which has estimated annual sales of C$1.25 billion ($912 million), said it arranged financing of C$555 million ($405 million) from an unspecified major financial institution.
The chain, which is owned by the Eatons, one of Canada's richest families, said it filed for a court order to continue the operations of its retailing division, while negotiating a restructuring plan.
Canadian department stores have lost market share in recent years due to a weak economy and the invasion of U.S. discounter Wal-Mart Stores Inc. in 1994.
Eaton's has about 90 outlets across Canada.
"About half of the stores will go...I think it'll be around about 40," predicted analyst John Winter of John Winter Associates Ltd in Toronto.
"As in most bankruptcy reorganizations, they're just going to close a large number of stores they shouldn't have opened in the first place and that will stanch the red ink."
Eaton's parent, Eaton Group of Companies, sold some of its real estate holdings in recent years, including properties worth about C$300 million ($219 million) a year ago.
The company has long been reluctant to discuss its operations, but rumors emerged recently about a possible takeover by a U.S. chain, one analyst said.
J.C. Penney Co. Inc. and Dayton Hudson Corp. topped the list of rumored suitors, while some Canadian discount retailers were seen possibly acquiring some of Eaton's unwanted locations.
Analyst Winter voiced doubt that anyone would want to purchase Eaton's weaker stores, saying: "They're such dogs that once they (the buyers) looked at the numbers they would retch."
Some Eaton's customers were shocked by the news.
"It's unbelievable," said one Eaton's patron at the court where the application for creditor protection was filed.
