Frozen yogurt firm Yogen Fruz World-Wide Inc is proposing to partly satisfy its appetite for expansion by teaming up with  Subway Restaurants and PepsiCo Inc's KFC unit, analysts said on Tuesday.
By offering its products in the fast food chains, part of a recent trend called co-branding, the Toronto-based firm could expand beyond 2,920-odd outlets. It is already the world's biggest frozen yogurt franchisor, ahead of TCBY Enterprises Inc of Little Rock, Arkansas.
"It's definitely a very strong growth story," said First Marathon Securities analyst Perry Caicco, who has a 52-week share price target of C$6.00.
Shares on the Toronto Stock Exchange jumped 0.35 to 4.84 in brisk trading of more than 850,000 shares in late dealings. The rise was sparked by news that brokerage Gordon Capital will issue an analyst's report on the company on Wednesday.
First Marathon helped underwrite a private placement of five million special Yogen Fruz warrants at C$4 each announced in late January.
"The test they have going with the biggest potential to really kind of blow the doors off the numbers is with Subway," Caicco said.
The privately held submarine sandwich chain is the world's second largest restaurant franchisor after McDonald's Corp.
The company began testing with Subway in 20 U.S. locations a few weeks ago, Caicco said.
Yogen Fruz President Michael Serruya cautioned: "It's is still very much in the initial stages."
Yogen Fruz is also experimenting with KFC in some outlets in Panama. "That happens to be farther advanced (than Subway)," Caicco added.
KFC, which has had mixed results developing its own desserts for the past few years, has been watching the tests closely and has been pleased with early results, Caicco said.
Serruya said the company was exploring other arrangements: "There are various other deals we're working on."
Another expansion possibility is selling new flavors in U.S. grocery stores through the Destination Products International group, an offshoot of Cott Corp run by Canadian marketing guru Dave Nichol. Destination is 85 percent owned by Cott, a maker of private label products, and 15 percent by President and Chief Executive Officer Nichol.
"I think they're experimenting with a high quality hard-packed frozen yogurt product," Caicco said.
An analyst who declined to be identified said: "Yogen Fruz has developed four or five flavors which they will package and sell."
Caicco said Yogen Fruz is aiming toward a limited store test somewhere in the United States.
"We're talking with them (Destination Products)," Serruya said.
In other developments, Serruya said, Yogen Fruz is planning to acquire one to three companies before its year-end of August 31.
Caicco said Yogen Fruz is eyeing a few complementary U.S. franchises, armed with the C$20 million raised in the private warrrant placement.
"They're actively, right now, looking at five or six deals in the U.S.," Caicco said. The other analyst said the prime target was in the north eastern United States.
Caicco added: "They may also, in fact, purchase or acquire a franchise that is not specifically complementary to what they do, but might be something that they could move out into their very strong sort of international franchise network.
Yogen Fruz, which is running out of manufacturing capacity, is considering buying a Pennsylvania plant in the next one or two months, Caicco added.
Serruya would only say that it would be on the U.S. East Coast.
((lydia.zajc@reuters.com, Reuters Toronto Bureau (416) 941-8109))
