The Canadian unit of Wal-Mart Stores Inc bowed to Canadian pressure on Thursday and said it would resume sales of Cuban-made pajamas after consulting with legal advisers and government officials.
On March 4, Canadian Trade Minister Art Eggleton said the government was investigating whether Wal-Mart Canada Inc broke any laws by removing the pajamas from its 136 stores on February 27.
Wal-Mart Canada is wholly owned by the world's largest retailer, based in Bentonville, Arkansas.
By refusing to sell the "Puritan" brand of men's cotton pajamas, Wal-Mart Canada could have violated Canada's Foreign Extraterritorial Measures Act.
The act penalizes companies in Canada for adhering to foreign legislation such as the U.S. Helms-Burton law that punishes firms for doing business with Communist-ruled Cuba.
Nichole Bourget, spokeswoman for Eggleton, applauded the move. "I think they made the right decision after realizing that ... what was important was that Canadian companies abide by Canadian laws, and I think that Wal-Mart decided to respect that principle," Bourget said.
The maximum penalty for contravening the Foreign Extraterritorial Measures Act is C$1.5 million (US$1.1 million), Bourget said.
Canada and Europe have protested bitterly against the Helms-Burton legislation, which allows Americans to file lawsuits in U.S. courts against foreigners deemed to have benefited from property confiscated by the Cuban government since the Communist revolution in 1959.
Wal-Mart Canada, which said it pulled the pajamas because of a customer's complaint at a Winnipeg, Manitoba store, said its reversal "reflects our commitment to meet the expectations of the Canadian marketplace."
Last weekend a group of 30 Winnipeg citizens gathered outside a store to protest the move to ban the pajamas by singing "O Canada", waving the Canadian flag and handing out leaflets.
Each Wal-Mart store had carried about 100 pairs of the C$12.96 (US$9.53) pajamas, one of 80,000 items sold by the Canadian chain.
((Reuters Toronto Bureau (416) 941-8100))
