Canada's venerable Eaton's department store chain, under bankruptcy protection, said on Wednesday it placed 31 of 85 stores under review as U.S. vulture brokerages swooped down on its C$150 million (US$110 million) supplier debt.
Toronto-based T. Eaton Co. Ltd., Canada's fifth largest chain with annual sales of C$1.67 billion (US$1.22 billion), said it would renegotiate leases for the stores under review, as part of restructuring plan it filed on February 27.
Eaton's is expected to eventually close some of the stores under review as it tries to grapple with its mounting losses in Canada's competitive retail market.
The 127-year-old retailer owned by one of Canada's richest families, the Eatons, owes C$150 million (US$110 million) to suppliers and another C$160 million (US$118 million) to two of the nation's largest banks, Bank of Nova Scotia and Toronto-Dominion Bank.
Eaton's has seen up to C$40 million ($29 million) of its C$150 million ($110 million) supplier debt snapped up by U.S. vulture brokerages, the firm said on Wednesday. The brokerages are trading the debt at a discount on behalf of their clients.
The U.S. brokerages are using names on their lists of suppliers garnerned from previous bankruptcy protection filings, such as Canadian clothing retailer Dylex Ltd.. Suppliers, eager to recoup some of their claims as soon as possible, sold their debt at a range of 50 to 81 percent of the dollar, they said.
Bear Stearns' Director of Bankruptcy and Research, David Goldburg, guessed that up to C$40 million ($29 million) has been bought.
BDS Securities Senior Managing Director Scott Donahue said his firm has bought between C$13 million ($9.5 million) to C$15 million ($11 million) which in turn has been sold to clients who trade it.
Donahue said that the market has likely topped out at offers of C$0.81 on the dollar, since the Eaton family may demand its suppliers to shave something off their demands to be paid in full.
"You have to assume that if the Eaton family risked their equity stake in this venerable old chain by filing under CCAA (Companies' Creditors Arrangement Act), they're going to try to get the unsecured claimants to take some kind of haircut," Donahue said.
Donahue also said the Eaton family, which consists of four brothers and their offspring, will have to work very hard to cut corporate expenses which is typically easier for outsiders.
"For 85 stores, it's dramatically higher than you would expect it to be, which is not so unusual in family owned and operated companies," he said. "A lot of Eatons in the trough."
Eaton's might stretch out its time frame to reorganize and pay creditors, which would cut into the traders' profits. "At these levels you're not allowing yourself much margin for error," Bright said.
But the U.S. vultures are not interested in pushing Eaton's into bankruptcy, Donahue said. "They would prefer to be passive investors" and eventually reap value, he said.
((lydia.zajc@reuters.com, Reuters Toronto Bureau (416) 941-8109))
