Toronto stocks ended mixed in brisk dealings on Friday, amid nervousness over a possible U.S. interest rate hike and quarterly triple-witching.
The Toronto Stock Exchange's key 300 Composite Index rose 19.50 points to close at 6074.78 on turnover of 101.5 million shares worth C$1.9 billion ($1.38 billion).
But the overall market was mixed with declining issues outnumbering advances 491 to 447, while 331 stocks were unchanged.
Volatility earlier in the session was due partly to the quarterly expiry of options, futures and options on futures called triple-witching, traders said.
Investors are also nervously awaiting a possible rise in U.S. interest rates following the U.S. Federal Open Market Committee meeting on Tuesday.
"We have the anticipation of (U.S. Federal Reserve Chairman Alan) Greenspan doing what he said he was going to do," said Montreal-based strategist Bill Ram.
The TSE, Canada's largest stock market, lost 87 points this week from last Friday's close.
Of Toronto's 14 sub-indices, 10 moved higher led by banks, oils, forestry products and conglomerates. The weak side included gold and base metals.
Among hot stocks, gold prospector Bre-X Minerals Ltd. sank 2.25 to close at 15.20 on over nine million shares, the TSE's heaviest trader.
The selloff was sparked by an Indonesian newspaper report which cast doubts on the size of the Busang gold deposit which Bre-X discovered in Indonesia.
Bre-X partner Freeport-McMoRan Copper &amp; Gold Inc. declined to comment on the Busang deposit until it has completed its due diligence process.
Sofware maker Cognos Inc. jumped 4.10 to close at 33.10 after UBS Securities upgraded it to a strong buy from a hold. The brokerage also raised its earnings estimates for the company.
Investors continued to scoop up shares of Canadian Occidental Petroleum Ltd. in the wake of its C$2 billion ($1.45 billion) friendly takeover bid for Wascana Energy Inc. Canadian Occidental rose 0.95 to finish at 26.90, while Wascana traded steady at 20.65.
