Toronto stocks closed softer in moderate trading on Wednesday, dragged lower by fears of Canadian interest rate hikes a day after the U.S. Federal Reserve increased short-term interest rates.
The Toronto Stock Exchange's key 300 Composite Index slipped 20.92 points to 6122.84. Trading was moderate at 93.6 million shares worth C$1.3 billion ($949 million).
"We react usually what happens to the U.S. maybe one day after," said Montreal-based portfolio consultant Ron Meisels. U.S. markets dipped yesterday after a widely expected quarter-point rise in the U.S. Fed Funds rate.
"People are worried that there will be a similar raising of rates in Canada," Meisels said.
Of Toronto's 14 sub-indexes, 10 tumbled, led by the interest-sensitive banks and pipelines along with transportation and consumer products.
The strong groups were real estate, golds, utilities and industrial products.
Declining issues beat out advances almost two to one -- 639 to 348 -- while 269 traded flat.
In other news, Toronto market watchers were rocked by news that Bre-X Minerals Ltd., with one of the hottest gold stories of recent years, may have "insignificant amounts of gold" in the Busang discovery in Indonesia.
Trading in Calgary, Alberta-based Bre-X was halted all day on Wednesday.
Bre-X's partner, Freeport-McMoRan Copper &amp; Gold Inc., based in New Orleans, said tests so far showed "insignificant" gold in what has been called the biggest gold find this century.
Bre-X Chief Executive David Walsh said in a statement that "there appears to be a strong possibility that the potential gold resources...have been overstated because of invalid samples and assaying of those samples."
A Toronto Stock Exchange official said the exchange did not know when Bre-X, part of Toronto's key 300 and 100 Indexes, would resume trading. It closed at 15.50 on Tuesday.
In individual issues, business applications software Cognos Inc. jumped 3.75 to 37.25, boosted by strength in U.S. high-technology issues, analysts said.
"It was a very strong day today for techs," said analyst James Moore at brokerage Alex Brown &amp; Sons. "Cognos is one of the quality names in the group."
"The stock has been oversold in the last couple of months by momentum investors," Moore added.
Tee-Comm Electronics Inc. lost more than 35 percent of its value, falling 1.75 to 3.20 in heavy trading. The company said it continued to proceed with plans to raise money to grow its subscriber base for its digital satellite service.
