The Vancouver Stock Exchange will become the first Canadian exchange to conduct trading at night, in order to tap budding interest from Asian investors.
The new after hours trading will begin on this Sunday, spokeswoman Joyce Courtney said on Friday.
The trading programme, called Vista, is intended to attract Asian market players just starting to trade when Vancouverites are winding down their work day, Courtney said.
The two-hour session will run from 6:30 to 8:30 Pacific time (1:30 a.m. to 3:30 a.m., GMT). It is officialy considered the beginning of the next day's regular trading session, despite the time gap, Courtney said.
Vancouver will start by offering 40 stocks ranging from Australian resource firms to Asian industrials, she said.
"Our purpose here is to attract additional business from Asia so we're looking, quite frankly, to get ... investment from Asia into these companies," Courtney said. "It's an extension of a number of Asian-Pacific initiatives we've had under way," which included marketing trips.
Some Canadian brokerages will get involved. "We don't have every single VSE member committed to the programme but we do have a kind of a critical mass to start the trading," Courtney said. Trading partners include Toronto-Dominion's discount service Green Line and Levesque Beaubien Geoffrion.
Overseas brokerages will also be able to participate. International brokerages can gain associate status through VSE members and trade using special Reuters and Bloomberg terminals, Courtney said.
As of yet none are confirmed but several have applied, she added.
Canadian brokerages seem to be approaching this development cautiously. Diane Ratte, Midland Walwyn Capital Inc's senior vice-president and director of equity trading, said the brokerage would not staff the new session. "At the present time, no. We're going to sit back and see what happens."
"I didn't get the impression that too many of the firms were going to be actively involved. I got the impression that most of the firms are going to take that attitude -- sit back and wait," Ratte said.
Courtney said the VSE is hoping for a low-key start but expects trading to build up. "We're looking for a gradual evolution of this trading session."
