Sears Canada Inc, Canada's third largest department store chain, said on Monday that retail revenues could grow by 8.6 percent or more in 1997, after an unexpectedly small first-quarter loss.
"We're hoping to do as well or better than that," Chief Executive Paul Walters told reporters after the annual meeting. Sears, which is 55 percent-owned by Sears, Roebuck and Co, earlier reported a first-quarter loss of C$0.03 a share versus a loss of C$0.23 in the same period of 1996.
Wood Gundy retail analyst David Brodie, who had forecast a deeper loss of C$0.10 a share for Sears Canada in the traditionally weak sales quarter, called the results "fantastic."
Sears Canada said first-quarter retail revenues rose by 8.6 percent from a year ago, but it did not break out actual retail revenues. Consolidated revenues jumped to C$875.1 million from C$821.7 million.
Walters credited stronger consumer spending and increased advertising. "Now is the time to step on the gas pedal and grow," he said.
Sears Canada also plans to spend C$300 million over three years to upgrade its 110 outlets, starting in Toronto.
Brodie said he would up his original 1997 profit estimate of C$0.70 by 10 cents or so. "They're in a very good position to step on the accelerator," he said.
"I don't attribute it (the growth) to the demise of Eaton's," Brodie added.
Venerable Canadian retailer T Eaton Co Ltd declared it might close up to 31 of its 85 outlets after entering bankrupcty protection on February 27.
Walters also said Sears Canada had been eying the purchase of a handful of Eaton's outlets. "We've identified stores that are of interest to us," he said, adding that Sears Canada had only considered only a few locations since it already had competing stores in the same areas.
Despite rumors that Canadian retailers may band together and snap up Eaton's outlets, Brodie said it was more likely that a U.S. company would acquire parts of the 127-year-old, family-owned Eaton's chain.
But no matter how many Eaton's stores will be shuttered, Sears Canada will pick up about 20 percent of their sales, or its portion of Canadian market share, Walters noted.
Sears Canada shares rose 0.25 to 14 in Toronto on Monday.
((lydia.zajc@reuters.com, Reuters Toronto Bureau (416) 941-8109))
