Investors cheered Hudson's Bay Co's naming on Monday of a former Wal-Mart Stores Inc official as chief executive, saying he would bring Wal-Mart's retailing savvy to Canada's biggest department store chain.
William Fields replaces retiring Chief Executive George Kosich on June 1. Hudson's Bay shares closed up 0.90 to 27.40 today on the Toronto Stock Exchange after the news.
Fields was most recently chief executive of Blockbuster Entertainment Group, a unit of Viacom Inc. He resigned by mutual agreement on April 22 after Viacom said that its movie rental unit's first quarter would fall short of year earlier performance by 15 to 20 percent.
He was chief executive from 1995 to 1996 of the stores unit of Wal-Mart, the largest U.S. retailer, capping a 25-year career at Wal-Mart in which he began as a store manager.
Hudson's Bay hired another former Wal-Mart executive, Millard Barron, last autumn to head its discount department chain Zellers. The 327-year-old retailer also runs a more upscale chain, the Bay.
"Having two of them, who understand the Wal-Mart way of doing things...will certainly give Hudson's Bay an advantage in adopting the new merchandising and marketing techniques," said analyst Leonard Kubas, president of Leonard Kubas Consultants.
"You've brought in two senior execs from, I guess, the most successful non-food retailer in the U.S," said an analyst, who requested anonymity, adding that "clearly it is a positive development for the company."
Wal-Mart, which came to Canada in 1994, has ousted Zellers as Canada's top discount store chain and brought everyday low pricing to Canadian consumers.
Fields told Reuters in a telephone interview that he was considering ways of battling his former employer.
"I do have some ideas, but I think the first thing I need to do is understand more about the Canadian consumer and the Canadian market place and maybe at least have a week before I come up with a strategy."
Fields added that he would likely bring some of Wal-Mart's culture to Hudson's Bay.
"The principles that Sam Walton established are pretty ingrained in me, so I think it would be hard to separate the two," he said.
((lydia.zajc@reuters.com, Reuters Toronto Bureau (416) 941-8109))
