Trading on most of China's futures markets, under pressure from Beijing to curb speculation, has now dropped so far that hedging has become virtually impossible, traders and analysts said on Tuesday.
A trader with a futures firm in Shanghai said only the metals contracts market, the Shanghai Metal Exchange, still had enough liquidity and flexibility to allow companies to hedge risk.
Beijing has recently issued two key documents encouraging the securities markets but warning the futures markets of more clean-ups and restructuring to come.
Rumours have swirled around the futures markets in recent days that Beijing plans to merge or close many of the 15 futures exchanges in the country, possibly concentrating all futures trading into five exchanges.
"From what I hear about the feedback from the China Securities Regulatory Commission (CSRC), there is no such plan," said Xie Boxing, deputy manager of the Information Department of the Shanghai Cereals and Oils Exchange (SCOE).
"There is no change to the basic policy of developing these markets," he added.
But Xie said liquidity on the exchange, particularly in rice, had fallen off as a result of the Beijing statements on the futures markets, making it difficult for companies to use the exchange for hedging.
"The scale of trading at this point is a bit small for hedging," he said.
The irony of the crackdown on the futures markets is that it has removed the basis for hedging and left only speculators in the market, one analyst said.
A second Chinese futures company trader said the trading volume of most commodity futures contracts on Chinese exchanges was now so small that there was no opportunity for hedging operations to take place.
"The only people trading the contracts for most of these commodities are speculators," the trader said.
A spokesman for the CSRC in Beijing on Monday told Reuters that the authorities still wanted the futures markets to develop despite the recent documents on the futures markets stressing current problems.
"This does not mean that futures market should cease to develop, development is a constant theme for China's futures market," he said.
But the spokesman declined to comment on the rumours of impending closures and mergers of futures exchanges.
"I cannot say anything on measures to deal with the markets in the future, I don't know whether some futures exchanges would be closed," he added.
One trader said that while the authorities would probably not formally close any of the exchanges, they could take other measures to in effect slowly strangle them such as raising the margin requirements on various contracts.
SCOE's Xie said the authorities still viewed the futures exchanges, set up in the early 1990s, as an experiment, but he felt that in the end they would prove their value.
"There should be a bright future for futures, particularly for contracts for agricultural products. That's how the futures business began in other parts of the world, and China is a big agricultural producer," he said.
But for now, trading volumes are down significantly on the SCOE compared to last year.
Up to Monday, 6.40 million lots on all contracts changed hands on the exchange this year compared to a full-year total of 13.5 million lots last year, he said. One lot is five tonnes of commodities.
