China issued another strong signal Sunday that its stock and bond markets have been given the green light for fast growth to provide the economy with more efficient means of investment.
A report in the official Shanghai Securities News was the latest in a series of indications that Beijing's previous suspicion of the securities markets has been replaced by a determination to expand and strengthen them.
Shanghai Securities News quoted a report that said the stock and bond markets must be developed vigorously to provide a stronger foundation for national economic development.
The newspaper quoted a report from the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, a think-tank, as saying the efficiency of investment channels was a key question affecting the long-term development of China's economy.
"The sluggish development of the direct investment markets is one of the factors affecting the long-term development of the national economy, so it is necessary to speed up the development of stocks, bonds and other direct investment markets," it said.
More direct investment would help to reduce the tangle of problems surrounding heavily indebted state enterprises and the state banks, which are currently forced to support the enterprises with a constant supply of loans, the report said.
"Banks are being squeezed from both sides, given the high risk (of loans to state enterprises) and the ever-growing deposits they are taking in," the paper said.
It said that it would be better for all parties if depositors put less cash into bank deposits and invested it directly in companies through the securities markets.
"Most of the money in the hands of ordinary people is currently put into bank accounts, which increases total bank deposits even as enterprises are short of money, resulting in capital being left idle and wasted," the report said.
The current small scale of the direct investment markets was a key reason for this imbalance, it said.
"So how to standardise, develop and strengthen the direct investment markets to allow for more reasonable usage of deposits is an important part of raising the efficiency of banks and making more efficient use of capital," it added.
The report gave no details on shifting the focus of enterprise investment from banks loans to securities, but Beijing has implemented a number of measures recently aimed at expanding the securities markets.
A record number of companies have been given approval this year to list shares on the country's two stock markets in Shanghai and Shenzhen.
The Shenzhen market was strongly affected last week by rumours, denied in Beijing, that securities authorities were about to release the quotas for company listings for next year.
But authorities last week did announce a major relaxation of policy on mutual funds, which are seen as an important conduit for funnelling funds from ordinary people into the securities markets.
Regulations allowing existing mutual funds to list on the stock exchanges are due to be released before the end of the year, official media reports said.
In another development, a senior Chinese official was quoted as saying Sunday that China is preparing to tap overseas capital markets by listing shares of one or two of its chemical companies abroad.
Chemical Industry Minister Gu Xiulian told Business Weekly that one or two chemical companies were getting ready for share offerings abroad, though she did not name the companies or the exchanges.
