China's effort to push domestic investors out of foreign currency B shares on its stock markets has so far failed, but volumes on the B markets have fallen significantly, analysts said on Monday.
The official media on September 21 announced that local investors were banned from buying any more of the B shares listed on the Shenzhen and Shanghai stock exchanges and supposedly reserved for foreign investors.
Domestic investors, who in recent months have accounted for more than 50 percent of B share trading on both of China's stock exchanges, were told to sell their B share holdings as soon as possible.
But traders and analysts said local investors were still in the market and continued to be an important support for B share prices, which are dragging along at low levels.
"The ban on local people buying B shares has not been implemented very seriously, people can still buy them," said one trader. "But volumes have come down because of a fear that the authorities might make further measures to clean things up."
"Trading by domestic investors in B shares is still continuing," said a broker with China Guotai Securities. "Brokers find it difficult to check all identification cards when old faces turn up."
B share trading volumes on both the Shanghai and Shenzhen exchanges have dropped significantly since the ban was announced, and many analysts believe the market could collapse altogether if the authorities seriously press home the ban.
Foreign investors took advantage of a surge in domestic B share buying in the middle of this year to dump their shares and get out of the market, particularly in Shenzhen.
Beijing authorities are unhappy about this largely due to a fear of a serious outflow of foreign exchange if foreign investors are allowed to sell their B shares to local people, analysts say.
A Shenzhen stock analyst said he felt the ban on domestic investors buying and holding B shares would not be pushed through with any greater vigour and would anyway be relaxed after the return of Hong Kong to China in mid-1997.
"I would forecast that by the second half of next year, the B share market in Shenzhen will be gradually opened up to domestic investors," the analyst with Guotai Securities said.
"By that time, Hong Kong will be back as part of China, and the Hong Kong dollar will be a Chinese currency," he added.
B shares listed in the southern city of Shenzhen adjacent to Hong Kong are denominated in Hong Kong dollars.
A trader with Nanfang Securities said he expected further big changes to policy on the B shares markets over the next year leading to a second, and this time officially-approved, relaxation of restrictions on domestic investment in B shares.
"The B share market will undergo significant changes by the second half of next year. By then, it will be easier and easier for Guangdong people to get hold of Hong Kong dollars," the analyst said.
"By the end of next year, Shenzhen B shares should at least be open to investors in Guangdong," he added.
The Shanghai B share index closed on Monday at 48.588, up a fractional 0.302, in sluggish trading, while the Shenzhen B share index closed at 89.79, down 0.10, also in slow trade.
