To hear the Shanghai Film Studio tell the story, it is a classic drama of a poor, brave underdog challenging a greedy, monopolising giant.
But the studio, one of the oldest and biggest film-making operations in China, says it is gaining ground in its cinema chain war against the main movie distributor in Shanghai, the Yongle chain.
The studio boss, Zhu Yongde, said he created his own chain of cinemas last year after Yongle refused a re-division of box offices receipts.
"I didn't want to do it but we had no choice, the Shanghai movie market is becoming more and more important," he said in an interview.
The Shanghai Film Studio has made only paper-thin profits in recent years largely due, Zhu says, to the unreasonably high demands of Yongle and other film distributors around China.
With cinema attendance well below half what it was in the days before China's 1980s television revolution, revenue has plummeted and costs have exploded.
What's a film studio boss to do but try to shave the distributor's box office share?
Zhu says he originally went to Yongle to ask for a re-division of profits, which used to be 30 percent for Yongle, 20 percent for the film studio and 50 percent for the cinema operators.
His final offer was a straight split: 25 percent for Yongle, and 25 percent for the film studio. Yongle refused, he said.
"I said to them: we spend the money to make the movies, we take all the investment risk, while you do nothing. You make profits on the basis of almost no costs. But they wouldn't do it," he said.
So Zhu went off and set up his own cinema chain instead.
Yongle's story is slightly different.
A spokeswoman said the Dongfang cinema chain was set up as part of a national process of diversifying ownership of cinemas and distribution. She said Yongle currently received only 15 percent of box office receipts.
Shanghai now has a total of 100 movie screens, ranging from some of the world's classiest picture houses dating from the golden age of cinema, to down-at-heel workers' clubs which put on movies each night in their main hall.
Yongle controls all of the top cinemas, including the magnificent Daguangming movie house on Nanjing Road, a major shopping and entertainment thoroughfare for more than a century.
Zhu's rival chain, called Dongfang (Orient), controls 22 screens which tend to be more basic and local, cinemagoers say.
"It took a lot of effort, a lot of negotiating with each cinema operator, the whole process took more than a year," said Zhu.
He said he only managed to prise many of the cinema operators away from Yongle by guaranteeing them a minimum level of income.
"Box office receipts for all of them are up since we took over their distribution, some up 70 percent, some up as much as 200 percent," he said. "The 22 cinemas used to account for eight percent of Shanghai's box office receipts, but it's gone up to 24 percent."
Yongle has been fighting back over the past year with the release of a series of blockbuster Hollywood epics, including most recently "Twister" and "True Lies", which have proved very popular.
Zhu declined to say how many movies the studio would produce this year, and a member of his staff later only said it would be less than 15, far below production levels of a decade ago.
But Zhu did say he was looking to diversify the studio's finances away from movies into a wide range of other activities including hotels, real estate, television production, advertising and a steel tube factory.
He said his aim was to make films responsible for less than 20 percent of the film studio's total profits by the year 2000.
"We can't make money out of films the way things are," he said.
