China's securities authorities Tuesday ordered the takeover of a futures exchange in what analysts said was the beginning of a clean-up campaign that may leave China with only four or five large futures exchanges.
The China Securities Regulatory Commission said the Changchun United Commodity Exchange would merge with the Beijing Commodity Exchange, according to the Beijing-based Financial Times.
The Changchun exchange, which was forced to suspend trading for six months from last October after the securities authorities accused it of irregularities, would become a trading floor of the Beijing exchange, the official newspaper said.
Analysts said the merger was the first of an expected series aimed at closing many of the smaller commodities exchanges around China that have been the focus of intense market speculation.
"This shows the determination of the authorities to restrict and clean up the futures industry and is a sign of more mergers to come," said an analyst with a metals trading company active in the futures markets.
China recently launched a sweeping crackdown on its futures markets and authorities last month issued two documents stressing the need to further clean up the industry.
Rumours have circulated for weeks on the futures markets that authorities would close most of the nation's 15 exisitng commodity exchanges, mainly through mergers that would allow only four or five of the largest and best-run to survive.
The Financial Times said Changchun was selected as the first to be merged among the 15 because of rampant trading irregularities on the exchange.
Analysts said there were currently too many exchanges trading similar futures contracts, particularly cereals and metals.
But they said the takeover process would be far from easy due to opposition from local governments and a range of technical difficuties. The exchanges provided significant tax income for local governments, said one analyst, who noted that differences in the contracts and rules of trading also presented many problems for combining various exchanges.
