China's top cashmere producer, Inner Mongolia Erdos Cashmere Products Co Ltd, reported good interim results on Monday and brokers expect a solid second half as raw material prices fall.
The company, a favoured stock among Shanghai's B share market bucked the trend of disappointing mid-term results with a 25 percent increase in profits over the same period last year to 67 million yuan ($8.07 million), despite lower revenue.
A spokesman for Erdos said he expected net profits for the year to rise to around 180 million yuan from 170 million yuan in 1995. Turnover in the first half fell to 252.7 million yuan from 349.4 million yuan.
"The jump in net profit was due to lower costs, primarily a drop in the price of raw materials in the first half of 1996," company director Guo Enzhe said in an interview.
He gave no further details but a foreign stock analyst based in Shanghai said the price of raw cashmere had fallen 15 percent from its 1995 highs.
The analyst said Erdos had indicated it had exhausted its stockpiles of 1995 raw cashmere and was replacing them with new stocks that were 15 percent cheaper.
"Generally we're fairly positive about the company," said Jardine Fleming's Shanghai representative John Crossman. "We will probably upgrade them from a hold to a buy.
"We're expecting a better second half because they're using cheaper raw materials and looking for really good stuff to happen in the first half of 1997," he added.
Analysts said a large portion of Erdos' sales to the United States and Europe were booked in the July-to-September period which should boost the company's position.
The positive effect of lower raw materials prices is expected to help the firm well into 1997.
Analysts said another factor helping to lift Erdos profits despite falling revenues was a move by the company into garment manufacturing, which has higher profit margins.
The company bought four textile manufacturing firms in the first half of the year, each of which has a 25 percent Japanese equity stake.
A company statement in the Shanghai Securities News on Monday said Erdos planned to establish five more joint ventures with domestic companies in the second half of 1996 for garment production.
Erdos shares closed on Monday at $0.506, up 0.006 on the Shanghai exchange. The shares were first listed last October at their issue price of $0.469.
($1=8.3 yuan)
