"Why can't I access the Playboy Website?"
That, say computer experts, is one of the most common complaints from the growing number of Internet users in China.
China, which controls information more carefully than most countries in the world, is cautiously opening up access to the Internet, in spite of the problems raised by such an anarchically free information dissemination medium.
Officials said security filters were placed on the main Internet access servers in Beijing and Shanghai in the middle of this year and, after a testing period, restrictions on ordinary people opening Internet accounts have been removed.
The filters stop access to politically sensitive sites on the Internet's World Wide Web supporting such causes as independence for Tibet or release of Chinese political prisoners.
They also attempt, often unsuccessfully, to stop access to the thousands of sexually-explicit sites such as Playboy magazine's Web page.
"Our customers using the Internet have complained they can't get through to the some sites, particulary sites like Playboy," said a computer industry expert working in Shanghai. "You'd be surprised at how many customers we have calling about that."
Meanwhile, usage of the Internet in China is growing so fast that phonelines on the main services are often engaged all day and far into the night.
"Growth is out-running infrastructure investment, so the system is being inundated," the computer expert said.
"Popularity is no problem, it's super-popular, but the government is not re-investing the money at a fast enough rate. So there's still a lot of technical problems. People are having trouble with access and speed once they get on," he added.
A senior official with Shanghai's Post and Telecommunications Bureau said there were no longer any restrictions on Chinese people signing up for Internet access.
"Some time ago, our security arrangements were incomplete and there was a problem with pornographic and politically unacceptable material," said the official, Zhang Weihua.
"But our arrangements have been improved and new accounts are being added without restriction," he added.
Zhang said there were a total of 3,200 registered Internet accounts on the Shanghai server at the end of August with the number increasing at several hundred a month.
But there are indications that several other organisations are selling Internet access and the real number of users is probably much higher, analysts said.
Chinese users going through the two main servers can access the World Wide Web and use e-mail, but the Internet's freewheeling discussion news groups are restricted.
And while users are able to establish their own Web sites, they are not supposed to load the material onto the Web themselves, said an attendant at one of Shanghai's two new Internet Cafes.
"You must give us the files to allow for inspection and we will upload them for you," the attendant said.
Analysts said the main priority of the authorities at present seemed to be to control the number of lines through which the worldwide Internet material enters China to just two -- one in Beijing and one in Shanghai.
"There's is upposedly another line going through from (the southern city of) Guangzhou to Hong Kong, but for political reasons, Beijing wants to keep very tight control," said the computer expert.
"I think Beijing and Shanghai will continue to be the main filtering points because otherwise they can't filter it. If they have a lot of international links then you can forget about any kind of filtering," he added.
The question, he said, is whether the Chinese authorities can stay ahead of the ever-changing technology of the Internet and ahead of the ability of local computer whiz-kids to find ways round any barriers that are set up.
"Given the number of hackers in China, I would say there's no way in hell (they can stay ahead)," the expert said. "This is a country full of hackers. These guys have found so many holes in the (Chinese) servers it's ridiculous."
"The servers don't have the latest security equipment installed and these guys are brilliant. They can see all of our e-mails. I know there are people who have all our account names and passwords," he added.
