China's state debt has become the top investment choice among local investors in 1996, thanks to a slew of market reform measures, but further reforms are needed to ensure a continued boom, analysts said on Tuesday.
Beijing ended a record issue of 195.2 billion yuan ($23.52 billion) worth of treasury bills and bonds for 1996 last Friday when it allocated the last batch of the seven-year bond to underwriters.
Analysts said the instruments had become best sellers this year mainly due to reforms of the process for issuing treasury bills and bonds.
"The most important has been the widespread adoption of a public tender system," said one T-bill trader. "This has made the coupons on state debt more reflective of market changes and needs."
Beijing had, in the past, allowed the Finance Ministry to decide the coupon rates and use adminstrative edict to allocate state debt to banks and other financial institutions for them to sell. But this year, the ministry organised public tenders for each new bond issue.
Under the new system, about 75 percent of each new batch was distributed to bidders according to the interest rates and amounts lodged by the bidders in public tenders. The rest was distributed according to adminstrative decision.
The coupons were largely based on the weighted averages of the valid bids at the public tenders, but industry sources said the ministry also "fine-tuned" them to some extent to come up with the final rates.
"The ministry usually raised the coupons to some extent to make it easier to sell the state debt," said one source. "This resulted in many underwriters retaining the bonds themselves to gain easy profits when the bonds were listed."
"Individual investors were in many cases disappointed when they were unable to buy the bonds even after standing in line for many hours," said a second T-bill trader. "This hurt their enthusiasm, with institutions making most of the profits."
Analysts said there is room for further improvement in the government's method of issuing debt.
They said they want to see a reduction in the proportion of the bond issues held back from the public tenders.
Another improvement would be if the ministry used market means to encourage the underwriters to sell a greater proportion of the bonds they obtained, and not hold them on their own account, the analysts said.
However, the market's maturity spectrum expanded as its popularity grew. A greater variety of bills and bonds have been issued this year -- three-month, seven-year and 10-year issues have been added to the traditional six-month, one-year, three-year and five-year bonds.
Also, discount bonds, sold at below face value with the pay-back at face value on maturity, were introduced for the first time.
Yet another innovation was the payment of interest on an annual basis instead of on maturity, for the first-ever seven-year bond and the 10-year bond.
"This method of payment allows investors to re-invest their interest and has been widely welcomed," said Lu Weiming, a T-bill trader with China Guotai Securities. "Its success is likely to lead the central government to use it more and more in future bond issues."
Chinese analysts believe Beijing will issue a new record amount of T-bills and T-bonds next year, probably around 250 billion yuan.
But they said this amount as a proportion of China's gross domestic product is still below that of advanced western countries.
($1 = 8.3 yuan)
