China's cautious and much-delayed experiment with convertible bonds as a way of raising corporate funds is expected to move forward next year with up to 6-10 foreign currency issues, brokers and analysts said on Wednesday.
Chinese securities authorities have said on a number of occasions they want to conduct test issues of convertible bonds, which give holders an option to convert the debt into stock.
Only a small handful of cases have been tried so far with very mixed results. But analysts said they believed authorities were increasingly taking a favourable attitude towards the concept of convertible bonds.
This is reflected in the many listed Chinese firms which have said in recent months they are considering or planning to launch bonds convertible into their foreign currency B shares, listed on China stock markets, or H shares listed in Hong Kong.
"The prospects for convertible bonds next year look good," said a senior analyst with a foreign brokerage in Shanghai. "I would say there could be up to 10 issues in 1997. The process has been slower than expected, but China has a need for more funds."
"There's a lot of momentum on convertible bonds at present," said John Crossman, general manager of Jardine Fleming in Shanghai. "We've been pushing the concept with companies and officials and it's now taken on a momentum of its own."
The China Securities Regulatory Commission (CSRC) is believed to have received a pile of applications for such issues but is cautious about proceeding partly because of a number of unsuccessful past attempts at issuing convertible bonds.
"China Textile Machinery's issue of convertible bonds, for instance, was a disaster," said the senior analyst. "Nobody has converted the bonds to shares, so they have to pay back the money by the end of this year."
But a stock analyst in Shenzhen said the market was ready to accept convertible bonds as a concept.
"The overall financial environment has matured to the point where it's possible to look at convertible bonds. But the companies which issue them need to be relatively good to ensure they have the ability to repay," the analyst said.
He said the prospect of convertible bonds as a means of raising capital is extremely attractive to China's listed companies because, unlike direct equity, it does not immediately dilute earnings.
The latest Chinese company to announce a convertible bond is Zhenhai Refining &amp; Chemical Co Ltd which said last month it would issue US$200 million of bonds convertible into the firm's H shares.
Other companies that have indicated an interest include truck maker Qingling Motors Co and Shenzhen-listed Jiangling Motors
But the experience of China Textile Machinery indicates that there is risk involved in issuing convertible bonds for companies as well as for investors.
"The advantage over a straight bond is that the company is placing a bet that it will be able to pay back with shares rather than cash. But there's a risk involved," said one foreign analyst.
"The authorities want to choose large, stable companies that are going to have the cash income to repay the bonds if the conversion proves difficult because of problems with the share price," he added.
