Too many futures exchanges in China are presently trading metals contracts, which should realistically be limited to just one or two given the current low trading volumes, officials and analysts said on Thursday.
Five of China's 14 futures exchanges have metals contracts but only two of them, the Shanghai and Shenzhen exchanges, see substantial trading, mostly in copper, a local broker said.
The other three exchanges which have at least some trading in metals futures contracts are the Chongqing exchange in southwestern Sichuan province, the Shenyang exchange in the northeast and Tianjin.
"Five exchanges doing metals are too many, I think one or two would be enough," Gu Jianxing, manager of information department of the Shanghai Metal Exchange, said in an interview.
"There have been rumours about mergers, but we have heard nothing official," he added.
China's securities authorities, while encouraging the stock and bond markets, have been cracking down mercilessly on the futures markets in recent months due to massive over-speculation on some contracts.
The futures exchange in the northeast city of Changchun last month became the latest casualty, being forced to merge with the Beijing futures exchange.
The Shanghai Metal Exchange's Gu said the pressure from Beijing to stamp out speculative activity had had a dramatic impact on trading volumes on the exchange.
"The restrictions have had a negative impact on market sentiment with turnover dropping," Gu said. "State-owned firms have been banned from speculating and financial institutions have been pushed out of the futures markets."
Gu said he expected trading volume on the Shanghai exchange this year to be only about 300 billion yuan ($36.14 billion), compared with 455.8 billion yuan in 1995 and a record 682 billion yuan in 1994.
"In a way, the metals trading has already been focused on one or two exchanges given the low trading volumes seen in the other three exchanges," said an analyst with a Shanghai futures trading company.
Gu said there were rumours the securities authorities planned to raise margin requirements for all futures trading from the current five percent to 15 or 20 percent, depending on the contract, to crack down further on speculation.
"If it happened, it wouldn't have a big impact on the Shanghai metals contracts, which are relatively mature and less speculative," Gu said.
But he said there was no need for the authorities to take a tough line on the Shanghai Metal Exchange.
"The speculative element in copper trading in Shanghai is relatively small and the futures trading here provides a valuable opportunity for hedging," he said.
He said that, currently, hedging accounted for about 20 percent of the trading in copper futures on the exchange, which he said was about the right level.
"The current margin requirement of metal contracts should be kept or at most increase it slightly," Gu added.
($1=8.3 yuan)
