Shanghai's foreign currency B share market has been consistently hitting historic lows over the past two weeks, and there's little prospect of a recovery at least until the middle of next year, analysts said on Monday.
They said there was no sign of a bottom to the market, with the foreign investors for whom the market was created having largely sold up and left, leaving it to local investors.
The confidence of the foreign investors has been killed by an unending string of disappointing company results and by the failure of the authorities to add new, sizeable and well-run companies to the market as promised, the analysts said.
"Confidence is totally destroyed and even long-term investors have begun to liquidate their positions," said a Shanghai-based investment analyst with a Western brokerage. "A recovery of confidence will not happen overnight."
The B share index closed down 0.809 points or 1.77 percent to hit another record low close of 44.867 points on Monday. It has hit all-time lows on five separate days over the past two weeks.
"There is no hope for the market to recover at least until the middle of next year," said a B share broker. "The most important factor is that company performance for 1996 full-year is unlikely to improve."
The dismal state of the B share is in sharp contrast to the local A share market which continues to attract huge amounts of cash, setting two-year year highs on a regular basis.
It is also at variance with the general level of interest among foreign investors in participating in the Chinese economic boom that continues unabated, with national growth this year expected to hit at least nine percent.
"If they listed a good company on the B share market even at this point, people would be willing to buy it," said a stock analyst with a foreign brokerage in Shanghai.
Many B share firms were formerly state-run enterprises and the leadership, methods and attitudes of many are little changed from the days when they were accountable to no one by the state planners in Beijing.
"Unstable performance and declining profits of some key firms listed on the B shares market have made foreigners more and more doubtful about the future of the B share market as a whole," said a second B share broker. "There is no immediate support or bottom line that we can see."
"Few people are willing to buy because there is a fear that the market will just keep falling," said a Chinese analyst with a major local brokerage.
"But the falls have become meaningless with the volumes so thin," he added. "The market has no momentum to rise due to lack of positive news."
