Shanghai's real estate market is showing signs of recovery thanks to growing numbers of individual home-buyers and policy support from the city government, analysts and officials said on Thursday.
Increasing numbers of people are buying their own homes in the city as a result of lower interest rates, a state-run house-buying fund and the inability of many state firms to provide homes for their employees, they said.
People from other parts of China are also showing a growing interest in buying apartments in Shanghai, partly due to new rules that allow home purchasers from elsewhere to obtain residency permits in the city.
In the first nine months of 1996, private citizens bought 1.21 million square metres of commercial housing in Shanghai, or 55 percent of the city's housing space sold in the period, the city's Business News said on Wednesday.
"Two years ago, all our buyers were enterprises," said a salesman from a Shanghai real estate company. "But this year nearly half the houses we sold were bought by individuals."
A key element in this growth is a public housing loan fund set up by the city government in 1992, into which most employers and employees each pay five percent of an employee's salary.
"More people have bought and plan to buy houses with the help of these funds due to lower interest rates on loans after two cuts in bank interest rates this year," said an official of the Construction Bank of China, which administers the fund.
"In the first half of this year, we lent about 500 million yuan ($60.24 million) from the fund and expect to lend 1.2 billion for the whole year," he said.
"Between 1992 and 1994, individuals borrowed a total of only 220 million yuan from the fund and in 1995 the figure reached 440 million yuan," he added.
To encourage more individuals to buy, the city government in September cut the tax on house purchases by half and in August raised the rents on state-owned apartments by 50 percent, a Shanghai Bureau of Real Estate Administration official said.
"These measures, including allowing non-Shanghai people the right to obtain a residence permit by buying property, show the determination of the local government to help real estate become a key industry in the city," she said.
In August, Shanghai started giving residency permits to out-of-city people if they bought an apartment worth more than 400,000 yuan in the Pudong New Area, and have since extended the offer to all districts of Shanghai.
Pudong is on the east side of the Huangpu River that runs through the city. Puxi, the main area of the city, is on the west side.
Pudong has so far sold 327 apartments worth 86.2 million yuan to people from outside of the city, an official of the Pudong Real Estate Exchange said.
"Sales of property in Puxi, despite higher prices, are hotter than in Pudong which is still seen as less convenient in terms of traffic," said an official of the Shanghai Real Estate Trading Centre said.
"Buyers from outside the city, mainly successful business people and enterprises, regard Shanghai as the best place in China to do business," he said.
Shanghai's economy continues to power ahead of the rest of China, with 12.8 percent growth in the first 10 months of 1996, official figures show.
China's GDP growth this year has been officially forecast at around 9.6-9.7 percent, compared to 10.5 percent last year.
Shanghai real estate prices have changed little in the first nine months of 1996 despite the increased sales due to a parallel growth in supply.
The average price of an apartment in Shanghai is now 4,020 yuan ($484.30) per square metre and office space 6,880 yuan ($828.90) per square metre, the Business News newspaper said.
"No one doubts that prices of property in the city will rise in the coming years," an analyst said.
($1=8.3 yuan)
