China is firming up a shortlist of foreign banks that will be allowed to do local renminbi currency business, foreign bankers said on Monday.
Hongkong Bank, Citibank and Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi are expected to be among the winners, they said.
Foreign banks with branches in China, currently restricted to doing business in foreign exchange, have been promised that a handful will be given the right to take deposits and make loans in the Chinese currency before the end of the year.
"The Hongkong Bank, Citibank and Bank of Tokyo are in, the Chinese have made that clear," said one banker. "There may also be a European bank and a Hong Kong-based bank added as well, but they may not. They are being very cautious."
"The decision will be made as always on a geopolitical basis -- one from America, one from Japan, one from Europe," said a Hong Kong-based European banker.
Officials from Hongkong Bank and Citibank declined to comment on their chances and Bank of Tokyo executives were not available.
But other bankers said there were still conflicting reports as to when the announcement would be made.
"It has to happen soon," said a Shanghai-based banker. "We've waited far too long. We're all tired and bored with the waiting."
Once the announcement has been made, foreign bankers said they expected it to offer only very limited renminbi business rights, restricted to taking in money from, and lending money to, foreign-funded enterprises in China.
"The funding problem is the key one," said a foreign banker. "Foreign-funded firms wouldn't generally want to put their renminbi on deposit with a bank, it's their working capital. If they did, it would be an act of charity (towards the banks)."
The foreign banks will definitely not be allowed in the foreseeable future to take in deposits from Chinese firms or individuals, bankers said.
The answer may be that the People's Bank of China, the central bank, will lend renminbi funds to the foreign banks to lend on to customers, thereby giving the central bank power to control the extent of the business, they said.
Once the first batch of banks have begun to do limited renminbi business, it could be as much as a year before any other foreign banks are allowed to join them, bankers said.
"They are being very careful; this will be an experiment that they will watch very closely before taking another step forward," said one banker.
