China unveiled on Tuesday the country's first major shipping exchange which it hopes will consolidate and standardise ship chartering and cargo fixing in East China and be a focus for the shipping trade nationwide.
Officials told a news conference that all shipping and freight companies in the east China region had been told to move their business as soon as possible to the new Shanghai Shipping Exchange.
Like the Baltic Exchange in London, the Shanghai Shipping Exchange will allow ship owners and charterers to arrange deals and fix prices for carrying cargoes.
The exchange, which has the direct support from the Beijing authorities, has been under preparation for two years and has as its founding members 116 companies, mostly shipping firms in Shanghai and the adjacent provinces of Zhejiang and Jiangsu.
"The foundation of the exchange shows the government's determination to make Shanghai into an international shipping centre," said Zhang Jinxiang, an official with China's biggest shipping firm, COSCO.
"Other world shipping centres such as London and New York also have such exchanges," Zhang added. "With China's fast-growing economy and Shanghai's good location, the exchange should help attract more shipping companies here."
Zhu Yongguang, a senior Ministry of Communications official told the news conference that the Shanghai exchange was one of a number of shipping and freight exchanges planned for China.
"There will be Tianjin in the north, Shanghai in the east, Guangzhou in the south and Wuhan inland. But the focus of the business nationwide will be the Shanghai exchange," he said.
Zhu declined to speculate on how much business the exchange would attract, but said:
"This will be a gradual thing. The shipping companies (in East China) will be expected to move their business to the exchange, but it won't happen overnight."
Members of the exchange include ship-owners, mostly state-run companies in Shanghai and surrounding areas, and freight forwarders.
The exchange will handle international cargo-fixing, but most of the business in the initial stages is expected to be domestic.
The establishment of the exchange was welcomed by an official for Shanghai Haixing Shipping Co, China's second-largest shipping company and its largest in domestic trade.
"The exchange may help cut illegal competition in the shipping market," the official said. "At present, there are some small shipping firms which make use of improper relationships or offer high commissions to get business."
Exchange officials said the exchange was under the supervision of the Ministry of Communications and the Shanghai city government and would be treated for the foreseeable future as "experimental", in line with other new markets in China.
