China's foreign currency B shares in both Shanghai and Shenzhen surged on Wednesday as investors piled in money on the back of rumours the government was planning measures to support the markets, brokers said.
Shanghai's B share index soared 5.49 percent to 49.689 points, while the Shenzhen index was up 8.25 percent to 111.35 in heavy trade.
"There have been widespread talk that regulators are meeting somewhere discussing ways to turn around the long bearishness of the Hong Kong dollar-denominated stock market," a broker at China Southern Securities in Shenzhen said.
"Such rumours triggered a steady inflow of fresh money," he added.
In Shanghai, brokers said the sharp rise was a reflection of the activity in the Shenzhen market with overseas investors buying selected stocks with relatively good prospects.
"B shares prices had become too cheap to drop any further, with the domestic economic situation improving," one broker said. "And recent rises in Shenzhen B shares also provided a chance for Shanghai B shares to follow."
In Shenzhen, brokers and analysts said the recent surges were linked to a report in the Shenzhen-based Securities Times last Thursday that the China Securities Regulatory Commission has been concerned about the market's prolonged bearishness.
The newspaper quoted the CSRC's chairman Zhou Daojiong as saying at an international business forum in Beijing that the poor performance of the country's B markets had negatively affected China's reform and open policy.
The buying is being led by Chinese domestic institutional investors, with increasing amounts of money from overseas investors, said brokers.
"There is also money coming from Chinese individual investors, but the amount is imposssible to calculate because it's illegal," said one analyst.
China's B shares are supposed to be for foreign investors only, but most of the trading is now done by domestic investors through a variety of means.
Stock analysts were at a loss to come up with suggestions as to what market-boosting measures may be implemented, assuming the rumours of an impending announcement from Beijing are correct.
"Beyond quietly allowing local Chinese investors to come back into the market, I can't think what they could do," said one analyst. "The problem has always been that the companies listed on the B share market are not performing well enough."
Another analyst said that the B share market will face a correction over the short term, given the fast pace of its ascent and that its medium-term trend should be decided by whether regulators announced stimulative policies.
"The rumours are responsible for the current rises but market fundamentals have changed little," said a Shanghai broker. "The upward trend can only be established after concrete governmental measures are announced. Otherwise, it will shortly be reversed."
