China's personal bank deposits, which surged in the past two years to stratospheric levels, have begun to grow more slowly as a result of two bank interest rate cuts this year, bankers and analysts said on Wednesday.
But the growth rate is still high -- more than 30 percent year-on-year -- and the huge deposits in the banks still pose a threat to the economy, with the possibility of fanning inflation, if the money is released into the market, they said.
However, there is little chance that the deposits will be unleashed in the short term because the authorities are determined to maintain their tight monetary policy, they said.
By the end of 1995, individual Chinese deposits totalled 2,970 billion yuan ($3,578 billion), thanks largely to high interest rates set by authorities to drain money from the system and cool inflation, which hit a high of 21 percent in 1994, analysts said.
But the growth of the deposits began to slow down this year.
In the first quarter of 1996, individual bank deposits increased by 40.1 percent year-on-year, slowing to 34.5 percent growth in the third quarter, according to figures by the People's Bank of China, the central bank.
"The trend is changing," said a Beijing-based banker with the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China (ICBC). "With the central government reducing interest rates and supporting the securities market, some money is moving elsewhere."
"Despite the change, the huge amount (of deposits) continues to be a tiger in a cage," said another banker with Shanghai-based Communications Bank. "If released into the market, it would pose a serious threat to push inflation up again."
The central bank sliced interest rates in May and August with the annual rate for one-year fixed deposits reduced to 7.47 percent after both cuts, from a very high 10.98 percent rate up to May.
In April, it also abolished an inflationary subsidy for long-term bank deposits of three years and above.
The cuts followed steady declines in the nation's inflation rate, which has dropped to about six percent this year from 14.7 percent last year.
Analysts said the interest rate cuts signalled a cautious relaxation of Beijing's tight monetary policy, begun in mid-1993 to cool an overheated economy characterised by surging inflation.
But Beijing will continue to keep a tight control on credit with the money supply remaining very high and the danger of reigniting inflation still present, they said.
"Experience since 1993 has proved that if we do not insist on tight monetary policy, high economic growth rates and the downward trend on inflation will be unsustainable," a central bank official said last week.
China's broad M2 supply increased by a year-on-year 26.9 percent by the end of September, slightly less than last year's 29.5 percent growth.
Beijing has set the M2 target at 25 percent for this year.
"The problem can only be solved when macro-economic conditions allow a complete relaxation of austerity measures and when interest rates are further cut to the level (where) the deposits can be gradually absorbed," said an ICBC official.
($1 = 8.3 yuan)
