China's foreign currency B shares went on another roller-coaster ride on Tuesday, with Shenzhen stocks rising 9.5 percent at midday before falling back to score a modest 1.27 percent increase on the day.
The Shanghai B share index was up 2.1 percent at the close after hitting its year-high of 54.475 at the end of the morning session.
Brokers said domestic investors were heavily in the market again in spite of a ban on the purchase of the B shares by local Chinese and selling by overseas investors was much in evidence, particularly in Shenzhen.
The B shares in both of China's stock markets have soared in the past 10 days on persistent rumours that the authorities plan to take measures to boost the market.
But one foreign analyst in Shanghai said it appeared that the implication the authorities would take no further action to limit domestic buying of B shares was enough to push them up.
"They're not going to make an announcement, but it would appear the authorities have let it be known that local investors can participate in the market," the analyst said.
"If that is true, then there will be some sustained momentum to the market," the analyst added.
The Shanghai B index rose 1.104 points or 2.10 percent to 53.766 points, on volume of 36.4 million shares worth $15.7 million, but off the intra-day year-high of 55.097 points due to profit-taking in the afternoon, brokers said.
In Shenzhen, the B index rose 1.70 points, or 1.27 percent, to end at 135.14 after touching an intraday high of 147.70 on turnover of HK$415.10 million, compared with Monday's HK$347.13 million.
"Heavy profit-taking pushed the index off its day high," said a broker at China Southern Securities. "But the (Shenzhen) index still has space to go up if there is no official denial of rumours that Beijing is considering market-boosting plans."
"With the index having gained about 50 percent over the past few sessions, the risk has become gradually higher," another Shenzhen analyst said.
Shanghai shares were pushed up largely by domestic buying of shares related to the Pudong development zone. But interest in the markets from foreign investors is gradually reviving as a result of the booming trade.
"Foreign investors are looking at China's B share markets again, encouraged by improved fundamentals of the B share companies and especially encouraged by the liquidity shown over the last few trading sessions," said Bruce Richardson of HG Asia in Shanghai.
