Shanghai city is on the verge of renting out the former Hongkong &amp; Shanghai Bank building on the riverside Bund to an unnamed bank but definitely not the Hongkong Bank, a senior official said on Wednesday.
The official, Zhou Jinbao, said final negotiations were in progress with two or three contenders for the huge building, built in 1925 as a symbol of the financial might of the British Empire.
"I will invite you to the signing ceremony. It will be held very soon," Zhou, general manager of the Bund Buildings Transformation Corp, said in an interview. "The basic issues have now been basically agreed upon."
He declined to say which companies were in the final running but said he expected the winner to be a bank.
"It is not the Hongkong &amp; Shanghai Bank," he added.
The Hongkong &amp; Shanghai Banking Corp Ltd, a unit of HSBC Holdings Plc, had more than two years of discussions with Shanghai city officials on terms for resuming control of their former headquarters but finally announced that they had decided not to proceed with the proposal.
Zhou said the Hongkong Bank had wanted to demolish several buildings behind the main structure and erect a modern office tower.
But he said this proposal would have had an impact on wider development plans for the area which have not yet been fixed and are unlikely to be finalised for at least another year or two.
The main building has 24,000 square metres of space and Zhou said he was looking at around three U.S. dollars per square metre per day in rental. The lease can be for any period up to 30 or 40 years.
"The rental fee we are looking for is based on the fact the Bund should be the highest priced piece of land (in Shanghai). If other buildings are currently renting for two dollars a day (per square metre), then this building should be three dollars," he said.
At that price, the monthly rental fee for the building would be over $2 million per month. Renovation costs, he estimated, would cost around $15 million.
The building is steeped in history. After serving in effect as the East Asian financial headquarters of western imperialism for a quarter of century, it became after 1949 the Communist Party's Shanghai headquarters and city hall.
The city officials finally moved into a new building last year, leaving the old bank empty and echoing, waiting for a new tenant.
The main banking hall, with its magnificent marble pillars and curved glass roof, has had its banking counters removed and the murals which adorned the main domed entrance hall have been painted over.
The room just off the hall which served as the bank's general manager's office and later the office of a succession of Shanghai city Communist Party chiefs, is small and airless.
"This building has not only huge architectural value, but also great cultural and historical significance," said Zhou. "That is why we will only rent it. We will not sell it. It is a treasure."
