Chinese authorities have closed their eyes to the booming illegal trade by domestic investors in foreign currency B shares and will not interfere unless the market becomes too speculative, analysts said on Friday.
The B shares listed on China's two stock markets, in Shanghai and Shenzhen, were created to attract funds from foreign investors.
But in the past six months the vast majority of trading has been done by domestic investors who have opened trading accounts by various means in contravention of the rules.
"The authorities have just closed their eyes to the issue," said an analyst with a foreign securities firm in Shanghai. "It looks like they will just leave it alone, as long as the markets don't become too speculative."
Given the huge volatility of the B shares over the past two weeks, it would appear the threshold of the authorities on the issue is high.
Shenzhen's B shares have risen more than 50 percent since mid-November and Shanghai's B shares are up over 15 percent in the same period, but with huge falls on some days.
Brokers have attributed the rapid rises and falls largely to rumours that the Beijing authorities plan either to allow domestic investors to buy B shares or to reaffirm the ban.
"The Beijing ban is there, but Beijing knows it is unenforceable," said another brokerage analyst. "And the brokers want local people to buy B shares because turnover would be so low without them."
A broker in Shenzhen said many domestic securities firms had opened B share trading accounts in Hong Kong, while Chinese individuals encounter no problem in opening the accounts, particularly in Shenzhen, which is just across the border from the wealthy British colony.
B-share trading is supposed to be restricted to people with foreign passports or residents of Hong Kong and Taiwan, but the Shenzhen and Shanghai exchanges are interpreting the rules with great flexibility, analysts said.
"The Shanghai exchange handled it in an interesting way," said a broker in Shanghai.
"A couple of months ago they required all B-share trading account holders to re-register, but all that they required was that people present a passport or a copy of a passport that didn't even have to be theirs," he said.
Analysts have said the basic reason for the ban on domestic investors holding B shares is to prevent an outflow of foreign exchange as foreign investors sell their holdings to local people.
But the announcement on Thursday that the Chinese yuan would become fully convertible on the current account this Sunday was taken as a sign by traders that the day was approaching when the ban on B share trading by locals would be dropped.
The Shenzhen B-share index rose 5.35 percent to 142.71 points on Friday on the news, brokers said. Shanghai B shares closed up 1.14 percent to 53.421.
"It is pretty hard for the securities regulators to curb the inflow of money from mainland Chinese into the Shenzhen B market because Hong Kong dollars are so easily available here due to the proximity to Hong Kong," said one Shenzhen analyst.
"I believe more and more Chinese will put their hard currency into the market after mid-1997 when Hong Kong reverts to Chinese rule," he added.
