China is cleaning up its market for mutual funds to prepare them to become a key vehicle to channel huge bank deposits back into the economy and stabilise its volatile stock markets, analysts said on Monday.
Among the most important steps, Beijing last week lifted a three-year ban on new listings of stock investment funds and has said it will shortly promulgate a set of rules governing the management of such funds.
Three funds listed last week surged as investors sought to buy into what analysts see becoming a major focus for the market in the months ahead.
The first effort to establish investment funds in the early 1990s collapsed in disarray because of a lack of adequate regulations and supervision with many losing money.
A total of 75 funds were set up, but only a few received approval from the central bank, and only 22 have been listed on China's two stock exchanges. Investors in unlisted funds will be unable to recover their cash for years to come.
"The central government first of all wants to clean up the fund market," said Shao Jiejun, a manager at Shenyin &amp; Wanguo Securities which manages Baoding Fund, one of China's existing stock investment funds.
"The fund money is expected to gradually flow into stocks, which should benefit the market greatly," he added.
At the moment, less than 10 percent of the money in existing funds is invested in stocks, Zhou Daojiong, chairman of the China Securities Regulatory Commission (CSRC), told a recent seminar in Beijing.
"Quality of fund managers is poor," Zhou was quoted by the China Securities as saying. "There have been many cases of irregularities and some funds have been used to participate in market manipulation and insider trading."
Most of the money was invested by the fund managers in industry and real estate projects two or three years ago when the stock markets were in a deep slide.
"Time is needed for old funds to withdraw from industrial and real estate projects and to establish new funds," said Xu Zhiling, deputy general manager of the securities trading department of China Guotai Securities.
Beijing has given strong indications that it supports the establishment of new investment funds and sees them as a major means of funnelling money from bank deposits, currently at record levels of more than three trillion yuan ($361.4 billion), back into the economy.
Experts say the authorities want to gradually replace the system of bank loans which currently support enterprises with a share system in which firms obtain money through investment rather than borrowing.
China's two stock markets in Shanghai and Shenzhen also suffer from huge volatility because of an absence of large funds and institutional money providing a non-speculative base to trading, they said.
Currently, stock funds account for less than one percent of China's stock investment with the share market being dominated by retail investors, searching for quick profits instead of long-term investment, Shanghai brokers said.
In new rules to be issued shortly, there will be provisions that require stock funds to invest at least 60 percent of their cash in securities, industry sources said.
($1 = 8.3 yuan)
