China's B shares continued their sensational surge on Tuesday with Shanghai's index gaining 11.63 percent and Shenzhen 4.7 percent as foreign and Chinese investors poured funds into the markets.
Trading volume on the Shanghai B share market hit a 15-month high of 63.595 with the index ending up 6.525 points or 11.63 percent at 62.639 points.
Brokers said market sentiment had been boosted by the recent strong performance of the Shenzhen B share market on expectations that Beijing plans measures to boost B share trading.
The Shenzhen B share index rose 7.42 points, or 4.70 percent, to end at 165.10.
The Shenzhen market has risen far further and faster than Shanghai in the past two weeks, but dealers said there were signs that the action was now moving north to Shanghai.
"There's a feeling that foreign investors largely missed the boat on Shenzhen and they don't want to miss out on Shanghai as well," said an analyst with a foreign brokerage in Shanghai.
ING Barings said that as a result of the heavy volume of trading, the company had today activated both its seats on the Shanghai Stock Exchange for the first time ever.
"There were signs that overseas institutions are paying more attention to B shares," one broker said. "The short-term market trend is bright."
But a second broker said the sharp rises woiuld inevitably be followed by a tumble, possibly as early as Wednesday.
"The market will see a technical correction after the sharp rise today," he said.
Shanghai Dajiang was the star on the Shanghai market, surging $0.132 or 34.37 percent to $0.516 on volume of 1.1 million shares.
Shanghai Jintai followed on bargain-hunting, soaring $0.038 or 28.78 percent to $0.170 on volume of 712,000 shares.
A foreign broker said the money coming into the market appeared to be about half-and-half foreign and domestic Chinese, in spite of the theoretical ban on local Chinese investors buying the foreign currency B shares.
Given the obvious lack of measures by the authorities to revive the supposed ban, the markets appear to be gaining confidence that local investors will not face being forced out of the market, at least for now, analysts said.
"The bull run may extend into later this week with the inflow of fresh money continuing," one broker said.
