China has approved three foreign banks to do local currency business, the official Shanghai Star newspaper reported on Tuesday, but bankers said deals could not start until a thorny tax rate issue was solved.
The newspaper said the three banks are Citibank, Tokyo-Mitsubishi Bank and Hongkong &amp; Shanghai Banking Corporation and that they would be granted licences to handle Chinese yuan business this month.
Up to now, foreign banks with branches in China have been restricted to doing foreign currency business only, with the Chinese banks retaining a monopoly on the huge local currency (yuan) loan and deposit market.
The Star said the banks will be allowed to handle yuan deposits, loans and other business, adding that the business would be opened to more foreign banks from early next year.
Bankers have said they expect the business licences to restrict them only to taking deposits from and making loans to foreign-funded firms for the foreseeable future.
The deputy governor of the People's Bank of China, Chen Yuan, said on Tuesday that China would grant licences for foreign banks to conduct local currency renminbi (yuan) business "very soon".
"We will very soon introduce foreign banks into the renminbi business in Shanghai," he told reporters after a Hong Kong Monetary Authority conference. "We will announce that very soon. It is a matter of days not weeks," Chen said.
He declined to say how many licences would be granted.
An official with one of the three chosen banks, said they had not yet been given formal notification that their applications to do local currency business had been accepted.
"But the PBOC has let us know we have been chosen in a more informal way," he said, asking not to be identified.
The main problem is the differing rates at which the authorities tax the profits of banks in China. Foreign banks are taxed at 15 percent, Chinese commercial banks at 33 percent and the main state banks at 55 percent.
Bankers say there is still no agreement on how profits made by foreign banks doing local Chinese currency business would be taxed.
"That issue still rests with the State Council, it is beyond the control of the Shanghai city government, or even of the PBOC," said a foreign banker.
He said the authorities wanted to unify the tax rate between the various banks, but there were huge wrangles over what rate to choose.
"Until the tax rate issue is resolved, I doubt if the foreign banks will start any local currency business," said the banker. "They will want clarification beforehand."
The Star newspaper said the three banks chosen to begin local currency business all had registered branches in the Pudong Development Zone to the east of Shanghai's city centre.
Officials had long said that only banks with Pudong branches would be considered for the licences.
