China will open its domestic A share markets to overseas investors through Sino-foreign joint venture mutual funds early next year, a Hong Kong newspaper said on Tuesday, but analysts predicted a cautious approach.
Brokers and analysts in Shanghai said the long-awaited experiment in foreign investment in China's A share markets would probably involve only a handful of funds in the first few years.
The Beijing-controlled Hong Kong newspaper Wen Wei Po quoted the executive deputy governor of the People's Bank of China, Chen Yuan, as saying China will allow some foreign joint venture firms to invest in A shares from early next year.
The newspaper quoted Chen as saying regulations governing Sino-foreign investment funds would be issued soon.
"Rumours on this have been circulating in the markets since the start of this year," said one A share trader. "It is certain that the regulations are under consideration, but a timetable has yet to be confirmed."
Officials at the central bank and the China Securities Regulatory Commission, the top securities watchdog, declined to comment.
Shanghai's A share index surged 9.94 percent on Monday, partly on speculation that Beijing was considering opening the A share market. It consolidated down 1.02 percent on Tuesday on a technical correction.
Analysts said a major problem is the Chinese yuan. While convertible on the current account since December 1, it is still a long way from full convertibility, and officials have given no hint as to the timetable for making it convertible.
"Solving the convertibility issue is a major obstacle," said a broker with a Chinese brokerage.
"There are also no definite candidates for establishing the funds. In the initial stages, the impact will be more psychological than real," said the broker.
An analyst with a foreign brokerage in Shanghai said the Chinese would probably seek to establish joint ventures with U.S. firms in the initial stages to learn from the highly developed and sophisticated U.S. mutual fund industry.
Without convertibility, it is unclear how foreign money will be exchanged for yuan to invest in A shares, and how funds being retrieved by foreign investors would be shifted back into foreign currency, analysts said.
"The key issue is how much liquidity from the funds the authorities will allow to be invested in the markets," said Xu Zhiling, deputy general manager of the securities trading department of China Guotai Securities.
Traders said introduction of joint venture funds would help stabalise the highly-volatile A share markets and create a secure vehicle for long-term investment.
"Funds from developed countries are often very large, seeking long-term investment," said a broker with China Finance Trust and Investment Co. "Their entrance into the market will alleviate a trend of excessive speculation."
