China's biggest electronics investment, a $1.2 billion integrated circuit (IC) production facility in Shanghai, is looking for foreign joint venture partners, the firm's president said.
Lu Dechun, director and president of the Shanghai Hua Hong Microelectronics Co Ltd, said the firm was in discussion with a number of major IC makers to find a partner to supply IC production technical know-how in return for an equity share.
"We are discussing joint venture possibilities with a number of companies, we want to do some kind of JV," Lu said in an interview on Monday.
"But the JV partner's share won't be large. This project is too big for anyone to bear the cost," he added. He declined to name the companies involved in discussions.
China's IC production lags far behind the world standard in both quantity and quality, and the five plants now in operation can meet only 20 percent of the country's demand for ICs.
The new Shanghai IC production plan, known as Project 909, will put China closer to the cutting edge of IC development when production begins in the second quarter of 1998, Lu said.
"But we will still be behind the highest international levels," said Lu. "We will produce eight-inch wafers of 0.5 microns in thickness, but by the time production begins the world standard will probably be down to 0.3 microns."
The production factory at the core of Project 909 involves four billion yuan in investment, with 2.1 billion yuan from the central government and 1.9 billion from the Shanghai city government.
The project has the support of the highest levels of the Chinese government -- Premier Li Peng attended the opening ceremony for the project last week in the Pudong Development Zone to the east of Shanghai's city centre.
But Lu said he was treating the project very much as a commercial venture.
"From Beijing's point of view, this may be a strategic policy project, but we have to run it as a commercial proposition," he said. "IC production is too expensive, the state is not going to keep giving us money."
It will have a monthly production capacity of 20,000 wafers, each one packed with IC chips.
Lu said output would fall into three categories, each with big potential in the China market -- IC "smart" cards, ICs used in communications equipment, and micro-controllers used to control household electrical appliances.
If things go smoothly it should move into profit in 2001, three years after production starts.
"But this is a highly competitive business, I know it won't be easy to make money," Lu said.
The factory itself is being designed by a Dutch firm, Crystal Consulting Engineers B.V. based in Eindhoven, which specialises in IC plant design.
Discussions are also under way with major producers of IC production equipment around the world. Lu declined to say which companies, but said most of the equipment would probably come from the United States.
Asked if the equipment could fall within the category of technology restricted for export from the United States to China, Lu said:
"There are some pieces of equipment that would require export approval. But relations between China and the United States seem to be getting better these days."
($1 = 8.3 yuan)
