China is expected to end the year without loosening its three-year old tight credit policy as rampant local fixed asset investment continues to threaten economic over-heating, analysts said on Thursday.
Earlier this year, China seemed poised to modify the austerity measures, but a surge in fixed asset projects since July has led Beijing to change its mind, they said.
In the latest high-level clue to credit policy, Vice-Premier Zhu Rongji was quoted by the official media on Thursday as saying there was a need to strictly control new fixed asset investment projects.
"There is the need to continue to curb inflation and strictly control new industrial projects," Zhu was quoted as saying during a recent visit to the eastern coastal province of Fujian.
The People's Daily, mouthpiece of the ruling Communist Party, on Wednesday also criticised a rush by provinces to invest in high-profile industries, citing 22 provinces that had listed car production as one of their key industries.
"There is still the threat of a resurgence of inflation and of the economy over-heating with fixed asset investment climbing again since the central bank cut bank interest rates earlier this year," said a Beijing-based official with the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China (ICBC).
Growth in retail price inflation is expected to slow to six percent year on year in 1996 against 14.8 percent last year.
Official figures show that local governments around the country have allowed 700 new fixed asset investments since July.
China's State Planning Commission estimates that fixed asset investment will hit 2.3 trillion yuan ($277.1 billion) this year, about three times the level of 1992.
"The resurgence of fixed asset investment in the second half of this year seems to have made the central bank more cautious about loosening credit," a banker with the Bank of China said. "The most important signal is that the much-discussed bank reserve ratio cut now seems to be off the near-term agenda."
In mid-July, Dai Xianglong, president of the People's Bank of China, said the central bank would shortly cut bank reserve ratios by a margin possibly as large as three percent. This would release huge amounts of money into the market.
Chinese banks and other financial institutions are required to place 13 percent of their deposits with the central bank and keep another five to seven percent themselves as reserves.
Between July and October, central bank officials talked frequently about cutting the bank ratios, which were set eight years ago and have never been changed.
"But now they are focusing on the need to continue the austerity measures," said an analyst with the Communications Bank of China. "The main concern is the large amount of money in the system beyond the direct control of the central bank."
China's central bank has direct control of the four major state banks -- the ICBC, the Bank of China, the Agricultural Bank of China and the Construction Bank of China.
Credit supplied by the four banks once accounted for more than 90 percent of total loans but this proportion has now shrunk to around 70 percent and is still falling.
Analysts said the impact from a cut in bank reserve ratio could be balanced by other policy controls such as the credit quota system.
But the bulk of money liberated from other banks and financial institutions would inevitably enter the markets with the central bank being unable to directly intervene.
($1 = 8.3 yuan)
