China's financial markets have made significant steps towards maturity in 1996, with Beijing more willing than ever to allow them to gradually take on the mantle of economic control, analysts said on Friday.
But the Chinese securities, futures and money markets, less than six years old and still suffering the volatility of youth, have a long way to go to reach the level of standardisation and stability found in many other Asian countries, they said.
"In the past the central government always used the word 'experimental' when referring to the markets, but this year they instead started saying they are 'in the initial stages of development'," said a Chinese brokerage analyst.
"This shows that it is more determined than ever before to let the markets survive and develop," he said.
Beijing gave its official blessing to the stock markets in April, and since then, the exchanges in Shanghai and Shenzhen have expanded faster than ever before, adding a total of 178 companies between them so far this year.
Total market capitalisation of the two markets is now 1,271 billion yuan ($153 billion) compared with 350 billion yuan at the start of the year.
The treasury bill market also boomed in 1996 with a record issue of 195.2 billion yuan worth of debt.
An interbank market for local currency, set up in January, has become an indispensible mechanism for banks to swap short-term funds, and has started the process of making interest rates responsive to market forces.
The developments all take China significantly further along the road from the state-planned past towards the market-influenced future.
Analysts said that while the Beijing leadership remains highly cautious about relaxing its controls over the main economic levers, it understands that it must do so eventually.
"The key motive behind the new approach is to gradually relieve the central government of the heavy burden of (the) money-losing state sector," said one economist.
"Beijing has urged state enterprises to resort more to market means to develop themselves instead of relying on loans from the state banks."
But this year, the authorities have also made it very plain that they will not allow rampant irregularities in the markets.
China's futures exchanges, which have largely operated as speculative casinos for years, have been firmly brought to heel over the past year.
The "hot money" which until early this year used to shift at lightning speed from Beijing green beans to Hainan plywood and on to Tianjin red beans has been squeezed out of the futures exchanges and shifted into the share markets, analysts said.
In the past month, branches of virtually all of China's top banks, securities houses and financial institutions have also been publicly accused of running illegal securities scams of one kind or another, with fines and warnings liberally dispensed.
"Serious efforts have been made to standardise the market," said a treasury bond trader. "No one, even the influential banks and key securities houses, are exempt from punishment if they breach the rules."
Analysts said the main shortcoming at the moment is the legal framework for the markets, which consists of a series of overlapping and often contradictory regulations.
The overall Securities Law and Futures Law, which will provide the basis for the future development of the markets, has been trapped in Beijing's bureaucracy for more than three years now with no sign of emerging soon, they said. ($1= 8.3 yuan)
