China's Shanghai Pudong Development Bank will rent the former headquarters of the Hongkong &amp; Shanghai Banking Corp, the most impressive building on the city's waterfront Bund, an official said on Tuesday.
The official said a signing ceremony would be held on Thursday in the grand main hall of the building, opened in 1925 as a symbol of the financial might of the British Empire.
"The building will be leased to the Pudong Development Bank," said the official with the Shanghai city government office set up to find new tenants for the old banks and trading houses along the Bund.
The Pudong Development Bank is a state-owned Chinese bank based in the Pudong Development Zone, across the Huangpu River from the Bund. It is majority owned by the bank building's landlord -- the Shanghai city government.
An official with the Pudong bank said they had agreed to a lease of 30 years duration. But he declined to give details of the lease terms for the building, which has a total floorspace of 24,000 square metres.
The general manager of the Bund Buildings Function Transformation Office, Zhou Jinbao, said last month that he believed the property was worth at least $3 per square metre.
A real estate analyst said he felt it was unlikely a Chinese bank, particularly one closely linked to the Shanghai city government, would pay anything close to that figure.
Another businessman said he understood the new tenant would be allowed to sub-let space in the building to other companies.
The lease announcement marks the failure of the city authorities to find a foreign bank that would be willing to lease the most prestigious building in Shanghai.
The building was the main office of the Hongkong &amp; Shanghai Bank until the Communist takeover in 1949 and then served as the Shanghai headquarters of the Chinese Communist Party until last year when the city officials moved into a new building.
Since then, the building, with its huge main banking hall featuring magnificent marble pillars and curved glass roof, has been empty.
The Hongkong Bank had more than two years of discussions with Shanghai city officials on terms for resuming control of their former headquarters but finally announced that they had decided not to proceed with the proposal.
Zhou said the Hongkong Bank had wanted to demolish several buildings behind the main structure and erect a modern office tower.
But he said this proposal would have had an impact on the wider development plans for the area which have not yet been fixed and are unlikely to be finalised for at least another year or two.
