Shanghai B shares soared a stunning 12.22 percent on Tuesday as new money poured into the market from both local and foreign investors, and analysts said there was a lot more capital waiting to enter the market.
The Shanghai foreign currency B share index closed at 84.534 points, its highest level since September, 1994, with the supply of shares unable to meet the demand, traders said.
One foreign analyst said he expected the B share index to top the 100-point mark before the end of the year, with investors increasingly confident the authorities had decided to allow local Chinese investors to stay in the B share market.
"What we're seeing is a lot of stir-frying of dog stocks," said Bruce Richardson, chief Shanghai representative for HG Asia, referring to widespread buying of weaker counters.
"There's nothing in the fundamentals to justify this. But this is liquidity-driven and there's a lot more money waiting to come in," he said.
Shenzhen B shares, however, which surged a week or so earlier than Shanghai, fell back 2.15 percent on Tuesday to end at 193.87 on profit-taking after steep rises over the past few sessions, brokers said.
A fundamental factor in the Shanghai B market is a growing feeling that the merger of the foreign currency B shares and the A shares denominated in local currency on China's two stock exchanges will come sooner than expected.
"The spread between the A and B share P/Es is substantial," said a foreign analyst in Shanghai. "The market average for the Shanghai A shares is 55 and 19 for the B shares, so local investors see the opportunity for capital gains in a unification of the two."
A Chinese broker agreed.
"Every day we are seeing so much fresh capital flowing into the market because investors believe the B share prices are going to move closer to their counterparts in the A share market," he said.
The Chinese authorities have so far made no predictions on when the two types of shares might be merged, saying only that the day is a long way off.
John Crossman, general manager of Jardine Fleming in Shanghai, said both locals and foreigners wanted to get into the Shanghai B share market.
"For locals, it is an easy decision when B shares are at a 75 percent discount to A shares," he said. "Foreigners are well disposed to China in 1997 and 1998 and do not want to be net sellers of Chinese equities."
He said the current bull run could continue for another couple of months.
But other analysts said the extreme volatility of the market posed a threat, particularly for holders of many of the weaker and smaller B shares, when the correction begins.
"Locals are not so discriminatory in the shares they buy and have bought shares simply because they were cheap," said one analyst.
"But for some poor-quality shares the prices are not sustainable. As soon as the momentum peters out, there will be a lot of sifting and these shares will go down quickly," the analyst added.
