The most magnificent building of old Shanghai -- the former Hongkong &amp; Shanghai Bank headquarters on the waterfront Bund -- became a bank once again on Thursday, with a state-run Shanghai bank renting it from the city.
In a signing ceremony in the huge main banking hall of the building, first opened in 1925, the Shanghai Pudong Development Bank took out a 30-year lease on the structure.
The ceremony marked the failure of the city's search to find a foreign bank to rent or buy the structure, long the city's main landmark.
The city had tried to interest a foreign bank in the 24,000-square-metre building, and spent two years discussing terms with Hongkong Bank.
But they failed to reach agreement and Hongkong Bank, which is owned by HSBC Holdings Plc, finally announced it would not to take it back.
Bankers said the city asked for an unrealistically high price and that the building was unsuited for modern banking.
The bank, once a symbol of the financial power of the British empire, was also the Shanghai headquarters of the Chinese Communist Party from 1949 until last year, when city officials moved out, leaving it empty and echoing.
The chairman of the Pudong bank, Zhuang Xiaotan, told reporters that his bank would pay an annual rent of 145 million yuan ($17.47 million) for the building, amounting to about $2 per square metre per day.
Pudong, Shanghai's main development zone across the Huangpu River from the Bund and the bank building, is earmarked to become the new financial heart of the city.
The Pudong Development Bank is building its own multi-storey headquarters there that will be ready in about the year 2000, Zhuang said.
"We will use this building as the bank's headquarters until the new building is ready," Zhuang said.
The building and the Pudong development bank are both basically owned by the Shanghai city government, and some analysts said the lease agreement had little significance.
"It's the left hand moving money to the right hand," said one analyst with a foreign bank in Shanghai.
But Zhuang denied this was the case.
"We are an independent economic unit and this is a commercial deal," he said, adding that the bank would consider sub-letting space in the huge building.
($1=8.3 yuan)
