China's B shares fell once again on Thursday with investors running scared in the face of reports that securities authorities would restrict mainland Chinese from trading in B shares, traders said.
Shanghai's foreign-currency B share index closed down 5.127 points or 6.35 percent to 75.558 points while Shenzhen's B index fell 11.23 points, or 6.02 percent, to 175.22.
Securities authorities in Shenzhen have contacted brokerages in the city, located across the border from Hong Kong, telling them to not accept money from domestic investors for stock purchases unless they had proof the money came from abroad, traders said.
An influx of funds from local investors has been at the heart of the spectacular rise in B shares over the past month, and fears that the tap would be turned off is making investors re-assess their positions, analysts said.
Chinese authorities have in the past expressed concern at domestic investors buying B shares, which were intended for foreign investors, saying it left locals vulnerable to the inflows and outflows of foreign money.
Shanghai stocks reacted on Thursday to the Shenzhen reports, but analysts said Shanghai securities authorities had so far not issued the same warning to the city's brokerages.
"The Shenzhen crackdown has triggered fears it will spread to Shanghai," said a trader. "Sentiment has been badly hurt."
"We have not heard of any crackdown in Shanghai. There is no indication of a crackdown here," said one foreign broker.
The broker said other factors in the Shanghai B market's fall were profit-taking and the issue of new Shanghai Diesel Engine Co Ltd B shares, which started trading today at a lower price than the company's existing shares.
He said the three largest brokerages in Shenzhen were believed to have stopped opening B share accounts for Chinese nationals.
"But large punters have ways to circumvent these regulations and have capital offshore," he said, adding that many retail investors could also easily call relatives abroad or in Hong Kong to arrange transfers.
"The CSRC (China Securities Regulatory Commission) is going for one weak link in the trading arrangements... the flow of funds," said Bruce Richardson, chief representative of HG Asia in Shanghai.
The Shanghai B index has risen 80 percent over the past month on expectations that Beijing would take measures to support the market.
"Profit-taking focused on cheap shares which rose the most during the surges of recent weeks," a trader said.
Shanghai Sanmao Textile was the biggest loser, plunging $0.072 or 20.11 percent to $0.286 on volume of 643,700 shares.
Shanghai Lianhua Fibre, which had surged 200 percent in recent weeks, was the second biggest loser, shedding $0.044 or 13.75 percent to $0.276, on heavy volume of 1.4 million shares.
Shanghai Diesel Engine, which listed an additional 85 million shares on Thursday, had the highest volume in inter-institutional trading, traders said. It lost $0.036 or 6.21 percent to $0.544 on volume of 6.0 million shares.
Shanghai's A share index closed down 70.491 points or 5.42 percent to 1230.831 points on a technical correction after repeatedly hitting three-year highs over the past few sessions, traders said. The Shanghai Stock Exchange's 30-share blue-chip index lost 111.482 points or 3.64 percent to 2952.753 points.
Brokers said A share market sentiment was still good and the index would recover next week after the powerful correction.
