A sudden crackdown on China's fledging stock markets pushed most shares to limit-down levels on Monday and triggered an outcry from securities brokerages and retail investors.
The People's Daily, mouthpiece of the Communist Party, said in a commentary on Monday that the country's stock markets had overheated on widespread speculation and warned that Beijing would not step in to help if the stock markets plunged.
Virtually all shares on the Shanghai and Shenzhen stock markets fell 10 percent, the daily limit announced by the authorities last Friday afternoon to prevent sharp fluctuations.
"This is very, very disappointing and outrageous," said one local stock analyst. "With this simple decision they can wipe out nearly all the gains in the securities business in a hard year."
"I can't understand it," said a trader. "Such administrative edicts will eventually kill the markets one day."
Analysts said they were shocked by the sudden change of direction by officials in Beijing.
Since April there have been many official statements, messages and hints indicating clearly that the stock markets had the official blessing of Beijing.
China's foreign currency B share market in Shanghai soared by about 80 percent between November 11 and December 10 while the bourse in the southern boomtown of Shenzhen rose by about 100 percent before sharp falls in the final days of last week.
Shanghai's A share index had surged more than 100 percent and Shenzhen's A share index nearly 300 percent since April.
"They had been talking about encouraging stock invesment and suddenly here comes the new policy," said a retail investor. "Most of us will have our money caught in the markets. It looks like prices will plunge and no one wants to buy."
Foreign brokers and analysts also slammed the sudden official intervention, saying it went counter to the trend in China of gradually allowing market forces and controls to play a greater role.
"Foreign investors will not welcome such administrative interference in the markets," said a Shanghai-based brokerage analyst. "What is worse is that it seems from the People's Daily editorial that they wanted to force prices down."
Shanghai's domestic A share index plunged 9.92 percent to 1,047.680 points and the foreign currency B shares fell 9.6 percent to 59.929 points.
In Shenzhen, the B share index dived 10 percent to 134.43, and the A share index also 10 percent to 417.20.
Brokers and analysts said they expected another 10 percent limit-down day for the markets on Tuesday, with virtually no buyers in sight, and a great sense of unease amongst investors about how quickly the market can be turned by officials edicts.
"For Shanghai B shares, tomorrow will be another 10 percent, but on the third day it may be less," said another foreign brokerage analyst. "Buying interest is very limited."
"Panic selling occurred in many securities trading halls in major brokerages," said one trader. "But nobody wants to buy. Investors believe current prices are very high taking into account the changed market fundamentals after the crackdown."
A second trader said market confidence was destroyed. "We can see no support for the time being," he said. The B index is likely to head for a historical low at around 45 points shortly."
In Shenzhen, local brokers said most Shenzhen-listed stocks were likely to register limit-down closes over the next few sessions as investors have been intimidated by the People's Daily commentary.
"They could have adopted other measures such as an effective ban on widespread illicit trading by institutional punters to cap share prices," a Shenzhen trader complained. "Instead, this method sacrifices many innocent, small investors."
Many investors, including institutions, were sitting on heavy losses on today's fall and investor confidence was unlikely to recover over the short term, brokers said.
($1=8.3 yuan)
