China's crackdown on stock markets this week is partly fuelled by fears in Beijing that the volatility of the exchanges could lead to social instability, analysts said on Tuesday.
They said the move was also aimed at avoiding disruption caused by foreign and domestic speculators planning to pump money into the markets up to the mid-1997 handover of Hong Kong from London to Beijing and then pull it out again.
"In a transitional period when the ailing leader Deng Xiaoping is gradually moving out of polical arena, social stability is the primary concern of the leadership," said one executive with a Chinese brokerage.
"Stock boom and bust cycles do not fit in with the aim of social stability," he added.
A Shenzhen-based broker said there had been many rumours that the surges on the Shenzhen market were supported by overseas funds from Hong Kong and Macau.
"Some rumours said that foreign funds wanted to push up the Chinese markets before the (Hong Kong) takeover and depress them afterwards," the broker said.
The People's Daily newspaper, mouthpiece of the Communist Party, said in a harshly-worded commentary on Monday that China's stock markets had overheated on widespread speculation. It warned that if the markets crashed, the government would not step in to support them.
In anticipation of the response to the commentary, the stock exchanges last Friday evening introduced a 10 percent limit on movements of prices for individual shares.
On Monday and again on Tuesday, most shares on both the Shanghai and Shenzhen stock exchanges plunged to the 10 percent limit-down level.
Shanghai's domestic A share index lost 100.964 points or 9.64 percent to 946.716 points after falling 9.92 percent on Monday. The B share index shed 1.431 points or 2.39 percent to 58.498 points.
In Shenzhen, the A index plummeted 9.99 percent to 375.51 points while the B index dived 9.51 percent, to 121.64 points.
Most shares hit the daily limit-down of 10 percent shortly after the opening, as on Monday, and stayed there for the whole session, brokers said.
Since April, both domestic and foreign currency share prices on the two markets have surged on average by well over 100 percent.
"The central government has chosen the right time," said one political analyst. "There are still a few months to go before the Hong Kong takeover and stock prices had not surged so far that falls would push investors out on to the streets (to demonstrate)."
Some stock traders said that by talking down the markets, Beijing had effectively prevented heavy fresh liquidity flowing in.
"The inflow of hot money (speculative funds) has been cut off with retail investors frightened away and institutions taking heed of the warning," one trader said.
"It seems now that the markets will be stable around the date of the Hong Kong takeover," he added. "Prices are expected to move little after the impact of the crackdown is gradually digested."
