China's crackdown on the stock markets this week is partly fuelled by fears in Beijing that the incredible volatility of the exchanges could lead to social instability, analysts said on Tuesday.
They said the move was also aimed at avoiding disruption caused by foreign and domestic speculators who had planned to pump money into the markets up to the mid-1997 handover of Hong Kong to Beijing, then pull their funds out again.
"In a transitional period when the ailing leader Deng Xiaoping is gradually moving out of political arena, social stability is the primary concern of the leadership," said one executive with a Chinese brokerage.
"Stock boom and bust cycles do not fit in with the aim of social stability," he added.
A Shenzhen-based broker said there had been many rumours that the surges on the Shenzhen market were supported by overseas funds from Hong Kong and Macau.
"Some rumours said that foreign funds wanted to push up the Chinese markets before the (Hong Kong) takeover and depress them afterwards," the broker said.
The official People's Daily said in a harshly worded commentary on Monday that China's stock markets had overheated on widespread speculation. It warned that if the markets crashed, the government would not step in to support them.
In anticipation of the response to the commentary, the stock exchanges last Friday evening introduced a 10 percent limit on movements of prices for individual shares.
On Monday and again on Tuesday, most shares on the Shanghai and Shenzhen stock exchanges plunged to the 10 percent limit-down level.
Since April, both domestic and foreign currency share prices on the two markets had surged on average by well over 100 percent.
"The central government has chosen the right time," said one political analyst. "There are still a few months to go before the Hong Kong takeover and stock prices had not surged so far that falls would push investors out on to the streets (to demonstrate)."
Some stock traders said that, by talking down the markets, Beijing had effectively prevented heavy fresh liquidity to flow into the markets.
"The inflow of hot money (speculative funds) has been cut off with retail investors frightened away and institutions taking heed of the warning," one trader said.
"It seems now that the markets will be 'stable' around the date of the Hong Kong takeover," he added. "Prices are expected to move little after the impact of the crackdown is gradually digested."
On Tuesday, a spokesman of the China Securities Regulatory Commission was quoted by local media as saying that the crackdown was aimed at protecting retail investors and that Beijing would continue to develop the markets.
"Our government has always insisted on the principle of steady development of the securities markets on the basis of their standardisation," he was quoted as saying.
"We do not care what kind of development the central government chooses," said one investor. "But periodic policy changes reflected in official statements really make us frustrated."
The strong surge in prices on China's two stock exchanges since April had been largely fuelled by expressions of support for the share markets from Beijing.
