China's stock markets surged anew on Wednesday following two days of dramatic falls, as investors recovered from the shock of an official crackdown on speculation, traders said.
Shanghai's B share index closed up 9.84 percent at 64.252 points and the A index was up 7.34 percent at 1016.241.
In Shenzhen, the B share index closed limit-up 10 percent at 133.8 points while the domestic A index gained 4.37 percent to 391.92 points.
The gains followed two days of precipitous falls after an announcement from Beijing that the stock markets were overheated and that the authorities would not step in to help investors if they collapsed.
"Investors are recovering from the shock," one trader said. "Reassurances to investors from exchange officials and local media that Beijing will continue to develop the markets has helped."
The China Securities newspaper on Tuesday quoted the presidents of the Shanghai and Shenzhen exchanges as welcoming the crackdown, saying the markets needed stability to develop.
The newspaper also urged investors to be fully confident that the central government would continue to develop the stock markets on the basis of standardisation.
"Active buying emerged in the early afternoon, with an increasing number of investors reluctant to reduce their B share holdings after the nosedives of the past couple of days," a Shenzhen-based broker with Shanghai Guotai Securities said.
"Institutional buying targeted shares of firms with strong earnings records," he added.
Traders said that both domestic institutions and overseas investors built new positions on the B share market in the belief that the impact of the crackdown would be limited.
They said many investors believed B share prices were now very cheap and would rise in the short term. One analyst said Shanghai's B shares on average were priced at only one-third the level of their A-share counterparts.
Most B shares mostly ended limit-up on Wednesday.
Traders said A-share trading was dominated by speculators who wanted to take advantage of plunges in the past two days to build positions.
Some retail investors who had bought at higher levels also built positions on Wednesday to reduce the average cost of their shares, they added.
Several A shares, mostly blue-chips, closed limit-up. Market giant Shanghai Petrochemical rose 0.50 yuan to 6.50 yuan on volume of 42.5 million shares, making it the day's most active stock.
"The markets might be over-speculative on the whole, but blue chips have not been the target of excessive speculation," said one trader. "Shanghai Petrochmical, for instance, had a P/E (price-earnings) ratio of only 18 percent against an average of 40 for the market."
Traders believe the B share market is likely to continue to rise in the next few days, but that A share rises will be limited.
