The crackdown on China's young stock markets has triggered huge losses in share values and highlighted problems, particularly widespread irregularities and the lack of a regulatory structure, analysts said on Friday.
The week of losses on the exchanges in the wake of a Beijing warning on speculation was also a re-run of the age-old Chinese boom-and-bust cycle: controls are relaxed, rule-breaking surges, the screws are tightened and the machine almost breaks.
"Widespread irregularities are partly a legacy of the old planned economy," said one economist. "But given the power of administrative edicts to influence the markets, some firms have no choice but to resort to irregularities to survive."
The sudden announcement of Beijing's wrath at the unruly stock markets, expressed in a People's Daily commentary on Monday, aimed to dampen speculative trading, but ironically could have the opposite effect, some analysts said.
"Policy changes have always been a key speculative topic on China's stock markets," said one trader. "To regulate the markets with official orders like this time might temporarily depress the speculative mood, but in longer term, it will further add weight to the speculative fever on policy shifts."
Market sources said that had Beijing used market means rather than administrative edicts to check the dangerous roller-coaster trend in share trading, the response of the markets would have been much less volatile.
As it was, Shanghai's domestic A share index plunged 20.07 percent to 922.34 points at the close of Friday's trading against Friday's close last week, while the foreign currency B index was down 3.84 percent to 63.743 points.
In Shenzhen, the A share index nosedived 29.07 percent on the week to 328.96 points, while the B index lost 15.94 percent to 125.56.
"Most investors are pessimistic about the short-term trend with turnover sharply down this week against last week," said one broker. "We had nearly no new accounts opened this week."
"The inflow of fresh money into A shares has almost stopped completely," a Shenzhen-based trader said. "Many investors are in despair seeing the price of their shares diving nearly every day."
Analysts said the dramatic changes this week sparked reflections on the bust-boom cycle which has dominated China's stock markets since they were re-established in 1990.
At its height, Shanghai's A share index had surged more than 100 percent and its Shenzhen counterpart over 300 percent since April when Beijing announced that it supported stock market development.
"The markets are poorly regulated," said one stock analyst. "One of the reasons for this is the lack of a national securities law governing the stock market."
The draft Securities Law, the topic of hot debate in the corridors of power in Beijing for years, is not expected to be enacted soon, analysts say.
Irregularities, including manipulation of selected share prices, have been rife in the Chinese markets for years.
In an effort to bring the industry to heel, authorities over the past month have punished branches of nearly all major state-run banks and securities houses for involvement in shady stock dealings.
