China's futures markets, which fell deeper into the gloom of official disapproval in 1996, look set for an even tighter year in 1997 with some small exchanges likely to be swallowed by bigger ones, analysts said on Friday.
There is still no sign of the long-awaited Futures Law being unveiled, but the analysts said the securities authorities have promised some new regulations in the first half of 1997 to provide a stronger regulatory basis for futures trading.
The markets, set up in the early 1990s, quickly became casinos with huge trading on commodities with often very small physical quantities for delivery, making the use of the markets for hedging -- the original purpose -- virtually impossible, analysts said.
In the past two years, trading volumes on China's futures exchanges have plummeted in the face of a relentless campaign by the securities authorities in Beijing to squeeze speculative activity out of the markets.
"The official measures, especially the ban on many institutions from trading futures, have pushed large amounts of money out of the markets and dramatically pulled down trading volumes on most exchanges," a local futures analyst said.
The Shanghai Metal Exchange, which is the least speculative of the 14 futures exchanges left open, expects total trade volume of 230 billion yuan in 1996, down from 455.8 billion yuan in 1995 and a high of 682 billion yuan in 1994, an exchange official said.
The authorities have ruthlessly hounded the speculative "hot money" which used to chase its way round from Suzhou red beans to Zhengzhou green beans and Hainan coffee, and have largely succeeded in killing the enthusiasm of speculators for futures.
In March, the China's Securities Regulatory Commission (CSRC) banned securities brokerages, trust and investment firms and state-run enterprises from trading commodities futures, forcing many traders out of the industry, traders said.
All commodity futures exchanges have been ordered to cap daily price movements and total holdings.
In October, the CSRC also abolished limits on the total amounts of goods for physical delivery, which was used to make it possible for wealthy institutions to build up huge long positions and then short-squeeze the market.
"Beijing has stressed restrictions rather than development for the futures markets because officials are angry about the repeated violations of rules and rampant irregularities," a local trader for metal futures said.
"No new money is coming into the futures markets," he added. "There are several safer investment methods, such as stocks and treasure bonds. Why take the extra policy risk?"
"Few people will pay much more attention to China's futures markets until the long-awaited Futures Law is introduced, which will indicate that the government has accepted the industry," a second trader said.
"It will still take some time for the Futures Law to be completed," a local exchange official said. "But the CSRC has said it will announce five new rules for the industry in the first half of the next year to fill up the regulatory vacuum."
Analysts said some of China's 14 existing futures exchanges will probably be closed down, merged or taken over in 1997 as the authorities continue their efforts to clean up the industry.
It is believed the authorities want to end up with four or five big exchanges.
In October, China's securities authorities ordered the Changchun United Commodity Exchange to merge with the Beijing Commodity Exchange, which was seen as the first of an expected series of mergers of exchanges, the analysts said.
"There are too many exchanges in China with most of them trading similar contracts and trading volumes for most contracts are too thin for hedging," a Shanghai-based dealer said.
