Last week's stern crackdown on China's stock markets has increased the speculative instinct of investors to trade on rumours of policy shifts rather than on fundamentals, analysts said Monday.
The share markets started their latest bull run in April when Beijing announced it would support the markets.
Rumours and guesses about Beijing's attitude and plans have been the primary trading factor ever since, the analysts said.
While the Beijing authorities have been trying to convince investors to look more at long-term investment based on the fundamentals of the economy and of individual companies, they again chose an old-fashioned means of reining in the markets.
"The crackdown has shown again the risk of policy changes for China's stock markets," said an executive with a major Chinese securities house.
"Policy changes have been a very hot speculative topic in the past and the use of administrative orders like this to cool down the markets will make them an even hotter topic in the long run," he added.
Beijing last Monday charged that China's two stock markets in Shanghai and Shenzhen were overheated and warned that Beijing would not come to investors' rescue if the markets crashed.
"The action has cooled speculative activity for now," said an analyst with a foreign brokerage in Shanghai. "But the investment pattern has not changed. It is still political issues which drive the stock market up and down."
In the shake-out last week, investors generally took refuge in blue-chip shares and dumped the so-called "rubbish shares" that have soared in recent months on the basis of little more than an impression that Beijing wanted the markets up.
Analysts said market psychology could have been better influenced if the authorities had pulled share prices back down using market means such as the issue of more shares or the listing of some state or institutional shares.
One key problem of the Chinese stock markets is the lack of suitable supervisory mechanisms and regulations, leading to widespread irregularities such as share price manipulation and the use of credit for stock trading, the analysts said.
"With a stock market law lacking and regulations incomplete, many trading activities are in a legal no-man's land, making it difficult to check irregularities," said one analyst.
The draft Securities Law, the topic of hot debate in the corridors of power in Beijing for years, is not expected to be enacted any time soon, due partly to differences over who will have the final say on securities policy, the analysts said.
Responsibility for securities policy at present overlaps between the Securities Commission under the State Council (cabinet), the China Securities Regulatory Commission and the People's Bank of China, or central bank.
Shanghai's domestic A share index rose 17.606 points or 1.91 percent on Monday to end at 939.946 after losing about 20 percent in last week's trading. The foreign currency B share index was up 0.944 points or 1.48 percent to 64.687.
In Shenzhen, the A share index fell 6.71 points or 2.04 percent to 322.25, while the B share index soared 6.11 percent or 7.68 points to 133.24.
