Chen Yifei, China's top-selling modern artist, is back home in Shanghai, basking in the glow of his international success and planning a shift in subject matter -- this time to illustrate China's Generation X.
The artist, best known for his almost photographic paintings of Chinese beauties, opened his first-ever retrospective exhibition on Saturday in the new Shanghai Museum.
The show, running through to January 19 before going on tour to other cities, is Chen's first exhibition in China.
It brings together more than 40 works from a variety of public and private sources, including drawings from Chen's youth during the 1960s Cultural Revolution, through to his latest paintings depicting the strong faces of Tibetan peasants.
But his next artistic goal is to capture on canvas the feel of Chinese urban youth in the mid-1990s, increasingly influenced by trends and concepts from beyond the borders of China, particularly Western culture.
"I want to do something on the life of the new generation, the ones I see dancing at the Hard Rock Cafe or New York New York (a Shanghai disco)," Chen said in an interview.
"This is a new generation of China after the revolution. I look at them and I think about the value of life. They look very happy, but maybe thinking a different way," he said.
MODERN CHINA'S TOP-SELLING ARTIST
Chen holds the record for the highest price paid at auction for a modern Chinese painting -- 2.86 million yuan ($344,000) for a Tibetan-theme painting called Wind of the Mountain Village, now owned by a Chinese securities firm.
Now 50 years old, Chen left China in 1980, the first mainland Chinese artist to emigrate to the United States in modern times.
But in spirit and in terms of artistic inspiration, he never really left.
His most famous paintings so far are a series of life-like portraits of Chinese women dressed in traditional garb, while his paintings reflecting the atmosphere of old Shanghai are well-known.
He continues to produce landscapes showing the canals and villages of the east China region that is his ancestral home and looking at his Tibetan portraits, you can almost smell the yak butter.
China is also at the heart of his other artistic interest -- making movies. In recent years, he has directed several movies with mixed commercial success but he says he is determined to press on with this branch of the visual arts.
He is currently working on three film projects, the first of which will be a documentary on the Jews who lived in Shanghai in the years before the Communist take-over in 1949, most of them refugees from repression in Europe.
CHINA'S NEW GENERATION OF ARTISTS
Chen said he was impressed by the standard of younger Chinese artists, particularly in Beijing and Shanghai, but declined to name any favourites.
"Many of the new generation are very hopeful. China will become very important on the world art market, the standard is really very high," he said.
He maintains apartments in New York and Shanghai, but there's an important difference.
"In my heart, Shanghai is my home," he said. "This is where I grew up. In New York, it's just a room."
He said he was really happy to see Shanghai developing so fast and so strongly.
"Everyone is watching Shanghai. If it can continue this level of development, this place has a lot of hope."
