More foreign firms are finally beginning to realise the dream of the China market that has long tantalised traders -- selling goods to the world's largest slice of mankind and making money from it.
Many foreign companies remain stuck in China ventures that are loss-making and frustrating, but the number turning a profit or at least gaining solid market share is increasing, along with the market, according to analysts and businessmen.
In the 16 or so years since China opened its doors to the global economy, the country has become the second-biggest recipient of foreign investment funds in the world, after the United States.
Foreign brands such as Coca-Cola, Kentucky Fried Chicken and Lux soap have become household names throughout China, and the shelves of convenience stores from Harbin to Hainan are stuffed with foreign brand soaps, chocolates and cigarettes.
PERSISTENCE PAYS OFF
"Overall more and more companies are coming, which is not necessarily to say they're making money yet," said a Western diplomat in Shanghai. "But there's now a general view that there's not only great potential but also an increasingly good track record for companies that have persisted."
"You can now see that if you stick it out, you can make money and you can get good market share. Coca-Cola is now a household name thoughout China," he added.
Coca-Cola came back to China after a 30-year absence in 1979, and the company booked its first accounting profit for its China operations 11 years later, said John Farrell, head of China operations.
"You cannot afford not to be in China. It's just the reality of opening a country of this size and the size of the economy and population," Farrell said.
"But it takes a lot of patience and you need to be very diligent to build your business. It's not easy by any means."
Coca-Cola has 18 bottling plants across China, and with sales volume doubling every three years this is just the beginning.
Coca-Cola declines to say just how profitable the China market is. Like most other companies, it does not issue figures on its China operations.
MARCHING WITH THE CONSTRAINTS
"You have to march along with the constraints that you're given," Farrell said.
"The main thing for us was living up to the commitments we'd made on building plants, transferring technology and training people. The more we did that, the longer we did that, the more people would believe and trust us and allow us to expand a little bit more."
Among the sectors that have done well so far are communications equipment firms, such as Motorola and Ericsson, and low-priced consumer product makers.
"Generally speaking, the easiest place to make a profit tends to be in the consumer industry, usually fairly small-scale operations," said Anne Stevenson-Yang, director of China operations for the U.S.-China Business Council.
"That is, assuming the deal is done right," she added.
There are big variations on market access and ease of business for foreign companies depending on the sector they are trying to storm.
The restraints are few in areas such as consumer products, while in sectors such as banking, distribution and insurance, foreign firms are kept on a very tight leash.
BIGGER INVESTMENT EQUALS BIGGER RISK
Overall, companies involved in high-cost, long-term projects seem to bear a proportionately bigger risk, analysts said.
"Big heavy industry projects are a problem," said one foreign broker in Shanghai.
"Generally foreign businesses in trouble have a bad business plan, or they're doing things which China is not famous for -- like trying to build aeroplanes or something."
The automobile industry has seen its share of troubles for foreign firms who have ventured in.
Chrysler Corp had a famously difficult relationship when it set up a joint venture in Beijing in the early 1980s, and France's PSA Peugeot Citroen is looking at closing one of its two China plants.
"We're having some difficulties -- all Western carmarkers are having difficulties in China," said a Peugeot official in early December.
General Motors, which has been close to completing negotiations for a $1 billion automobile factory in Shanghai for months, is well behind schedule on its plans and could have trouble ever making a profit in China, according to some analysts.
"It's going to be very difficult for them to make money. But they're coming in because they feel they have no choice," said the Western diplomat. "It they don't do the deal, Ford will."
Hong Kong and Taiwan businessman have generally done much better in their investments than non-Chinese, said a representative for a Hong Kong trading group in Shanghai.
"But more people make money than they would admit," he added. "People find ways to shift profits to Hong Kong or from one company to another to make things look like break-even."
CHOOSING MARKET SHARE OVER PROFITS
Making money is anyway not a top priority for many companies in the China market, at least in the initial stages. Many are happy to break even or lose money for many years in order to gain market share.
The Canadian insurance company Manulife, for instance, which set up a joint venture last month, said it doesn't expect to see a profit for at least seven years.
"Many companies are ploughing everything back into expansion and advertising," said a Western diplomat. "In many cases, headquarters doesn't care if you make money, it's whether you're getting greater market share."
"If you're a global company you have to be here, and the potential risk of not being here is greater than losing your shirt for a while when you come in," said Richard Graham, representative of ING Barings in Shanghai.
Success and failure for a foreign company in China is also closely related to who they work with.
"The reasons for people failing are usually related to joint venture problems. Choosing the wrong partner is the source of a lot of difficulties," the diplomat said.
But analysts said profits and market share aside, major advances have been made by foreign firms in recent years in the areas of experience and staffing.
"There are many companies now which have a lot of experience of operations in China, their staff are more used to operating in Chinese ways, and local staff are more used to operating under international practice," said Barings' Graham.
"This should allow them to go forward more positively."
