China on Monday named the first four foreign banks, based in Shanghai, to be allowed to conduct business in the local Chinese currency, ending months of speculation.
The four banks are the Hongkong &amp; Shanghai Banking Corp, Citibank, Tokyo-Mitsubishi Bank and the Industrial Bank of Japan.
A spokesman for the Shanghai branch of the People's Bank of China, the central bank, said the foreign banks would be allowed to do Chinese currency loans, deposits and some other business.
"The scope of the business was defined in the rules issued recently," he said but declined to give further details.
A report from the official Xinhua news agency two weeks ago said the chosen foreign banks would not be allowed to have oustanding local currency loans exceeding 35 percent of their foreign currency loans.
All foreign banks in China are currently restricted to do business in foreign currency and have been eager to gain a share of the huge local market for Chinese yuan deposits and loans.
Foreign banks doing China yuan business would have to adopt the regulations that applied to Chinese financial institutions, Xinhua said.
It did not elaborate, but that appeared to mean foreign banks would have to accept the same tax rate used for Chinese banks -- one of the key obstacles to implementing the policy change.
Foreign bank profits are currently taxed at a 15 percent rate while Chinese commercial banks are taxed at 33 percent and the main state banks at 55 percent.
A foreign banker working with one of the chosen banks said formal confirmation had been received today.
"But there were no details at all, no conditions of business given," he said.
A foreign banker with one of the other banks said he had not yet received formal notification.
"There has been no news," he said. "But even after we hear, it will still be at least a month or two before business would start. My impression is it will take quite a while. There are many things to sort out."
The tax rate issue remains unclear and is still the main obstacle to foreign banks starting up local currency business, he said.
The China manager of Credit Lyonnais, Jacques Bertholier, said he hoped his bank would be included within the second batch of banks to be granted approval to do yuan business, hopefully within a couple of months.
"It is not perfectly clear what the terms of business are, but there appears to be a good scope for activity," he said.
