Britain's United Assurance Group, created by the merger of Refuge and United Friendly last October, said on Thursday 2,200 jobs would be lost as a result of integration, some 400 more than had been originally expected.
The company, Britain's fourth largest home services insurer -- selling through agents who visit customers homes, said last August that it expected around a quarter of the group's 7,100 employees would lose their jobs.
United is planning to close over half its offices in an effort to cut costs by around 37 million pounds ($60 million) a year.
Group chief executive George Mack said that the opportunities to make cost savings and achieve economies of scale were essential in enabling it to compete in its chosen businesses.
The rationalisation and integration will involve an eventual reduction in the group's regional and branch offices to 116 from 279.
United has set aside 76.3 million pounds for the expected integration costs.
The new structure would enable greater emphasis to be placed on clients' needs, the company said.
Mack declined to rule out further job losses but told Reuters that any reductions were unlikely to be material in the near term.
"We are looking to make sure we're lean and efficient in our back offices and strong and expanding on our sales force front... if anything we're looking to expand our sales force," he said.
The group has yet to get a response from the Department of Trade and Industry to its proposals that the costs for the restructuring be borne by shareholders. Under its plans shareholders would receive a greater return for taking on the additional risk.
The news of the lay-offs cames as the merged group announced pre-tax profits of 549.3 million pounds for 1996, which included 430 million pounds from the transfer of 'orphan assets' -- surplus insurance funds -- to shareholders.
United shares rose on the figures, adding 11-1/2 pence to 485-1/2.
Excluding net exceptional items of 371.3 million pounds, profits from continuing operations were up 18 percent at 193.5 million pounds.
The dividend for the year was raised 35 percent to 18 pence per share.
Run-off costs from the closure of the group's motor business to new business in 1996 had been higher than expected with the pre-tax loss of 15.5 million pounds reflecting the effect of an adverse increase in the number of claims and value of settlements.
Efforts would now be concentrated on the household busines which United said offered "great potential" to the enlarged group.
"We've had a less good year this year than last. Market conditions have been less favourable but we believe we have a strong product range and sound account and with the client base of the combined group we expect to be vigorous in expanding our portfolio," said Mack.
Provisions chargeable for the 11,000 cases of possible mis-selling of pensions by the group, remained broadly unchanged at 71 million pounds.
"We will have a clear idea of the level at which we're settling at the end of 1997 but we believe we're appropriately provided for at the moment. Until we have specific settlememnt experience there is some uncertainty in the size of that provision," Mack said.
