Britain on Friday launched a new watchdog for the country's 200,000 occupational pension schemes.
Called the Occupational Pensions Regulatory Authority (OPRA), the body was set up in the wake of the pension scandal surrounding publishing mogul the late Robert Maxwell.
The independent watchdog, which will be based in Brighton on the English south coast and starts operations on Monday, was established under the Pensions Act 1995 drawn up in the wake of the Maxwell pensions scandal of 1991.
The new act comes into force on April 6 and the reforms are designed to reinforce the most important parts of existing British pensions law.
OPRA chief executive Caroline Johnston said it would be naive to say that one could guarantee that there could not be a recurrence of the Maxwell situation when more than 400 million pounds ($655 million) went missing, but she expressed confidence that it would be "much less likely" in the future.
OPRA will ensure that occupational schemes, which control some 500 billion pounds of assets, abide by the new rules and are adequately funded to cover members' pensions.
Its remit is to see that the interests of Britain's 12 million members of company pension schemes are protected and that occupational pension schemes comply with the law.
It will have powers to investigate suspected breaches of the law and take legal, disciplinary or regulatory action against employers or trustees where breaches are found.
Under the Pensions Act legislation, it will have the power to investigate trustees, search company offices and seize documents.
Actuaries and auditors will be under a new statutory duty to report clients if they find rules being breached.
In the event of any wrongdoing, OPRA will be able to fine trustees, remove them from their posts, disqualify them and, if necessary, replace them with their own nominees.
It can also wind up schemes and apply for injunctions to prevent the misuse of pension scheme assets.
OPRA chairman John Hayes promised the body would take a pragmatic approach and did not necessarily expect schemes to be in a position to comply with every aspect of the new Pensions Act from day one.
"We will deal with cases on merit...and be sensitive but tough," Hayes said.
And while it plans to make use of publicity to encourage compliance, OPRA says it will not be heavy handed with small-mistakes that do not involve dishonesty or a deliberate ignoring of the rules.
The new regime will rely heavily on tip-offs and has set up a hotline to enable employees and pensioners to pass on information -- anonymously if they wish.
($ = 0.609 British Pounds)
