Equitas, created to run off Lloyd's of London's huge pre-1993 losses, on Monday received -- as expected -- only a qualified opinion on its first set of accounts.
The development underlined the difficulties Equitas faces in unwinding 10.4 billion pounds ($17 billion) of liabilities which had threatened to destroy the Lloyd's market.
Equitas chairman David Newbigging described its initial five months of operation as a case of "so far, so good" as the company released first details of its financial position since it was given the green light last September.
But auditors Coopers &amp; Lybrand cited 'significant uncertainties' about the accuracy of provisions relating to claims outstanding, reinsurers' share of those and reinsurance recoveries.
Claims experience was likely to differ from estimated liability, potentially to a 'material degree', it said, warning that if adjustments were necessary they could wipe out shareholders funds of 588 million pounds.
That threat was well flagged in the Lloyd's settlement offer document last year, however, and the company expressed little surprise at the position taken by the auditors.
"Obviously no company likes to see an audit qualification... There are fundamental uncertainties associated with the type of liability we've got and I think we'll have some mention of it in audit qualifications -- probably forever," said Equitas finance director Jane Barker.
However, she said the group would be looking to remove another problem highlighted by Coopers, that of data quality, as quickly as possible.
While it would continue to be a feature of Equitas' first trading period through March 1997, the objective is to remove or substantially reduce it by March 1998.
Equitas was formed to allow a line to be drawn under Lloyd's near-disastrous pre-1993 losses.
Its creation was a central plank in Lloyd's 'Reconstruction and Renewal' (R&amp;R) plan, freeing Names from their exposure to the eight billion pounds of losses accumulated between 1988 and 1992.
The payment of claims and expenses by syndicates last year had reduced Equitas' reinsurance premium to 11.2 billion pounds by the time it began operating in September, down from a figure set at 14.7 billion pounds based on year-end 1995 figures.
The company said that by September the group had assets totalling 16 billion pounds and net claims reserves of 10.5 billion pounds.
But the surplus between the Equitas premium and the value of discounted liabilities had been reduced from the projected surplus of 880 million pounds as at year-end 1995 to 588 million pounds in September.
Newbigging said Equitas had two clearly defined objectives -- to secure true finality for reinsured Names -- individuals with unlimited liability who traditionally supported Lloyd's -- and to create a sufficient surplus to enable some return of the premium to them but that neither of these targets would be easy.
However, there had been no major surprises so far, he said, and the position of the group today was "much as we anticipated at the time we became operational".
The company expects total group liabilities to halve over the next three or four years but asbestos, pollution and health claims, all long-tail and notoriously difficult to assess, make up some 40 percent of Equitas' discounted liabilities and are expected to take up to 40 years to run-off.
While any surplus over eventual liabilities, can be returned to Names, that was unlikely to occur within the next three, four or five years according to Newbigging. ($ = 0.611 British Pounds)
