The long-term prospects for Lloyd's reinsurance vehicle Equitas, an integral part of the recovery plans of the world's oldest insurance market, remain uncertain after a qualified set of first accounts.
A four-page report from auditors Coopers &amp; Lybrand spoke of "significant uncertainties" about the level of claims against Equitas, set up to run-off Lloyd's huge pre-1993 losses, warning that the company could well be pushed into insolvency.
It says much about the unusual nature of the company that management took a relatively sanguine view of the audit.
Since its creation last year, the board have been careful to stress the doubts that underlie the success or failure of the project.
It is just too early to say what the eventual liabilities of the company are and whether it is adequately funded to cover them, analysts say.
The accounts showed that in the eight months leading up to the start of operations on September 4, the surplus of assets to liabilities was reduced by 122 million pounds ($198.4 million) because of further provisions for syndicate assets transferred to Equitas.
But management has also kept its cards close to its chest, leaving industry observers none the wiser about the prospects for the group.
Around 40 percent of Equitas' 10.4 billion pounds of discounted liabilities are for asbestos, pollution and health claims.
All are notoriously difficult to assess and many years are likely to pass before the full exposure becomes clear.
The auditors have also been denied access to some information on claims which are the subject of actual or potential litigation because of the risk of breaches of legal privilege.
"It's very early days... and putting myself in the position of an auditor, I would certainly be very cautious about giving an unqualified opinion," said one industry analyst.
"On a more positive note they haven't come out with a complete condemnation and that has got to be reasonable news."
Compounding the difficulties, question marks hang over much of the data on which the assumption of liabilities have been calculated, a point not lost on Coopers.
Equitas has had, by necessity, to rely on unaudited work from Lloyd's own reserving project, involving in Coopers words "the use of many assumptions which have a significant effect on the quantification of the provisions for claims".
The company has committed itself to resolving this issue as quickly as possible and hopes to solve it by March 1998. Whether that turns up some unexpected surprises may go a long way to indicating the long term success of Equitas.
If it does come unstuck its first option is to trigger the "proportionate cover" clause which allows it to pay claims at a reduced rate.
Were it to fail completely, Names could yet find themselves asked to dip their hands back into their pockets.
In the words of Sir David Berriman, chairman of the Association of Lloyd's Members which represents over 8,000 Lloyd's Names, they "need as much reassurance as they can get and heavily qualified accounts do nothing to help".
($ = 0.614 British Pounds)
