Lloyd's of London received a much needed vote of confidence on Tuesday with news that British insurance giant Commercial Union was taking a role in the Lloyd's insurance market.
CU acquired a majority stake in managing agent Marlborough Underwriting Agency Limited, responsible for running syndicates which form the basis of Lloyd's. The move represents the first active participation by a major composite insurer in Lloyd's.
But it may also signal another nail in the coffin for Names - individuals with unlimited liability who have traditionally backed the insurance market.
The news comes just one day after a qualified set of first accounts left question-marks hanging over the long-term prospects of Equitas, the company set up last year to run-off Lloyd's near-disastrous pre-1993 liabilities.
The shape of Lloyd's has been changing rapidly since more than eight billion pounds ($13 billion) of losses between 1988 and 1992 threatened to sink the market and ushered in corporate capital with limited liability to Lloyd's three years ago.
Corporate capital now accounts for around 44 percent of the market's 10.3 billion pound capacity while the number of Names has shrunk to below 10,000 for the first time since the mid-70s.
In 1989, Names numbered over 34,000.
Since their introduction, corporate investors have been strengthening ties with agents, which manage the underwriting syndicates of both limited and unlimited Names at Lloyd's.
The developments have raised questions over Names' long-term future in Lloyd's and some forecast the share of corporate capacity to rise to two-thirds or more by the turn of the century.
There are fears that this increase could damage the entrepreneurial spirit and scope of insurance cover offered which supporters say have given it the market its pre-eminent position and ability to meet policyholders' claims.
The attraction for managing agents is the security of capital offered by corporate investors.
"A managing agent doesn't want to have capacity dropping off his syndicates. He wants long term syndicate participation," said one industry analyst.
Names only back their syndicates for one year at a time, at which point they can decide whether to renew or not.
Much simpler, say some, would be to abandon Names and annual renewal for permanent capital provided by corporate capital.
Sir David Berriman, chairman of the Association of Lloyd's Members (ALM) which represents around over 8,000 Names said today's move represented another shift in the ownership and control of Lloyd's and arguably further eroded the rights of Lloyd's traditional Names.
Angerstein investment Trust, one of the largest corporate investors in Lloyd's has repeatedly stated its intention to look for opportunities to expand its interest in managing agents.
Already this year it has completed the purchase of managing agencies Mumford and Coffey, quickly followed by the acquisition of members' agency Stace Barr Wellington.
U.S. companies have also been at the forefront of such moves with firms such as Ace Ltd, Capital Re and Chartwell Re all purchasing managing agents outright.
Others have gone for minority shareholdings
Angus Sladen, managing director of Marlborough said the company had been impressed by CU's conviction that the revitalised Lloyd's had a bright future.
He said that CU's financial strength and experience of the London and international market would enable it to "seize the opportunities available to Lloyd's" in the wake of its 'Reconstruction and Renewal' plan implemented last year.
CU is paying the Blenheim Partnership an initial 2.9 million pounds in cash for the Marlborough stake with a further payment of up to 2.9 million, half of which is dependent on capacity levels.
It said it intended to develop the business from its current capacity of around 80 million pounds, building up its own capacity on Marlborough syndicates, at the same time as encouraging the presence of existing individual Names and other capacity providers. ($ = 0.614 British Pounds)
