The prospect of a shake-up at Sedgwick Group looked possible on Wednesday after news that a U.S. fund manager known for his aggressive attitude to underperforming companies had taken a sizeable stake in the insurance broker.
Chicago-based David Herro, instrumental two years ago in ousting Maurice Saatchi as chairman of the advertising group Saatchi &amp; Saatchi, since renamed Cordiant, now owns over three percent of Sedgwick through his mutual fund, Oakmark International.
A spokeswoman for Sedgwick said it had held several meetings with Herro as part of its normal programme of contacts with institutional investors, but declined further comment.
Herro led a shareholders revolt against Saatchi in a battle over boardroom pay in 1994.
Saatchi left the firm he founded with his brother, but took some of the group's leading clients with him.
Shares in Sedgwick, which has made no secret of its  desire to take part in the quickening consolidation in the insurance broking sector, rose three pence to 127.5 pence.
The shares have rebounded from a year's low of 113 pence only last week, a gain of nearly 13 percent.
Herro's shareholding may signal renewed pressure on the company to do something following the poor performance of the shares in recent years.
They have fallen nearly 40 percent since the beginning of 1992, compared with a 71 percent advance in Britain's leading shares over the same period.
A demand for action could come in three weeks time at the group's annual meeting on April 24.
There are fears that Sedgwick may have missed the boat after a stream of mergers and takeovers among rival firms.
Just last month Marsh &amp; Mclennan announced a $1.8 billion merger with Johnson &amp; Higgins to form the world's largest broker.
The $1.2 billion merger of Aon and Alexander &amp; Alexander in the U.S. last December, followed swiftly on the heels of Aon's purchase of Bain Hogg from Inchcape. JIB Group and Lloyd Thompson merged at the end of last year to form Jardine Lloyd Thompson.
This has left Britains's two largest brokers, Sedgwick and Willis Corroon somewhat stranded and has raised the prospect of the two being pushed into each others arms as the only solution to their current difficulties.
Willis has always brushed off suggestions it may be interested in teaming up with its British rival.
But Sedgwick chairman Sax Riley, until recently group chief executive, has repeatedly refused to rule out a merger.
After the results in February which saw a five percent rise in pre-tax profits to 95.5 million pounds ($155.2 million) Riley said the group continued to look at opportunities in the sector and predicted a second round of consolidation was about to begin in the industry.
The attraction of mergers are the huge cost savings firms can strip out. Marsh &amp; Mclennan predicted annual cost savings of at least $150 million following its March deal.
However, mergers also raise potentially big  difficulties in marrying often very different corporate cultures and the risks of damage to staff morale or loss of key personnel have to be weighed carefully.
But insurance broking is suffering from overcapacity and stagnant or declining commissions. Insurance premiums, the basis for commissions, have slumped in the past decade.
There has also been a trend of companies taking on more risk themselves and paying fees for risk management advice rather than commission for broking. ($ = 0.615 British Pounds)
