Britain's largest life insurance group Prudential Corp said on Wednesday it is to increase its exposure to the top end of the personal financial services market by taking a near 30 percent stake in St James's Place Capital.
The move coincides with news that St James' is seeking to buy the 49 percent of life insurer J. Rothschild Assurance (JRA) it does not already own and comes hot on the heels of the Pru's purchase of mutual insurer Scottish Amicable two weeks ago.
It is the attraction of JRA, set up by St James's co-founder Sir Mark Weinberg in 1992, and its upmarket clientele which lies behind the Pru's interest in St James's.
JRA targets high net-worth individuals, managing some 1.7 billion pounds ($2.8 billion) for its near 200,000 policyholders.
In 1996, the company announced a 41 percent growth in new business, among the highest in the industry.
Despite assurances from the Pru that it would respect JRA's wishes to stay independent, any future takeover of it or St.James would represent a neat hat-trick for Weinberg.
In the 1960s he founded insurance firm Abbey Life, which he later sold to Lloyds Bank. He then set up Allied Dunbar, eventually selling that to B.A.T Industries.
However, the Pru has agreed not to increase its holding in St James's for at least a year, unless the company attracts a bid from a third party.
That undertaking was described as "fundamental" to the deal by Mike Wilson chief executive of JRA.
The Pru will pay around 39.6 million pounds for 30.5 million St James's shares, to add to the 10.4 million shares it already owns.
Scottish Amicable holds approximately 20 percent of JRA which after conversion into St James shares will give the Pru control of 118.8 million shares or 29.9 percent.
"Something had to happen to sort out the interest the Pru acquired through ScotAm. This looks an elegant intermediate step but may not be the final solution," said one industry analyst.
The move gave the Pru strategic options, he said and a purchase of JRA further down the line would not conflict with its existing Prudential or Scottish Amicable brands.
"The value would be in keeping it separate. It's a fairly unique organisation and the Pru's chief executive Peter Davis has said in the past that there's nothing wrong with operating separate brands."
St James said it believed the plans would enable JRA to achieve more rapid growth through improved incentives for the sales force and a simplification of the management structure.
Plans to float JRA on the stock market, possibly as early as this summer, have been shelved.
Wilson said today's proposals would result in the same benefits for shareholders but at an earlier stage than would otherwise have been possible.
JRA contributed 11 million pounds towards St James' after tax profits from continuing operations of 25.1 million pounds in the nine months to December 31, 1996, up from 5.5 million pounds for the whole of the previous year.
St James said it believed JRA, with its high quality, focused distribution and strong brand name was well placed to take advantage of current developments in the industry.
Lord Rothschild who co-founded St James's with Weinberg, sold half his family's stake for 13.8 million pounds last October following his decision to step down as joint chairman after the group's reconstruction in the summer.
St James's also owns Life Assurance Holding Corp which specialises in the acquisition and management of closed life assurance policies and Global Asset Management, a specialist fund management company. ($ = 0.615 British Pounds)
