Lloyd's of London Names -- the traditional backers of Lloyd's insurance market -- will have to dig deep in their pockets in future if as expected a working party set up to assess the market's funding recommends an increase in the minimum amounts Names provide to support their underwriting, insurance sources said.
Lloyd's, still smarting from massive claims suffered by the market between 1988 and 1992, is expected to announce fundamental changes to its capital structure in the next week, the sources said on Wednesday.
According to the sources, the report filed by the working party should be published within the next few days.
At present Names must put up between 20 and 30 percent of their underwriting capacity as deposits, compared with 50 percent for corporate investors.
Under the working party's plans Names may be required to provide at least 32.5 percent next year, and 37.5 percent in the following year, according to a report in Britain's Financial Times newspaper.
One source at Lloyds described the figures as looking "familiar in terms of earlier discusssions here".
The new system would require all investors to show evidence of assets totalling 50 percent of premiums.
The eight billion pound ($13 billion) losses between 1988 and 1992, which have prompted the latest changes and at one point threatened to sink Lloyd's, ushered in the introduction of corporate capital for the first time and a decline in the number of Names to below 10,000 for the first time since the mid-70s.
In 1989, the figure was over 34,000.
Corporate funds now account for around 44 percent of this year's 10.3 billion pound capacity and since their introduction have been strengthening ties with managing agents which run insurance syndicates.
Only last week Commercial Union became the first major composite insurer to enter Lloyd's with the purchase of Marlborough Underwriting Agency.
The developments raise questions about Names' long term future at Lloyd's and some observers expect the share of corporate capacity to rise to two-thirds or more by the turn of the century.
($ = 0.614 British Pounds)
