The numbers of Names at Lloyd's of London, already at 20-year lows, could fall even further after the insurance market said it would raise the amount of capital they must pledge to back their underwriting activities.
The move, which was announced earlier on Thursday as part of a package of measures to strengthen Lloyd's financial credibility, will fuel fears among the insurance market's traditional backers that Names are being eased out in favour of corporate investors.
But Andrew Duguid, secretary of the Lloyd's council, rejected any suggestion of a hidden agenda and said that the purpose of the proposals was to bolster the market's financial security.
"I don't think it will have a dramatic or abrupt impact on the number of Names. I wouldn't expect many to leave but some may reduce the amount they underwrite," said Duguid.
But he admitted that the balance between the two was likely to shift amid a continued growth in corporate members, who were first introduced in 1993.
There will now also be fewer differences in the way Names and corporate investors are treated.
The number of Names has dwindled since the huge losses which threatened to bankrupt the three hundred year old insurance market between 1988 and 1992.
In contrast, the amount of capital provided by corporate investors has surged to around 44 percent of total capacity.
From a peak of over 34,000 in 1989, there are now fewer than 10,000 Names, the lowest figure since the mid-70s.
Under the scheme, which will come in next year, Names will be required to put up at least 32.5 percent of their underwriting capacity as deposits at Lloyd's. This will rise to 37.5 percent the following year.
At present Names must put up between 20 and 30 percent, compared with 50 percent for corporate investors. But Names will no longer be able to use their homes to guarantee funds deposited at Lloyd's.
Lloyds also plans to introduce a new requirement for Names to show evidence of assets of at least 40 percent of premiums underwritten next year and 50 percent by 1999.
This will be made up of the funds held at Lloyd's and proof of other personal wealth.
Different categories of Names will also disappear and members will annually have to reconfirm the wealth backing their underwriting.
The minimum total of assets required is also to increase to 350,000 pounds ($568,000) by 1999, from its present level of 250,000 pounds.
The proposals, designed to strengthen the so-called "chain of security" at Lloyd's, are recognition that since its reconstruction plans implemented last year, Lloyd's is now subject to far greater scrutiny by policyholders and brokers worldwide.
The  first link in that chain is the premiums trust fund, made up of policyholders premiums, and Lloyd's is to replace its existing investment criteria with a single, more flexible regime.
The aim is to allow managing agents greater  opportunity to achieve better returns while keeping the assets safe.
Actuarial opinions on the adequacy of the reserves held will be compulsory from the 1997 year-end for all syndicates.
In addition, a consistent accounting treatment will be imposed to highlight potential reinsurance bad debts -- a central problem in the near-disastrous losses suffered between 1988 and 1992. ($ = 0.615 British Pounds)
