Members of the Norwich Union are to receive 3.1 billion pounds ($5.1 billion) worth of free shares after they overwhelmingly approved plans on Friday to float the insurance group on the London Stock Exchange in June.
The company, Britain's third largest life insurer, said that nearly 99 percent of members who voted had backed management's proposals to drop mutual status and become a public company.
The results of a postal vote announced at a sparsely attended extraordinary general meeting showed 21,000 votes against the plans dwarfed by over 1.85 million members in favour.
Less than 200 Norwich Union members turned up to the meeting held at the London Arena in the capital's Dockland, but a number who did voiced their opposition to the flotation which will see members net an average 800 pounds worth of shares.
Another one million "non-profit" policyholders of the group will receive a fixed handout of shares worth beween 330 and 400 pounds.
Norwich Union chief executive Allan Bridgewater welcomed the result. "We are delighted to have received a resounding endorsement from our members for the flotation proposal and thank them for voting in such numbers," he said.
There were few doubts about the outcome of the vote which follows a series of similar moves by British building societies in the past year.
The Halifax, Alliance and Leicester, and the Woolwich have all received unequivocal backing for plans to convert to banks which have also involved distributing hundreds of pounds worth of shares to members.
Norwich Union also plans to raise 1.75 billion pounds of fresh capital through an offer of new shares in May and Bridegewater said he hoped a considerable part of this would come from existing members increasing their shareholdings.
They will be able to purchase the shares at a discount, the size of which has yet to be announced.
The demutualisation and flotation of the company, the first by a mutually-owned British insurer, will value Norwich Union at around five billion pounds and rank it among Britain's 50 largest companies.
Norwich Union's 10,000 employees will share in the giveawy, receiving 150 shares each.
The two million with-profit members will receive a minimum of 300 shares with additional shares based on the value and duration of their policy holdings as at October 1, 1996.
But the giving up of mutual status, entailing the transfer of ownership from policyholders to shareholders is an emotive issue.
Supporters of mutuality argue that it gives members undiluted exposure to the profits of the business without the need to pay dividends to shareholders.
The attraction of demutualisation is the access to capital it gives. It was the need for capital, with the greater investment flexibility it brings, which drove Scoottish Amicable to put itself up for auction in February.
But there are questionmarks over how long Norwich Union will be able to hold onto its independence.
Australian mutual AMP which lost out in its fight for Scottish Amicable to Britain's Prudential last month, has made no secret of its desire to expand in Britain.
Interest may also come from Europe with a number of continetal insurers including Dutch insurer Aegon and Germany's Allianz looking for a foothold in Britain.
Norwich Union argues its plans will offer more scope for developing the business in the future and allow the separation of the group's life operations from the risks associated with its more volatile and cyclical general insurance business.
A court hearing formally to approve the proposals will take place on April 23.
