British insurers are jostling for position in preparation for the opening of the potentially lucrative Indian market to foreign companies for the first time in over two decades.
On Monday Prudential Corp became the latest company to team up with an Indian partner, announcing plans to explore opportunities in life insurance with Industrial Credit and Investment Corp of India.
The Indian government is expected to outline rules governing participation in the health insurance and pensions industries soon, following February's budget announcement that private and foreign investors would be allowed into the sectors through joint ventures with its two state-run monopolies.
The General Insurance Corp (GIC) and the Life Insurance Corp (LIC) have controlled the industry since life insurance was nationalised in 1956 and general insurance in 1972.
The budget has been a hostage to a political crisis and change of prime minister in recent weeks, but new Indian leader Inder Kumar Gujral has indicated he is keen to push the February budget through parliament quickly.
Participation is initially to be limited to firms with majority Indian ownership but attracted by the possibility of wider reform, British firms have been working hard to forge links with Indian companies.
Many have been visiting India since the early 1990s, well in advance of the report of the government's Malhotra committee which proposed reform.
For many, such as the Pru whose Indian operations were its largest overseas before nationalisation, it will be a return to a market with which historical ties are strong.
Others looking for a foothold in India include Commercial Union which has formed a joint venture for general insurance with the Hindustan Times, part of the KK Birla Group.
Eagle Star, part of B.A.T, has established links with the Indian Tobacco Co, mutually-owned Standard Life with Housing Development Finance Corp, General Accident with the Bombay-based Wadia group, Guardian Royal Exchange with the Peerless Group and Legal &amp; General with SK Modi Group. Royal &amp; Sun have a joint venture with DCM Shriram Consolidated.
Industry analysts expect it to take between six and eight months to pass the necessary legislation and award licenses for the health insurance sector.
Successful applicants are expected to begin operating sometime in 1998.
But how long it takes to liberalise other areas of insurance is open to question.
"I suspect the coalition government is going to hamstring decision-making. I don't see the general insurance market opening up for two or three years. As far as getting licences is concerned we're hostages to the political situation which is volatile," said one British insurance executive.
Government plans, an extension of free-market reforms begun in 1991, have run into opposition from Indian labour unions and parties across the political spectrum.
But fears of a repatriation of funds by foreign companies are unfounded according to a spokesman for one insurance company.
"Insurers try to match liabilities with the funds they have in a country," he said, adding that worries firms would compete for profitable sectors and ignore loss-makers were also misguided.
"The example of the health sector is ample proof that we're willing to enter what is generally believed to be a loss-making sector, turn it around and make it profitable."
Health insurance cover in India is limited compared to the rest of the world and penetration low.
Per capita spending on insurance premiums of around $5 is among the lowest anywhere and compares with $30 in Thailand and $407 in Taiwan according to Eagle Star figures.
But its potential is enormous. The middle class is estimated at between 250 and 300 million people and the finance ministry estimates the insurance industry is growing at around 11 percent annually. ($ = 0.612 British Pounds)
