Britain's Co-operative Wholesale Society (CWS) breathed a sigh of relief on Thursday as the ambitious takeover bid led by 31-year-old Andrew Regan crumbled in a flurry of legal writs.
But the company's satisfaction at seeing off Regan may be tempered by the realisation that its battle for independence may have only just begun.
While the chances of Regan ever succeeding in his bold attempt to buy the group and sell off its disparate parts were probably always slim, the move has alerted many in the industry to the underlying and, some say, under-utilised CWS assets.
The view among banking observers was that CWS remains in play whatever the outcome of the Regan episode.
"It's not the end of saga. It may be the end of Regan's offer but that's not the same thing. Regan's done a lot of other people's work for them," commented one banking source.
In favour of its hopes of staying independent, CWS boasts a convoluted ownership and voting structure which complicates any hostile takeover attempt.
But Regan, who had planned to mount a bid approach through a unit of his Lanica Trust Plc, has identified both a wealth of underperforming assets and possible purchasers in the event of any break-up, and put in place the financing to back it.
It was not the deal that ultimately foundered, but doubts about Regan himself that allowed CWS to claim victory in what may prove to be only round one of its fight for independence.
Last week, the group turned in a 10 million pound ($16.2 million) fall in profits for the year before tax and distribution to its members of 68.2 million pounds on flat sales of around three billion pounds.
A 21 percent rise in trading profits in its banking arm was more than offset by falls in its trading operations.
Regan planned a 1.2 billion pound offer for CWS through a company specially set up for the purpose - Galileo Group - intending to sell off CWS businesses which include supermarkets, banking, insurance as well as opticians, chemists and funeral parlours.
Allied Irish Banks confirmed it was among those interested in Co-op businesses, and supermarket chain J.Sainsbury was also reported to be among those lining up to purchase the assets.
The plans foundered amid allegations of financial irregularities regarding an earlier deal Regan had been involved in concerning a food supply agreement with the CWS and Hobson Plc, which was run by Regan at that time.
CWS has launched criminal proceedings against Regan, partner David Lyons and suspended CWS employee Allan Green relating to confidential documents allegedly stolen by Green.
It is also suing Regan's banking advisor Hambros and law firm Travers Smith Braithwaite.
According to banking sources, Regan's decision to ditch his bid may have been precipitated by the threat that his financial backers were about to pull out.
Japanese bank Nomura which was financing it was understood to be very unhappy about the allegations surrounding Regan and had written to Hambros on Wednesday demanding a full explanation of them by nine o'clock Thursday morning.
But Nomura had not been satisfied by the response it had received according to the industry sources and was reviewing its position when Regan announced he was dropping his bid.
A spokesman for Nomura declined to comment. ($ = 0.615 British Pounds)
