British tobacco-to-insurance group B.A.T Industries on Wednesday said it was confident a string of tobacco-related lawsuits in the United States would have no material impact on its bottom line.
But chairman Lord Cairns said the company must brace itself for "occasional reversals along the way, especially at the lower court level".
B.A.T's American subsidiary Brown &amp; Williamson is facing a string of lawsuits, including 24 cases brought by individual states to recover funds spent on treating patients with tobacco-related illnesses.
Speaking after the group released flat first quarter pre-tax profits, B.A.T chief executive Martin Broughton declined to comment on recent press reports that the industry may be in negotiations over a possible $300 billion settlement of the lawsuits.
Broughton also would not comment on suggestions that the tobacco industry may be able to rely on insurance cover to offset the claims.
The issue of insurance, he said, was complex both factually and legally, with many different policies containing many different exclusion clauses.
Schroders insurance analyst Paul Hodges in a recent research note argued that loosely worded general liability insurance policies could open the way for claims by the tobacco industry against their insurance companies.
On Wednesday, B.A.T reported a one million pound ($1.6 million) rise in group pre-tax profits to 591 million pounds in the first three months of the year.
But the company repeated a warning made at last week's annual shareholders meeting that if the strength of the British currency persisted it may hold back the group's full-year results.
B.A.T shares eased slightly after the broadly in-line figures, shedding 1-1/2 pence to 522-1/2 pence by early afternoon.
Total trading profit from B.A.T's financial services business rose three percent to 266 million, with the general business slightly ahead at 142 million pounds and the life companies showing a six percent rise to 124 million pounds.
In North America, insurer Farmers made an encouraging start to the year with all round business growth fuelling a six percent rise in profits to 163 million pounds. But market conditions remained difficult for B.A.T's British business where profits fell two million pounds to 77 million pounds.
While the company expects further rises in premiums in the coming year, it anticipates increases to be limited.
Asked about the recent consolidation in the industry Broughton said the company remained "alert to acquisition opportunities" but did not feel the need to do anything urgently.
Re-emphasising comments made last year, he said, the group lacked a strong brand in the independent financial advisory segment of the market and that was likely to be the focus of the group's acqusition appetite.
Total tobacco profit of 363 million pounds would have risen by eight percent but for a 22 million pound provision for the future closure of a cigarette factory in the German capital Berlin, which reduced the increase to two percent.
Total group cigarette volumes rose slightly to 167 billion pounds, with good gains in Asia Pacific, Middle East and Africa and Europe more than compensating for reduced sales in North America.
Tobacco profit from the America-Pacific region was lower at 140 million pounds in the first quarter. Reduced sales in a very competitive U.S. domestic market and the loss of contribution from the sale of brands disposed of at the end of 1996 as required by U.S. competition authorities, more than offset the benefit of last year's price increase.
B.A.T's American subsidiary Brown &amp; Williamson saw lower shipments and its market share fell to 16.3 percent from 17.5 percent, mainly due to the sale of the brands. ($ = 0.614 British Pounds)
