Lloyd's of London on Thursday dismissed concerns about its exposure to possible U.S. tobacco-related insurance claims.
A spokesman for the insurance market said that the possibility of large tobacco liability claims against the industry was not regarded as a significant issue for Lloyd's.
There had been no substantial volume of tobacco manufacturers' coverage underwritten directly with the Lloyd's market, he said, and any claims applying to years prior to 1993 would be covered by the Equitas reinsurance vehicle.
Equitas was set up under last year's Lloyd's rescue plans to run-off the market's billions of pounds of pre-1993 losses.
Tobacco was one of the potential health hazards scrutinised in the course of the "exhaustive" reserving work for Equitas, and no significant exposures were identified, said Lloyd's.
"Health-related claims against tobacco companies have been covered by robustly worded policy exclusions for many years," added the spokesman.
The question of whether such clauses are sufficient to exclude cover for tobacco-related claims are at the centre of a piece of research recently produced by Schroders insurance analyst Paul Hodges.
Hodges suggests that loosely worded general liability policies may open the way for tobacco-related claims against insurers should the tide turn in legal cases currently being fought out in U.S. courts.
The tobacco industry is facing thousands of individual claims from sufferers of smoking-related diseases and on Wednesday Ohio became the twenty-fifth U.S. state to say it would be seeking to recover public money spent on treating illnesses caused by smoking.
Last month, the Louisiana attorney-general named more than one hundred insurers as co-defendants in its action against tobacco companies.
But the tobbaco industry has never had damages upheld at the end of the appeal process, in more than 500 cases filed since 1954.
For their part, tobacco manufacturers are keeping silent on the extent of any insurance cover they may have.
Asked about it at B.A.T Industries' first quarter results on Wednesday, chief executive Martin Broughton was tight lipped, saying only that the issue was complex and "certain to require litigation" to clarify it.
No tobacco company has tried to claim against its insurer in the U.S. because, argues Hodges, of the costs involved, fear of losing control of its defence, and scrutiny of possibly embarrassing internal documents under U.S. discovery laws.
But the bottom line according to one insurance market observer is that no-one knows whether insurers will be dragged into the courts or whether the exclusion clauses will stand up. -- London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
