The latest rise in Britain's lending rates is unlikely to put the brakes on the recovery in house prices, market experts said on Tuesday.
While the impact of today's 1/4 point rate rise is widely expected to be limited, the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors warned that further rises in rates could risk widening the country's north-south divide in the housing market.
The warning came after some of Britain's largest home loan providers raised mortgage rates in response to the newly elected Labour Government's decision to increase base rates from six to 6-1/4 percent.
Britain's biggest mortgage provider, the Halifax Building Society and Abbey National Plc acted quickly to raise their lending rates after news of the government's move. The Halifax raised its rate to 7.6 from 7.25 percent, while Abbey raised its rates by 31 basis points.
The two, who together have more than four million borrowers, are likely to be followed by other mortgage providers.
Despite worries about future rises, today's increase is unlikely to halt a recovery in Britain's housing market, which has seen prices rise throughout the country and boom in London and the South East region, after falling sharply during the early 1990s.
According to figures from NatWest Group, house prices fell on average by 1.5 percent annually between 1990 and 1995.
"Today's interest rate rise will do little to harm the housing market recovery, but any further rises, if coupled with the abolition of mortgage interest tax relief (MIRAS), would leave thousands of homeowners worse off and widen the north/south divide," said the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors.
MIRAS has been widely tipped as a possible casualty in the Labour government's plans to implement its spending plans while keeping its income tax pledges.
It is a proportionately bigger benefit for homeowners in the north of Britain, where the average mortgage of 40,000 pounds ($64,700) is less than half that in the south east.
Today's interest rate rise is not expected to be the last and the Institution of Chartered Surveyors estimate that a one percentage point rise in rates, together with the loss of MIRAS, could increase the cost of the average mortgage by around 60 pounds a month by the end of the year.
Others, however, were less gloomy about the future prospects for house prices.
A spokesman for the National Association of Estate Agents said they were disappointed by the rise in rates but said they did not expect it to have a major impact on buyer confidence.
NatWest Group are forecasting a strong rise in the market in 1997, peaking at over 10 percent nationally and at more than 15 to 20 percent in London and the South East.
Despite predicting year-end interest rates of seven percent, Natwest estimate house prices will rise by eight percent in 1997 and average 4.5 percent annually between 1997 and 2001.
Strong growth in personal incomes reflecting rising employment, higher earnings and lower taxes, together with maturing TESSA saving plans and windfalls estimated at over 20 billion pounds from building society and insurance company mergers and stock market flotations, are behind NatWest's positive outlook.
It also does not expect mortgage rates to rise much above current low levels, "ensuring that houses remain very affordable by historical norms".
That view was echoed by Halifax chief executive Mike Blackburn.
"Mortgage rates are still at a relatively low level and it is clear that the housing market is continuing to recover. We do not believe this increase will halt the recovery," said Blackburn.
After the latest change, interest rates are still around half the peak experienced in 1990. ($ = 0.618 British Pounds)
