British insurance group Norwich Union said on Tuesday it will float on the London Stock Exchange on June 16.
The company, Britain's third largest life insurer, expects to allocate around 1.3 billion free shares to 2.9 million qualifying members as part of its plan to drop its mutual status and become a public limited company.
Norwich also hopes to raise 1.75 billion pounds ($2.8 billion) of fresh capital through an offer of new shares. Existing members will be able to buy the shares at a discount, the size of which will be announced on May 21.
Last month Norwich members voted overwhelmingly in favour of its conversion proposals, the first by a mutually owned British insurer.
The flotation will value it at around five billion pounds, ranking it among the country's 50 largest companies.
Norwich members wishing to participate in the public offering will have to apply for a minimum of 400 pounds worth of shares. There will be an upper ceiling on applications by members of 100,000 pounds.
Non-members, who will not receive any discounts, will have to apply for at least 1,000 pounds worth of shares and those registering with the Norwich will be sent a mini-prospectus from May 21.
Around 1.5 billion pounds of the money raised will go into the existing with-profits fund to enable the company to keep up benefits to policyholders.
The balance, less the 120 million pound cost of the flotation, will be used for corporate purposes.
Around 1.8 million "with profit" members will net an average of 800 pounds worth of free shares under the plans. They will receive a minimum of 300 shares with additional shares based on the value and duration of their policies as at October 1, 1996.
Another one million "non-profit" policyholders will receive a fixed allocation of 150 shares worth between 330 and 400 pounds.
Norwich sent British and Irish members a booklet today, providing information on how to buy shares at a discount.
Application forms and a mini-prospectus will be sent to members along with details of the size of the discount on May 21.
A June 10 deadline has been set for the return of the forms and payment ahead of the start of trading in the shares on June 16.
Norwich said it was setting up a single company personal equity plan (PEP) for which there will be no initial charge. For plans opened within 42 days of flotation, the first year's management fee will be waived. ($ = 0.618 British Pounds)
