Royal Bank of Scotland's telephone-based insurance subsidiary Direct Line said on Wednesday that it believed the motor insurance cycle had bottomed and forecast profits for the year would top last year's levels.
But the company, Britain's largest motor insurer, also struck a cautionary note, warning that competition remained tough and it could not be taken for granted that "irrationality" would not return to the motor insurance market.
The comments came as Direct Line reported a small rise in pre-tax profits to eight million pounds ($13.1 million) for the six months to the end of March from five million pounds twelve months ago.
"We see signs in the market place that prices are beginning to recover and expect our results this year to be somewhat higher than last year," said Royal Bank's chief executive George Mathewson.
"Some of the people writing about doomsday scenarios seem to slightly off the mark," he added.
The rise in profits expected for the current year would result partly from the firming in motor rates and partly from an improvement in claims experience, he said.
However, the full effects of the recovery in the motor market are not expected to be fully reflected until next year.
Last year saw an 86 million pound slide in Direct Line profits to 26.5 million pounds following intense competition in the motor market where rates have been falling since 1993.
Continued price competition and rising personal injury claims costs again dominated results with lower average motor premium rates and volumes reducing profits by some 15 million pounds.
The performance was much in line with expectations, said analysts, and was unlikely to prompt any significant changes in forecasts.
"They're not saying rates are rising materially, just that they're edging ahead," commented one.
The company said that expense and accident repair claims costs remained firmly under control over the period and that it had held operating costs for each in-force policy steady at 45 pounds.
With a cost structure roughly half that of rivals there were limited savings in that area to be made, Mathewson said.
Claims, however, offer some potential with the development of Direct Line's own repair centres, he added.
The company has four sites now operational and plans to open a further four.
"These are really very different to any concept that we have seen before in the industry. We expect to reduce repair claims and offer a substantially improved service to the customer," said Mathewson.
Direct Line chief executive Ian Chippendale described the first half performance as a "good result in exceptional market conditions".
"Our business is in excellent shape with a prudent balance achieved between market share, costs and profitability. The company is exceptionally well placed to move forward as rationality returns to the motor market place," said Chippendale.
Direct Line said it had allowed its motor market share to fall to 2.1 million from 2.2 million while pricing remained "irrational" but renewal rates were a healthy 82 percent.
Total gross premium income for the period rose four million pounds to 308 million pounds while total assets rose 16 percent to 1.27 billion pounds.
Claims costs were 12 million pounds lower than the same period last year which was hit by exceptionally severe winter weather.
The company continued to expand its home insurance account, increasing policies to 819,000 by March.
Direct Line Financial Services had also seen good progress with the mortgage book now standing at 870 million pounds and savings book 370 million pounds. ($ = 0.611 British Pounds)
