British insurance broker and risk management consultant Willis Corroon Group Plc on Wednesday blamed sterling's strength and continued competition for a five percent fall in profits over the first three months of the year.
Pre-tax profits first quarter fell to 45.7 million pounds ($74.7 million) in the first quarter from 48.1 million pounds last year.
But after adjusting for the adverse impact of foreign exchange movements of 4.4 million pounds, underlying profits were up four percent.
Brokerage and fee revenue from continuing operations fell by seven percent to 184.2 million pounds.
Willis executive chairman John Reeve said the results were in line with expectations at the start of the year and reflected "intensifying competition" between underwriters which had led to further falls in premium rates.
Shares in the company dipped slightly after the figures which analysts said broadly met forecasts, losing four pence to 144 pence by late morning.
"There's the effect of falling premium rates, the effect of the currency and an element of shifting profits from the first quarter to later in the year," said one analyst.
"They are looking to enhance shareholder value over time but it's not going to happen overnight. There isn't any great underlying revenue growth. Costs are likely to be held down and brokerage to remain flat so it's not very exciting basically."
The strengthening of sterling against the dollar and other currencies had a disproportionate effect on the results due to the weighting of foreign currency revenues in the company's global speciality businesses in the early part of the year.
As previously forecast, changes in the pattern of the business were likely to reduce the proportion of annual profit arising in the first quarter, Reeve said.
"Against this background, our underlying performance is satisfactory, with encouraging growth in a number of key business segments," he said.
Industry consolidation had led to significant shifts in the competitive environment and the resulting large combinations created both challenges and opportunities, said Reeve.
A series of mergers among rivals has left Willis and British rival Sedgwick Group trailing far behind industry giants Aon Corp and Marsh &amp; McLennan Cos Inc of the U.S.
Chicago-based Aon has bought out three of its rivals in the past six months and said only last week that it was still interested in doing more deals.
Marsh &amp; McLennan's $1.8 billion acquisition of privately-owned Johnson &amp; Higgins in March has further increased the pressure on the two British brokers and raised the prospect of the two being pushed into each others arms as the only solution to their current difficulties.
However, Willis has always brushed off suggestions it may be interested in teaming up with its British rival.
Reeve said the company intended to continue to pursue its change programme, designed to alter fundamentally the way it does business and "seize new development opportunities within the altered market-place."
($ = 0.611 British Pounds)
