Royal Bank of Scotland's telephone-based insurance subsidiary Direct Line on Wednesday said it had seen signs that the bottom of the motor insurance cycle had passed and that it expected results this year to improve on 1996.
But the company, Britain's largest motor insurer, struck a note of caution, warning that it could not be taken for granted that "irrationality" would not return to the motor insurance market.
The comments came as Direct Line reported a small rise in pre-tax profits for the six months to the end of March to eight million pounds ($13.1 million) from five million pounds in 1996.
"We see signs in the market place that prices are beginning to recover and we expect our results this year to be better than last year," said Royal Bank's chief executive George Mathewson.
"Some of the people writing about doomsday scenarios seem to slightly off the mark," he said.
Last year saw an 86 million pound slide in Direct Line profits to 26.5 million pounds as a result of the intense competition in the motor insurance market where rates have been falling since 1993.
Continued price competition in motor and rising personal injury claims costs again dominated the results with lower average motor premium rates and volumes reducing profits by 15 million pounds.
However, the company said that expense and accident repair claims costs remained firmly under control and it had held operating cost per in-force policy steady at 45 pounds.
With a cost structure roughly half that of rivals there were limited cost savings that could be made, Mathewson said.
Claims, however, offered some potential and one opportunity in that area was development of Direct Line's own repair centres.
The company has four sites now operational and has purchased a further three.
"These are really very different to any concept that we have seen before in the industry. We expect to reduce repair claims and offer a substantially improved service to the customer," said Mathewson.
Claims costs were 12 million pounds lower than the same period last year which was hit by exceptionally severe winter weather.
Direct Line chief executive Ian Chippendale described the performance as a "good result in exceptional market conditions".
"Our business is in excellent shape with a prudent balance achieved between market share, costs and profitability. The company is exceptionally well placed to move forward as rationality returns to the motor market place," said Chippendale.
Direct Line said it had allowed its motor market share to fall to 2.1 million from 2.2 million while pricing remained "irrational".
Total gross premium income for the period rose four million pounds to 308 million pounds while total assets rose 16 percent to 1.27 billion pounds.
The company continued to expand its home insurance account, increasing policies to 819,000 by March.
Direct Line Financial Services had also seen good progress across its whole product range with the mortgage book now standing at 870 million pounds and savings book 370 million pounds. ($ = 0.611 British Pounds)
