Lloyd's of London, beset by huge losses until 1993, is focused on its future and the needs of its clients after one of the most dramatic periods in its 300-year history, chairman Sir David Rowland said.
In the insurance market's 1996 report and accounts published on Wednesday, Rowland said that Lloyd's had to continue to offer first-rate security to keep the confidence of its policyholders.
It also had to "strive to make its internal arrangements as transparent and equitable as possible".
"The forces that shape the future must be the needs of our clients and our determination to preserve the unique marketplace, with its powerful attractions to clients and brokers alike, that is both our inheritance and the source of our future prosperity," said Rowland.
The successful implementation of last year's reconstruction package and the settling of the "great majority of the litigation that beset us" had removed huge uncertainties, said Rowland.
Huge losses run up between 1988 and 1993 threatened the future of the insurance market before the 'Reconstruction &amp; Renewal' (R&amp;R) plan was put in place last year.
Since the completion of R&amp;R, the priority has shifted to debt collection and so far more than 1,300 writs have been issued against "Names" -- investors whose capital underpins the market.
Lloyd's members who did not accept the R&amp;R settlement or did so without paying in full, still owe Lloyd's over 600 million pounds ($970 million).
Whilst a significant amount of this is uncollectable Lloyd's was "absolutely determined to recover as much debt as we can, in the shortest possible time", said Ron Sandler the market's chief executive.
The post-reconstruction solvency return showed a margin of total assets over total liabilities of 4.7 billion pounds, exceeding the statutory margin of solvency by more than five times.
The Corporation of Lloyd's contributed 486.4 million pounds to the settlement. The Corporation's balance sheet shows a deficiency of 239 million pounds, reflecting a 292 liability connected with the settlement, offset by 53 million pounds of net assets.
The creation of five new business units at the beginning of this year was designed to make the Corporation of Lloyd's more transparent and accountable to those whom it served and to promote more commercial pricing mechanisms and management disciplines, said Sandler.
Progress in the implementation of the reorganisation had been encouraging and business plans for each were to be published shortly. ($ = 0.618 British Pounds)
