The Lloyd's insurance market's "annual venture" - where syndicates are formed anew every year - has been criticised as costly and damaging to competitiveness in a report by accountants KPMG published on Friday.
The report will form part of the submission by the Lloyd's Corporate Capital Association (LCCA) to the Lloyd's Syndicate Structure working party which is weighing the pros and cons of different capital structures for syndicates.
But it will also be seen as another attack on the position of unlimited liability Names, the traditional backers of the 300 year-old insurance market, who fear they are being eased out of the market in favour of corporate investors.
Only last month, Lloyd's put forward proposals to raise the amount of capital Names must pledge to back their underwriting activities.
That move is likely to reduce further the number of Names at Lloyd's, already at 20-year lows.
Corporate capital, first introduced in 1994, now accounts for 44 percent of the market's total capacity.
KPMG puts the direct costs of the annual venture at 117 million pounds ($190 million) in an average year, more than 10 percent of the underwriting profits of the insurance market in the 1994 year of account.
In addition, it argues that the indirect costs involved clearly inhibit Lloyd's syndicates in critical areas such as long-term planning, capital investment and reinsurance purchasing.
This, it says, will increasingly restrict Lloyd's competitiveness internationally in areas such as the provision of multi-year insurance products and compliance with overseas regulatory standards.
KPMG suggests that 58 million pounds could be saved by the abolition of members' agents who represent Names' interests. The Corporation of Lloyd's annual costs could be reduced by around 41 million pounds, it says.
Antony Haynes, chairman of the LCCA which represents corporate investors, said the KPMG report "speaks for itself."
"Both traditional names and corporate capital providers are seeing a substantial part of their underwriting returns being eroded by a market practice of the annual venture...," Haynes said.
But Robert Miller, spokesman for the Association of Lloyd's Members (ALM) which represents around 8,000 Names, rejected the report's conclusions.
"We are doubtful about the apportionment of the costs. Secondly what it has completely failed to take into account is that the Names significantly pay for the costs of the annual venture," said Miller.
Names were willing to pay for the annual venture, he argued, because it allowed them to receive an income stream unrelated to other investments such as shares and to diversify their portfolios.
The Lloyd's syndicate structure working party is due to publish its conclusions soon.
It is one of a number set up to examine the key strategic issues facing Lloyd's which will report by the end of May.
The findings will be pulled together to develop the blueprint for the market's new business plan, expected to be published in June or July.
Supporters of the present system argue that a shift to corporate capital will damage the flexibility and entrepreneurial spirit of the Lloyd's market.
ALM has commissioned its own independent study on the way capital is provided to Lloyd's syndicates which will provide the basis of its submission to the working party. ($ = 0.615 British Pounds)
