British regulators on Tuesday moved to speed up compensation payments to people who were vitims of pension misselling by banks and insurance companies in the late 1980s and early 1990s.
The Personal Investment Authority (PIA) which regulates the pension industry announced it had set firms new targets for completing the review of outstanding cases.
In an effort to reduce delays, regulators also laid out criteria for the use of legally binding "guarantees" to reassure victims they would not lose out.
Individual timetables have been set for the 24 companies with the greatest number of cases while all other regulated firms will be required to have completed 90 percent of priority cases by the end of December 1997 and the remainder by December 1998.
The 24 companies, which are responsible for three quarters of cases, include household names such as Prudential Corp, Legal &amp; General, Norwich Union, Allied Dunbar and Royal Sun Alliance.
They have been given individual deadlines for settling priority cases ranging from July to the end of the year.
Those have been set by agreement between the regulator and the firms.
The remainder of all cases must be completed before the end of 1998 and the PIA warned that failure to meet the timetables would lead to disciplinary action.
The guarantee system outlined today is intended to enable firms to settle cases more quickly.
Under it, someone missold a personal pension would be guaranteed that if it were not possible for them to rejoin their old company scheme, the insurer would provide benefits mirroring those they would have received had they remained in their occupational schemes.
As many as 1-1/2 million people may have been wrongly advised by the financial services industry to take out personal pensions instead of staying in occupational schemes.
A review was launched in 1994 but figures released today show that so far only 50,300 assessments have been completed out of the 570,000 cases for review.
Around 102 million pounds ($165.4 million) has been paid out in 12,650 cases where redress has been accepted, just over 8,000 pounds apiece.
Sir Andrew Large, chairman of Britain's top regulatory body the Securities and Investments Board (SIB), said it was time for the excuses to stop.
"Firms can be under no illusion that results are expected from them, and expected soon," said Large.
"Last November I said that the front line regulators would agree targets with their firms. I welcome the fact that these targets have now been set."
The move to crack down on perceived foot-dragging by firms guilty of the misselling comes just 24 hours before the 20 worst offenders have been summoned to a meeting at the Treasury to discuss the slow progress made in settling outstanding cases.
Treasury economic secretary Helen Liddell is reported to want to hammer out the quickest solution possible.
The SIB originally promised to resolve the issue by the end of last year but difficulties in gathering and processing information have proved particularly time consuming.
The Association of British Insurers (ABI) welcomed today's move and said at most senior levels in the industry there was an absolute determination to complete the review as quickly as possible.
The review is estimated to be costing the industry some 250 million pounds in administration alone.
The cost of redress has already been reserved by pension providers, the ABI said, but the industry recognised that the current uncertainty needed to be resolved quickly so individuals knew exactly where they stood. ($ = 0.616 British Pounds)
