The strength of the British pound hit results at Sedgwick Group Plc on Tuesday as the international insurance broker reported a fall in profits in the first three months of the year.
Over the quarter, pre-tax profits slipped by 1.8 million pounds ($2.9 million) to 43.5 million pounds, with the strong pound knocking 3.4 million pounds off the figures.
The company also announced it was seeking a listing for its shares on the New York Stock Exchange with trading expected to begin in June.
Chairman Sax Riley said that with 40 percent of the group's business emanating from North America, the listing represented a logical step.
Sedgwick's results followed a similar performance by British rival Willis Corroon last week which blamed the pound's strength for a five percent fall in first quarter profits.
Excluding the impact of the currency Sedgwick pre-tax profits were up four percent on last year.
The results were described as "encouraging" by Riley given the adverse effect of exchange rates and an increasingly weak insurance rating environment.
Shares in Sedgwick firmed slightly on the results which broadly matched analyst expectations.
By early afternoon, the shares were trading at 130-1/2 pence, an increase of two pence on the day.
"There were no real surprises. Sterling was factored in and there were no shocks there at all," commented one analyst.
Merger talk continued to be in the background, he added, but there was no indication that there was any substance to continued speculation about a possible tie-up with British rival Willis.
A series of mergers among rival firms has left both Sedgwick and willis trailing far behind industry giants Aon Corp and Marsh &amp; McLennan of the U.S.
That has prompted speculation the two British companies may pursue a similar strategy in the drive for cost savings.
"The brokers are doing all the right things except making money. Noble Lowndes is doing well - that is one part of the business geared to grow. It is nice to see they're pushing hard at fee-based services. The rest of the business still looks pretty dull," said the analyst.
There is an acceptance that rates would not recover in the short-term and that Sedgwick was not budgeting on assumptions of a hardening in rates, he said.
Sedgwick's operational strategy has been focused on lessening the group's dependence on the underwriting cycle by increasing fee-earning consultancy business.
It has also concentrated on broadening its business base and keeping a tight control on costs
The company was looking to extend worldwide consultancy and outsourcing activities, said Riley, and would continue to look for new initiatives aimed at additional profit improvement and cost containment.
"We are confident that this strategy will enable us to make the most of our global network and brand, and to increase shareholder value," he added.
The planned joint venture with Nikols, Italy's largest broker and the combination of the two companies' businesses in southern Europe and Latin America created opportunities for significant profit, he said.
The plans are part of Sedgwick's strategy of strengthening its global operations and it was exploring further opportunities to develop its presence in continental Europe, it said. ($ = 0.616 British Pounds)
