A sharp fall in weather-related losses lifted British insurer General Accident Plc to a record first quarter on Tuesday.
But a disappointing shortfall in the Scottish-based group's net asset value (NAV) saw the shares slip despite the strong operating performance.
Operating profits for the first three months of the year more than doubled to 114 million pounds ($184.8 million) from 55 million pounds last year.
"They are terrific operating figures but the NAV was a long way short of what the market was expecting," said Credit Lyonnais insurance analyst David Hudson.
The disappointing NAV reflected the company's policy of switching out of equities and into bonds. That reduced NAV growth because of the absence of unrealised gains but increased operating profits because the higher yield comes through in investment income.
The company's NAV of 723 pence per share was some 30 pence below market expectations, said Hudson, and the shares slipped five pence to 958 pence by late morning.
"It's a question of trying to weigh up the fact that profit expectations will be raised but NAV expectations have been disappointed," said Hudson.
The strong operating performance, if repeated across the industry as a whole would raise the prospect of a prolonged downturn in the insurance cycle, with rates remaining under pressure.
General Accident described trading as "competitive" over the quarter and while it had implemented premium increases in personal and commercial motor classes, elsewhere rates were static.
The focus going forward was on maintaining the improvement in its underwriting performance, chief executive Bob Scott told Reuters.
"We've seen growth in original currencies of about four percent in the quarter and we've got to keep that pushing ahead," said Scott.
Worldwide underwriting results improved by 50 million pounds over the period while weather costs fell by 30 million pounds - four million pounds in the UK and 20 million pounds in the U.S.
The company maintained underwriting profitability in the UK while underlying trends in the U.S. and Canada improved.
In Britain, the first of a series of rating increases in personal motor planned for 1997 of 3.2 percent was implemented on April 1. Further rises are being considered.
Commercial rates were increased by eight percent.
"All the evidence is that private motor rates are moving up. The Automobile Association (AA) survey indicates they're definitely moving after a three or four year period when they've been in decline. Commercial motor is following a similar pattern," Scott said.
"There are some signs on content that rate increases may be being thought about but generally the weather has been good and the homeowners account hasn't suffered unduly."
But General Accident had seen a 50 percent increase in subsidence claims to two million pounds, although it was too early to say whether it was going to be as bad as it was in 1991, he said.
After absorbing the integration costs of Provident Mutual in 1996, life profits were up 45 percent to 32 million pounds.
Sales of life and pension products were up 9.5 percent overall with the profitability of new business continuing to grow.
New UK single premium business grew by 18 percent to 253 million pounds.
"We're concentrating on writing profitable new business in life. Margins are under pressure in every area of the insurance business, life insurance as well, but we've got a good franchise ...we can grow strongly organically we believe," said Scott.
Investment earnings in the quarter fell to 133 from 135 million pounds. ($ = 0.616 British Pounds)
