British composite insurer Commercial Union Plc on Wednesday reported a strong rise in first quarter profits, helped by a sharp fall in U.S. weather claims.
Pre-tax operating profits rose to 102 million pounds ($166.4 million), up from 83 million last year.
The results were in line with expectations but the shares lost ground after a recent good run.
Forecasts were likely to be left largely unchanged, analysts said, and by mid-afternoon Commercial Union shares had slipped 13-1/2 pence to 736p.
The strength of the pound held back headline figures and, excluding the impact of sterling, profits advanced 46 percent. On the same basis profits and new business sales in the group's life business rose 25 percent.
General insurance profits increased to 67 million pounds, up three million pounds over 1996 despite a reduction in profits in Britain due to increased competition.
The company is set to unveil details of its strategy for the UK general insurance business next month.
A fall in weather losses helped U.S. results while France and Australia also saw profit increases.
Weather claims in the U.S. fell 23 million pounds over the period to six million pounds after the milder winter.
In Britain, weather costs were broadly flat.
But a dry start to the year and increased turnover in the housing market combined to push up subsidence costs.
Claims notifications were up 11 percent while costs increased to 11 million pounds from seven million pounds.
Echoing comments made by General Accident which reported on Tuesday, Commercial Union said British general insurance rates remained competitive though there was evidence of firming in certain classes of business, particularly motor.
U.S. general insurance was also competitive and average rate increases there had broadly matched inflation.
France was seeing rises in certain classes but areas such as motor cover were becoming more difficult, the company said.
Life profits over the quarter increased to 62 million pounds from 58 million pounds last year, with strong performances from the UK, the Netherlands and France.
Excluding the impact of exchange rates, new life, pensions and investment sales rose by 25 percent.
With the acquisition of 73 percent of French life assurer Societe d'Epargne Viagere (SEV) in April, life operations now account for around 50 percent of total group premium income.
The growth of the life business, part of a long-standing strategy, is set to continue for the foreseeable future.
The company hopes to take advantage of future changes in welfare provision in Britain and continental Europe.
Demographic changes putting pressure on spending on state pensions, sickness and accident benefits is expected to provide a growing number of opportunities for private providers in years to come.
Growth is likely to be organic but the company remains open-minded about acquisitions.
"If a suitable opportunity arose we would certainly consider it... but we're not actively seeking acquisitions," said finance director Peter Foster.
Sales at the company's French life operations were expected to remain dull for the rest of this year and possibly early into 1998 as the reorganisation of the sales force continued.
First quarter new sales figure in France, where new single premium business fell 16 percent, disappointed many.
The reorganisation, a rise in interest rates and strong 1996 first quarter comparisons were among the factors blamed for the shortfall.
Commercial union continues to eye further opportunities in eastern Europe after the success of its Polish operations and will start writing business in the Czech Republic later this year. ($ = 0.613 British Pounds)
