British composite insurer Commercial Union Plc posted a strong rise in first quarter profits on Wednesday, helped by a sharp fall in U.S. weather claims.
Chief executive John Carter described the company's prospects as "excellent" but the shares trimmed 10-1/2 pence to 739 pence after the figures, which were in the middle of analysts' forecast range.
Pre-tax operating profits rose to 102 million pounds ($166.4 million), up from 83 million pounds last year.
Excluding the negative impact of sterling, profits were up 46 percent. On the same basis profits and new business sales at the group's worldwide life business rose 25 percent.
Net assets per ordinary share were up 23 pence over the quarter to 568 pence.
Echoing comments made by General Accident which reported on Tuesday, Commercial Union said the rating environment remained competitive in UK general insurance though there was evidence of firming in certain classes of business.
A fall in weather losses helped U.S. results and France and Australia also saw increases in profits.
Weather claims in the U.S. fell 23 million pounds over the period to 6 million pounds as a result of the milder winter.
Finance director Peter Foster dismissed recent concerns about exposure to possible U.S. tobacco-related insurance claims.
"Commercial Union has very limited exposure to tobacco. We believe our policies have clear exclusion clauses and our exposure is not significant," Foster told Reuters.
In the UK, weather costs were broadly flat.
But the incidence of subsidence, a result of the dry start to the year, rose over the quarter. Claims were up 11 percent while the cost increased to 11 million pounds from seven million pounds in the first quarter last year.
General insurance profits rose to 67 million pounds, up three million pounds over 1996 but continuing competition in the UK reduced general insurance profits there.
"The UK rating environment remains competitive though there is evidence of rates trying to move upwards - particularly in motor classes," Foster said.
"Other rates are relatively stable on the personal lines side. On commercial lines the market remains competitive but the rate of reduction being seen has actually declined."
In the U.S. general insurance also remained competitive with overall average rate increases broadly in line with inflation.
France was seeing rises in certain classes but areas such as motor cover were becoming more difficult, said Foster.
Asked about disappointing first quarter new sales in France where new single premium business fell 16 percent, Foster said he was confident about the quality of the business and the prospects for the future.
French first quarter 1996 figures had been very strong and a rise in interest rates and reorganisation of the sales force had not helped comparisons, he said.
With the acquisition of 73 percent of SEV, a French life assurer in April, life operations now account for around 50 percent of total group premium income.
This is likely to continue to rise in the future, said Foster.
"Life business tends to grow at a faster rate than general and we expect that to continue in the future. A lot of the growth will be organic. We can achieve a pretty high level of organic growth but if a suitable opportunity arose we would certainly consider it," he said.
Life profits over the quarter increased to 62 million pounds from 58 million pounds last year, with strong performances from the UK, the Netherlands and France.
The company had an open mind about a life acquisition, said Foster, but it was not actively seeking them.
($ = 0.613 British Pounds)
