The Association of British Insurers (ABI) on Thursday cautioned the new Labour government against reducing tax credits on dividends or lowering incentives to pension provision in its first budget.
It also called on Labour to use the budget, expected in June, to encourage long-term savings and warned it against changes in the tax system which would undermine consumer confidence.
Reducing the level of tax credits on dividends would hit Personal Equity Plans (PEPs) and charities as well as pension business, said the ABI.
It would also lead to an increased imbalance between the tax treatment of interest and dividends, it said.
Advance corporation tax (ACT) is payable by British tax resident companies on dividends but can be offset against their mainstream corporation tax liability.
Currently, institutions such as pension funds pay no tax and are able to generate extra income by claiming back the ACT paid by companies which distribute dividends net of basic tax.
Because the Labour party has ruled out changes to income tax, it is widely believed to be considering reducing the credit for corporation tax paid to non-taxpaying recipients of dividends, including pension funds, to help meet spending plans.
The Association's director general Mark Boleat said its budget representations aimed to help the government's commitment to encourage savings and develop the partnership between public and private provision.
"Adequate pension provision and savings are essential for everyone and it is vital that the tax system should be targeted at encouraging this and without undue complexity," said Boleat.
According to the ABI, more people could be encouraged to start or increase levels of pension savings through simplifying the pension contribution rules and introducing greater flexibility for pension schemes to cover long-term care and other forms of provision.
It also advised the introduction of savings accounts with tax treatment along PEP lines and extending the qualifying status for life insurance policies.
Restricting tax relief on pension contributions to the basic rate of income tax would make pension savings less attractive and could lead to a transfer of funds into more tax favoured arrangements such as PEPs, it said.
Similarly, removing tax relief on private medical insurance for the over 60s would substantially reduce take-up of insurance by older individuials and increase pressure on National Health spending.
The ABI also urged the government not to raise the  current rate of insurance premium tax, saying it would represent a threat to prudent protection.
It said if individuals bore risks themselves rather than insure they could be unable to meet the resultant financial liabilities and called for the eventual abolition of it.
Most non-life premiums are taxed at a rate of four percent with some classes of business such as travel insurance anbd extended warranties facing rates of 17-1/2 percent
"It is a regressive tax in its effect and hits hardest those in tne poorer sectors of the community who can least afford an unexpected loss," said Boleat.
-- Simon Cowell, London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
