Lloyd's of London confirmed on Friday it is to abandon 300 years of self-regulation and recommend supervision be handed over to an external authority.
The insurance market's ruling body, the Council of Lloyd's, has endorsed the findings of a working party set up in October 1996 to review the existing regulatory system.
The proposals include bringing Lloyd's more into line with other regulated markets and narrowing the gap in treatment between it and insurance companies.
The Council would retain day-to-day responsibility for regulation but be subject to external oversight by the Securities and Investments Board (SIB) and the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI).
Lloyd's is to ask the government to amend both the Insurance Companies Acts and the Financial Services Act to bring in the additional external accountability.
It has yet to discuss the proposals with the Labour government which is expected to carry out a thorough review of all financial services regulation in coming months. That review is likely to include Lloyd's.
The government has previously indicated that it favours centralising financial regulation into one body rather than the current division of responsibility between Self-Regulatory Organisations supervised by the SIB.
Today's proposals would effectively make the Council something akin to an SRO and so could be overtaken by events if the government goes ahead with the shake-up of regulation.
The changes themselves, if approved, could take up to two years to implement.
In the meantime the report suggests Lloyd's mirror best practice elsewhere in the financial sector with the assistance of a representative from the SIB.
A spokesman said the SIB would give careful consideration to the proposals but that the legislation needed to implement them was a matter for the government.
The report says powers enabling the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry to assume direct responsibility for supervising Lloyd's members if they fail solvency tests should be widened to bring them more into line with those relating to insurance companies.
This would include allowing the DTI to sequester the assets and freeze the bank accounts of Lloyd's members if they were to default.
External regulators would set out the regulatory principles, approve the market's rules and review and monitor the Council's performance.
Lloyd's said such a move would reinforce confidence that the interests of policyholders and members are sufficiently safeguarded and that the Council is objectively discharging its responsibility to ensure a properly regulated and solvent market.
Sir Alan Hardcastle, chairman of Lloyd's regulatory Board who headed up the review, said it was in the collective interest that the market was "solvent, fair, stable and clean".
Other recommendations backed by the Council include cutting the size of the present Regulatory Board from 18 to 12 with one third drawn from the market, one third from external members of the Council and one third independent members.
Regulatory complexity is also to be addressed together with a review of Lloyd's rule book of bylaws and regulations.
A greater proportion of regulatory costs would in future be recovered from firms rather than wholly from members' subscriptions as at present.
The 14-member working group was set up last year in the wake of the 'Reconstruction and Renewal' (R&amp;R) rescue package which saved the market from collapse threatened by huge losses run up between 1988 and 1992.
The panel included representatives from within Lloyd's and the wider financial services industry.
