British composite insurer Royal &amp; Sun Alliance Group Plc on Tuesday gave the green light to a planned share buyback as the company reported a sharp increase in profits for the first quarter of 1997.
But in the absence of any major positive surprises, shares gave only a muted reaction to the news, slipping back 7-1/2 pence to 482 pence pence by late morning.
Pre-tax operating profits for the first three months of the year rose 24 percent to 195 million pounds ($320.6 million), helped by a fall in weather related costs in the United States.
Royal Sun said it remained on target to achieve at least the 175 million pounds of cost savings identified at the time of last year's merger and with the results now out of the way the buyback of five percent of the shares approved at the annual meeting would go ahead.
"We're now in a position that brokers can start to move into the market to do the buyback. How long it will take is just a matter of timing and it's something we're discussing closely with our brokers," chief executive Richard Gamble told Reuters.
While a 34 million pound fall in weather-related costs boosted U.S. general business profits to 51 million pounds, a near two thirds rise in UK subsidence took the shine off the British results.
The 10 million pound rise in subsidence more than accounted for the five million pound drop in British profits to 50 million pounds.
"Subsidence is a worry. The good news is the recent rain but it has been one of driest winters on record following on from other dry periods," said Gamble.
"We do anticipate subsidence is going to be with us for some time to come but that is being built into the cost of household insurance."
Analysts said views on the stock largely depended on assessments of the pace of progress in integrating operations.
Repeating a "hold" recommendation on the stock, Tim Young at brokerage SocGen warned it may drag out longer than some expect.
"It is a huge task integrating the two groups and that makes us cautious for the short term," Young said. "I find it difficult to see how it can operate as a truly integrated unit before 1999."
At Lehman Brothers, analyst Rob Procter said good news on the integration progress should emerge through the next 12 months.
"They are likely to beat their cost savings targets and the share buyback could be the first of many," Procter said.
Following last year's six billion pound merger of Royal Insurance with Sun Alliance Insurance, Gamble said the reduction in staff numbers would accelerate in 1997.
By the end of March some 1,500 people had left the company and together with properties vacated, annualised savings are so far running at 44 million pounds.
The merger had not affected the group's ability to pick up new business nor retention levels which, said Gamble, were holding up to expected levels.
Echoing remarks made by competitors last week, the company said the rating environment had become more realistic with a succesful four percent increase in motor market rates implemented last autumn.
Royal Sun is to continue to keep an eye on opportunities for small acquisitions such as the recent 46 million pound purchase of Prudential's Italian life assurance and pensions business, but is not actively pursuing larger acquisitions.
"We're not aggressively in the market. Money is not burning a hole in our pocket - that's the indication given by the share
