Around three million members of British insurer Norwich Union will be able to buy shares at a 10 percent discount in a planned offering ahead of the company's flotation on June 16.
Norwich is to raise 1.75 billion pounds ($2.9 billion) of fresh capital in the offering and up to a further 670 million pounds to fund cash payments to its half million overseas members.
The company has also increased its estimate of the price of the new shares.
They are now expected to be sold at between 240 pence and 290 pence. The group's brokers Kleinwort Benson had previously given a guide price of between 220 pence and 265 pence.
Members of the insurance group, Britain's third largest with seven million customers worldwide, are to be offered extra shares at a fixed discount of 25 pence.
A member is someone who holds a Norwich life insurance, pension or annuity policy. Holders of non-life policies such as house contents or car insurance do not qualify.
Members will also receive around 1.3 billion free shares worth around 3.4 billion pounds under flotation plans already announced.
Under the new forecasts, the value of the 300 shares minimum allocation to with-profits policyholders will increase by at least 60 pounds and could be worth as much as 870 pounds.
Members will receive additional shares based on the value and length of time they have held their policies.
The company said it expected to be valued at between 4.9 and 5.6 billion pounds on flotation which would put it in the FTSE 100 index of Britain's largest quoted companies.
Norwich chairman George Paul said the company was keen to encourage members to continue to participate in the future of the group.
"I hope that they will take advantage of this opportunity to buy further shares at a 25p discount," said Paul.
Alan Bridgewater, Norwich's chief executive, said they were expecting widespread interest in the offer.
Norwich members wishing to take part in the public offering will have to apply for a minimum of 400 pounds worth of shares. There will be an upper ceiling on applications by members of 100,000 pounds.
At least 800 million pounds worth of shares have been reserved to meet applications from members. This may be increased by clawing back 400 million pounds worth of shares from the public offering in the event of strong demand.
The final members' offer price will be announced on June 15 and will be used to determine how many shares succesful applicants receive.
Mini-prospectus and application forms are to be sent to members today. The deadline for receipt of applications is June 10.
Around 1.5 billion pounds of the money raised will go into the policyholders' life fund while the excess, less the 120 million pound cost of flotation, will be used for corporate purposes. ($ = 0.604 British Pounds)
