The Treasury may well take over regulation of insurance companies from the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) under the Labour government's plans for sweeping reform of Britain's financial services, industry observers said on Thursday.
Spokesmen for both the DTI and Treasury said that no decision had yet been made on the changes, but that this could form part of the new government's shake-up of financial regulation.
Such a move would bring insurance into line with the rest of the financial services sector.
"If the Treasury is responsible for all other aspects of regulation of insurance it would be only sensible," said one industry executive.
The steady erosion of the boundaries between insurance and banking industries has also increased the pressure to bring the supervisory regimes closer together.
Many banks are beginning to offer insurance products while insurers are increasingly providing services such as savings facilities, personal loans and mortgages.
At present the DTI regulates insurance companies,  ensuring they are financially sound and meet solvency requirements. Regulation of products is separate.
General insurance is regulated by an industry code of practice and life products by the Financial Services Act, which is to be replaced by fresh legislation arising out of framework reforms announced by Chancellor Gordon Brown on Tuesday.
While British insurers may have given a cautious welcome to the announcement of the regulatory shake-up, they have, as yet, little information on how far the government will go. But many in the industry admit the logic of doing away with the current multi-tiered system.
The creation of a single statutory body, a Securities and Invesments Board (SIB) with enhanced powers and extended remit, could reduce costs, improve transparency and clarify uncertainties which have developed under the present set-up where insurers may be regulated by several different watchdogs.
It could also give a much needed boost to public confidence, after a series of scandals typified by the pension mis-selling of the late 1980s and early 1990s which have undermined public perceptions of the sector.
Britain's financial services market operates on the principle of "buyer beware", with regulators focusing on the solvency of practitioners.
The market is left to regulate product suitability, with consumers having to shop around for a good deal. As the pensions mis-selling scandal showed, this was a less than perfect system from the customer's point of view.
Both the SIB and the Personal Investments Authority (PIA), the self regulatory organisation currently responsible for the industry, have come in for severe criticism of their handling of the scandal.
Hundreds of thousands of people were wrongly advised to take out personal pensions rather than stay in company or other occupational schemes and many have yet to receive compensation.
Underlining the problems that have beset the sector in recent years a leaked draft report from the SIB on Wednesday accused Britain's largest life insurer, Prudential Corp of mis-selling financial products and wrongly advising clients to put money into one of its most popular products, The Prudential Savings Account.
While insurers acknowledge the benefits of dealing with a single regulator, there are fears that the government may introduce tighter controls on products and selling.
Only last week, Britain's National Consumer Council called for urgent and wholesale reform of insurance law to "drag it into the 21st century and redress the balance for consumers".
A Treasury spokesman said it was too early to say whether detailed legislation on the selling of products would be included in the reform.
With the private sector likely to play a larger part in the provision of pensions in the future, tighter regulation would seem to fit in with the government's long term plans, said industry observers.
