Nearly eight million members of Britain's largest mortgage lender, the Halifax Building Society, are in-line to pocket hundreds of pounds more than originally expected when it floats on the London stock market on June 2.
If betting at London financial bookmakers is near the mark, the basic handout of 200 shares will be worth around 1,400 pounds ($2,270), way ahead of predictions when the flotation was first announced.
The average payout would be 2,170 pounds, nearly 900 pounds more than the Halifax's initial forecasts in January.
Bookmakers, City Index and IG Index, are quoting the Halifax closing price on its first day of trading at 695-705 pence.
That would value the group which converts to a bank on flotation at over 17-1/2 billion pounds and rank it among Britain's largest dozen companies.
In January, the Halifax estimated the shares would be priced at between 390 and 450 pence and in April put a 415 pence 'floor' value on the shares sold on flotation through its free dealing service.
"We opened the Halifax at 660 to 670 pence yesterday. It was very difficult to find people to sell it at that price and it looks as though it's going to be dragged a bit higher," said IG Index's Peter Hetherington.
Around two-thirds of Halifax members will receive the basic 200 shares windfall. Members will receive additional shares based on the level of savings.
The maximum allocation for those who can claim for a mortgage account and savings account will now be worth just under 10,000 pounds.
Forecasts of the size of handout have risen steadily since the original announcement of the flotation.
A downward revision in the number of qualifying members gave an initial boost to the figure and the performance of financial stocks since has helped drag the price higher.
The success of the Alliance and Leicester flotation in April has added to expectations of strong demand for Halifax shares. Alliance shares rose sharply on the first days of trading as institutional investors scrambled for stock.
That experience and the subsequent strength of the shares is likely to tempt many Halifax members to hold onto their handouts, at least initially.
"On fundamentals it's unlikely it's worth seven pounds but built into that price is a big chunk of scarcity premium," said one banking analyst.
"The concern is that there isn't going to be a lot of supply around and whatever there is will come out largely in one auction. That's where institutions are going to get their stock ... and they'll only get one shot at it." ($ = 0.615 British Pounds)
