Britain's Scottish Amicable on Thursday defended the multi-million pound fees paid to banking advisers as part of its 2.87 billion pound ($4.7 billion) takeover by life insurer Prudential Corp.
The comments came as ScotAm, based in the Scottish city of Stirling, published details of the proposed transfer of business to the Pru and benefits to policyholders as part of the acquistion plans.
A policyholder circular outlining the proposals will be mailed to members over the next week. The plans have to be approved by voting members at a special general meeting to be held on June 27.
Gavin Stewart, general manger of the Scottish-based mutual insurer, admitted the cost of the deal, estimated at 34 million pounds, was a lot of money but said it was important to get things right.
It was always expensive to demutualise, he said, and had to be seen in the context of similar moves by building socities.
Norwich Union recently put the costs of its  plans to drop mutual status and its five billion pound flotation next month at 120 million pounds.
The amounts paid by ScotAm covered not only advisory fees for bankers SBC Warburg but all the logistical costs of posting circulars to more than a million policyholders and holding special meetings, said Stewart.
Around 1.1 million members stand to receive cash payments averaging 550 pounds and a total package of 1,450 pounds once additional bonuses to policies are taken into account.
All qualifying with-profits members will receive a fixed cash payment of 250 pounds with a further variable amount based on the size and duration of the policy.
Assuming ScotAm gets the necessary approval of three-quarters of members' who vote and the go-ahead from the Court of Session in Edinburgh, it hopes to pay cash and bonuses shortly after the completion of the deal on September 30.
"We're convinced this is an excellent deal for policyholders. 600 million pounds is being paid out in cash and one billion pounds as added value in bonuses on to policies - about half now and half added to policies when they pay out," said Stewart.
"We think policyholders when they see the deal will recognise the value and will be pleased to vote for it."
In all, the cash and bonus payments amount to 1.6 billion pounds. In addition, the Pru is to inject 1.3 billion pounds of financial support to enable increased investment freedom for the ScotAm with profits fund, enhancing the potential for better returns.
ScotAm policies are to be transferred to the Pru and held in a dedicated fund, serviced from ScotAm's headquarters.
The Pru beat off rival offers from Abbey National and Australian Mutual Provident (AMP) to win control of ScotAm and reinforce its position as Britain's number one fund manager.
The poilcyholders circular will lay out details of the rejected Abbey and AMP bids.
ScotAm chairman Sandy Stewart said the bidding process had produced a high value for the business and a full distribution of the assets in the with-profits fund to with-profits policyholders.
"The members of ScotAm now have the opportunity to vote for a package which will provide additional financial security and the prospect of improved future investment returns leading to enhanced payouts," said chairman Stewart. ($ = 0.611 British Pounds)
