Insurance broker C.E. Heath announced late on Friday that senior management were in advanced talks about a possible buyout of the company for just under 100 million pounds ($163.7 million).
That would value the shares at 143 pence each, a premium of 63 percent over the day's opening price, Heath said shortly after the close of the stock market.
Management involved in the possible offer include group chief executive John Mackenzie Green, according to a source close to the talks.
Meanwhile, non-executive directors are considering the approach.
Over three million shares changed hands in the course of the day ahead of the late afternoon announcement. It was the unusually high stock activity which forced the company to release the news early, the source said.
The success of a bid hinges on fund management group PDFM, which owns 22 percent of Heath, Hambros, which holds 13 percent, Fidelity, with a 13 percent stake and Equitable Life with just under five percent.
In the past Heath was an underwriter, broker and computer services business.
The strategy over the last five years has been to sell underwriting businesses and demerge computer services leaving a pure, medium sized broker in the hope of making the company more attractive to investors.
Over the last year, however, the whole sector has been depressed with market conditions difficult as intense competition squeezed margins.
"Management launched a major reorganisation but the argument is that its very difficult to carry out a restructuring in the full glare of the market place," said the source.
Analysts said that a bid from another broker was a possibility but the difficulty was getting the right people to stay with the company.
"The main problem is that the company is the people...There would be other brokers who would be interested if they could get the right people to stay on board," said one.
"It's a tricky question -- do shareholders say you can't buy the company but allow them to continue to manage it?" ($ = 0.610 British Pounds)
