Lloyd's of London on Friday posted profits of over one billion pounds ($1.6 billion) for the second year running -- but warned that profits would fall for at least the next two years.
The insurance market, which last year only just succeeded in pushing through a rescue package after the billions of pounds of losses run up between 1988 and 1992, also said its future focus would be on customers.
"For too long, Lloyd's has been obsessed with its capital base. We need to get back to basics," said Chief executive Ron Sandler.
That meant providing customers with the best service and developing international trading opportunities, he said.
Lloyd's results are reported three years in arrears and for 1994, profits once again topped the billion pound mark at 1.01 billion pounds.
That fell just short of 1993's record level of 1.08 billion pounds and was in line with forecasts.
Corporate members, who were introduced to the market in 1994 following the near-disastrous losses which threatened to sink Lloyd's, will share in today's profits for the first time.
Corporate capital now provides some 44 percent of the market's capacity, a figure that is forecast to increase further in the future.
Sandler described the 1994 results as "extremely satisfactory" but said that there was no sign of an end to the downward trend in premium rates.
That decline, a product of competition in insurance markets worldwide, is expected to have a significant impact on profits in the next few years.
An aggregate of individual syndicate forecasts suggests profits will fall to around 900 million pounds in 1995 and 600 million in 1996.
The 1995 figure is ahead of projections made this time last year despite the adverse movement in currencies but the slide in rates is expected to take its toll in subsequent years.
Lloyd's chairman Sir David Rowland admitted 1997 results would be under pressure from the decline and said he hoped brokers would "sit on their hands when offered business at crazy rates".
The 1994 figures were a result of generally good market conditions and the exercise of much sharpened skills in pricing and the setting of terms by Lloyd's underwriters, he said.
They were also helped because of fewer catastrophes, he added, though currency effects reduced profits by around 100 million pounds.
Lloyd's returned to profit 12 months ago following five years of record losses totalling more than eight billion pounds.
Those losses were reinsured into a separate company, Equitas, a central plank in Lloyd's "reconstruction and renewal" plan which ensured the 300-year old insurance market's survival.
The reinsurance of 1992 and prior liabilities had transformed Lloyd's position, Sandler said, and clients could be confident that Lloyd's security ranked alongside the best in the world.
Final proposals for further strengthening the market's financial security which will include increasing the amount of capital that Names -- the traditional backers of the market -- have to put up to back their underwriting, are expected to be published next week.
Lloyd's is continuing its efforts to recover around 600 million pounds of debts owed by Names who have refused to meet their losses.
Rowland said it was impossible to give an estimate of how much Lloyd's thought it could collect, but said it would be a substantial sum of money.
Litigation in the U.S. and Britain was unlikely to prove problematic and the amount recovered would depend ultimately on the assets of the Names involved, he added. ($ = 0.610 British Pounds)
