Lanica Trust Limited, the investment vehicle run by 31 year old Andrew Regan confirmed on Monday it had lost over 600,000 pounds ($981,000) in its failed attempt to win control of the Co-operative Wholesale Society (CWS).
And the company said its shares, suspended in February after news of its interest in the Co-op leaked to the press, would not be relisted until legal proceedings pending against Regan and business partner David Lyons had been resolved.
Lanica shares were suspended on February 10 at 19-1/2 pounds after soaring from just 137 pence at the end of October.
A spokeswoman for the London Stock Exchange said that there were a number of "unresolved issues" surrounding the company.
Lanica's ambitious plans to bid 1.2 billion pounds for the Co-op crumbled in April amid a flurry of legal writs following allegations of the theft of confidential Co-op documents and financial irregularities in an earlier Regan deal.
The circumstances surrounding the planned Co-op takeover won it an unprecedented "unreserved" public apology and substantial cash settlement from Regan's merchant bank Hambros.
A preliminary hearing of the private prosecution for theft and handling stolen property brought by the Co-op against Regan was last week adjourned until June 18.
The Serious Fraud Office is currently investigating a transaction between the Co-op and Hobson Group, then headed by Regan, back in January 1995.
Lanica said that it had made a loss of 381,045 pounds last year, compared with a 578,456 profit a year earlier.
The loss included the write-off of Lanica' entire 600,000 pound investment in Galileo Group, the company specially set up to make the Co-op bid.
Regan intended to break-up the Co-op, selling off constituent parts of the group whose interests range from supermarkets, banking and insurance to opticians, chemists and funeral parlours.
Following the failure of the bid, Galileo was put into liquidation. The liquidators, Ernst &amp; Young, have not ruled out legal action against Regan, Lanica or its advisers Hambros.
In a statement accompanying the results, Regan again expressed his disappointment that Galileo had been unable to put its proposals to Co-op members.
"We believed very strongly that these were in the best interests of Lanica Trust's shareholders, but equally importantly, to the owners of CWS. However, it was not to be," said Regan.
Lanica would continue to examine investment opportunities which over time would "provide our shareholders with substantial potential for capital growth", he added. ($ = 0.611 British Pounds)
