Lloyd's of London announced on Tuesday it is to give Names more time to meet planned increases in the capital they must put up to support their underwriting activities.
Lloyd's has also dropped proposals to prevent Names - the traditional backers of the insurance market - using their own homes as collateral for underwriting.
The planned capital increases are part of a package of measures designed to strengthen the financial security that underpins Lloyd's and to provide a level playing field between Names and corporate members.
The longer transition period for the changes announced today may go some way to meeting the concerns of Names' representatives who had called for more time to be given to meet the new capital requirements.
Names fear they are gradually being forced out of the market in favour of corporate capital first introduced in 1994, a charge repeatedly denied by the Lloyd's hierachy.
Names are to be given three years before they have to meet the new requirements of showing evidence of assets amounting to 50 percent of the premiums they underwrite.
In a Lloyd's working party report last month a two-year transition period was proposed but, after consultations, that has been extended from 1999 to the year 2000.
A phased increase in Names' minimum level of means to 350,000 pounds ($571,000) from the current level of 250,000 pounds has also been increased from two to five years and will come into force in 2002.
This 350,000 pounds will be made up of funds held at Lloyd's and evidence of "other personal wealth" (OPW).
Proposals to double the OPW requirements for 2000 and beyond have been dropped in favour of a slightly higher level of funds which must be held at Lloyd's.
At present Names must put up between 20 and 30 percent of the total business they back compared with 50 percent for corporate members.
By 2000, Names will have to hold 40 percent of premium capacity at Lloyd's with OPW making up a further 10 percent, bringing them into line with corporate members.
The use of "principal private residences" (PPRs) - Names' own homes - as collateral for members' underwriting are to be allowed to continue but only for those in existence at the end of 1994.
No new PPR backed guarantees may be introduced in the future nor existing one increased.
Risk assessment is to be extended to all members from  1998 onward and may require higher capital levels for members with greater risk exposure.
This is expected to affect less than 10 percent of individual members.
The Association of Lloyd's Members (ALM), which represents Names' interests, broadly welcomed today's proposals, saying it was essential that all Names should demonstrate their ability to meet any losses they incurred.
Lloyd's proposals coincided with the publication of an independent report commissioned by the Market Interests Group - an alliance of the ALM, member agents and Lloyd's brokers.
It acknowledged that reform in particular of the annual venture and management of Names' based capital was important, but said that creating an environment that encouraged their disappearance would be a significant mistake.
Earlier on Friday a leading figure in Lloyd's called for the capital structure of the market to be simplified.
Robert Hiscox, chairman of insurance group Hiscox Plc described the annual venture - where syndicates are reformed anew every year - as an "anachronistic absurdity" and said the current mixture of unlimited and limited members was too expensive to maintain. ($ = 0.611 British Pounds)
