Lloyd's of London announced Tuesday it will give backers more time to meet planned increases in the capital they must put up to support their underwriting activities.
Lloyd's has also dropped proposals to prevent Names -- as the traditional backers of the insurance market are called -- from using their own homes as collateral for underwriting.
The planned capital increases are part of a package of measures designed to strengthen the financial security that underpins Lloyd's and to provide a level playing field between Names and corporate members.
The longer transition period for the changes announced Tuesday may go some way to meeting the concerns of Names' representatives, who had called for more time to be given to meet the new capital requirements.
Names fear they are gradually being forced out of the market in favour of corporate capital first introduced in 1994, a charge repeatedly denied by the Lloyd's hierachy.
Names are to be given three years before they have to meet the new requirements of showing evidence of assets amounting to 50 percent of the premiums they underwrite.
In a Lloyd's working party report last month, a two-year transition period was proposed but, after consultations, that has been extended from 1999 to the year 2000.
A phased increase in Names' minimum level of means to 350,000 pounds ($571,000) from the current level of 250,000 pounds ($409,000) has also been increased from two to five years and will take effect in 2002.
This 350,000 pounds ($571,000) will be made up of funds held at Lloyd's and evidence of "other personal wealth" (OPW).
Proposals to double the OPW requirements for 2000 and beyond have been dropped in favour of a slightly higher level of funds which must be held at Lloyd's.
At present, Names must put up between 20 percent and 30 percent of the total business they back, compared with 50 percent for corporate members.
By 2000, Names will have to hold 40 percent of premium capacity at Lloyd's with OPW making up a further 10 percent, bringing them into line with corporate members.
The use of "principal private residences" (PPRs) -- Names' own homes -- as collateral for members' underwriting will be allowed to continue but only for those in existence at the end of 1994.
The Association of Lloyd's Members (ALM), which represents Names' interests, broadly welcomed Tuesday's proposals, saying it was essential that all Names should demonstrate their ability to meet any losses they incurred.
