Lloyd's of London on Friday moved to reassure its traditional backers, Names, that there was no hidden agenda to force them out of the 300 year-old insurance market.
"Trust us," outgoing chairman Sir David Rowland answered in response to a question from one worried Name. "It'll be all right."
Speaking at his last annual meeting as chairman, Rowland also promised there would be no move to do away with the venture where syndicates are reformed each year, despite criticisms from some managing agents that it is out-of date and expensive.
But he threw his support behind recent changes in the market which have seen members move away from unlimited to limited liability.
On retirement, said Rowland, he would become a limited liability member of Lloyd's.
"Unlimited personal liability has been shown to mean exactly what it says, and I no longer believe that the substantial advantages of that method of trading should blind us to the reality of its possible consequences for the individual," he said.
New trading structures with continuous capital, allowing the commitment of resources for the long term development of underwriting businesses, may prove the better route, said Rowland.
Unless it embraced change Lloyd's would see a steady decline in its fortunes, he warned.
The annual venture and the reinsurance of outstanding claims when the syndicate year closed - known as reinsurance to close - had appeared to work admirably until the eight billion pounds ($13 billion) of losses between 1988 and 1992 that at one point threatened to destroy Lloyd's.
Rowland argued it would never again be possible to reinsure to close an annual account without remembering the vulnerabilty of the system.
Critics have increasingly questioned the viability of the annual system of raising capital for Lloyd's, which they say is both costly and prevents long term planning.
Only a few days ago, the outspoken former chairman of Lloyd's, Robert Hiscox, described it as an "anachronistic absurdity" and attacked the complexity of the current capital structure where Names and corporate capital co-exist.
There is increasing tension at Lloyd's between Names, whose assets largely back the market on an unlimited basis and limited liability corporate capital, first introduced in 1994.
These tensions would be resolved by market forces promised Rowland.
"The Council affirms members' rights to continue to trade on an annual venture basis if they and their agents wish," said Rowland.
"But the Council does not believe that it should prescribe one structure over another. The pattern that results will reflect the choices made by agents, members and new capital providers," he said.
Members would also be free to choose whether to continue to trade on an unlimited basis, he said.
The Council, however, expects the trend toward corporate membership to continue.
A survey by the Association of Lloyd's Members, a group which represents Names' interests, showed more than half will be considering conversion to limited status over the next few years, according to Rowland.
Both Rowland and chief executive Ron Sandler in their speeches repeatedly stressed the importance of looking forward to the 500 or so Lloyd's members who turned up to the meeting in London's Barbican Centre. ($ = 0.615 British Pounds)
