British composite insurer Commercial Union Plc on Tuesday announced a major restructuring of its domestic general insurance operations to improve profitability and customer service.
The shake-up is aimed at producing some 100 million pounds ($163.5 million) of savings annually by 1999, largely through the reduction of administration and claims supply chain costs.
But the company was quick to emphasise that no jobs were under threat.
"Provided we meet our overall strategic objectives there won't be any compulsory redundancies. There is no hidden agenda here to lose jobs," said Andy Homer, manager of Commercial Union's UK general insurance division.
Dubbed 'Market Orientation', the changes will see head office functions reorganised into customer-focused trading units built around specific market segments and distribution channels, the company said.
There will be nine new trading units, each focused on one market sector. They will handle product development, underwriting, marketing and delivery.
Underwriters, marketers, finance and information technology staff will all work in teams, with the task of focusing on customer needs and Commercial Union believes it is the first British insurer to take this cross-functional approach.
"Market Orientation will create an innovative, team-based commercial culture and ensure that we establish ourselves as the pre-eminent force in the UK insurance market," said Cees Schrauwers, managing director of Commercial Union non-life insurance.
The company hopes to save 40 million pounds through more effective management of the claims supply chain, which accounts for five percent of the 800 million pound annual claims bill.
It already has a sole supplier agreement for windshields with Autoglass.
The benefits will be shared by customers as well as shareholders, Schrauwers said.
Around 40 million pounds of savings are targeted from administration costs through greater use of new technology.
Four of the group's 22 branches -- Liverpool, Manchester Bristol and Southampton -- have already piloted the changes.
Another 20 million pounds are to come from new modelling software to improve pricing and margins.
Many of the costs involved in the programme have already been incurred as normal business expenses, Homer said.
"In 1998 and 1999 we believe we can complete the programme. There's no hidden charge coming up later in the year," he said.
($ = 0.611 British Pounds)
