British mutual insurer Norwich Union said on Thursday strong demand had led it to increase the members' offer in next week's flotation to 1.2 billion pounds ($2 billion).
That means some 400 million pounds worth of shares will be clawed back from the public offering, primarily financial institutions, to satisfy members' appetite for extra shares which saw many queuing to beat the June 10 deadline.
Some 800 million pounds worth of shares had originally been set aside to meet members' applications but this proved insufficient as members' rushed to top up their holdings at a 25 pence per share discount to the public offer price.
For Norwich, the flotation will bring to an end more than 200 years as a mutual with policyholders owning the company.
Demutualisation will allow it to separate the group's life operations and thus policyholders' returns from the risks associated with its more volatile and cyclical general insurance business.
It will also strengthen Norwich's financial position and allow the core life business greater investment freedom.
The flotation is likely to value Norwich, which has more than seven million customers, at around 5.5 billion pounds and create Britain's third-largest quoted insurer behind Prudential Corp and Royal &amp; Sun Alliance.
Nearly three million Norwich policyholders will share 1.3 billion free shares in addition to the extra discounted shares.
Norwich still expects the offer price to range between 240 pence and 290 pence per share suggesting large profits for those lucky enough to get extra shares.
Bookmakers City Index are taking bets on a first day closing price of between 335 pence and 345 pence, an immediate profit of at least 70 pence per share.
It would put the value of the minimum 300 free shares with profits members will receive at over 1,000 pounds.
Many will receive far more depending on the value and duration of their policies.
Non-profit policyholders are to receive a flat rate 150 shares.
Institutional demand is a big factor in the likely sharp gains over the offer price.
The two building societies who floated recently -- Halifax and Alliance &amp; Leceister -- saw their share price squeezed higher by financial institutions keen to buy the shares and maintain the weighting of the financial sector in their portfolios.
Like Halifax, Norwich is almost certain to enter the FTSE 100 index of Britain's largest companies.
The public offer, which is made up of the institutional offer, retail offer and employees offer, will be between 1.1 and 1.2 billion pounds following the clawback of the extra shares for members.
News of the final public and members' offer price and provisional basis of allocation is expected to be made on June 15. Dealings in Norwich shares will begin on June 16. ($ = 0.612 British Pounds)
