British insurer Norwich Union looks set to make a sparkling debut when its shares start trading on the stock market on Monday.
On flotation the company, which has more than seven million customers, is likely to be valued at around six billion pounds making it Britain's third-largest quoted insurer behind Prudential Corp and Royal &amp; Sun Alliance.
As with recent demutualising building societies Halifax and Alliance &amp; Leceister, Norwich Union's members have seen the value of their stakes in the company steadily climb since proposals to float the group were first announced.
Nearly three million Norwich policyholders will share 1.3 billion free shares under the flotation plans. The company aims to raise another 1.75 billion pounds ($2.9 billion) of capital in a public and members' offer of new shares.
Members have rushed to grab the opportunity to buy further shares at a 25 pence discount, queuing to beat the registration deadline earlier this week.
Norwich Union said on Thursday it still expects the public offer to be priced at between 240 pence and 290 pence per share, 215 pence to 265 pence for members, suggesting large profits for those lucky enough to get extra shares.
Bookmakers City Index are taking bets on a first day closing price of between 343 pence and 353 pence, a profit for members of at least 78 pence per share.
Many are expected to cash in their profits immediately especially those who have borrowed to fund the purchase of extra shares.
The minimum 300 free shares that 1.8 million with-profits members will receive is likely to be worth more than 1,000 pounds. The average handout will be far higher with additional shares based on the value and duration of their policies.
The 1.1 million non-profit policyholders are to receive a flat rate 150 shares.
Members may be disappointed by the number of discounted shares they actually receive with a scaling down of applications a near certainty.
In fact, such has been members' appetite for extra shares that Norwich Union on Thursday announced it was clawing back 400 million pounds worth of shares from the public offering, primarily financial institutions, to satisfy demand.
That took the members' share to around half of the total offering of 2.4 billion pounds.
For Norwich Union, the flotation will bring to an end more than 200 years as a mutual where ownership is held jointly by members.
Demutualisation will allow it to separate the group's life operations and thus policyholders' returns from the risks associated with its more volatile and cyclical general insurance business.
It will also strengthen Norwich Union's financial position and allow the core life business greater investment freedom.
Institutional demand is a big factor in the expected sharp
rise in the share price.
Both Halifax and Alliance &amp; Leceister saw their shares squeezed higher by financial institutions keen to buy and maintain the weighting of the financial sector in their portfolios.
Like Halifax, Norwich is almost certain to enter the FTSE 100 index of Britain's largest companies later this year.
Many analysts estimate fair value of the shares at anything from 280 pence to 340 pence.
Norwich Union has also been touted as a possible takeover target, with Australian insurer AMP reportedly heading the list of possible predators.
The probable price tag of the group now looks set to price it out reach of many who might have been interested.
News of the final public and members' offer price and provisional basis of allocation is expected to be made on June 15. Dealings will begin on June 16. ($ = 0.613 British Pounds)
