Norwich Union, the British insurer which starts trading on the stock market this week, said on Sunday that its public offer of shares had been priced at the top end of pre-float forecasts following huge demand for stock.
As widely expected successful applicants will pay 290 pence per share in the public offer while members will pay 265 pence, reflecting their 25 pence discount.
The offer raised around 2.4 billion pounds ($3.9 billion) for Norwich Union and values it at over 5.6 billion pounds.
That makes it Britain's third largest quoted insurer behind Prudential Corp and Royal &amp; Sun Alliance.
But many applicants will be disappointed with the number of shares they actually receive after a sharp scaling back of allocations because of the heavy demand.
Members applied for nearly four times as many shares as were available while the institutional offer was covered a mammoth 10 times.
Norwich Union chief executive Allan Bridgewater declared himself "delighted" at the response from both members and institutional investors.
It was, he said, an endorsement of the strength of the Norwich Union brand and the prospects for the business going forward.
Members applying for up to 1,500 pounds worth of shares will get their full allotment but for instance an application of 10,000 pounds will get just 22 percent of shares asked for.
Less than half of the 766,000 members applying for shares will receive their full allocation.
In fact, such was members' appetite that Norwich Union had to claw back 400 million pounds worth of shares from the public offering, primarily financial institutions, to satisfy it.
On the start of trading on the stock market on Monday members will hold just over three-quarters of Norwich Union's share capital.
Those lucky enough to get shares may be tempted to cash-in immediately especially those borrowing to fund the purchases.
But Bridewater said the company had seen no evidence that this would be the case.
Many analysts estimate fair value of the shares at anything from 280 pence to 340 pence. Bookmakers City Index predict the shares to race as high as 353 pence by the end of the first day.
Under the floatation plans which brings to an end 200 years as a mutual nearly three million Norwich Union policyholders will share 1.3 billion free shares under the flotation plans in addition to any extra shares in the members offer.
The minimum 300 free shares 1.8 million with-profits members will receive is likely to be worth more than 1,000 pounds. The average handout will be far higher with additional shares based on the value and duration of their policies.
The 1.1 million non-profit policyholders are to receive a flat rate 150 shares. Bridewater said the company had considered raising the offer price above its pre-float predictions of between 240 pence and 290 pence but had felt on balance that a 290 pence price reflected a "fair price" looking forward.
As with recent demutualising building societies Halifax and Alliance &amp; Leceister institutional demand will be a big factor in the expected sharp rise in the share price.
Both saw their shares squeezed higher by financial institutions keen to buy and maintain the weighting of the financial sector in their portfolios.
Like Halifax, Norwich Union is certain to enter the FTSE 100 index of Britain's largest companies later this year.
Norwich Union has also been touted as a possible takeover target, with Australian insurer AMP reportedly heading the list of possible predators.
The probable price tag of the group now looks set to price it out reach of many who might have been interested and Bridewater confirmed that there had been discussions of a takeover with anyone. ($ = 0.611 British Pounds)
