Peter Jarvis, chief executive of brewer to leisure group Whitbread Plc, said the company is seeing fairly strong growth in consumer spending on leisure.
Jarvis said although consumer spending has been positive for the last 12 months, it was masked somewhat by expenditure on the National Lottery which took out 5.0 billion stg from the economy last year, equal to about 5.0 percent of total leisure spending in Britain.
"So all of the natural growth there would have been last year was missing," he told Reuters in an interview.  
"So the feelgood factor was not there and the main reason was the diversion of expenditure into the Lottery. But the comparables now don't have the Lottery effect in and we have got back into quite strong growth in leisure expenditure," he said.
The improvement was evident across all areas of its activity although Jarvis was especially encouraged by the hotels business.
"The hotel market in this country is very buoyant. The growth in expenditure in hotels far outstrips growth in new accomodation. And that is about more travel, more tourism, more retired people, more affluent retired people."  
Whitbread acquired health and sports club group David Lloyd Leisure for about 200 million stg and a chain of 16 Marriot hotels in Britain for about 185 million last August.
"We are making very good progress in our hotel business. Our profits are substantially ahead of last year and our customers are recognising the improvements that have been made to our hotels through joining up with Marriot," he said.
"The performance of the Marriot hotels we bought has improved against last year as well as the performance of Whitbread hotels that have been transferred to Marriot."  
Whitbread opened about 45 new budget hotels called Travel Inns during the year to March 2 and Jarvis said they this part of the hotels arm was performing well. "The occupancy levels we are getting in our budget hotels now are higher than they have ever been since we started out in this business," Jarvis said.
He said the Marriot company would contribute substantially to the earnings of Whitbread, even after interest payments.
"If we paid 185 million for Marriot, and you can work out the interest, I am saying we will make many millions beyond that in the current year. And this is the first full year we have had Marriot," he said.  
"Next year David Lloyd will be in that kind of position and I think that Pelican will be as well," he added.
Whitbread announced an agreed 133 million stg bid for the Pelican Group of cafes in the UK in July.
"This year if you take Marriot and you take our Travel Inns we will make broadly as much money in hotels as we make in beer," Jarvis said.
The beer company reported operating profit of 44.9 million stg in 1995/96, a rise of some 4.5 million on the previous year, but just 15 percent of the company's total operating profit.  
Whitbread's restaurants and inns division, which includes Marriot hotels, reported trading profit of 88.3 million up from 66.0 million.
The company is due to report half-year results on November 5.
