Scotch whisky maker Highland Distilleries posted a 14 percent fall in its full year profits on Monday, saying sales of its brand leader The Famous Grouse blend fell in Britain and the home market remained tough.
"The UK continues to be a very competitive market. However there are indications that prices are moving up with more emphasis being given to brand building activities," it said.
Pretax profits fell to 37.1 million pounds ($58.43 million) in the year ended August 31, 1996 down 14 percent. Before reorganisation costs, profits were flat at 36.5 million pounds, below the market forecast range of 39.2 million to 42.5 million. Highland's shares fell 10p to 332p in early trade.
The British market for Scotch whisky fell by four percent, despite a cut in excise duty in the November 1995 Budget, while sales of The Famous Grouse fell by three percent.
"These results illustrate the problem Highland has got; the fact it still makes about 60 percent of its profits out of Famous Grouse sales in the UK where the market continues to be very competitive," said BZW analyst Charles Winston.
In the England and Wales off trade, which represents 65 percent of the home market, the Famous Grouse market share rose 0.5 percent to 9.3 percent.
However, sales in the on-trade or in pubs and restaurants remained tough and The Famous Grouse share fell by one percentage point. But overall market share for The Famous Grouse rose slightly to 13.3 percent.
Overall export sales of The Famous Grouse were up five percent and sales in Europe rose 13 percent, with strong performances in France, Greece and the Netherlands, although conditions were more difficult in Asia.
Single malt whiskies continued to grow both at home and overseas with Highland's key brands, Highland Park from Orkney and Bunnahabhain from Islay, up 12 percent on a global basis.
Profits from associate Robertson &amp; Baxter fell nine percent to about 10 million pounds mainly because of increased advertising behind the Cutty Sark brand.
Sales of new and mature whiskies to blenders have grown considerably with new filling orders for the calendar year 1996 up by 31 percent.
The interest charge rose by 2.8 million pounds mainly due to the cost of carrying a 26 percent shareholding in distiller Macallan-Glenlivet Plc from January 1996.
Highland and Suntory, Japan's leading Whisky distiller, already owned 51 percent of Macallan but decided in July to pay up to 88 million pounds to take control of the remaining 49 percent.
Highland argues that the Macallan malt whisky brand has substantial growth potential.
Highland reported an exceptional charge of 3.0 million pounds in the year to cover reorganisation costs at Macallan and Macallan bid defence costs. ($1=.6350 Sterling)
