Ice cream had a sad time in Europe this summer, adding fresh impetus for the big makers to try to persuade us to eat it in the winter.
"We think for Unilever its meant 125 million pounds ($198.4 million) in lost sales and lost profits of 50 million in the summer months across europe," said David Lang, analyst at Henderson Crosthwaite.
The dull summer has hit impulse purchases of ice creams worst of all, a high-margin sector that makes up one third of all European ice cream sales.
Coca-Cola, sometimes taken as a benchmark for consumer spending behaviour, reported a 10 percent decline in case sales in Germany, 17 percent down in Britain and four percent down in France as a result of the poor summer.
It's no surprise then to find marketing executives at Wall's and Nestle scurrying for new products to sell in the winter months.
Britain's Birds Eye Wall's, owned by Unilever, said it has launched seven new lines across its impulse, take-home and multipack sectors as chocolate indulgences for the winter months.
Nestle is trying to roll out products like its Christmas Log in France to even out the seasonal swing in sales.
Both companies argue if people in Norway and Sweden, where the climate is cooler, can eat twice as much ice cream than in Britain, then there is work to be done.
"The snag is that in summer when people are on holiday that is when impulse sales are always at their highest, people just don't associate having an ice cream with winter," said John Campbell, an analyst at Paribas.
Industry watchers also point out that children, who account for 40 percent of all impulse icecream sales, take their longest holidays in the summer.
Wall's, the largest player in the British icecream market worth about 1.0 billion pounds estimates some 60 million pounds of the market growth in 1995 came from the very hot summer.
Wall's brands account for 17 out of the top 20 selling impulse brands with Wall's Solero heading up the league followed by Magnum White and Magnum Classic.
In terms of total market share Wall's has 43 percent in Britain, Nestle Lyons Maid 12 percent, Mars 7 percent, own label 29 percent and others 9 percent.
In a week of indifferent summer weather Wall's sells about 23 to 25 million portions of icecream whereas in a hot sunny week this figure can rise to around 55 million portions.
The big players in the 15 billion pounds European icecream market have come down with a thud from the summer of 1995.
It was the third hottest summer on record in Europe and August the hottest and sunniest ever -- with long periods of temperatures above 16 degrees centigrade, at which point consumers really switch into buying icecream.
Temperatures soared to an average 17.5 degrees centigrade in Britain with 7.8 hours of sunshine a day compared with 7.2 hours in 1996. Statistics from the MetOffice, Britain's national weather centre, show an average temperature of 15.9 degrees for the summer of 1996. The office says the South of France and Spain had just an average summer this year.
Nestle, who entered the UK market in 1992 with the purchase of the Lyons Maid brand, estimates total sales in Britain are down some 5 percent at 879 million due to the dull summer, of this hand held icecreams accounted for 489 million.
In Britain the all-time Summer record for Wall's still stands at 71 million portions sold during one week in the long, hot summer of 1976 -- the year when Wall's Cornetto first hit the market.
However much the big fridge fillers spend on advertising and dreaming up new products it will be hard to break that record.
($1=.6299 Pound)
