British tobacco and insurance conglomerate B.A.T Industries can expect more tough questions about U.S. litigation when it reports third quarter results on Wednesday as scientific evidence continues to mount that smoking and lung cancer are linked.
"It should be another set of solid results but they are nowadays rather secondary to litigation developments which are critical to the company's future growth prospects," said Charles Pick, analyst at Panmure Gordon.
B.A.T shares appear increasingly vulnerable to this issue.  
The growing pace of litigation claims against B.A.T's U.S. tobacco subsidiary Brown &amp; Williamson, and the U.S. industry in general, recently led credit rating agency Standard &amp; Poor's to revise down its outlook for the company to negative.
Meanwhile, analysts expect B.A.T's pretax profits this quarter to range from 650 to 715 million stg, slightly firmer than the 659 million stg last time.
No exceptional items are anticipated and the company pays a dividend only at the half- and full-year stage.
Paradoxically, underlying strength and growth in tobacco is likely to offset a mixed performance from financial services.  
While the group's main life and pension firms Allied Dunbar, Eagle Star overseas and Farmers should report higher sales, Eagle Star's general insurance business is widely forecast to suffer further from a cyclical downturn.
Analysts expect B.A.T's tobacco sales to emerging markets to remain strong, with continued growth in Asia.
Pretax profits for the nine month period, estimated to top the 2.0 billion stg mark, will include 69 million of exceptional gains on sale of two subsidiary businesses in the first half.
Further ahead, a consensus forecast for 1996 full-year earnings per share is 51.10p, rising to 53.40p for 1997.  
However, despite the prospect of firmer earnings and a strong performance by the London stock market in the first 10 months of ths year, B.A.T shares have generally weakened.
They have fallen from a high of 585p on February 2 to 434p on Friday, shedding nearly four billion pounds from the company's total stockmarket value along the way.
The main damage has been done by constant pressure on both B.A.T and its big U.S. rival Philip Morris from a stream of upsets and shifts in the progress of U.S. litigation.
The trend has led some of its big UK shareholders to call for a demerger of B.A.T's two component businesses.  
Analysts are sceptical on the whole about the possibility of demerger, despite the tactic's popularity among other diversified groups with tobacco interests.
"I don't think a demerger is legally possible and I don't think management see it as in the group's interest. In fact it only makes sense to liley-livered UK institutions who are obssessed with the U.S. tobacco litigiation," said Tom Bennet, analyst at Paribas.
Some tobacco litigants also oppose demergers, claiming they would amount to "false conveyance" on the tobacco industry's ability to pay up if it were to lose a major court battle.  
Proponents, on the other hand, argue a demerger would separate U.S. tobacco liabilities and enable the company to put its effort into selling cigarettes in Asia and other emerging markets.
The successful spin-off of Imperial Tobacco from the Hanson group has added more fuel to their cause, along with American Brands Inc's plan to spin off its UK-based Gallaher tobacco operations some time next year.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 6437
