British cider group Matthew Clark said on Tuesday fashionable "alcopop" drinks had helped to wipe a third off the sales of its premium brands -- Diamond White, K and Babycham -- in the first five months of the financial year.
Matthew Clark has been hit the hardest by a surge in popularity for so-called alcopops -- alcoholic colas and lemonades -- which have proved a success with younger drinkers. Fierce price wars among rival drinks companies have also had ab affect.
Since Matthew Clark stunned the stock market in September with a profit warning that wiped more than 290 million pounds ($466 million) off its market value, investors have badgered the group to explain how it intends to win back sales.
In the long-awaited statement, Matthew Clark conceded that price wars had continued and that sales of draught cider in June and July, were 10 percent lower than during last year's hot summer. Premium brands saw sales slump 30 percent.
The group's draught cider sales were 15 percent down across the whole summer -- although current trading in cider had since stabilised. "We expect the underlying growth within the cider market as a whole to resume," the company said.
But it said it expected to hold its interim dividend at nine pence when it reported half year results ending October 31.
The company's shares closed a sharp 17.5 pence higher at 317.5 pence, although far short of their year high of 804 pence.
"The thing that's made them bounce is they've said they expect to maintain the dividend. But you've got to be cautious because there's no guide as to underlying profit levels," said one dealer.
The company has launched a review of its marketing strategy in branded drinks, mainly Diamond White and mainstream ciders Dry Blacthorn and Gaymers Olde English. The key findings will be released in January.
In the meantime, the company said it would create the new position of marketing director, a main board appointment, and take on 40 staff in sales and marketing in its branded drinks division.
Alcopops have proved especially popular with young drinkers, forging major inroads into the British drinks market. In May, research body Euromonitor said it would be worth about 170 million pounds this year after 100 million in 1995.
Leading brands include alcoholic lemonade Hooper's Hooch, owned by Bass, and Two Dogs, marketed by Merrydown.
Drinks industry leaders agreed in January to a voluntary code of practice aimed at limiting the promotion of alcopops after the drinks sparked a storm of controversy over whether they encouraged under-age drinking.
In its last budget, the government imposed a heavy duty on ciders with an alcohol content over 7.5 percent from next year but left alcoholic colas and lemonades unaffected.
