B.A.T Industries, reporting a nine percent rise in nine-month profits, on Wednesday ruled out a demerger of its tobacco business despite conceding that U.S. tobacco litigation was the main issue affecting its share price.
Chief executive Martin Broughton said the company did not see value in demerging the group into separate tobacco and financial services companies.
A strategy review showed "there was no value we could see that would be generated from a demerger," he told Reuters.
Profits in the nine months rose to 2.04 billion pounds ($3.3 billion) from 1.87 billion last time. Profits in the third quarter rose to 714 million from 680 million pounds.
Trading profit from financial services rose by three percent, and profits from tobacco were seven percent ahead.
Worldwide cigarette sales rose by three percent, although volumes were lower in the United States, a market where total industry sales were flat, the company said.
The growing pace of litigation claims against the company's U.S. cigarette subsidiary Brown &amp; Williamson (B&amp;W), and the U.S. industry in general, continues to unsettle investors and hurt B.A.T's share price.
B.A.T shares have fallen from a high of 585 pence on February 2 to below 430 pence, shedding nearly four billion pounds from the company's stockmarket value along the way.
Broughton said a demerger of Brown &amp; Williamson would be "highly destructive" of shareholder value, adding there was "no question" that the board of directors was united on the issue.
He also played down fears over U.S. litigation. Only a few cases actually get to court although many are filed, and the company was confident of winning its appeal in the high-profile Carter case, Broughton told a meeting of company analysts.
In the case of Grady Carter, of Orange Park, Florida, a jury in Jacksonville ruled in August that B&amp;W was negligent and made a dangerous and defective product. Carter smoked for 50 years until he was diagnosed with lung cancer.
B.A.T shares have fallen sharply since the Florida court decided to award damages of $750,000 to Carter.
Lawyer Woody Wilner, who acted for Carter in the Florida case, had promised to bring one case a month, but three have been postponed until next year and one dismissed, B.A.T said.
B.A.T was also confident of blocking the U.S. Food and Drug Administration's attempts to bring tobacco regulation into line with drugs and pharmaceuticals, said Broughton.
If the FDA proposals become law, cigarettes will be classified as "medical devices" and would have to meet rigorous safety and sales criteria.
Responding to a recent paper in the U.S Science Magazine which claims a direct link between smoking and lung cancer at cell level, Broughton said B.A.T had no internal research which proved smoking caused lung cancer or that smoking was addictive.
"We have not concealed, we do not conceal and we will never conceal," he said. There was still a lack of understanding of the mechanisms of diseases attributed to smoking, he added.
Turning to the business results, B.A.T said the seven percent rise in tobacco trading profit to 1.27 billion pounds was helped by strong sales growth in the Asia Pacific and the African, Middle East and Indian subcontinent regions.
In financial servies, B.A.T said its U.S. unit Farmers continued to have an excellent year. In Britain, the Eagle Star insurance division faced fiercely competitive conditions and profits fell to 162 million pounds from 194 million.
It also suffered a 91 million pounds charge for a surge in asbestos and pollution claims in the United States.
The life insurance and investment business reported a five percent increase in profit.
Shares in the company initially rose after the results, but later fell back to close at 427-1/2p pence, down 8-1/2p. ($1=.6223 Pound)
