A planned merger between British brewer Bass and Carlsberg-Tetley will create such a dominant force in the industry that it is almost certain to fall foul of Britain's competition authorities, regional brewers said on Tuesday.
"I think it will be referred but what will happen then is anybody's guess. They must think there is a reasonable risk of that happening otherwise why have a plan B in place," said Ralph Findlay, finance director of Wolverhampton &amp; Dudley Breweries.
On Sunday Bass confirmed details of a long-awaited deal to merge with Carlsberg-Tetley, leaving Danish brewer Carlsberg with a 20 percent stake in a merged Carlsberg-Tetley-Bass if British regulators allow the marriage to take place.
Under the terms of the deal, if Bass cannot combine C-T with its own brewing business within 16 months, Bass has the option to put its whole shareholding to Carlsberg and Carlsberg has an option to put 15 percent of C-T to Allied Domecq.
"If it doesn't work it seems plan B comes into operation. But it is by no means clear what will invoke plan B," Findlay said.
Bass was knocked off its perch as Britain's leading brewer last year when Scottish &amp; Newcastle (S&amp;N) acquired Courage from Australian brewer Fosters, giving it a 31 percent share of Britain's beer market.
A merger of Bass and Carlsberg-Tetley would make Bass Britain's largest brewer by far with 35 percent of the market.
Britain's competition authorities will want to find out if the deal would leave Bass and S&amp;N too much control over beer prices and too powerful a grip in the Midlands and Yorkshire.
Roger Young, retail director at Greenalls Group, said: "In common with the rest of the world we are expecting a referral. Anything that takes competition out on the supply side is not good news from the point of view of the purchaser."
Greenalls, owners of some 2,400 pubs, exited brewing at the end of February 1991. "If it becomes too much for Bass to swallow then I suppose plan B swings in -- Carlsberg effectively takes over," he told Reuters.
Many brewing analysts argue that the duopoly that exists in Scotland between Bass and S&amp;N results in much higher margins for the brewers which means higher prices for drinkers.
"I think the supply position in the Midlands and Yorkshire is obviously something that needs to be looked at very carefully," said one senior source at regional brewer.
"Because Bass and Allied have dominated the beer supply in those areas since the Second World War."
"In those areas they are the two biggest brewers and the two biggest brewers getting together in very significant regions like that is something which has never happened before."
A spokesman for the Office of Fair Trading confirmed it would look at the deal but declined to comment on whether the OFT would recommend referring it to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission for a full investigation.
Industry sources say although S&amp;N's purchase of Courage was referred the OFT gave the company much clearer guidance on what concessions would be required to let it through.
S&amp;N was obliged to reduce its tied estate of pubs by 115 to 2,624. It also agreed to the early release of IEL (Intrepreneur Estates Ltd) pub tenants from a supply agreement. It had to release 500 of them by January 1996 and a further 500 by January 1997.
