Family-controlled British food and retailing group Associated British Foods should report a sharp rise in full year profits on Monday, as its retail and textile business benefit from a pickup in high street spending.
"The two parts of the business really driving the increase are the retail and clothing side which is benefitting from the feel-good factor," said Michael Bourke, analyst at Panmure Gordon. Analysts forecasts are centred on pretax profits of 415 million stg up from 375 million last time and a dividend increase to 9.5p from 8.8p.  
ABF, a food processor and manufacturer in Britain, Australia and the United States, as well as a food and textile retailer in Britain and Ireland, is also widely expected to yield yet more cash from British Sugar.
"The feature of the figures as ever is the strong cashflow coming out of British sugar. Net cash should rise by about 130 million pounds which always begs the question will they spend it?" said UBS analyst Charlie Mills.
That would bring net cash to 735 million stg at year end.  
On the retail side PriMark, women's clothing chain in Ireland and Britain, as well as the Irish retailing businesses -- Stewarts supermarkets in Northern Ireland and Crazy Prices and Quinnsworth -- are expected to perform much better.
However the mainstream side of the business, British Sugar which contributes about 50 percent of profits, is likely to be slightly weaker after a hot summer in 1995 affected the sugar beet crop and margins came under pressure from the strength of sterling which made European imports look cheaper.  
Aside from British sugar, analysts expect the grocery business, like milling and baking, Rivita and Burton biscuits to show improvements.
On average analysts forecast trading profit from groceries, excluding British Sugar, to rise by 14 million stg to 82 million in the belief that the company has managed to claw back some of the margin on non-packaged food.
Including British Sugar operating profits are predicted to increase to about 265 million from 252 million previously.
ABF shares have risen consistently from 280p in January to 418-1/2p at Friday's close.
Consensus estimates, taken from a Reuter poll of 17 brokers, for 1996 is 30.1, rising to 31.6 in 1997.
The company has a return on equity of 11.5 percent, putting it in 28th slot in the FTSE-All share food manufaturing sector of 57 companies.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 6437
