Brewer to leisure group Whitbread Plc should report a 10 percent rise in first half earnings on Tuesday, kicking off the reporting season for drinks companies with a rosy picture of consumer spending on the high street this summer.
Analysts estimate pretax profits for the six months to the end of August in a range of 168-175 million, against 155.7 million last time.
Dividend forecasts range from 5.9 to 6.24p, up from 5.75p.  
"It's been a good performance in the summer. Consumer spending has picked up and on the beer side, they moved to higher margin premium beer. And you will see their acquisitions adding some benefit," said Ron Littleboy, analyst at Nomura.
Whitbread acquired health and sports club group David Lloyd Leisure for about 200 million stg and chain of 16 Marriott hotels in Britain for some 185 million in August 1995.
"If there is a surprise, it is probably on the upside and if that is going to come from anywhere, it would be on the hotels side," said John Beaumont, analyst at Merrill Lynch.  
The Whitbread hotel company includes about 130 budget Travel Inns, where new openings are running at a rate of about  one every two weeks, and Marriott hotels.
"The main growth will come on retail and leisure and what will pull them back is their leased pub side," said Littleboy.
WHitbread manages about 2,200 pubs mainly on 20 year leases.
The restaurant and leisure division includes TGI Friday, Pizza Hut, 50 percent owned by Pepsico, Costa Coffee, Thresher and Beefeater. Whitbread Inns, the managed pubs side of the business, includes Brewers Fayre which leads the casual-dining out sector.  
The company announced an agreed 133 million stg bid for Pelican Group of cafes in July -- including Cafe Rouge and Dome urban, French-style bistros -- which the company said would not contribute to earnings this financial year.
"One of the main variables that influences our future profit estimates is how quickly will they be expanding on the leisure and pub side," said Beaumont.
"And provided the company is still fairly sanguine on the roll out programme for these concepts, that will gives us a lot of reassurance."  
Some analysts are also keen to get a view from the company about the impact of a minimum wage for its workforce on its earnings -- the opposition Labour Party widely expected to win the forthcoiming general election has pledged it will introduce a national minimum wage.
Whitbread shares rose 10p to 729p in early trade Friday, as positive notes from analysts reached their clients ahead of the first half results. The stock set a high for the year of 757p in April. The consensus estimate for EPS, taken from 25 brokers polled by Reuters, is 47.40 for 1997, rising  to 52.30 in 1998.  
The company currently shows a 9.84 percent return on equity, against the leader in the FTSE 350 breweries and pub sector Aberdeen Steak with 99.68 percent. Rival Bass has a return on equity of 10.44 percent.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 6437
