Family controlled food and retailing group Associated British Foods reported a 15 percent incrase in its full year profits on Monday, but chairman Garry Weston sounded a wary note when asked about the year ahead.
"I never play hostage to fortune. I've always been cautious," said Weston in an interview. "It's a very bad time to forecast anything with two elections coming up -- in the United States and Britian. We have no idea how they will impact on us."
ABF posted pretax profits of 430 million pounds ($704.1 million) for the year ended September 14 whereas most stockmarket forecasts had centred on 415 million.
Worldwide sales were up 17 percent to 5.707 billion. Profits were driven by an especially strong performance from the company's retail operations in Britain and Ireland. Operating profits rose 25 percent to 69 million, with the company's supermarkets in Ireland further increasing their market share.
Primark, the women's textile chain, included results from One Up stores bought from Storehouse last year.
"We got the fashion right. Primark has been refurbished and that improved its buying power and gave it more notice on the high street." In the second half Primark was more in tune with public demand, said Weston.
ABF's food manufacturing and processing operations in Britain showed an 8.0 percent sales growth to 3.11 billion pounds and a 12 percent profits increase to 282 million.
However, operating profits from British Sugar fell to 183 million. British Sugar sales are limited by European community quotas and the renewed strength of the pound made imports from mainland Europe look cheaper in the second half.
AFB's profits from its Australia and New Zealand operations increased by 20 percent to 38 million.
AC Humko, acquired from Kraft Foods in September 1995, chipped in its first full year of profits to ABF's north American business to help turn a 3.0 million loss in 1995 to a six million stg profit.
Analysts were surprised by the stronger than expected performance from ABF's milling and baking business where margins improved strongly. ABF owns the Twining group of companies, Burtons Biscuits, Allied Bakeries and an animal feed business.
"They were good numbers a bit ahead of our figures, but it will be hard to match that in the current year," said Michael Bourke, analyst at Panmure Gordon. "The green pound rate is likely to mean a reduction in British Sugar profits and inflation in food prices looks very subdued," he said.
ABF shares rose 8p to 426p on the news.
Net cash held by the company rose by 196 million to 797 million at September 14, after spending 242 million on its assets and acquisitions during the year.
The company is keen to expand in the Far East and although ABF's history is one of expansion by organic growth if the oppurtunity arises it will make acquisitions, said Weston.
"We have been picking up acquisitions and if opportunities come along for something big then we will take it," he said.
During the year ABF acquired or formed businesses in Norway, Indonesia, China and the United States. ($1=.6107 Pound)
