British brewer to leisure group Whitbread Plc posted a 14 percent increase in its half year profits on Tuesday to 177.5 million pounds ($290 million) and chairman Sir Michael Angus said he expects recent levels of growth in its markets to continue.
In an interview chief executive Peter Jarvis, in ebullient mood, said British consumers were feeling better, spending much more on leisure and the upward trend was set to roll for at least another two years.
"I think the consumer position in Britain is favourable for at least two or three years. Unless we have some kind of catastrophe, the prospects in Britain are good. All the economic predictions from the banks point to low inflation and growing consumer confidence," said Jarvis.
The company's hotels business doubled profits and sales in the six months to August 31. Like-for-like sales were up by 11 percent with occupancy levels and room rates much higher.
"The number of foreign tourists to Britain is growing very, very fast. They spent 13 to 14 billion pounds last year and half of that in London," he said.
"That's been growing very fast in the last 10 years and its forecast by Henley (forecasting centre) to be the fastest growing sector of the leisure market."
Americans flocked to Whitbread's 16 Marriott hotels during the half year for the first time as a result of a marketing link-up with Marriott in America, adding five percent to occupancy levels at some Marriott hotels.
Whitbread acquired health and sports club group David Lloyd Leisure for 200 million pounds and a chain of 16 Marriott hotels in Britain for some 185 million in August 1995.
The company also owns a chain of about 130 low budget Travel Inns, which Jarvis said will be added at the rate of about one every 10 days to reach 300 by the end of the year 2000. Consumers also spent more eating out during the half year with Pizza Hut, jointly owned with Pepsico, and TGI Friday's sales ahead by about 20 percent.
The Beefeater chain of restaurants increased like-for-like sales three pecent and profit by 7.0 percent. The company's restaurant and leisure division saw pretax profits rise 58 percent to 56.3 million.
Whitbread Inns, which includes casual dining out pub chain Brewers Fayre, saw profits grow by 15 percent to 77.4 million and total sales by 14 percent. But sales from Whitbread's 2,200 leased pub estate were down three percent.
"The main driving force on like-for-like sales is on food pubs and restaurants and we also opened a lot more new places that appeal to people who would not normally go to pubs."
Whitbread's beer company increased profits by 12 percent to 30.8 million pounds on sales which were ahead eight percent pushed higher by the acquisition of the Labatt and Wadworth brands. Heineken Export and Stella Artois produced the strongest brand performances.
However gearing -- the ratio of debt to equity -- more than doubled to 27.3 percent, after a spate of recent acquisitions including the Pelican Group of French-style urban bistros Cafe Rouge and Dome, for 133 million in July.
Whitbread shares rose 7p to 748p on the results, which beat most analysts' forecasts.
