John McGrath, chief executive of food and drinks giant Grand Metropolitan Plc said the company will continue to unshackle itself from production in its mission to bear down on costs.
"In many cases we don't need to produce what we sell," McGrath told Reuters. "Whether you own the processing is often academic as long as you control the quality."
The company is looking at further Seneca-type deals in the next year, he said, where a third party takes on the production but GrandMet keeps hold of pricing, marketing and quality.  
Last year, GrandMet contracted out to U.S. company Seneca the processing and packaging of its Green Giant's canned vegetables. Green Giant was acquired as part of Pillsbury, GrandMet's U.S. food arm, in 1989.
Pillsbury currently produces some 75 percent of what it sells and this number will decline in the future.
If a product can be insulated by patent from the competition, then GrandMet would want to continue making it, said McGrath in an interview. But, if it's a bread or biscuit product, for instance, it may make economic sense to allow a third party producer in.  
"We would never get out of distilling whisky or blending... that is a skill which only a few highly skilled people can ensure. They know how to get the right quality, the right taste, the right balance. But, whether you need to bottle it yourself is another matte," McGrath said.
"The best example is Coca-Cola who are brand marketeers, brand owner and controllers of the concentrate. But, whether they own the processing is academic as long as they control the quality."  
McGrath paid tribute to former chairman Lord Sheppard, who stood down as chairman in March, after 21 years with the group, for transforming GrandMet into a leaner, more focused company.
When Sheppard took over in 1987, he found a company with over 30 very different business which he thinned down to three: food, drinks and Burger King retailing.
McGrath, appointed chairman and chief executive of International Distillers and Vintners (IDV), GrandMet's spirits arm, in September 1993, brought a tough, cost-conscious urge to make Sheppard's vision work.  
McGrath, whose management skills stem from the shopfloor and operations rather than boardroom, separates himself from the culture of GrandMet's heady, deal-making days of the last decade when companies were carved up and sold on in droves.
"The view I take which the board strongly supports is concentrating on making those very expensive assets that we have acquired work highly efficiently."
"Now is the time to concentrate on organic growth very strongly supported by new brand development. We will only make minor acquisitions chiefly in emerging markets or food service in the U.S. where we can get some good returns," he said.
"What I am very much concentrating on now is taking all the action we possibly can to as rapidly as possible increase our return on capital," said McGrath.
"We are investing for the medium term and no longer for short term gain," he said.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
