British consumers are feeling better, they are spending more on leisure, and the upward trend is set to roll for at least another two years, said Whitbread chief executive Peter Jarvis.
"The markets in which we operate are better than they have been for many years. People are feeling better. House prices are rising again, the job situation is better and they have seen personal tax decreases this year," Jarvis said in an interview.
Earlier Whitbread posted a 14 percent rise in half year pretax profits to 177.5 million, beating analysts forecasts.  
"I think the consumer position in Britain is favourable for at least two or three years. Unless we have some kind of catastrophe, the prospects in Britain are good. All the economic predictions from the banks point to low inflation and growing consumer confidence," said Jarvis.
He said the outlook was unlikely to be affected by the government's budget statement on November 26 or if the opposition Labour Party wins the next general election. Labour have pledged to introduce a national minimum wage.
"I'm on the record as being in favour of a national minimum wage. I hope and believe it will be set at a reasonable level."  
Whitbread's workforce comprises 42,000 full-time and 33,000 part-time staff, with many working in catering.
The company's hotels business doubled profits and sales in the six months to August 31. Like-for-like sales were up by 11 percent with occupancy levels and room rates much higher.
"The number of foreign tourists to Britain is growing very, very fast. They spent 13 to 14 billion pounds last year and half of that in London."
"That's been growing very fast in the last 10 years and its forecast by Henley (forecasting centre) to be the fastest growing sector of the leisure market."  
Americans stayed at Whitbread's Marriot hotels for the first time in the half year.
"We never had effective marketting in the U.S. for our hotels before. This link up with Marriott in the States gives us a great marketing power. And they are in really attractive places for American visitors like Stratford-upon-Avon and Edinburgh. So we have seen a huge influx of Americans and in many places it has put five extra points on occupancy levels."
Whitbread acquired health and sports club group David Lloyd Leisure for 200 million stg and a chain of 16 Marriott hotels in Britain for some 185 million in August 1995.  
The company also owns a chain of about 130 low budget Travel Inns, which Jarvis said will be added at the rate of about one every 10 days to reach 300 by the end of the year 2000.
Whitbread plans to expand its hotel presence in London by converting County Hall and bringing Travel Inns into the capital. Consumers also spent more eating out during the half year with Pizza Hut, jointly owned with Pepsico, and TGI Friday's sales ahead by about 20 percent. The Beefeater chain of restaurants increased like-for-like sales three pecent and profit by 7 percent.  
Whitbread Inns, which includes casual dining out pub chain Brewers Fayre, saw profits grow by 15 percent to 77.4 million and total sales by 14 percent.
"The main driving force on like-for-like sales is on food pubs and restaurants and we also opened a lot more new places that appeal to people who would not normally go to pubs," said Jarvis.
The group thinks it can add about 40 new Pelican's a year -- the Pelican Group acquired for 133 million in July owns French bistro style cafes the Dome and Cafe Rouge -- bringing the total to about 300.  
"The most satisfying thing for me is the capital we have put into new businesses and invested in them has paid off. They have all performed well."
Whitbread now owns "three to four strong concepts that will give us good growth for the next three to four years."
Whitbread, which confirmed last week it was in talks with BrightReasons about buying its pizza and pasta chains, hopes to agree on terms this month, said Jarvis.
BrightReasons owns a 180-strong chain of restaurants trading as Bella Pasta, Pizza Piazza and Pizzaland.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
