Britain's leading discount food retailer Kwik Save Group Plc on Thursday said it was closing 107 shops as part a radical shake-up of its struggling discount chain, which unions said could mean 1,000 job losses.
The group, squeezed between mainstream food superstores and limited range discounters, also reported a 28 percent drop in annual profits to 90.3 million pounds ($148.2 million), before a provision of 87.5 million to pay for the rationalisation.
Sales rose 8.8 percent to 3.5 billion pounds ($5.76 billion) in the year and the company maintained its final dividend at 14.05p, making an unchanged total of 20p.
Chief executive Graeme Bowler said the reorganisation was designed to fend off fierce competition from superstores and continental discount groups, which have robbed Kwik Save of many of its traditional customers.
The restructuring pleased investors and Kwik Save's shares rose to peak 21 pence higher at 325 before settling a few pence bit lower.
A review of the company's operations by outside consultants, initiated in February, showed a need to improve its existing 979 stores and invest in staff and technology.
Kwik Save said it planned to spend some 50 million pounds on its New Generation programme in the next year and 100 million the year after as the new concept is rolled out into its stores.
Finance director Derek Pretty estimated the store closures would involve less than 200 job losses, as 90 percent of the staff would be redeployed in Kwik Save's remaining 900 stores.
There are plans to launch a Kwik Save own-label range to take on the superstores, improve contol over its fresh foods and tighten control of its pricing and quality. The group would have to invest heavily in technology, where it was about two to three years behind the competition.
"Research showed us that what our customers really like is discount values," Pretty said. "What they did not like was our range which was not good enough in some areas and did not match superstores."
Bowler acknowledged the group had failed to invest enough in upgrading the fabric of its existing stores in previous years. The new-style stores will be rolled out over the next three years at a cost of some 300 million pounds.
The chief executive told a news conference the company would introduce a new range of chilled foods, health and beauty products and over-the-counter medicines.
But he said the group was not trying to move away from its roots.
"We are not moving away from discounting prices," he said. "We are not trying to be a mini-version of someone else, we want to be ourselves."
Re-shaping the group was "an enormous task," he said, which would have to be undertaken in stages in order to minimise disruption.
The 107 stores would be closed progressively between now and September 1997. ($1=.6093 Pound)
