British clothing retailer Burton on Thursday showed off a 54 percent full year profit rise, breaking all stockmarket forecasts, and said shoppers were happier now than at any time since the early 1990's.
Pretax profits rose to 151.6 million pounds ($249 million) in the year to August 31 from 98.6 million on sales up 7.1 percent to 2.0 billion. The group raised its full-year dividend by 27 percent to 2.8 pence a share.
Chairman Sir John Hoskyns said all the group's divisions had reported an increase in full-year profits.
"This performance reflects the success of the trading strategies and continued brand building in every division," he said in a statement.
The retailer has had a long struggle to boost profit margins in what was until recently a depressed retail market. But the group has achieved a major turnaround.
Finance director Andrew Higginson said there was scope for more improvement in margins, although at a slower pace.
"There is still some scope for margin improvement this year, but be it at a lower pace. It will ease back somewhat from where we are at the moment," he told Reuters.
Higginson described the current trading environment as better than anything seen since the early 1990's, although he said it was certainly not booming.
Burton's Debenhams department store chain produced a 21 percent increase in profits to 102.8 million pounds. Hoskyns said the department store was set for a 20 percent increase in space over the next four years.
All the group's fashion stores, including Top Shop and Dorothy Perkins, made profits. Burton Menswear and Principles both moved back into the black after making losses last year.
Burton's shares rose on the better-than-expected results. The stock stood 1.5 pence higher at 146.5.
"The figures were at the top end of forecasts and we are still positive on the stock," said one senior trader.
Analysts had expected pre-tax profit of between 139.0 million and 149 million pounds.
Burton has just moved into home shopping via the acquisition of mail order group Innovations in August and Racing Green in October. But Higginson said the main focus of the group would remain with its stores.
"At the moment the focus is on the core retail division where the key oppurtunities lie," he said. "Home shopping is a medium-term project which will kick in in two to three years time." ($1=.6093 Pound)
