Derek Pretty, finance director of troubled U.K. discount supermarket chain Kwik Save, said on Thursday a radical shake-up of the group, including the closure of 107 stores at a cost of 87.5 million stg, was the best way to ensure its future.
"We researched opportunities in other areas and we reviewed, among other options, mergers. We looked at whether we should go back to being a limited range discounter, with much lower choice, and little in terms of chilled food," he told Reuters.
"But that would have meant losing nine million customers."  
He said the store closure programme would involve less than 200 job losses, as 90 percent of the staff would be redeployed in Kwik Save's remaining 900 stores.
About 1,900 work in the 107 stores to be shut. "Yes, we are confident that the provisioning is solid and appropriate. Anything more than that would have put us in the realms of big baths and contigency buckets."
"We have looked at this particularly carefully, the days of doing big bath provisioning have gone. We have looked very specifically at the stores we plan to close. We are confident it is the proper provision to take us forward." he said.  
At a news conference chief executive Graeme Bowler said the company would introduce a new range of chilled foods, health and beauty products and over the counter medicines as well as widening its existing product range.
"We are going for width rather than depth in brands," he said. Kwik Save will have 100 own-label products in its stores from the spring 1997.
"We are not moving away from discounting prices. It is our core proposition and we will not dilute it," said Bowler. "We are not trying to be a mini-version of someone else, we want to be ourselves."  
"Kwik Save made its reputation because it sold quality products cheaply. We will not engage in selling cheap products cheaply," Bowler told reporters.
Stores will also be upgraded after research conducted by outside consultants Anderson Consulting, initiated in February, showed customers wanted stores to be more welcoming and easy to use, said Bowler.
Kwik Save would need to invest heavily in technology, where it was about two to three years behind the competition, said Bowler, so that, for instance, debit cards could be used at all its tills and stock levels could be better controlled.  
He acknowledged that the group had failed to invest enough in upgrading the fabric of its stores in previous years.
The new-style Kwik Save stores will be rolled out in geographical clusters over the next three years at a cost of some 300 million stg, funded from cost savings.
The 107 stores will be closed progressively next year.
Research had identified the need to beef up the management team and as a result Kwik Save has appointed a group marketing director and a supply chain director, and planned to appoint a new buying director, Bowler said.  
He stressed the underlying performance of the group remained strong, generating sales of seven billion stg over the last two years despite fierce price pressure from superstores, and a return on capital of 20 percent in line with the industry average.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 6437
