Spirits, pubs and Dunkin' Donuts group Allied Domecq is likely to post a big drop in full-year profits on Tuesday, hit by a 320 million stg loss on the sale of its 50 percent stake in brewer Carlsberg-Tetley (C-T).
Before this exceptional charge, analysts' forecasts for pretax profits range from 560 to 581 million stg, down from 645 million last time, with most of the damage coming in Allied's spirits arm. Profits have been hit by the weak Mexican peso, tough trading conditions in the mature markets of Europe and America and de-stocking in the United States.  
The consensus forecast for the total dividend is 23.6p.
Allied sold its share in C-T to Bass in August for 200 million in cash together with its beer brands, allowing the group to quit brewing and concentrate entirely on its spirits and retailing businesses.
Allied said at the time it expected a loss on the sale of C-T of about 320 million stg.
After tax the company said it would mean a reduction in reserves of some 200 million stg.  
At Allied Domecq Spirits and Wines, many analysts are predicting a 60 million drop in trading profits from the 488 million stg recorded in 1995. Stock reduction and weak markets dented profits at the division in the first half, too.
In the United States where trade stocks of four major brands -- Kahlua, Beefeater, Courvoisier and Canadian Club -- built up last year, Allied was forced to start reducing stock levels by half a million cases which it expected to complete by the end of August 1996.
Some analysts think this de-stocking will strip 40 million stg off operating profits from the group's spirits arm.  
Trading profits from Allied's spirits and wine division dropped to 258 million stg for the six months ended February 29 from 327 million.
"Spirits will continue to show that things are tough although we are now seeing price increases of two to three percent coming in for the industry as a whole," said Mark Puleikis, an analyst at Merrill Lynch.
Allied's retailing division, which includes managed pubs as well as Baskin-Robbins and Dunkin' Donuts, is expected to post only a slight improvement in profits of some eight million to 223 million.  
"Although the managed pub side will improve, let's say it will add about about 12 million pounds to give 127 million at an operating level, Dunkin' Donuts and Baskin Robbins will drag the division down," said one analyst who declined to be named.
In franchising, poor winter weather held back same-store sales growth particularly in Baskin-Robbins during the first half.
Carlsberg-Tetley is forecast to chip in trading profits of some 65 million at the year-end up from 61 million. In the six months to 29 February 1996 it made trading profits of 25 million, an increase of 14 percent on the same half last year.  
Attention will focus on what management has to say about continued pressure from the investment community for a demerger of Allied's spirits division.
Allied shares touched a five-month high of 492p on Friday. "Obviously people are hoping there will be some news on a demerger," said one analyst who chose not to be named.
"A trading demerger would really add value to the group. The City has obviously done its sums and worked out it is worth about five pounds on a post-demerger basis," said another.
A Reuter poll of 24 brokers shows a consenus forecast for earnings per share of 33.7p rising to 37.4 next year.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 6437
