Shares in Anglo-Dutch consumer group Unilever Plc jumped on Friday after the group posted a better-than-expected five percent rise in third-quarter profits.
The company announced that profits rose to 826 million pounds ($1.4 billion) for the quarter, boosting the share price by 75p to 1,350 by the official close of the London market at 1630 GMT.
"I gritted myself for something rather unpleasant and its turned out very well," said David Lang, an analyst at Henderson Crosthwaite.
The results beat analysts' forecasts which ranged from 760 million pounds to 820 million.
"I think there is quite a lot of momentum in Unilever and that is before the benefits of management reorganisation which began in September," said Lang.
Before an exceptional charge of 32 million pounds, mostly to reshape Diversey, its newly acquired industrial cleaning business, pretax profits rose six percent to 918 million pounds.
"The total charges were clearly lower than we expected," said Richard Newboult, an analyst at Lehman Brothers. He had forecast a total restructuring charge of 74 million pounds with about half of that related to Diversey.
Diversey, acquired in January from Canadian brewer Molson for 360 million pounds, was merged with Lever Industrial in October to form a combined business with annual turnover of 1.15 billion pounds and a workforce of 13,000 in 60 countries.
Unilever owns a range of household brands including Persil and OMO washing detergents, Brooke Bond tea, Ponds cosmetic cream and Walls and Igloo frozen foods.
"Although poor weather had a negative effect on ice-cream sales, other parts of the business in Europe did well," said Unilever press officer Mike Haines.
Analysts and stock market dealers agreed. Despite the impact of a dull summer on ice-cream sales and profits, Unilever still managed to improve its profit by 13 million pounds to 502 million in the three month period from improved profits in detergents, frozen foods and personal products.
"The real strength came from the emerging markets of Latin America and Asia Pacific and the strong underlying performance in North America," added Haines.
The Asia-Pacific region turned in a 20 million pounds increase in profits to 108 million in the third quarter, Latin America was up 14 million pounds at 79 million, while Africa and the Middle East showed a nine million rise to 56 million pounds, reflecting changes made by the group to its Nigerian business.
($1=.6093 Pound)
