British dairy and distribution company Unigate Plc posted better than expected profits at the half year stage on Tuesday and said it was seeking to expand its presence as a distributor in mainland Europe.
"We have now refocused the group into food and distribution. And a lot of pan-European customers of ours are looking for us to come to them with some European capability, so one area we are looking at is distribution," chairman Ian Martin said.
Pretax profits in the half year to September 30 were up 0.3 percent at 60.6 million pounds ($101.1 million), better than stockmarket forecasts of 57 to 59 million. The company held cash of 58 million at September 30, giving it ample resources for acquisitions.
The company raised its interim dividend by 5.3 percent to 7.0 pence. Unigate shares were up four pence at 431p by late in the session.
Martin told a news conference: "We tend to see the duck being thickest in Europe and that is where we are shooting at the moment."
Chief executive Ross Buckland said in an interview that Unigate had between 200 and 300 million pounds to spend on acquisitions. "If our interest cover went down below four times then you would have to question our cautiousness," he said.
He ruled out a special dividend, saying that growth by acquisition represented better value to shareholders.
"We are prepared to expand beyond areas in which we operate, into another food area, but if we did it would have to be a large and meaningful acquisition," said Buckland.
Unigate's European foods division reported profits up 3.1 million at 44.1 million in the first half, with fresh foods increasing profits from 20.5 million to 26.5 million pounds.
This increase was helped by the 77 million pound acquisition of Kraft's European margarines and spreads business in August.
Malton, the bacon and pork processing business, has also benefited from recent acquisitions.
In the half year, a total of 100 million was spent on acquisitions, including 20 million on the Hargrave pork products business to further strengthen Malton. Another 77 million was spect buying Kraft's Vitalite and Golden Churn brands to add to St Ivel's existing brands -- Gold and Utterly Butterly.
"I don't believe we can be accused of unwise investments over the last year," Buckland said.
Unigate's dairy business reported profits down 2.9 million pounds at 17.6 million due to lower prices for butter and milk powders, which Unigate estimated cost it about 4.0 million in the period. But from October, Unigate said it has seen a small reduction in raw milk prices.
Wincanton, Unigate's distribution business reported profits up 1.7 million at 12.3 million.
In August, Unigate completed its exit from the U.S. restaurant business with the sale of Taco Bueno and Casa Bonita for 27 million, enabling the company to focus purely on developing its core European food and distribution business.
The group sold its U.S. restaurant chain Black-eyed Pea for 42 million pounds in July and its minority stake in Dutch food company Nutricia for 360 million in January. Cash at the bank and in hand amounted to 292 million at the half-year stage. ($1=.5994 Pound)
