British dairy and distribution company Unigate Plc is keen to acquire food and distribution companies in Europe, said finance director John Worby.
"We are actively seeking acquisitions. We continue to look at acquisitions of all sizes in both the food and distribution area in Western Europe," Worby told Reuters in an interview on Tuesday.
"We talk about small, medium and large. Medium is in the area of 50 to 150 million. We will continue to make small acquisitions of the in-fill, bolt-on type nature," he said.  
Unigate, which acquired Kraft's European margarine and spreads business in August for some 77 million stg, reported net cash held of 57.9 million at September 30.
The cash outflow for the half year of 110.4 million stg includes 71.4 million spent on acquisitions, net of disposals. The group sold its U.S. restaurant business Black-eyed Pea for 42 million stg in July.
The sale of Taco Bueno and Casa Bonita for 27 million since the half-year stage enables the company to focus on developing its core European food and distribution business.  
The company also sold its minority stake in Dutch food company Nutricia for 360 million stg in January.Cash at the bank and in hand amounted to 292 million at the half-year stage. Worby declined to say whether the company was in talks with any third parties nor would he be drawn on the specific type of acquisition Unigate is after.
At an operational level Worby said he expects the dairy side of the business to continue to suffer from weak commodity prices in the second half of the year. Dairy reported profits down 2.9 million stg at 17.6 million due to lower prices for butter and milk powders which cost Unigate about 4.0 million in the period.  
But from October 1 Unigate has seen a small reduction in raw milk prices, said Worby.
"In fresh foods, trading is still reasonably tough in the UK retail environment. We have seen high pig prices in the first half which squeezed margins but we expect some easing in that area," he said.
Unigate's European foods division reported profits up 3.1 million at 44.1 million in the first half, with fresh foods increasing its profits from 20.5 million to 26.5 million stg.
The improvement was especially helped by the contribution from the August acquisition of Kraft's margarines and spreads business.
Malton, the bacon and pork processing business, also benefitted from recent acquisitions.
In the half year a total of 100 million was spent on acquisitions, including 20 million on the Hargrave pork products business to further strengthen Malton and 79 million in buying Kraft's Vitalite and Golden Churn brands to add to St Ivel's existing brands -- Gold and Utterly Butterly.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 6437
