British food producer Northern Foods Plc posted virtually flat profits on Wednesday, held back by the collapse of world prices for its dairy products.
"The dairy business continues to be affected by the decline of commodity markets compared with a period of exceptionally high prices last year," said chairman Sir Christopher Haskins.
Profits rose one percent before tax and exceptional items to 57.8 million pounds ($97 million) for the six months ended September 30. Northern Foods shares rose 2-1/2p to 198p.
"There is no immediate prospect of commodity prices improving in the second half. We are also very driven by the strength of sterling against other currencies," Jo Stewart, head of Northern's prepared foods division said in an interview.
At a news conference Haskins repeated his plea for Britain to join a single European currency which would remove one swing factor in its profits. "If there is one company that thinks EMU is a good idea it is us."
Prices on the world commodity markets for butter, skimmed milk and bulk cream were off some 20 percent on last year's levels. Weakening world demand for dairy products and the rise in sterling against the other major European currencies was not offset by a reduction in Northern's cost of milk.
Eden Vale Food Ingredients, which sells milk products on world commodity markets was the hardest hit of Northern's divisions. The company estimated the collapse in commodity prices cost it about 6.0 million pounds.
Its dairy business posted operating profits of 21.6 million pounds, down 27 percent, reflecting a sharp deterioration in dairy commodity prices.
Competition in supplying milk to supermarkets remained intense but the recent erosion in prices should stop soon, said Stewart. "The profitability of that sector is now such that people are losing money and we expect the price erosion to stop," he said.
Northern now supplies about 33 percent of all milk in supermarkets, having lost about two percentage points of market share in the first half. Most British consumers get their milk from supermarkets where it costs about 28p, 10p less than a pint delivered to the doorstep.
On Tuesday rival Unigate said its sales of milk to supermarkets fell 2.4 percent in the first half, while dairy profits fell 2.9 million stg to 17.6 million due to lower prices for butter and milk powders, which Unigate estimated cost it about 4.0 million in the period.
Profits from Northern's prepared foods division were up 24.2 percent at 43.1 million, driven hardest by the grocery sector which benefitted from a full six month contribution from Green Isle which sells the Goodfella pizza brand.
But consumers' concern over a link between mad-cow disease and a similar brain wasting disease in humans hit sales of convenience foods and meat pies. Northern estimated the beef crisis cost it about 3.0 million pounds in the first half.
"We have seen a significant swing in our products offered to M&amp;S (Marks and Spencer Plc). Thirty-three of our thirty-five new lines will have no beef in them," Haskins said.
He said total consumption of beef was off 20 to 30 percent since fears first surfaced over the spread of mad-cow disease.
"We have seen no material recovery in consumer demand for beef, we would be glad if it stabilised," said Haskins.
($1=.5950 Pound)
