Britain's Northern Foods sees world dairy commodity prices as unlikely to improve in the second half but the impact of this on earnings should be partly offset by improved margins on prepared foods, said Jo Stewart, managing director of the company's prepared food division.
"There is no immediate prospect of commodity prices improving in the second half. We are also very driven by the strength of sterling aginst other currencies," Stewart said in a telephone interview after the firm reported first half results.  
In the first half prices on the world commodity markets for butter, skimmed milk and bulk cream were off some 20 percent on last year's levels.
Weakening world demand for dairy productes and the rise in sterling against the other marjor European currencies was not offset by a reduction in Northern's cost of milk.
Eden Vale Food Ingredients, which sells by-products of milk production like butter, skimmed milk powder and cream, on world commodity markets was the hardest hit of Northern's divisions.  
Overall, however margins recovered on the company's prepared foods business rising one percentage point to 8.0 percent in the first half and there was room for further improvement in the second half, Stewart said.
"Our markets have been strengthening in general. We have seen stronger consumer demand, a trend we expect to continue at least until the end of our fiscal year."
Northern achieved four percent price inflation on its prepared foods in the first half, compared with zero last year, and so far consumers have not reacted to price increases by curbing their demand, said Stewart.  
A typical pack of Northern's biscuits is now 2p higher at 51p than six months ago.
The impact of the beef crisis on consumers demand for beef and meat pies and in turn on Northern's operating profit should lessen in the second half to 2.0-3.0 million, said Stewart.
Sales of Northern's meat products were off 6.8 percent in the first half as shoppers continued to worry about a link between mad-cow disease and a similar brain wasting disease in humans. Northern estimated the beef crisis cost it about 3.0 million pounds in the first half.  
"The impact of BSE is likely to be a little less in the second half as we have put products in the market that can take the same role. We now use chicken, lamb or pork in a pie."
Before the beef crisis about 55 percent of Northern's hot pies were beef against 40 percent today. Pies are more important to Northern in the winter months of the second half year.
Competition in supplying milk to supermarkets remains intense but the recent erosion in prices should stop soon, said Stewart. "The profitability of that sector is now such that people are losing money and we expect the price erosion to stop," he said.  
Northern now supplies about 33 percent of all milk in supermarkets, haing lost about two percentage points of market share in the first half.
Robert Wiseman and fast-expanding Danish dairy products group MD Foods were especially keen on pricing of milk to supermarkets in the first half.
On Tuesday Unigate said its sales of milk to supermarkets fell 2.4 percent in the first half and dairy profits fell 2.9 million stg to 17.6 million due to lower prices for butter and milk powders, which Unigate estimated cost it about 4.0 million in the period.
Northern reported dairy profits down 27 percent at 21.6 million in the six months ended September 30.
Profits from its prepared foods division were up 24.2 percent at 43.1 million, driven hardest by the grocery sector which benefitted from a full six month contribution from Green Isle which sells the Goodfella pizza brand.
-- London Newsroom +44 71 542 6437
