Britain's independent brewers on Thursday pressed for a cut in the excise duty on beer ahead of Chancellor of the Exchequer Kenneth Clarke's budget statement on November 26.
The brewers are lobbying hard this time round, after Clarke's previous budget cut the duty on Scotch whisky for the first time since 1895, while leaving the rates on beer and wine unchanged. The duty on beer was raised by 2p a pint in 1994.
"Increasing excise duty over a period...has inevitably increased the divergence with our European partners. The single market demands a single fiscal policy and a uniform excise duty," said a letter to the Times newspaper from the chairman of the Independent Family Brewers of Britain.
The letter said the group would deliver a petition to the European parliament, asking for the European Commission to take into account the wide differences in excise duty between EU member states on alcoholic drinks and beer in particular.
The Brewers and Licensed Retailers Association (BLRA) are arguing that a 20 percent cut in the beer duty, equivalent to knocking 6p off a pint, would lower inflation, help boost government revenue and discourage illegal cross-border shopping.
Oxford Economic Forecasting researcher Adrian Cooper used the Treasury's own economic model to argue that a 20 percent cut in beer duty would mean lower inflation, more jobs and in the second year of a duty cut more money for the Exchequer.
British duty on a pint of five percent alcohol by volume is 30 pence. In France, it is just four pence, encouraging people to buy their beer in mainland Europe.
The total volume of duty paid beer flooding into the country is estimated by the BLRA to be about 4-1/2 percent of the total beer market. Over half of this is for illegal resale.
The Scotch Whisky Association estimates the government has received 2.0 million stg more in revenue from the industry as a result of the last cut in the whisky duty. It says the reduction has also fed through into lower prices for consumers.
Before last year's budget, a typical bottle of blended whisky costing 10.70 pounds ($18.01) about 67 percent went in tax, with duty at 5.55 pounds a bottle and value added tax at 1.59 pounds.
Since last year's cut in duty, average prices per bottle have fallen to 9.85 pounds for on supermarket own labels, although the price of brands has risen slightly. The Association is pressing for another four percent off duty paid on a bottle.
Britain's tobacco industry wants a freeze on duty, arguing the government is losing revenue because the tax is so high compared with central Europe, that smuggling is rife.
"We would certainly like to see a freeze this year because we are so far out of sight of the rest of Europe that it's causing a major smuggling problem," said Clive Turner, media relations at the Tobacco Council. "The government is currently missing out on 640 million a year in lost revenue," he said.
A 50 gram pack of rolling tobacco normally costs about 7.47 stg in Britain but can be bought in Belguim for slightly under 2.0 stg. The Tobacco Council estimate 68 percent of all hand rolling tobacco sold in Britain comes from mainland Europe and some 62 percent of that is smuggled across.
In his last budget statement Clarke, left the duty paid on hand rolling tabacco unchannged but raised thaty on cigarettes by 15 pence per pack. Cigarettes currently retail for around 2.95 pounds.
In the 1993 budget, Clarke pledged to raise tobacco tax on average by the rate of inflation plus at least three percent in future budgets. Last year's rise was equivalent to the rate of inflation plus seven percent. ($1=.5940 Stg)
