British sugar and sweeteners group Tate and Lyle Plc is likely to see a sharp drop in its full year profits on Wednesday, as its U.S. sugar unit Staley suffers a near 50 percent decline in earnings.
"The main swing factor will be Staley which has been squeezed between high raw material costs and poor high-fructrose corn syrup pricing," said Michael Landymore, an analyst at Henderson Crosthwaite. Analysts forecasts for pretax profits range from 270 to 285 million stg, down from 311 million last time. A total dividend for the year of 17.0p is expected, up a penny.  
Staley, which turned in profits of some 150 million stg in 1995, is expected to contribute just 75 million this time round.
But analysts expect the downturn at Staley to be partly offset by an improvement in the company's North American sugar business in the second half and better returns from its investment in emerging markets.
"The key feature is going to be Staley and the re-negotiation of contracts although clearly these figures come a little early for the company to give us much indication of that," said John Elston, an analyst at Panmure Gordon.  
Staley, which produces high fructrose corn syrup used as sweeteners in Coca Cola and Pepsi drinks, re-negotiates supply contracts with soft drinks firms at the beginning of every calender year.
In May, at the half year stage, Tate &amp; Lyle warned on its results for the full year as a result of steep grain prices. For the 26 weeks ended March 30, 1996 profits were up 10.1 percent from a year earlier at 168.2 million stg before tax.
But chairman Sir Neil Shaw said that profits for the full year were expected to be below the level anticipated at the company's annual meeting in January.  
"Trading conditions for Staley, the group's North American subsidiary are difficult, affected by increases in available industry capacity and coinciding with a dramatic increase in the cost of maize," said Shaw at the half year stage.
He said Staley's profits were expected to continue to be affected by the abnormal grain prices and competitive pressures through 1997 but that Tate &amp; Lyle should get more benefit from other investments, especially in new growth areas.
Traditionally Staley has provided about 50 percent of group profits.  
In July, the company said an explosion at its Scottsbluff sugar beet facility in Nebraska would hit 1996 pretax profits by 10 million -- two thirds would be for the insurance loss and one third for the disruption to production.
Domino Sugar, a North American cane refiner, is likely to show an improvement while Tate's Western Sugar Company in Colorado is expected to suffer from a bad sugar beet crop.
Analysts expect Tate's north American business, excluding Staley, to contribute about 110 million to group profits.
An improvement is also expected in earnings from Tate's UK Thames sugar refinery, forecast to chip in about 60 million stg.  
Amylum, a Belgium based cereal sweetener and starch company majority owned by Tate, is forecast to make about 85 million.
Other European sugar businesses should contribute some 22 million. In 1995 Tate's European business made 144.3 million stg in operating profits.
The company's sweeteners and starches busines in the rest of the world, including 100 percent owned Bundaberg Sugar in Australia, should add about 32 million stg to group trading profits up from 25.1 million stg in 1995.  
The group's animal foods and bulk storage business is predicted to contribute some 32 million, slightly down from 35.4 million in 1995. A Reuter poll of 20 brokers produced a consensus estimate for earnings per share of 37.6p for the year ended 28 september 1996, rising to 40.6p the following year.
Since May, Tate &amp; Lyle's shares have underperformed the stock market by about five percent but outperformed its peers in the food manufacturing sector by a similar amount.
The shares were up 3p in early trade on Friday at 466p.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 7717
