British sugar and starch producer Tate and Lyle reported an 11 percent fall in full year profits to 276 million pounds ($463 million) on Wednesday after an earnings drop of more than 50 percent at its U.S. subsidiary Staley.
But the company's shares rose 9-1/2 pence to 479-1/2 after touching 482 as company executives made positive noises about the current trading environment for corn miller Staley, with corn prices now at more normal levels and demand rising for ethanol, which is extracted from the corn.
The price of corn now at $2.60 a bushel has settled after a much larger crop this summer of 9.3 billion bushels, Tate chief executive Larry Pillard told Reuters in an interview.
"I would like to think futures prices will stay at about $2.60 a bushel. At this time last year they were up by 33 percent at 3.50 and as high as five dollars a bushel at mid-year. That's unprecedented, the highest price for 120 years," he said.
Staley was severely squeezed last year. On the one hand by very high corn prices, which doubled after a low U.S. corn crop, and increased competition from new producers of high fructose corn syrup and on the other hand by its inability to pass this added cost onto customers.
"Conditions have reversed this year so that corn milling companies can divert some of their excess capacity into ethanol and that could tighten up the market a bit," he added.
Ethanol, a gasoline substitute, can also be made by corn millers but the price of gasoline was so low last year that this option was closed. Gasoline prices have averaged 63 cents a gallon so far this year, reaching a peak of 77.01 in April, up from 56 cents a gallon in 1995.
"I think that obviously the world grain situation getting back to more normal levels is encouraging, the re-emergence of ethanol is quite encouraging and the three percent increase in sugar deliveries in the U.S. is quite encouraging," said Pillard.
Staley, which produces high fructose corn syrup used as sweeteners in Coca Cola and Pepsi drinks, renegotiates supply contracts with soft drinks firms at the beginning of every calender year. Pillard said it was too early to comment on the next round of contracts.
"It looks like Staley has finally hit the bottom of the cycle," said one analyst who declined to be named.
Tate benefited in the last quarter of the year from a recovery in the U.S. sugar market where the selling price of white sugar rose after a low U.S. beet crop reduced supplies.
Cane raw sugar costs declined as supplies of cane raw sugar rose due to increases in the import quota.
North American sweeteners and starches business chipped in 116.2 million pounds in the year ended September 28, down from 170.9 million, as a result of Staley.
European profits rose 8.0 million to 152.5 million pounds, with increased security of supply to Tate's sugars from the new European Union Sugar Regime and progress at Amylum, its European cereal sweetener and starch business.
Trading profit from its emerging markets business was up 6.4 million at 31.5 million. Tate's animal feed and bulk storage business showed a slight profit improvement to 36.8 million.
Tate reported a currency loss of 3.5 million pounds in the year, against a gain of 4.8 million last time, due to sterling's strength against the dollar.
The board recommended a final dividend of 11.7p, bringing the total for the year to 17.0p, an increase of six percent. ($1=.5956 Pound)
