Drinks, food and retail group Grand Metropolitan Plc will post a strong rise in its underlying business performance in its full-year results on Thursday driven by its North American foods business Pillsbury, but it also stands to take a huge 522 million stg loss on disposals.
"The growth will really come through from Pillsbury, particularly on dough and pizza," said Goldman Sachs analyst Colin Davies. Analysts forecasts for pretax profits range from 948 to 999.0 million stg, before the loss on disposals.  
GrandMet posted pre-tax profits of 920 million stg last year. Dividend forecasts are centred on 15.8p, up from 14.9p.
The loss on disposals is made up of 265 million stg of goodwill written off on the sale of its optician business Pearle, a 36 million stg hit on the disposal of William Hill and Mecca to leisure group Brent Walker and a 14 million stg loss on the disposal of its Erasco food business in Germany, to the Campbell Soup Company.
At the time of the Erasco sale GrandMet said it would take a further 207 million stg of goodwill written off on the sale of a batch of European foods businesses.  
The sell-off is designed to enable GrandMet to focus in Europe on its major international brands - Pillsbury,  Green Giant, Haagen-Dazs and Old El Paso.
Aside from the exceptional charges analysts see a 26 percent profit improvement from GrandMet's food business to an estimated 456 million stg.
Pillsbury has achieved prices rises and gained market share since the first half, GrandMet said in September.  
Analysts expect Pillsbury to contribute about 274 million stg of the estimated 456 million while Pet, producer of Old El Paso and Italian foods and soups acquired in January 1995 for some 2.0 billion stg, is expected to chip in about 160 million.
Sector analysts also anticipate a near 15 million stg improvement in profits to 470 million from the company's spirits arm International Distillers and Vintners (IDV). "We expect GrandMet's drinks business to do better than either Allied Domecq or Guinness," said Merrill Lynch, analyst Mark Puleikis.  
"They have been a lot more proactive and aggressive in their advertising expenditure over the last two years and they are more exposed to the vodka category which is standing them in good stead," he said.
