Brewer to leisure group Bass Plc is expected to report a strong improvement in full-year earnings on Wednesday, driven by growth at Holiday Inns and its chain of Harvester restaurants.
"The company will benefit from a full year on its acquisition of Harvester, a full year of sales in Caffrey's and Hoopers Hooch and a full year from Robinsons'," said BZW analyst Charles Winston. Bass bought the Harvester chain of 78 pubs for 165 million stg from Forte in July.  
Analysts forecasts for pre-tax profits range from 665 to 675 million stg, up from 599.1 million stg in 1995. A dividend of 24.7p is anticipated. The tight profits range bears testimony to the full and detailed trading statement the company announced in September, covering the first 48 weeks of the year.
Chairman Sir Ian Prosser said at the time revenue per available room in the US franchised hotels increased by six percent. Analysts expect revenue per available room to show an increase of 8.0 percent in Europe at the full year.  
"The growth will come from hotels, up 18 percent and pubs up 16 percent," said Goldman Sachs analyst Colin Davies.
Analysts expect profits from Holiday Inns to come in at about 193 million stg up from 164 million a year ago. The pubs division, which includes Harvester, is anticipated to show trading profits of some 284 million up from 240 million.
However, trading profit from the leisure division is expected to be down about 10 million at 65 million because of the impact of the national lottery and scratch cards on admissions at Gala, Bass owned traditional bingo clubs.  
But betting shops Coral, also part of the company's leisure division, are likely to see the benefit of government changes in June that allowed betting shop operators to have up to two 10 pound all-cash AWPs on the premises.
The company's brewing business should report a near 10 million stg increase in operating profit to 155 million, helped along by strong sales in the markets leading alcopop Hoopers Hooch and creamy ale Caffrey's.
Profits from the soft drinks division, which includes Britvic, should also be slightly higher -- some analysts predict by as much as 10 million up at 56 million -- as a result of the acquisition of Robinsons' soft drinks business.
Bass shares closed 11p down at 783-1/2p on Friday as talk surfaced that its proposed 200 million stg acquisition of Carlsberg-Tetley would only be allowed through with tough conditions imposed by government.
-- London Newsroom +44 71 542 6437
