Britain's largest brewer Scottish and Newcastle Plc announced a 26 percent increase in half-year profits to 195.1 million pounds ($328 million) on Monday and said the second half of the year had started positively.
The company's acquisition of Courage from Australian brewer Fosters last year helped give a 67 percent push to 89.9 million pounds in trading profits from its beer divisions.
"Overall, I think our 10 percent dividend increase, at the top end of the (forecast) range, is a measure of our confidence for the second half of the year," chief executive Brian Stewart told Reuters in an interview.
The dividend rise to 7.21 pence per share beat most analysts' forecasts which were centred on a 7p payout.
"General trading conditions are at least as good as they were this time last year and there has been a bit of an improvement in mainland Europe," he added.
The company's shares rose 7p to 647p. "The results were well ahead of our expectations. The really surprising number was the one that came in from beer. We were very impressed," said James Wheatcroft, an analyst at Panmure Gordon.
A Reuter poll of analysts produced a forecast range of 178 to 198 million pounds for pretax profits.
Beer sales fell by just over one percent compared with the first half of 1995 which was bolstered by outstanding summer weather, said the company. Despite this, S&amp;N said sales of John Smith's, the country's leading ale, were up 17 percent and sales of Foster's lager grew 6.5 percent to its highest ever volume.
Stewart, however, bemoaned the failure of Chancellor Kenneth Clarke to reduce excise duty on beer in his Budget last week.
Profits from its S&amp;N's Center Parcs activity holiday resorts were down 11 percent at about 44 million pounds due to the weak economic background in mainland Europe and the cost of improving its facilities in the Netherlands and Belgium.
The company sold its smallest village at Lommerbergen, Netherlands, and had to close its De Eemhof parc in Belgium while it upgraded the centre.
"We would expect Center Parcs to be much more on the front foot in the second half and we would quite clearly spell out that conditions in Germany are now more positive," said Stewart.
Profits from the company's pubs grew 8.2 percent to 87 million pounds, driven by its managed outlets where like-for-like food sales across the estate grew by 13 percent as the company put more restaurants into its premises.
The company will open 35 new Chef &amp; Brewer pub restaurants by the end of the year and push the Barras &amp; Co community pub brand very strongly, said Stewart.
"We will really be pushing down the accelerator on our community pubs Barras. Our focus has previously been on the high street or city centre and these community pubs really have a great deal of potential," he said.
Profits from S&amp;N's tenanted pubs fell some nine percent to 11.8 million pounds after the company was forced to sell off outlets to comply with a government requirement, imposed as a condition of S&amp;N's acquisition of Courage.
($1=.5953 Pound)
