Brian Stewart, chief executive of brewer to leisure group Scottish and Newcastle Plc, said on Monday he expected an improved performance from its Center Parcs holiday resorts in the second half.
"We would expect Center Parcs to be much more on the front foot in the second half and we would quite clearly spell out that conditions in Germany are now more positive," said Stewart in an interview.  
S&amp;N's profits from Center Parcs fell 11.4 percent to 38.9 million stg in the first half due to the weak economic background in mainland Europe and the cost of improving its parcs in Holland and Belgium.
The company sold its smallest village at Lommerbergen, Holland and had to close its De Eemhof parc in the Benelux while it upgraded the centre.  
"There were three hits to profits on Center Parcs. One million from the strength of sterling against the guilder, one million in redundancy for restructuring in the Benelux and 1.3 million from the effective closure of Eemhof while we were restructuring the centre," said Stewart.
He said no more new parcs would be built until consumer demand improves in mainland Europe. However, even in the absence of any pick-up in consumers leisure spending the Center Parcs business will do better in the second half, said Stewart.  
S&amp;N's leisure business, which includes Pontin's holiday camps, represented the one drag on its half-year results, with its other two divisions, beer and pubs, both performing strongly.
The inclusion of Courage, acquired from Australian brewer Foster's last year, for its first full half-year pushed operating profits on the beer side by 67 percent to 89.9 million.
Margins improved on beer sales, both for take-home and in pubs and restaurants, but this meant giving up unprofitable sales, resulting in a small loss of market share for S&amp;N.  
S&amp;N posted trading profits up 8.2 percent at 87 million stg from its pub division, driven by its managed outlets where like- for-like food sales grew by 13 percent as the company developed more restaurants.
S&amp;N will increase its capital expenditure by 25 percent from last year's level to 120 million stg at the end of its current financial year, said Stewart.
The company will open 35 new Chef &amp; Brewer pub restaurants by the year-end and push the Barras &amp; Co community pub brand very strongly, he said.  
"We will really be pushing down the accelerator on our community pubs Barras. Our focus has previously been on the high street or city centre and these community pubs really have a great deal of potential," said Stewart.
However, profits from the company's tenanted pubs fell some 9.0 percent to 11.8 million. The company sold 100 pubs in the first half period, reducing its number of tenanted pubs by 14 percent and managed outlets by 3 percent giving it a total estate of about 2,600 pubs.
The sales mean S&amp;N has now met its obligation to government to reduce the size of its pub estate as a condition of the company being allowed to acquire Courage.
"Overall, I think our 10 percent dividend increase, at the top end of the range, is a measure of our confidence for the second half of the year. General trading conditions are at least as good as they were this time last year and there has been a bit of an improvement in mainland Europe," said Stewart.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 6437
