Regional brewer Marston, Thompson &amp; Evershad Plc on Tuesday reported an 8.5 percent decline in sales of its key brand ale Marston Pedigree in the first half of the year due to the rising popularity of so-called nitrokegs.
But the ale increased its market share by one percent as its competitors real ales suffered even more. Overall sales of the company's own brewed beers rose 0.5 percent and it launched its own nitrokeg, Marston's Bitter Smoothbrewed, in the Spring.
"Nitrokeg is having quite an effect in terms of market share," said chief executive David Gordon in an interview.  
The company's shares were 5p lower at 275p. But the country's two largest brewers -- Scottish &amp; Newcastle and Bass -- who boast a huge portfolio of brands, saw their shares rise.
S&amp;N shares were up 6p at 667p after announcing an unexpectedly strong 26 percent rise in its half year profits on Monday. Unlike traditional beers, nitrokegs do not undergo a secondary fermentation in the cask.  
Brewers have scurried to launch their own nitrokegs after the runaway success of Bass-owned Caffrey's, which sold fast in the scorching 1995 summer.
Caffrey's, served chilled, has taken traditional real ale drinkers away from warmer ales and also attracted premium lager drinkers.
Earlier Marston, Thompson reported a 5.3 percent increase in its pretax profits to 14.7 million stg in the half year ended September 28, driven by strong food and liquor sales in its managed estate.  
Food sales were up by 18.9 percent and now account for 30.8 percent of total sales in its managed pub estate. The company's managed estate of 242 pubs made operating profits of 9.4 million up 12.2 percent.
"There is no evidence that demand is dropping. The average spend per head is seven pounds for food and the retired elderly and the young can afford to do that maybe two or three times a week," said Gordon.
"I feel there is a touch more consumer confidence," he said, adding conditions were better now than for six or seven years.
In a separate statement, Belhaven Brewery said it managed to increase sales of Belhaven Best despite tougher competition from other nitrokegs. Belhaven shares were unchanged at 188p.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 6437
