British brewer-to-leisure group Bass Plc, said on Wednesday the company planned to spend 670 million pounds ($1.1 billion) on the business next year, creating some 7,000 jobs.
The company plans a 300 million pound ($500 million) investment programme next year on its Bass Taverns, converting many pubs to branded concept bars like the trendy All Bar One or Irish pubs O'Neills and refurbishing community pubs.
This year Bass invested, net of disposals, 568 million in capital projects, which it calculates created at least 6,000 new jobs.
But in an interview chairman Sir Ian Prosser declined to comment on its proposed acquisition of brewer Carlsberg-Tetley (C-T) which is currently being studied by Britain's Board of Trade on competition grounds. Their decision is expected in the next few weeks.
C-T is a joint venture between Allied Domecq and Danish brewer Carlsberg A/S formed in 1992 by the merger of their British brewing and wholesaling businesses.
"I don't make any comment on that. Our discussions with the Office of Fair Trading are obviously confidential. We'll wait and see what the president of the Board of Trade says," he said.
Bass shares were 1p lower at 808p by 1302 GMT.
"To get the share price to move forward, the company needs to resolve the uncertainty surrounding C-T," said Charles Winston, an analyst at BZW. But he added the company's profits for the full year were at the top end of market expectations and showed the strongest cashflow since 1985.
In August Bass announced the acquisition of Allied's 50 percent stake in the venture for 200 million pounds in cash together with some 30 beer brands, among them Tetley Bitter, Skol and Ansell, six breweries and C-T's network of depots.
Bass and Carlsberg agreed at the same time to merge C-T and Bass Brewers, given regulatory approval. If approved, the merger will create Britain's largest brewer by far with at least 35 percent of the market.
Bass currently has a 23 percent market share.
Bass was knocked off its perch as Britain's leading brewer last year when Scottish and Newcastle (S&amp;N) acquired Courage from Australian brewer Fosters, giving it a 31 percent share of Britain's beer market.
Prosser dismissed fears expressed by regional brewers and competitors that a full merger would make Bass too dominant in the Midlands and Yorkshire. "I don't think we are going to have that high a concentration in any region," he said.
He also restated that the acquisition would be good for drinkers and reiterated the company's committment not to close any of C-T's breweries.
Bass anticipates continued buoyancy in UK consumer spending over the next year from which it will benefit, Prosser said.
The company's Holiday Inns profits rose by 18.9 percent to 195 million, while its Bass Taverns' chain of managed pubs increased operating profit by 22.8 percent to 221 million. The brewery division improved profits nine percent to 157 million while the Britvic soft drinks arm improved profits 8.7 percent to 50 million.
But the leisure division, which includes traditional Gala bingo halls and Corals betting shops, continued to be affected by lower admissions after the introduction of scratch cards and the national lottery. Profits were off 10.8 pct at 66 million.
Coral was hit by a one-off cost of 4.0 million pounds on the last Saturday of the financial year when all seven races at Ascot were won by the same jockey. A final dividend payout of 17.3 pence was recommended, making a total 25p for the year. ($1=.6054 Pound)
