Imperial Tobacco Group Plc, demerged from Hanson Plc in October, said on Thursday it's future was bright although British market growth was tough due to escalating taxes on cigarettes.
"In Britain it is difficult to see the market growing given the punitive taxes. We are likely to see continued strong growth, though, in the Asia Pacific area of the world," chief executive Gareth Davis said in an interview.
Imperial posted trading profits of 303 million pounds ($491.8 million) from Britain in the year ended September 28, unchanged from its 1995 level, but profits from overseas grew 55 percent to 70 million.
Overall group profits before tax for the year were up five percent at 366 million pounds. The company's shares rose 5-1/2p to 373-1/2p.
Britain's Finance Minister, Kenneth Clarke, announced an increase of 15p on a packet of 20 cigarettes in his November 26 budget.
After a similar rise in 1995, British cigarette sales fell by 2.5 percent and Davis said he expected the same sort of fall again.
He said the latest tax rise would fuel smuggling by widening further the gap between taxes in Britain and mainland Europe.
The company's profits from overseas, which now make up 19 percent of total group profits, are targeted to reach 25 percent by the end of the decade, said Davis.
"I think we are in a world market which is still in growth, albeit modest, and Imperial is a relatively late entrant to international markets and has tremendous potential to exploit its brands internationally."
In 1995, Imperial's set-up costs in emerging markets were about 9.0 million pounds before falling to around half that in 1996, said Davis, and its overseas investment is likely to remain at around that level each year until 2000.
He said the company was confident of its defence against 12 lawsuits bought in Britain by people who allege their health has been damaged by smoking its products.
"We have very strong defences and great confidence in those defences and we will defend each and any claim aganst us with the upmost vigour."
One case involving 12 plaintiffs is the first in Britain where their lawyers, who have been denied legal aid, are working on a no win, no fee basis, a common practice in the United States. ($1=.6161 Pound)
