British food and drinks giant Grand Metropolitan Plc posted a six percent rise in annual profits before tax on Thursday to 965 million pounds ($1.6 billion).
Chairman George Bull said trading in the current year had started "satisfactorily" as the company outlined a strategy of steady organic growth.
Profits grew 30 percent at its North American foods business Pillsbury to 431 million pounds, with both sales and prices up, and its spirits arm International Distillers and Vitners (IDV) posted a four percent increase in trading profit to 471 million.
GrandMet shares fell back 8p to 448p however, as investors and analysts worried about the effects of a strong pound against the dollar on GrandMet's profits next year.
Pillsbury and fast food chain Burger King generate about 60 percent of group earnings in dollars. The pound stood at $1.493 on May 1 and has since risen to $1.6477.
"The main reason is the currency translation which means a lot of analysts will be downgrading their forecasts for next year and earnings growth will remain in single figures," said one analyst who declined to be named.
In an interview, group finance director Gerald Corbett said GrandMet had embarked on an era of steady, organic growth driven by profits from Pillsbury and spirits arm IDV.
"The message is steady as she goes, managing what we have got, building our brands and keeping the ship on a steady course," Corbett said.
The avowed strategy of steady, organic growth from GrandMet contrasts sharply with former chairman Lord Sheppard's era of frenetic acquisitions and disposals.
Corbett said the company is confident it can achieve the same level of profits growth at Pillsbury next year. Sales at Pillsbury were up four percent and prices three percent while margins rose 0.7 of a percentage point to 12.2 percent.
"We are not looking for a sharp improvement in demand in the states and equally we see no evidence of deterioration."
Pillsbury included a full year from Pet, producer of Old El Paso and Italian foods and soups, which was acquired in February 1995. The division was able to cash in on rising raw material costs in the United States by lifting prices on all its major brands like Haagen-Dazs ice cream, Green Giant and Pillsbury.
At IDV GrandMet plans to get price rises through of another two to three percent on average next year, said Corbett.
IDV's spirits sales up five percent and average price rises of two percent in the year ended September 30. Profits growth in Europe was led by drinkers in Britain and Spain. Spirits sales in emerging markets were up 15 percent.
"We think we have done rather better on pricing than our competitors as we started investing on brand equity about two years ago whereas they have yet to really put their foot on the accelerator," said Corbett.
He sited the fact GrandMet got its first price rise for five years through in April on Smirnoff vodka in the United States.
GrandMet plans to spend 30 to 40 million pounds more on marketing its IDV brands this year, said Corbett, after spending 420 million in 1995-96. Again the bulk of its marketing spend will go behind liqueur Bailey's, Smirnoff, and J&amp;B whisky.
Overall marketing expenditure was up 16 percent at 1.2 billion pounds in its year ended September 30.
But operating profits from Burger King fell 29 million to 167 million pounds in the year, hit by difficult trading in Britain and Germany due to the beef crisis and the slowing pace of refranchising outlets. The company opened 756 restaurants in the year to bring its worldwide total to 8,696.
GrandMet plans to ask for shareholder approval at its annual meeting in March to buy back up to 10 percent of its own shares.
Corbett said the company is "reviewing a number of options" but declined to say what they were or talk about the timing or size of any buyback. ($1=.6054 Pound)
