An ambitious bid by brewer-to-leisure group Bass to create Britain's largest brewer by merging with Carlsberg-Tetley  may get snagged by a UK government sensitive about bad publicity ahead of a general election, said analysts on Monday.
Ian Lang, president of the Board of Trade, will be reluctant to wave through a merger that could mean large scale job losses, upsetting the ruling Conservative Party's re-election drive in clear view of an election that must be held by May 1997, they said.  
Although analysts expect Britain's competition authority, the Monopolies and Mergers Commission, to approve the merger -- providing Bass agrees to certain conditions -- the final decision to let the deal go through rests with Lang.
"Clearly there is a very strong element of politics. And it is certainly more subject to politics than the last decision on S&amp;N (Scottish &amp; Newcastle ) for Courage," said Nikko analyst Dermott Carr.  
Former Trade and Industry secretary Michael Heseltine, accredited with nodding through S&amp;N's acquisition of Courage from Australian brewer Foster's 18 months ago without an MMC referral, was operating mid-way through the Conservative Party's term in office and his stance on competition policy is widely viewed by analysts as more laissez-faire than Lang's.
Earlier, Britain's Department of Trade and Industry, said it had decided to refer Bass' proposed merger with Carlsberg-Tetley to the MMC for investigation. An MMC report is due by March 24.  
"I think politics will enter into this. They will be very lucky to get a decision by March 24 and the government will be in no hurry to decide before the election," said Stephen Cox, campaigns manager for the Campaign for Real Ale (CAMRA).
CAMRA wants to see the deal blocked because government undertakings imposed on S&amp;N for its acquisition of Courage to go ahead have not improved customer choice in the pubs or led to lower beer prices, said Cox.
Analysts however expect the Bass deal to go through in some form, reflecting growing competition in the industry and brewing over-capacity.  
"We are confident that more jobs will be safer at both companies if the merger goes ahead than would otherwise be the case," said a Bass spokeswoman.
Analysts said they expect the MMC to require Bass to sell about 1,000 of its pubs, it currently owns about 4,200, and to cull its brand porfolio. The requirement to sell pubs may include a selective disposal programme in areas of particular geographic dominance.
A combination of these two requirements would reduce Bass' market share to around 35 percent from about 40 percent if the deal was allowed to go ahead unconditionally.
"How many they will be prepared to sell really does depend on what they (Bass) think the EC is going to come out with," said Carr. The European Commission has yet to decide whether British brewers should be allowed to keep the tie -- in other words brewing beer and requiring its own pubs to sell that beer.
"If the EC says they can't keep the tie then the pubs are clearly worth less. So Bass might get a better price for them now if they believe we are at the top end of the pub cycle," added Carr.
-- London Newsroom +44 171 542 6437
