Britain on Monday referred brewer to leisure group Bass Plc's acquisition of Carlsberg-Tetley (C-T) to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission for investigation but analysts said they believed the deal would go through once certain conditions had been met.
"Mr Lang (British Trade &amp; Industry Minister) considers that the merger gives rise to competition concerns in relation to the significant increase in concentration of production in the UK brewing industry," the Department of Trade &amp; Industry said in a statement.
Bass acquired half of C-T from Allied Domecq for 200 million pounds ($328 million) in August and declared its plan to buy the rest of the company from Danish brewer Carlsberg A/S, in exchange for Carlsberg taking 20 percent in the merged company.
Britain's MMC will investigate whether a full merger of the two companies would operate against the public interest. It will report by March 24, 1997.
If approved, the merger would create Britain's largest brewer by far, with at least 35 percent of the market. Bass now has a 23 percent market share.
Rival brewers and analysts widely expected a referral to the MMC because of the dominance it would give the merged group in setting beer prices in some regions.
Bass shares fell about 6p on the news to 783p but recovered to close 14-1/2p higher at 803-1/2p as analysts said they expected the Bass deal to go through with conditions imposed, given the force of growing competition in the industry and brewing over-capacity.
But they added Lang will be in no rush to approve the deal so close to a general election due before May 1.
"They will probably try to defer the decision until after the election. I don't think they want the negative PR of having a large number of people fired," said Lehman Brothers analyst John Wakeley.
Former Trade and Industry secretary Michael Heseltine, accredited with nodding through Scottish and Newcastle's (S&amp;N) acquisition of Courage from Australian brewer Foster's 18 months ago without an MMC referral, was operating mid-way through the Conservative Party's term in office.
His stance on competition policy was also widely viewed by analysts as more laissez-faire than that of Lang.
"Clearly there is a very strong element of politics. And it is certainly more subject to politics than the last decision on S&amp;N for Courage," said Nikko analyst Dermott Carr.
Analysts expect the MMC to require Bass to sell about 1,000 of its pubs, it currently owns about 4,200, and to cull its brand porfolio. It may be required to sell more pubs in areas where it is especially dominant.
A combination of these two conditions would reduce Bass' market share to around 35 percent from about 40 percent if the deal was allowed to go ahead unconditionally.
Brian Revell, Transport and General Workers Union national secretary for the drinks industry, welcomed the decision to refer the Bass takeover.
"Our main concern is that if the takeover is allowed to proceed, at least 2,000 jobs are likely to be lost," he said.
A spokeswoman for Bass said the company hoped the MMC could make a hasty decision. "We are confident that more jobs will be safer at both companies if the merger goes ahead than would otherwise be the case," she added.
Britain's Secretary of State has the power to refer to the MMC for investigation any proposed merger which creates or intensifies a market share of 25 percent of supply in Britain.
Bass was knocked off its perch as Britain's leading brewer last year when S&amp;N acquired Courage, giving it a 31 percent share of Britain's beer market.
C-T was formed as a joint venture between Allied Domecq and Carlsberg A/S in 1992 by the merger of their British brewing and wholesaling businesses.
Bass announced the acquisition of Allied's 50 percent stake in August along with some 30 beer brands including Tetley Bitter and Skol, six breweries and C-T's network of depots. ($1=.6087 Pound)
