Bougainville's secessionist rebel leader Francis Ona said he feared his mountainous, jungle-clad South Pacific island would be destroyed by mining if it failed to win independence from Papua New Guinea.
Ona, political leader of the rebels, said in a rare interview aired on Australian radio on Tuesday he believed Papua New Guinea would allow the remote, resource-rich island to be plundered by foreign miners.
"Bougainville seems to be on top of a big mineral resource. We truly believe that all the island of Bougainville is under threat of destruction by these foreign companies," Ona told the Australian Broadcasting Corporation.
Papua New Guinea on Sunday announced it wanted to buy back the foreign interest in Bougainville's giant Panguna copper mine, closed in 1989 after sabotage attacks by rebels.
Papua New Guinea Prime Minister Sir Julius Chan said the buy-back scheme would result in a financial compensation package for landowners and, along with the hiring of mercenaries, was aimed at ending the nine-year rebellion.
Development of the mine fuelled secessionist sentiment among Bougainvilleans who felt they were not sharing in its wealth.
The mine, which opened in 1972, swelled the Papua New Guinea government's coffers by producing 160,000 tonnes of copper concentrate annually, increasing local resentment on the island. The mine also produced copper and silver.
Ona, president of the rebels' self-declared Bougainville Interim Government, said the Panguna mine would be restarted and four other mines approved if the independence struggle failed.
He named four other areas he said were ripe for mining, including Buka, a small island a short canoe ride to the north of Bougainville where Papua New Guinea troops are based.
"Without independence Papua New Guinea is going to enforce those five mines on Bougainville," Ona said.
Chan has said he wants to buy control of the Panguna mine from global mining group RTZ-CRA, which owns 53.6 percent of the mine operator Bougainville Copper Ltd.
Mining analysts have said it would take three to four years to restart the Panguna mine and that a political solution was essential for any mining activity on Bougainville.
Ona and other rebel leaders were targetted for capture in mid-1996 when the Papua New Guinea government launched an offensive to snatch control of rebel-held areas on the island.
Since the demise of "Operation High Speed", Papua New Guinea has hired a British-based supplier of mercenaries, Sandline International, to train troops for a mission to Bougainville.
The presence of 40 mercenaries now in Papua New Guinea has attracted strong criticism from Australia, New Zealand, Britain, the United States and South Africa.
The Bougainville conflict has claimed hundreds of lives since sporadic guerrilla warfare first broke out on the island in 1988, and has attracted charges of human rights abuses by both troops and rebels.
