Australia's Woodside Petroleum Ltd on Wednesday announced it would ramp up exploration spending this year as it sought to diversify away from the lucrative gas fields of the North West Shelf.
Woodside unveiled its aggressive exploration programme for calendar 1997, much of its centred outside the offshore North West Shelf fields, after reporting a 58 percent surge in annual net earnings to A$191 million for 1996.
Woodside's shares shot up on the profit announcement, which was in line with market expectations.  
The stock closed at the day's high of A$8.97 on Wednesday, up 31 cents on Tuesday's close, confirming the market's bright view of Woodside.
Woodside said it would more than double exploration spending in 1997 to a record A$120 million with over half of this being thrown at the company's interests in the Timor Sea.
"Certainly this is an order-of-magnitude increase in non-North West Shelf exploration activity," Akehurst told a news conference in Melbourne.
Woodside plans to drill 12 to 14 exploration wells, including eight or nine outside the North West Shelf, he added.  
Akehurst also announced in North West Shelf's proven reserves, with ultimate gas recovery leaping 60 percent to 24.4 trillion cubic feet (tcf) at the end of 1996.
Oil reserves rose 11 percent to 175 million barrels and condensate reserves were up 21 percent to 690 million barrels.
Woodside expressed confidence the North West Shelf would meet the 30 tcf in gas reserves needed to justify a doubling of LNG capacity to meet growing demand from Japanese customers.
"Quite clearly we see considerable upside...," Akehurst said, citing estimated possible reserves of 45 tcf.  
Equal partners in the North West Shelf are Woodside, The Broken Hill Pty Co Ltd, The British Petroleum Co Plc, Japan Australia LNG (MiMi) Pty Ltd, a partnership of Mitsui &amp; Co Ltd and Mitsubishi Corp, Chevron Corp and the Royal Dutch/Shell Group.
The six partners plan to double annual LNG production to 14 million tonnes by 2003 at a capital cost of A$6 billion.
The North West Shelf partners and owners of the nearby Gorgon gas field have been discussing the prospects of merging the two developments, with a view to expanding the North West Shelf's existing LNG plant further.  
"I think the exciting prospect is to see how we can move on from there and look for opportunities with third parties to expand that project," Akehurst said.
He said he would welcome any proposal to merge Gorgon with North West Shelf production "to cooperate on a sixth and seventh train". Currently, the North West Shelf partners plan to expand their Burrup Pensinsula plant to five trains.
Chevron, Texaco Inc and Shell each hold two-seventh stakes in Gorgon, with Mobil Corp owning one-seventh.
-- Melbourne bureau 613-9286-1421
