Australian paper and packing group Amcor Ltd is expected on Thursday to report a sharp fall in half-year profit after a tumble in world paper prices.
Stock analysts have on average forecast the company to post a net profit before abnormals of about A$145 million for the six months ended December 31, a fund manager told Reuters.
The average forecast compares with a result of A$213.5 million for the same period a year earlier, when paper prices soared, but is broadly in line with the previous half-year.  
"In the second half of last year (1995/96), they made A$142 million and really that's what people are looking for," a Sydney-based analyst told Reuters.
Paper prices, which impact heavily on Amcor's earnings, touched historic highs towards late calendar 1995 but came back to earth last year.
"Paper prices have probably fallen on average by around 25 to 30 percent," Macquarie Equities analyst Philip King said.
"They probably hit their bottom in the June quarter of 1996 and since then they have been pretty flat," he told Reuters.  
Sluggish economic growth at home and abroad as well as stiff competition in Amcor's packaging businesses in Australia and New Zealand also kept a lid on half-year earnings, analysts said.
The group's container packaging and fibre packaging divisions accounted for over half of Amcor's earnings before interest and tax in 1995/96. Both would report a slight fall in earnings for the half-year, against a year ago, analysts said.
Amcor's loss-making Holfelder fibre-packaging business in Germany was again expected to detract from the group's half-year result, they said.  
Amcor had begun a cost-cutting drive at the German box-maker and says it would approach break-even in 1996/97.
But the paper division would shoulder most of the expected fall in half-year earnings, analysts said.
Its profit could be roughly half the A$173 million it earned before interest and tax in the first half-year of 1995/96, the fund manager said.
The silver lining in Amcor's result should be its outlook, which analysts described as positive.  
Domestic and world economic growth was set to underpin stronger earnings in 1997/98, with some signs of improvement evident already, they said.
One analyst warned of a risk that paper price would show renewed weakness, but others saw prices firming and margins fattening in the packaging businesses in 1997/98.
"For some significant improvement you have to look at '98...," the Sydney analyst said.
-- Melbourne bureau 613-9286-1421
