Shares in Crown Ltd, Australia's most successful casino tumbled on Friday as nervous investors cashed in their chips weeks before the company opens the nation's biggest casino complex aimed at Asian gamblers.
Crown shares closed at a 16-month low, completing a rapid 27 percent slide from grace since mid-January when concerns about rising costs and delays at the A$1.55 billion (US$1.23 billion) complex began to shake confidence in the company.
Crown, which plans to move into its new riverside home in Melbourne in April, has also raised investors' eyebrows with its lavish attempts to attract the region's biggest gamblers.
It uses private jets to bring its best customers into the country and also plans to buy a private golf course, estimated to be worth about A$40 million, for their exclusive use.
In addition, it is negotiating to buy the management rights to its own casino from major shareholder Hudson Conway Ltd for an estimated A$300 million. Crown owns the casino but Hudson manages it for a fee.
To fund its ambitions, Crown has raised over A$500 million in equity and debt since August. On Thursday, it announced a rights issue of shares, spooking investors further.
"It's just the continued raising of capital. People are now at the stage where they really do not believe perhaps that this is the last one," a casino industry analyst told Reuters.
Investors are also uncertain about its Asian strategy. "People have no understanding how big that market is and how much of that market Crown will be able to attract ...," she said.
The company's profit outlook was downgraded in an independent accountant's report which came to light last month.
But Crown has said its earnings outlook remains bright and denied on Friday its new complex had run into big cost overruns.
The total estimated cost of the project has risen to A$1.55 billion from the company's December estimate of A$1.25 billion.
"There's obviously been additional expenditure on plant, property and equipment, but we are fairly happy with that level of expenditure," Crown spokesman Gary O'Neill told Reuters.
Crown has pinned most of its hopes on Asian gamblers, who account for about one-third of the firm's revenues. Crown hopes to take this to over 60 percent after opening its new complex, which it says is being fitted out with Asian tastes in mind.
But the impending opening has coincided with a backlash against Australia's gamble on the casino industry, both by investors as well as political, community and business leaders.
Australia now boasts 14 casinos.
Investors see the industry as saturated while other businesses, especially retailing chains, regard it as a threat to their own slice of the consumer dollar.
Prime Minister John Howard also stepped into the debate this month, ordering an investigation into the levels of gambling after official figures showed A$1 in every A$200 spent by Australians ended up on casino tables.
He said gambling threatened to become a "national blight". "I think ... we're at saturation level as far as gambling facilities in Australia are concerned," Howard said.
(A$1 = US$0.79)
