Australia's biggest retailer Coles Myer Ltd on Thursday reported a 41-percent surge in half-year earnings, its first profit rise in almost two years.
The result buoyed Coles' once-sinking share price, which rose despite a weaker market, and followed a two-year nightmare of sliding profits, shareholder anger and consumer thrift.
Coles, which pockets about 18 cents in every retail dollar spent in Australia, reported a net profit of A$273.6 million (US$217 million) for the half-year ended January 26, compared with A$194.5 million a year ago.
Before abnormals, net earnings leapt 23 percent to a better-than-expected A$229 million, boosting the shares 13 cents above Wednesday's close to a high of A$6.04 before easing back.
"We see this as a very good first step on a road to recovery," chief executive Dennis Eck told reporters.
Coles' performance has now recovered to the levels of its year ended July 1995, one of its most profitable ever, he added.
Coles gave a bullish forecast for 1996/97 annual profit, predicting more strong profit growth in the second half-year and looking forward to a quieter time in the nation's newspapers.
Coles is rising from the ashes of poor management and board turmoil.
In late 1995, a controversy surrounding Coles' largest shareholder and then chairman, Solomon Lew, erupted in the nation's media. At one point, media baron Rupert Murdoch accused Lew of thuggery and trying to stifle newspaper coverage.
The row focused on a transaction that cost Coles A$18 million and benefitted a company associated with Lew by a similar sum. Lew denied any impropriety but stepped down as chairman in 1995 in the first of several board shake-ups.
Coles managing director Peter Bartels quit in December, handing the reins over to Eck who appeared on Thursday to be relieved Coles was no longer in the headlines.
"For a couple of months, our staff was quite happy to see us out of the press," Eck said.
Retail analysts are tipping Coles to report annual net profit of around A$310 million in 1996/97. One analyst said profit forecasts for Coles might now edge a little higher, but improving sentiment was mainly behind the firmer share price.
"I think the retail market is picking up, but it's still tough out there," the Melbourne-based analyst said.
The half-year results highlighted Coles success in improving profit margins. The 23 percent rise in pre-abnormal profit was struck on a 5.4 percent increase in sales to A$9.945 billion.
"What is important are people's expectations of the turnaround now. I think that's why the stock is where it is, on anticipation of much better margins and profit," a broker said.
Coles is not the only big retailer to weather tough trading conditions and investor scepticism.
Upmarket retailer and rival David Jones Ltd is now feeling the heat. Its chief executive resigned this week on the eve of the company reporting a 50 percent dive in half-year net earnings.
(A$1 = US$0.79)
