The world's biggest miner, RTZ-CRA, announced a major realignment of its sprawling empire on Wednesday and removed any doubt that London was its capital.
The group, born of a 1995 merger of London-based RTZ Plc and Australian-based CRA Ltd, said it would now manage its global businesses along six main product lines.
These were aluminium, copper, energy, industrial minerals, iron ore, and gold and other minerals. Together they reaped revenues of around US$8 billion for the group in calendar 1996 from operations on all six continents.
RTZ-CRA said it would shrink its Melbourne office, CRA's home base and until now the group's "other" headquarters. It will halve the staff there, shedding 100 jobs, and leave the office with a support role only. A total of 200 jobs will go worldwide.
The announcement provoked an angry response in parts of the Australian press. One newspaper said that CRA had been "buried under the RTZ shake-up".
CRA chairman John Uhrig said that the merger, which maintained the two firms' separate listings, had so far not produced a better outcome for shareholders.
"It would have been surprising if it had in its first year of operation," Uhrig told a news conference in Melbourne.
In London, RTZ-CRA executive chairman Robert Wilson told reporters the group would take a one-off restructuring charge of US$40 million this year, and expected to gain annual cost savings of $50 million to $60 million by 1998.
The reorganisation leaves Australian-based executives to manage the aluminium, energy and iron ore businesses from Brisbane, Melbourne and Perth. London handles the rest and remains the sole group headquarters.
The Salt Lake City office of its Kennecott copper operation in the United States as well as the group's Johannesburg office would be closed, the company said.
The new structure shifts the focus of management away from a geographical view of the world, where operations differ by country, toward a single management for each global business.
It ensures RTZ-CRA does not become an unwieldy bureaucracy unable to compete with more nimble rivals which deal in just one commodity, the group said.
"RTZ-CRA is a big company by the standards of the industry," executive chairman Wilson said. "We are striving to obtain benefits of scale without the bureaucracy that goes very often with size."
Chief executive Leon Davis gave examples where, under the current structure, copper operations and coal mines were under several different leaderships across the globe.
"These are barriers that are artificially created and we are intent on removing them," Davis told the news conference.
"It will eliminate duplication, lower our costs and improve our efficiency," he added.
Mining analysts welcomed the move. One viewed it as confirmation the RTZ-CRA marriage, made without any shares actually changing hands, was effectively a cheap buy-out of CRA.
"If anyone thought the DLC (dual-listed structure) was anything other than a buy-out on the cheap, they should assess this little move because they are virtually wiping out Melbourne head office," a Sydney-based analyst told Reuters.
The analyst said he expected the group to eventually transform the dual-listed structure into the one company, although in London Wilson denied that the changes would undermine the dual-structure.
RTZ-CRA has already proposed to ditch its double-barrelled name and become known, subject to shareholder approval this year, as Rio Tinto. RTZ's shares would then trade in London as Rio Tinto Plc and CRA's stock in Australia as Rio Tinto Ltd.
A Melbourne-based analyst said the cementing of London as the group's headquarters came as no surprise. "It doesn't make any sense to have two head offices," he said.
