Global miner RTZ-CRA on Wednesday announced a major relignment of its sprawling minerals empire and removed any doubt that London was its capital.
The group, born of a 1995 merger of RTZ Plc and CRA Ltd, said it would now manage its world-wide businesses along six main product lines -- aluminium, copper, energy, industrial minerals, iron ore, and gold and other minerals.
It also said it would downsize its Melbourne office, CRA Ltd's headquarters, halving the number of jobs there and reducing its role to a support function.  
CRA chairman John Uhrig said in outlining the changes that the merger, which maintained the two firm' separate listings, had so far not produced a better outcome for shareholders.
"It would have been surprising if it had in its first year of operation," Uhrig told a news conference in Melbourne.
The restructure leaves Australian-based executives to manage the aluminium, energy and iron ore businesses from Brisbane, Melbourne and Perth. London handles the rest and remains the sole group headquarters, RTZ-CRA said.  
The Salt Lake City office of its Kennecott copper operation in the United States as well as the group's Johannesburg office would be closed, it added.
The new structure shifts the focus of management away from a geographical view of the world, where operations differ by country, toward a single management for each global business.
It eliminates problems of overlapping time zones and managements, ensuring the group does not become an unwieldy bureaucracy unable to compete with rivals dealing in just one commodity, the group said.  
Chief executive Leon Davis gave examples where, under the current structure, copper operations and coal mines were under several different leaderships across the globe.
"These are barriers that are artificially created and we are intent on removing them," Davis told the news conference.
"It will eliminate duplication, lower our costs and improve our efficiency," he added.
Mining analysts welcomed the move, with one seeing it as confirmation the RTZ-CRA marriage, made without RTZ making a takeover bid, was effectively a cheap buy-out of CRA.  
"If anyone thought the DLC (dual-listed structure) was anything other than a buy-out on the cheap they should assess this little move because they are virtually wiping out Melbourne head office," a Sydney-based analyst told Reuters.
The analyst said he expected the group to go a step further and rationalise its assets and then transform the dual-listed structure into the one company.
RTZ-CRA has already proposed to ditch its double-barrelled name and become known, subject to shareholder approval this year, as Rio Tinto. RTZ's shares would then trade in London as Rio Tinto Plc and CRA's stock in Australia as Rio Tinto Ltd.  
A Melbourne-based analyst said the cementing of London as the group's headquarters came as no surprise. "It doesn't make any sense to have two head offices," he said.
That would come as cold comfort for the 100 people whose jobs have been scrapped in Melbourne under the reorganisation.
But RTZ-CRA said it would carry out the job cuts as painlessly as possible. "The group will provide both practical and financial assistance to help their transition," it said.
-- Melbourne bureau 61-3 9286-1421
