The Australian state of Victoria announced on Monday the nation's biggest gas privatisation, unveiling plans to sell its gas monopoly, Gascor.
Victoria Treasurer Alan Stockdale made the announcement at a gas reform conference, where one industry consultant estimated the sell-off would reap around A$4 billion for the government.
Gascor will be be split into three separate, competing distributors by July 1, ahead of their sale from mid-1998.  
The Victoria government has already sold over A$13 billion worth of electricity assets, making it the leader in efforts to set up a national free market for energy.
"Gascor is currently ill-equipped to compete in the fast approaching national gas market," Stockdale told the conference.
"It is the vision of this government to create an integrated energy market that will deliver low-cost energy to industry and householders, providing Australia with an important boost to its competitiveness...," he added.  
Gascor has 1.4 million customers throughout Melbourne, 50 towns in rural Victoria and some border towns in New South Wales state. Its balance sheet shows net assets of A$1.14 billion.
Interest in the Gascor businesses, to be known by individual names, is likely to come from private power utilities already operating in Australia and from new foreign entrants.
"I think a lot of the companies currently involved in electricity will also be interested in gas," said Walter Dewe, a a consultant who once headed a national taskforce on gas reform.
"I think there will be new ones that missed out for electricity and also gas companies," he told Reuters.  
Offshore interest in Australia's emerging national energy market has come chiefly from the Britain and the United States.
A consortium led by Britain's National Power Plc spent A$2.35 billion last year to buy Victoria's Hazelwood coal-fired power station.
Earlier, another consortium headed by British-based Powergen Plc bought another Victoria generator, Yallourn Energy, for A$2.43 billion.
U.S. utility Edison International has a controlling stake in another coal-fired power plant through its Edison Mission Energy unit.  
U.S.-based Northern States Power Co is also eyeing the Australian market, declaring it was "hell-bent on acquisitions" in Australia this year.
Under the terms of the Victoria privatisation, gas prices will be capped below the cost of inflation until the year 2001.
Until then, only major gas consumers will be able to shop around among gas companies for the best deal, with all other consumers able to do so in 2001, regardless of where they live.
The move comes as plans are being drawn up to link the two biggest states, Victoria and New South Wales, with new pipelines to create a seamless gas market in the country's southeast.  
-- Melbourne bureau 613-9286-1421
