Australia's labour market watchdog is expected to award the nation's lowest-paid workers a wage rise on Tuesday in a move that is likely to have profound implications for inflation and interest rates.
Financial markets are on tenterhooks as the Industrial Relations Commission prepares to arbitrate in an old-style showdown between the trade union movement and employers.
The Australian Council of Trade Unions (ACTU) has asked for a wage rise of A$20 (US15.50) per week for the lowest paid, as well as rises in minimum rates of pay of up to 8.75 percent.
Employers oppose it, saying it will harm the economy.
The central bank has also expressed concern at the ACTU's so-called "living wage" claim, which seeks to help workers left behind in Australia's move away from centrally-fixed wages toward individual deals hammered out on the factory floor.
The Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA) estimates the claim, if granted in full, would swell the nation's total wages bill by 1.6 percent, taking the rate of wages growth to about 5.5 percent, well above the bank's comfort zone of 4.0-4.5 percent.
Employers go further, saying Australia's jobless rate would jump sharply higher as industry adjusted to the higher labour costs by shedding staff.
"If the ACTU claim were granted, unemployment would race past a million, inflation would rise well above its current level, interest rates would lift and investment growth would come to an immediate halt," a peak employer group has warned.
Australia's jobless rate was at 8.7 percent in March, and has been stuck at or above 8.5 percent since early 1995.
The Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry has said it believes the ACTU's claim would increase the national wages bill by more like 4.8 percent, based on an industry survey showing more workers were covered by the claim than commonly thought.
Financial markets are also jumpy, with inflation data for the March quarter to be released on Wednesday, the day after the commission's decision is handed down.
"You never know which way they (the commission) are going to jump. It's a fairly big week...," National Australia Bank chief economist Alan Oster told Reuters on Monday.
Market economists are tipping 2.1 percent underlying inflation for the year to March, comfortably within the RBA's target range of two to three percent.
Economists predict the commission will hand down a compromise on Tuesday, leaving minimum rates of pay alone and granting a wage rise of between A$10 and A$15 per week.
This would exceed the government's position, which is to support a rise of A$8 per week for the lowest paid, but would not move the RBA to lift interest rates sooner than expected, they said. Rates are currently tipped to rise late in 1997.
(A$1 = US$0.77)
