Australia's Industrial Relations Commission (IRC) is due to award the nation's lowest paid workers a wage rise on Tuesday, a decision that could have profound implications for inflation and monetary policy.
Australian financial markets generally expect the AIRC to award workers a wage rise of A$10 to A$15 per week.
The Industrial Relations Commission will hand down its decision on the trade union movement's claim for national wage rises at 0400 GMT (2 p.m.) in Sydney.  
The decision will be keenly watched not only by workers and their employers, but by the Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA), which has repeatedly warned of the threat real wage rises pose to the nation's recent record of low inflation.
The Australian Council of Trade Unions (ACTU) has asked the IRC to grant Australia's lowest paid workers a wage rise of A$20 per week as well as a 8.75 percent rise in minimum rates of pay.
The RBA estimated the claim, if granted in full, would swell the nation's total wages bill by 1.6 percent, taking the current rate of wages growth to about 5.5 percent, well above the central bank's comfort zone of up to 4.5 percent.  
A complete victory by the ACTU on Tuesday would not only be expected to hasten a rise in official interest rate, now expected in early 1998, but would in the view of employers send the jobless rate sharply higher.
"If the ACTU claim were granted, unemployment would race past a million, inflation would rise well above its current level, interest rates would lift and investment growth would come to an immediate halt," a peak employer group has warned.  
The Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry said it believes the ACTU's "living wage" claim would increase the national wages bill by more like 4.8 percent, based on an industry survey showing most workers were covered by the claim.
But financial market economists are more sanguine than the captains of industry, predicting the Industrial Relations Commission will leave minimum rates of pay alone and grant a wage rise of between A$10 and A$15 per week for the lowest paid.
This would still exceed the government's position, which is to support a rise of A$8 per week for the lowest paid.  
"We don't expect them to give twenty-something dollars (a week). Probably between A$10 and A$15," National Australia Bank chief economist Alan Oster told Reuters on Monday.
"I think once you are up around A$20, you are...starting to cause some jitters," he added.
The Commonwealth Bank of Australia expects the commission to award a pay rise of A$10 to A$12, which it said would be consistent with underlying inflation remaining at the lower end of the RBA's target range of two to three percent.  
Bankers Trust expect a wage rise of between A$11 and A$14, but warn that the "wild card" will be if higher paid workers try to stay well ahead of the pack and seek similar pay rises.
"If a modest A$11 to A$14 outcome were to eventuate as expected, however, we do not think this would upset relativities greatly and therefore should dampen the risk of large follow-on wage claims," Bankers Trust said in a research report.
The wage decision comes at a tense moment for the financial markets and central bank, with inflation data for the March quarter to be released on Wednesday. Economists are tipping 2.1 percent underlying inflation, year on year.  
-- Melbourne bureau 61-3 9286-1421
