A state-owned power station and coal mine in Australia sold on Tuesday for A$4.86 billion in the nation's single biggest privatisation.
A consortium comprising U.S. utilities CMS Energy Corp and NRG Energy Inc and Australian investors was awarded the prized assets by the Victoria state government.
The sale, announced by state premier Jeff Kennett, followed a tight bidding war involving some global heavyweights of the electricity-generating industry, including other U.S. utilities American Electric Power Co Inc and AES Corp.  
The sale of the 2,000 megawatt power station and coal mine overshadows last year's sale of half of Commonwealth Bank of Australia as the biggest Australian privatisation.
The national government reaped A$4.0 billion for disposing of its 50.4 percent stake in the bank.
The sale of Loy Yang A, the most efficient electricity generator in Australia, comes as private generators clamour to enter Australia's emerging national energy market.
As a first major step in the development of a free market in electricity, Victoria and its bigger state neighbour, New South Wales, will merge their markets from the end of this month.  
"We believe that there's a great opportunity here," CMS Energy vice-president David Weaver told reporters in Melbourne after the sale announcement.
CMS, which has 50 percent equity in Loy Yang A, and its partners have paid roughly 14 times the operation's forecast underlying earnings for the year to June 30, 1997.
The Loy Yang A estate, which includes Australia's largest coal mine producing 30 million tonnes a year, is seen earning A$335 million before interest, tax and depreciation in 1996/97.  
Due to the depreciation and interest costs to be borne by the new owners, the operation is unlikely to pay any tax for the next few years at least, government sources said.
NRG Energy Inc has a 25 percent stake in Loy Yang A.
Australian institutions led by Macquarie Bank's Infrastructure Trust of Australia Ltd also hold 25 percent.
Horizon Energy Investment Ltd, the vehicle for the Australian-held equity, plans to issue some or all of its shares in Loy Yang A to the public next year in a stock exchange float.  
As conditions of sale, Horizon cannot be floated within a year of sale while CMS and NRG may not sell down, or out, of Loy Yang A before two years. The sale will be settled on May 13.
About 77 percent of the purchase price will be borrowed, with syndicated bank debt of A$2.9 billion, inflation-indexed bonds of A$350 million and subordinated debt of A$300 million.
The bank debt is being coordinated by the Australian and New Zealand Investment Bank (ANZIB) and involves 10 other lead-managers: NationsBank, Banc National de Paris (BNP), Sumitomo, WestLB, First Chicago NBD Bank, Indosuez, ABN Amro Bank, Deutsche Bank, National Australia Bank (NAB) and AMP.  
"We expect this acquisition will contribute to CMS Energy's earnings in 1997 and beyond," CMS Energy president and chief operating officer Victor J. Fryling said in a statement.
The winning consortium bid A$4.75 billion for Loy Yang A, but it also assumed liabilities worth A$109 million, enabling the government to say the sale was worth A$4.86 billion.
The sale takes to A$18 billion the amount of money raised by once heavily debt-laiden Victoria government from the sale of electricity assets over the past two years.  
The net proceeds of A$4.75 billion to the state government from Loy Yang A will be used to slash Victoria's public-sector debt back to about A$14.5 billion, Kennett said.
More electricity assets are set to follow, including the state's transmission grid, PowerNet Victoria, which the Victoria government hopes will raise up to A$2.5 billion.
It could be sold as early as this year.
-- Melbourne Bureau 613-9286-1421
