An Australian state-owned power station and coal mine sold on Tuesday for A$4.86 billion (US$3.65 billion) in the nation's single biggest privatisation.
A consortium comprising U.S. utilities CMS Energy Corp and NRG Energy Inc and Australian institutional investors was awarded the prized assets by the Victoria state government.
"We are very proud owners," said David Scaysbrook, managing director of NRG Australia Ltd, a unit of NRG.
The sale followed a tight bidding war involving some global heavyweights of the generating industry, including other U.S. utilities American Electric Power Co Inc and AES Corp and Hong Kong utility China Light and Power Co Ltd.
The sale of the 2,000 megawatt power station and coal mine overshadows last year's sale of half of the Commonwealth Bank of Australia as the biggest Australian privatisation.
The national government reaped A$4.0 billion for disposing of its 50.4 percent stake in the bank.
The sale of Loy Yang A, the most efficient electricity generator in Australia, comes as private generators clamour to enter Australia's emerging national energy market.
As a first major step in the development of a free market in electricity, Victoria and its bigger state neighbour, New South Wales, will merge their markets from the end of this month.
"We believe there's a great opportunity here," CMS Energy vice-president David Weaver told reporters in Melbourne.
CMS, which has 50 percent equity in Loy Yang A, and its partners have paid roughly 14 times the operation's forecast underlying earnings for the year to June 30, 1997.
NRG Energy Inc takes a 25 percent stake in the Loy Yang A estate, which comes with Australia's biggest coal mine producing 30 million tonnes a year.
Australian investors led by Macquarie Bank's Infrastructure Trust of Australia Ltd hold the remaining 25 percent.
Horizon Energy Investment Ltd, the vehicle for the Australian-held equity, plans to issue some or all of its shares in Loy Yang A to the public next year in a stock exchange float.
As conditions of sale, Horizon cannot be floated within a year of sale while CMS and NRG may not sell down, or out, of Loy Yang A before two years. The sale will be settled on May 13.
"We expect this acquisition will contribute to CMS Energy's earnings in 1997 and beyond," CMS Energy president and chief operating officer Victor J. Fryling said in a statement.
The winning consortium bid A$4.75 billion for Loy Yang A, but it also assumed liabilities worth A$109 million, enabling the government to say the sale was worth A$4.86 billion.
The sale takes to A$18 billion the amount of money raised by the once heavily debt-laiden Victoria government from the sale of electricity assets over the past two years.
More electricity assets are set to follow, including the state's transmission grid, PowerNet Victoria, which the Victoria government hopes will raise up to A$2.5 billion.
New South Wales state has resisted selling its state-owned generators, but on Tuesday said it would put its TAB betting agency on the market in a A$1.0 billion share float.
Australia's debt and equity markets have been flooded by the sale of state assets over the past few years, including such business icons as Qantas Airways Ltd and the Commonwealth Bank.
But the biggest is yet to come. The national government plans to sell a third of telecommunications giant Telstra Corp this year for an expected tag of at least A$8.0 billion.
