Australian aluminium producer Comalco Ltd said on Wednesday its smelting division was back in profit and that major expansion work was starting to pay off.
Comalco, which plunged into the red in calendar 1996 after a rotten year of low aluminium prices and high costs, said it had turned a "reasonable" profit for the first three months of 1997.
Comalco is owned 67 percent by global mining giant RTZ Corp Plc-CRA Ltd, soon to be renamed Rio Tinto.  
Speaking at the company's annual meeting, chairman Leigh Clifford also announced a new pot line at its majority-owned Boyne Island smelter in Queensland would be running at full steam from the third quarter of 1997.
The A$1 billion expansion, in which Comalco has a 59.25 percent stake, as well as recent expansions and upgrades at its Tasmanian and New Zealand smelters, will take the company's share of total output to over 650,000 tonnes in 1998, he said.
The world aluminium market is also improving, with the London Metal Exchange price averaging 74 U.S. cents per pound so far in 1997, Clifford said. It averaged 70 cents in 1996.  
"Aluminium demand is strong in Asia and North America and the outlook for the industry is robust," Clifford said.
Brokerage HSBC James Capel expects Comalco to report a net profit before abnormals of about A$120 million in 1997, assuming a firm rise in aluminium price in the second half of the year.
"A chunk of that earnings will be as much a function of increased production volumes as price," HSBC James Capel analyst Unit Safak told Reuters.
Comalco reported a bottom-line loss of A$16.8 million on a joint-venture basis for 1996, after abnormal losses before tax of A$93.8 million.  
The closure of Comalco's kaolin plant at its bauxite mine in Weipa, in north Queensland, and workforce restructuring accounted for most of the abnormal losses.
By the end of 1997, Comalco expects to have shed 600 workers since September last year, chief executive Terry Palmer said.
With about 80 percent of workforce restructuring complete, cost reductions played a part in first quarter profits, he said.
"The impact (of lower costs) has been pretty solid," Palmer told reporters after the brief meeting.  
Comalco, the only one of RTZ-CRA's business not performing in the most efficient quartile of the world's producers in 1996, hopes to reach that benchmark in 1998.
"I think to get to those sorts of levels you have to look at well into next year," Palmer said.
Comalco was not prepared on Wednesday to say when it would decide on the site for its remaining major project, a A$1 billion alumina refinery.
The refinery is to be sited in Sarawak, Malaysia, or at Gladstone, Queensland, depending on which site offers the better deal on price and security of power supply.  
In Queensland or Malaysia, the refinery would be powered by gas.
-- Melbourne bureau 61-3 9286-1421
