Australian steel-maker The Broken Hill Pty Co Ltd (BHP) on Tuesday announced the closure of Australia's oldest steel-making plant, an industrial icon which it said could no longer match its Asian competitors.
The Newcastle mill, a milestone in the nation's industrial development when it opened in 1915, will shut down its blast furnaces by the end of 1999 as part of a major overhaul of BHP's global steel business, the company said.
BHP chief executive John Prescott, who like his predecessors forged his early career at Newcastle, was unsentimental in announcing the closure, which will end 2,500 workers' jobs.
"The fundamental purpose of all the change is to ensure a viable industry going forward," Prescott told reporters.
"We are not walking away from the steel industry," he added.
BHP now faces possible industrial action from trade unions, one of which said the closure would directly and indirectly destroy up to 12,000 jobs Australia wide.
A mass meeting of Newcastle workers at the site, north of Sydney, next Friday is expected to consider calling a strike against BHP, an Australian Workers Union (AWU) official said.
The AWU's Newcastle secretary, Mauri Rudd, told Reuters that a strike, if called, would try to block BHP exports.
BHP, Australia's biggest company, is also Australia's biggest exporter of coal and a major exporter of Australian iron ore, liquefied natural gas and manganese.
The Newcastle plant, at the foot of the coal-rich Hunter Valley, was opened in World War One as the first big step toward downstream processing of Australia's vast mineral resources.
The Australian government described the decison to end steel-making at Newcastle as disappointing. New South Wales state Premier Bob Carr went further.
"To lose such a chunk of steelmaking capacity is tragic, not just for the workers but for this country and its capacity to make things," Carr told reporters after the announcement.
But investors applauded the decision, sending BHP shares sharply higher and buoying the broader Australian market. BHP shares closed on Tuesday at the day's high of A$17.87, up 49 cents or 2.7 percent on Monday's close.
The announcement of Newcastle's demise as a steel-maker was buried in a company statement outlining BHP's goal to move away from the weakest parts of steel business to its strengths.
The statements followed a year-long review of BHP's position in the rapidly changing global steel business. BHP Steel aims to slash well over A$500 million from its cost base.
The review identified BHP Steel's strengths as downstream steel products for use in offshore construction and car-making industries, especially in Asia and the Pacific Rim.
Newcastle's rod and bar mills will be retained and developed into the centre for BHP's rod, bar and wire business. BHP's Geelong rod mill and Sydney wire mill will also close in 1999.
BHP Steel chief executive Ron McNeilly made it clear that in the business of raw steel-making, BHP lagging behind its chief East Asian competitor, South Korea's Pohang Iron and Steel Co.
Pohang has already achieved the industry's productivity benchmark of 1,000 tonnes per worker per year, while Taiwan's China Steel Corp aims to match this by year 2000, he said.
