Loss-making airline Ansett Australia said on Wednesday it would not survive unless it made major changes to turn the business around.
Ansett executive chairman Rod Eddington, in his first major speech since his appointment last year, said the airline needed to sell out of resorts and other non-core assets, even if this meant wearing a loss.
He said Ansett must free up cash and improve its operating performance to fund the airline's expanding core business, including eight new aircraft it needed to rationalise its fleet.  
The contract for the new aircraft orders, said to be worth over A$2 billion, is a close contest between European aircraft consortium Airbus Industrie and Boeing Co.
Ansett is owned equally by Air New Zealand and media group News Corp.
In a frank assessment, Eddington called Ansett an excellent airline but a poor business which needed to cut unit costs but at the same time increase customer service.
"Unless Ansett changes, it won't survive in the medium to long term," he told the National Aviation Press Club.  
"There's no point in taking any business to the market until it's in pretty robust shape. Ansett is a long, long way away from that now," he said.
"It takes time ... it takes two to three years, not two to three months," he added.
The decision on Ansett's new long-term fleet plan, expected to be made by the board early in the second half of 1997, will be crucial to Ansett's future, Eddington said.
It is a close call between Airbus's A330-200 and Boeing's 767-300. "It's the closest one I have been part of," he said.  
Eddington foreshadowed another poor result for the year to June 30, 1997, saying that profits were "thin on the ground".
He would not even discuss Ansett's level of gearing which, according to the airline's balance sheet at June 30 last year, means that for every A$1 of equity, Ansett owes A$9 in debt.
"If we were floating at the moment, it would make things a little difficult," Eddington said.
The Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC), the country's competition watchdog, could also make life difficult for Ansett's alliance with Air New Zealand.  
ACCC approval will be needed for the two carriers to go ahead and work together on ground services, information technology, procurement and marketing and sales, he said.
"This work will ultimately lead to an application for ACCC authorisation," Eddington said.
-- Melbourne bureau 613-9286-1421
