Australia's car-makers face massive disruption from next week due to a prolonged strike at a steel plant supplying the industry, car-makers said on Tuesday.
The four major manufacturers -- Ford, Toyota, General Motors Holden and Mitsubishi Motors -- have warned production will be shut down if the strike drags on.
The strike, in its fourth week, has crippled industrial group Email Ltd's Martin Bright Steel factory in Melbourne. The plant is the sole supplier to TRW Steering and Suspension Australia Ltd, which makes power steering units.  
The subsidiary of U.S. car-parts giant TRW Inc is a monopoly supplier to local car-makers, an industry source said.
The Australian Manufacturing Workers Union (AMWU), which wants a 15 percent wage rise over two years for the Martin Bright Steel workers, said on Tuesday the strike could escalate.
The 130 striking workers at Martin Bright Steel have been picketing the factory since April 11, preventing Email from moving stock out to its customers, an AMWU official said.
"We are talking about a major escalation of the dispute if they try to break that picket," AMWU organiser Craig Johnston told Reuters.  
"I think you will see a reaction that not even the employers are counting on," he added.
A spokesman for Email was not immediately available.
In letters sent last week to Australia's Industrial Relations Commission, car-makers said they would be forced to halt production and stand down thousands of workers from this week if the strike was not resolved quickly.
But on Tuesday, Ford, Toyota and Mitsubishi said they could now maintain full production for at least another week, but perhaps for not for much longer.  
"We are still going and expect to be until at least Friday week (May 16)," said Ford Australia's public affairs general manager, Wendy Perkins.
"Obviously if supply of anything dried up, we would not be able to keep producing. We are keeping a watching brief."
Toyota and Mitsubishi spokesmen told Reuters production was guaranteed for at least "this week".
TRW Steering and Suspension managing director Michael Laufer declined to comment on Tuesday, but an industry source said the firm could only keep going for another two weeks.  
TRW has kept car-makers supplied over the past three weeks by finding a contractor to make substitute parts for the power steering units, but this is a stop-gap measure, the source said.
"The automotive companies have gone along with the substitution ... but it's different material and they would prefer us to go back to the Martin Bright specifications," he said.
The Martin Bright Steel dispute has also hit other suppliers to the car-making industry. "I am sure there are half a dozen others on the brink," the source said.
-- Melbourne bureau 613-9286-1421
