Australia's A$6 billion (US$4.68 billion) car industry could grind to a halt from late next week due to a crippling strike at a key supplier, industry sources said on Tuesday.
The four major manufacturers -- Ford, Toyota, General Motors Holden and Mitsubishi Motors -- have warned local production lines will be shut down if the strike drags on much longer.
The strike, in its fourth week, has crippled Melbourne's Martin Bright Steel factory, which holds a key position in the local car-parts industry supplying the car-makers.
"Obviously if supply of anything dried up, we would not be able to keep producing. We are keeping a watching brief," said Ford Australia's public affairs general manager, Wendy Perkins.
"We are still going and expect to be until at least Friday week (May 16)," she told Reuters.
The steel plant, owned by industrial group Email Ltd, is the supplier to TRW Steering and Suspension Australia Ltd, which is a monopoly supplier of power steering units to car-makers.
TRW Steering and Suspension managing director Michael Laufer declined to comment on Tuesday, but an industry source said the firm could only keep going for another two weeks.
TRW has supplied car makers for the past three weeks by finding substitute parts for the power steering units, but this is a stop-gap measure, the source said.
"The automotive companies have gone along with the substitution...but it's different material and they would prefer us to go back to the Martin Bright specifications," he said.
About 130 workers walked off the job at the steel plant on April 11 in a dispute over wages. They have since picketed the site, preventing Email from moving stock out to its customers.
In letters sent last week to Australia's labour market watchdog, the Industrial Relations Commission, car-makers said they would be forced to halt production and stand down thousands of workers from this week if the strike did not end quickly.
But on Tuesday, Ford, Toyota and Mitsubishi told Reuters they could now maintain full production for at least another week, but perhaps for not for much longer.
Toyota and Mitsubishi spokesmen told Reuters production was guaranteed for at least "this week". Holden, which had warned it would be forced to shut down a production line on Thursday, said it did not now see disruptions to production "at this stage".
The four car-makers' have combined sales revenue of about A$6 billion, including over A$2 billion in export sales, and along with car-part manufacturers employ 45,000 people, according to the Federal Chamber of Automotive Industry.
The Martin Bright Steel dispute has also hit other suppliers to the car-making industry. "I am sure there are half a dozen others on the brink," the source said.
The Australian Manufacturing Workers Union (AMWU), which wants a 15 percent wage rise over two years for the Martin Bright Steel workers, said on Tuesday the strike could escalate.
"We are talking about a major escalation of the dispute if they try to break that picket," AMWU organiser Craig Johnston told Reuters. A spokesman for Email was not available.
(A$1 = US$0.78)
