The former chief of Australia's biggest retailer was jailed on Wednesday for four years for defrauding the company of A$4.46 million (US$3.47 million) in what the judge called a 1980s case of greed and excess.
Former Coles Myer Ltd chief executive Brian Quinn, convicted last month of using company funds to make lavish renovations to his Melbourne mansion, stood ashen-faced in the courtroom and nodded in meek resignation at the sentence.
Judge Geoff Eames ordered that Quinn, 60, who ran the company for six years until he retired in 1992, not be eligible for parole until he had spent two and a half years in prison.
Eames accused Quinn of greed, vanity and extravagance and said he had shown no remorse.
"It was extravagance and excess to such a degree to be demonstrative of the fact that you did not intend to pay for the work yourself," he told Quinn.
"It is impossible to escape the conclusion that what occurred here was motivated by greed," Eames added.
Quinn, dressed smartly in a grey suit and burgundy tie, was immediately escorted back to prison after the sentence. He has been held in custody since his conviction on April 19.
Quinn had denied that between 1982 and 1988 he and the head of Coles Myer's maintenance department conspired to falsely claim the money spent on renovating Quinn's home as work done on Coles supermarkets and other company properties.
Work on the house included adding another storey, building a tennis court and building an eight-car garage. Interior work included installation of a mirror worth A$15,000.
A string of prominent Australians, including Victorian state premier Jeff Kennett and the leader of Australia's trade union movement, gave character testimony to the court last month.
But judge Eames said Quinn, a former board member of Australia's central bank, had clearly felt his talents deserved more in the way of reward than his handsome salary packages.
"The company was not ungenerous. It was the height of vanity to believe that your talents had not been sufficiently rewarded," the judge said.
"It remains a criminal offence to plunder the assets of a company, whatever the opinion held by the thief of his own worth to the company."
Later, one of Quinn's close friends, Bruce Bingham, said the Quinn family was considering an appeal against the severity of the sentence.
Bingham drew a comparison with 1980s high-flier Alan Bond, who was sentenced to four years' jail in February for his role in Australia's biggest case of corporate fraud, worth A$1 billion. "Mr Quinn, he has been a victim," Bingham said.
Quinn has repaid over A$3 million of the funds defrauded. (A$1 = US$0.78)
