Australian retailer Coles Myer Ltd is praying a cold, wet winter will cheer up the group's struggling apparel business and add new growth to annual profit.
Chief executive Dennis Eck, speaking after Coles announced another firm rise in quarterly sales, said he remained cautious about the profit outlook for its three main apparel businesses.
"That (apparel) is the thing that most concerns us," Eck told Reuters on Thursday.  
Earlier, Coles posted a 6.5 percent rise in sales revenue to A$4.559 billion for the quarter ended April 27, bringing total sales for the year to date to A$14.5 billion, up 5.7 percent.
Coles' best-performing supermarkets division again led the result, recording a 12.3 percent jump in sales revenue for the quarter compared with the same quarter a year ago.
The group's once-struggling merchandise group, especially its Kmart chain of stores, also improved, posting a 5.8 percent rise in sales revenue, including fatter profit margins at Kmart.  
But sales at Coles' women's wear business, Katies, as well as its Target discount stores and its Myer Grace Bros department store chain, which both rely heavily on clothing sales, were all down.
Eck said fashion sales depended on extremes of weather and that a wet, cold winter could help revive them.
"I'm hoping for cold and rain for 20 more days and that would be nice," he said. "It's a nice cold rainy day and May is when you really sell through your winter."
A Sydney-based retail analyst agreed the weather had helped prolong weakness in Coles apparel sales.  
"One of the reasons why this quarter has been so bad (for apparel) is this incredible Indian summer we have been having, and fashion needs extremes of weather," he told Reuters.
Some economists have argued apparel sales are the victim of a long-term shift in spending patterns, with entertainment and other consumer items competing for household incomes.
But Eck defended Coles' apparel businesses and rejected a suggestion it sell Katies, its only speciality fashion business.
"If you take straight apparel as a category, it represents...no more than 16 percent of our business, including Katies," he said.  
"We are happy to be in that segment. We think we have a very good balance to the retail category that we sell, and we are not in the mood to make short-term decisions on cyclical events.
"When apparel gets good again, it will be very nice to own a specialty apparel business," Eck said.  
Weak apparel sales were offset in the third quarter by strong sales from the supermarket and Kmart businesses, enabling Eck to stick to his forecast of steady second-half profits.
"We...(had) stated that we expected a similar percentage growth in the second-half profit after tax to that experienced in the first half, excluding property disposal profits and abnormals," Eck said in a statement.
"We are still of that view, subject to conditions remaining stable."  
Analysts are forecasting Coles to report, on average, a net profit before abnormals of A$326.7 million for the year to July 27, according to an April survey by Barceps forecasting service.
Coles reported a pre-abnormal net profit of A$302 million in 1995/96.
-- Melbourne bureau 61-3 9286-1421
