Australia's top bank, National Australia Bank Ltd (NAB), is expected to report half-year net earnings of over A$1 billion (US$780 million) on Thursday, putting it on track for another record full-year result.
Banking analysts contacted by Reuters have forecast NAB to report a net profit of A$1.13 billion to A$1.17 billion for the half-year to March 31, a rise of up to 17 percent on a year ago.
Such a result would dwarf the interim earnings of NAB's major rivals, with Westpac Banking Corp forecast to report on Wednesday a net profit of up to A$620 million.
The only other major bank with an end-September balance date, the Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd, reports its interim earnings on May 22, with one Melbourne analyst tipping a half-year net profit of A$630 million.
A half-year result of upwards of A$1.1 billion would put NAB on course for an annual net profit of up to A$2.47 billion for 1996/97, surpassing last year's record A$2.102 billion, according to analysts' forecasts.
NAB's strong profit growth comes despite shrinking lending margins and hot competition for home mortgages in Australia.
While Commonwealth Bank of Australia has sacrificed margins to build market share, and an acquisitive Westpac has gone shopping for asset growth, NAB has used marketing to boost its share of home loan assets, analysts said.
NAB's offshore assets -- four banks in Britain, Northern Ireland and Ireland, as well as Michigan National Bank and Bank of New Zealand -- have also lessened its overall exposure to Australia's weak housing sector, a Melbourne analyst said.
"They are also very aggressive on costs," the analyst said.
NAB, the most efficient of the big banks, aims to lower its cost-to-income ratio to 40 percent by year 2000 from 53 percent.
NAB is also likely to buck the trend on charges for bad debts in its interim result, the Melbourne analyst said.
"For NAB, we have them going down still. I think that's due primarily to some write-backs," he said. But he predicted worsening bad debts across the banking sector in the near-term.
Increased fee income is likely to cushion the major banks against further margin squeeze, said Colonial Investment Management's senior investment manager, Martin Hickling.
NAB is also cutting costs offshore, he added.
"They have been earning sub-normal levels of returns over the last couple of years and they have been doing work in terms of improving those returns," Hickling told Reuters.
NAB, ranked Australia's top bank on Monday in a survey by accountants KPMG, is also seen as the most likely to gobble up one of the other majors.
But the government has ordered a freeze on big bank mergers until it sees competition for banking services heat up further.
