Australia's biggest bank, National Australia Bank Ltd (NAB), said on Thursday it would consider any opportunity to merge with a local life office.
Managing director Don Argus told Reuters that NAB remained an acquisitive bank, even though its hands were tied on mergers with other major domestic rivals by government policy.
"That's an option, yes, because we have a liability driven strategy," he said when asked if NAB would consider merging with a domestic life office or forming an alliance with one.
NAB has placed heavy emphasis on asset growth, but it is now trying hard to grow the deposit side of its business. Life offices manage major pools of deposited funds.
NAB recently made a failed bid for the New South Wales state government's Axiom funds management arm, which has A$18 billion of funds under management. Axiom was sold for A$240 million to London-based funds group Deutsche Morgan Grenfell.
"We have been an acquisitive bank for something like 10 years and our strategy is well known -- it's opportunity and price," Argus said.
Australia's life offices have begun to compete with banks in lending, in line with the global convergence of financial service industries.
Under revised government policy announced in April, the nation's two major life offices, the Australian Mutual Provident Society and National Mutual Holdings Ltd, are allowed to merge with any of the major banks.
National Mutual is controlled by French insurer Axa SA
Other major life offices are Colonial Ltd, which lists on the Australian Stock Exchange next week, and Mercantile Mutual, a unit of ING Group NV.
Earlier on Thursday, NAB announced a 14.1 percent jump in half year net profit to A$1.14 billion but said it faced increasing competitive pressures. Even so, Argus said NAB hoped to achieve at least match this record result in the second half.
Argus was also critical of government policy on financial sector reform, saying delays in finalising the new rules were making the local big banks takeover targets for foreign competitors.
NAB, which has profitable bank operations in the United Kingdom, the United States, and New Zealand, was a keen supporter of allowing big bank mergers in its submission to the Wallis inquiry into the financial system.
In its response to the Wallis report, the national government said on April 9 that it would not allow mergers among the big four banks at the moment but would permit them to merge with major life offices and would also permit takeovers by foreign banks.
NAB, the largest and most profitable of Australia's private banks with an asset base of nearly A$190 billion, ended Thursday trade with a market capitalisation of A$27.1 billion.
It overshadows the other three banks, Commonwealth Bank of Australia, Westpac Banking Corp, and the Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd which are valued at between A$12.6 billion and A$13.7 billion.
-- Mark Bendeich, Melbourne bureau 613-9286-1421
