Australia's biggest bank, National Australia Bank, on Thursday reported record half-year net earnings but said it felt vulnerable to foreign takeover.
Unveiling a A$1.14 billion (US$885 million) profit for the six months ended March 31, managing director Don Argus suggested a government freeze on mergers between the four big local banks had exposed all of them to the threat of foreign takeover.
He said NAB felt vulnerable.
"I certainly do, particularly when some of our friendly merchant banks from the Northern Hemisphere tell you that you're at the top of the 'Hit Parade'," Argus told reporters.
The most profitable of Australia's banks and ranked its top bank by KPMG management consultancy, NAB has been seen as a likely predator if big bank mergers in Australia are approved.
But the freeze remains despite an official inquiry into the Australian financial system recommending last month that the big banks as well as major life offices be allowed to merge.
The government wants the ban on big-bank mergers to stay until competition widens and intensifies. But it has opened the way for a foreign bank to swoop on one of the big four.
Argus on Thursday criticised the government's position, warning competition was unrelenting and would put the group's ability to deliver further record profits under pressure.
The warning sparked sell orders on NAB shares, which ended at $A18.11 on Thursday, down 23 cents on Wednesday's close but still at historical highs.
Offshore income bolstered NAB's performance, with earnings growth from its six bank subsidiaries in the United Kingdom, Ireland, the United States and New Zealand.
Even Asia, a small part of NAB's international business, has begun to "put its head up now with some decent black figures", Argus said. Net profit from the Asian business more than doubled to A$15 million from A$6 million a year ago.
Offshore income now accounts for 37 percent of NAB's net earnings. This offers the bank some protection from Australia's fragile housing market and will ensure it continues to outperform its domestic rivals, banking analysts said.
"All the banks are doing it very tough in Australia at the moment," a Melbourne-based analyst said.
Argus said NAB would start to feel the pinch of lower interest rates in the curent half-year, ending September 30, but felt the bank could match last year's second-half result.
"We would like to think we could," he said.
If so, NAB would achieve a record annual net profit of about A$2.24 billion, just under state-owned telecommunication carrier Telstra's Australian record profit of A$2.3 billion in 1995/96 (July/June). (A$1 = US$0.7760)
