French insurance giant Axa-UAP is to be awarded a coveted licence to sell life insurance to China's emerging middle classes, the group's Asian subsidiary said on Friday.
Australian-based National Mutual Holdings Ltd, owned 51 percent by Axa-UAP, said Chinese authorities had advised its parent verbally that a licence would be granted.
The announcement, which confirmed a Reuter report from Shanghai on Tuesday, sent the shares of National Mutual to a record high on the expectation it would run the China business.
Shares in National Mutual Asia Ltd, the Hong Kong-listed Asian business arm of National Mutual, were also firmer.
"Obviously it's good that the greater Axa group of companies has secured a licence to operate in China," National Mutual Holdings managing director Geoff Tomlinson told Reuters.
But he cautioned investors in National Mutual not to get "too excited" about the announcement, saying it was not clear if the National Mutual group would play any role in Axa's success.
The licence itself could still be 18 months away, he added.
"Until we understand the conditions that apply to the granting of this licence, it is impossible to state what role National Mutual Holdings or National Mutual Asia may play in the development of the business," Tomlinson said.
As well, one Sydney insurance analyst said, there was a risk National Mutual had angered Chinese authorities by confirming they intended to grant the parent company a licence.
"They were with (German insurer) Allianz and they withdrew the licence and that's a possibility (with Axa-UAP) as well," Macquarie Equities analyst Tony Jackson told Reuters.
China told Allianz AG Holding in November it would be granted a licence, but the licence was thrown in doubt after European Trade Commissioner Sir Leon Brittan broke the news.
Allianz has since been awarded the licence and will soon join only a handful of foreign life insurers operating in China.
China's insurance market, still in its infancy, was once almost monopolised by the state-owned People's Insurance Group, but it has gradually opened up to local and foreign competition.
National Mutual hopes its 69 percent-owned National Mutual Asia subsidiary will own the China business, in a joint venture with local partner China Everbright-IHD Pacific Ltd.
But Axa-UAP shareholders are unlikely to hand ownership of such a potentially lucrative business to a subsidiary, Macquarie Equities' Jackson said.
"It would be just a gift to minority interests," he said.
Axa-UAP shareholders have only an effective 28 percent interest in National Mutual Asia, and would prefer the Hong Kong company managed the China business for a fee, he added.
National Mutual shares hit a record high of A$2.10 after the announcement, but then fell back to end at A$1.98, up four cents on Thursday's close.
(A$1 = US$0.77)
