Australian banking and insurance group Colonial Ltd hopes to make a strong share-market debut on Monday after major investors rushed its A$690 million (US$535 million) float.
On the eve of its listing on the Australian and New Zealand exchanges, Colonial announced it had priced the share offer at A$3.10 per share for institutional investors, well above the shares' net asset backing of A$2.48 each.
Colonial had given an "indicative range" of between A$2.50 and A$2.90 as a guide to institutions, but on Sunday it said the limited number of shares on offer drew bids well above that.
Institutional bids closed on Friday.
Of the total 235 million shares on offer, institutions could bid for only two-thirds, ensuring they paid a handsome premium to the price paid by retail investors in the first stage of the offer.
Colonial sold shares to members of the public for a fixed price of A$2.60 each this month. Each share, for both retail and institutional shareholders, comes with an option to buy more.
"We are delighted...," Colonial managing director Peter Smedley told a news conference in Melbourne.
"One would hope for a premium over the institutional price (on listing)," he added.
Colonial becomes only the second life office to list on the Australian Stock Exchange, after one of its bigger rivals, National Mutual Holdings Ltd, listed last October.
Australia's biggest, the Australian Mutual Provident Society (AMP), will soon follow. It plans to shed its old mutual structure and list in Australia and New Zealand next year.
Colonial has total assets of A$29.7 billion and is the only local life office with a bank, Sydney-based Colonial State Bank.
It will list with a register of over 500,000 shareholders, including its former Asian insurance partner, Jardine Matheson Holdings Ltd, which has secured a major stake.
Colonial will use some of the proceeds of the float to fund its recent decision to buy out Jardine's half interest in their Asian business for US$163 million.
Colonial has, like National Mutual, focused on Asia to grow its business.
It has applied for a licence to sell life insurance in China and has operations across Southeast Asia, including Hong Kong, Singapore, Indonesia, the Philippines and Thailand. Its traditional offshore markets are Britain, New Zealand and Fiji.
Colonial's Smedley indicated on Sunday the company had tried to weed out the stags from the long-term investors in the float.
He said Colonial had tried to identify investors "perceived to be long term" when allocating shares to institutions.
