Australian financial services group Colonial Ltd made a strong debut on the Australian share market on Monday, its share price soaring on listing.
In early trading, Colonial shares opened at A$3.31 (US$2.56), well above the A$3.10 paid by institutional investors in the company's public share offer, which closed last Friday.
The opening price eclipsed the A$2.60 paid by members of the public in the A$690 million float, but those who took their stag profits and ran on Monday failed to dent the price.
In late morning trade, Colonial shares were trading around the opening price, giving the company a market capitalisation of A$1.9 billion and putting it in the top 50 Australian companies.
"We are obviously delighted that we have come on with a premium. It's a strong market response," Colonial managing director Peter Smedley said after watching the opening share price flash up on the stock exchange boards in Melbourne.
Colonial on Monday became only the second life office to list on the local exchange, after one of its bigger rivals, National Mutual Holdings Ltd, made its debut last October.
Australia's biggest, the Australian Mutual Provident Society, will soon follow. It plans to shed its old mutual structure and list in Australia and New Zealand next year.
Smedley said he did not feel the share offer had been priced too low. "I think the end result is a reflection of the fact we have set the price well," he told reporters.
"There was very heavy over-subscription from the public and a very positive response from institutions."
Each share issued came with an underwritten option to buy more, enabling the company to raise another A$200 million between September this year and June 1998.
Colonial also made a strong debut on Monday on the New Zealand exchange, wher it has a secondary listing.
"It's certainly been an outstanding success," said Melbourne-based broker Kevin Lourey, of Peake Lands Kirwan.
Colonial is devoting some of the float proceeds to development of its life insurance business in Asia.
The group is spending US$163 million to buy out its old Asian partner, Jardine Matheson Holdings Ltd, from their equal life insurance joint venture based in Hong Kong.
Colonial has applied for a licence to sell life insurance in China and has operations across Southeast Asia, including Hong Kong, Singapore, Indonesia, the Philippines and Thailand.
Its traditional offshore markets are Britain, New Zealand and Fiji.
Colonial will also use A$50 million of the float proceeds to complete the 1994 purchase of the State Bank of New South Wales, now renamed Colonial State Bank.
Colonial has total assets of A$29.7 billion and has forecast a net profit before preference dividends of A$180 million for calendar 1997, a-50 percent rise on its 1996 earnings.
(A$1 = US$0.7745)
