Australia's Foreign Investment Review Board (FIRB) said on Tuesday it would probe French insurer Axa-UAP's move into China, insisting it must hand ownership of Asian businesses to its Australian subsidiary.
"The board will critically examine the matter," a FIRB spokesman told Reuters by telephone from Canberra.
"It's a major matter -- absolutely," he added.
Axa-UAP said last week Chinese authorities had given it the green light to sell life insurance in China.  
The announcement hardly mentioned Axa-UAP's 51 percent owned Australian-based subsidiary, life office National Mutual Holdings Ltd, which is the Axa group's Asian arm.
National Mutual, which had separately applied for a licence to operate in China, has said it is not clear what role, "if any", the Australian company will play in Axa's China business.
When Axa bought 51 percent of National Mutual in 1995, the Australian government agreed to the foreign investment on the condition the parent make National Mutual its Asian arm.  
The government's FIRB approved the foreign investment provided Axa "transferred its existing life insurance interests to National Mututal Holdings" and pursue "its Asia Pacific life insurance business strategy through that company".
Insurance analysts have speculated Axa would retain ownership of the potentially lucrative China business, but would pay National Mutual's 69-percent subsidiary, Hong Kong-based National Mutual Asia, to manage it.
But the FIRB spokesman said the board, in approving Axa's investment in National Mutual, cleary intended for Axa to hand ownership of its Asian businesses to the Australian company.  
"It means ownership," the spokesman said.
FIRB will seek dialogue with both Axa and National Mutual in order to examine how the China business will be run, he said.
Ultimately, if the conditions of Axa's investment in National Mutual were found to be breached, the government could move to enforce those conditions, he added.
"There are powers under the Foreign Acquisitions and Takeovers Act which enable the government to enforce compliance with the conditions of approval," he said.
"There are penalties available...," he added. He declined to comment further.  
In an earlier case, the Australian government ruled that Canadian company CanWest Global Communication Corp  CCSs.TO had to reduce its stake in the Ten Group Ltd because it was inconsistent with the government's foreign investment policy.
-- Melbourne bureau 61-3 9286-1421
