Australia's central bank is out to make a buck -- preferably a foreign one.
The conservative, pin-striped officials of the Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA) are quietly but aggressively building up a business in printing foreign currency.
Deep inside a heavily guarded concrete fortress on the outskirts of Melbourne, the RBA's printing presses are already turning out as many foreign banknotes as Australian notes.
Thai baht, Singapore dollars, Indonesian rupiah and Kuwaiti dinars have all rolled off the bank's presses under printing deals with offshore central banks.
Like the new generation of Australian banknotes, the foreign banknotes are all made of plastic using patented technology promoted world-wide by the RBA as the scourge of counterfeiters.
"The RBA is very keen to see this technology adopted internationally," said Robert Larkin, chief executive of the RBA's printing division, Note Printing Australia.
Plastic banknotes of the type made by the RBA, which each feature a small transparent "window" to foil counterfeiters, last much longer in circulation than paper banknotes. A paper note can be in tatters in months; plastic can last four years.
PLASTIC REIGNS
Now that all Australian notes are printed on polymer, not paper, the RBA does not need to print nearly as many banknotes. Its printing presses were becoming idle.
About 600 million local banknotes rolled off the RBA's presses each year before the switch to plastic notes from 1988. Now they churn out only 150 million Australian banknotes a year.
"We are victims of our own success, but at the same time we have liberated capacity for export opportunities," the printing division's sales manager, Michael Beedle, told Reuters.
So the bank is globe-trotting for new business, trying to convince other central banks to go plastic.
"Significant numbers of countries have done or are currently undertaking trials (on the plastic notes) virtually around the world," the RBA's Larkin said. Printing presses do not need any modification to cope with the plastic notes, he said.
Within three years, the RBA hopes that 75 percent of the banknotes rattling off its Melbourne presses will be for export.
But competition for the export dollar -- or lira, rupee or whatever currency is up for grabs -- is cut-throat.
Canadian commercial printers Dura Note and Domtar Inc also make plastic banknotes, while the world's few commercial paper banknote printers fiercely guard their turf, Larkin said.
"The industry is reluctant to move away from a 300-year-old technology and there's strong resistance from printers to put plastic through the printing press," the RBA's Beedle said.
MONEY-MAKING JOINT VENTURE
The RBA is not only targetting central banks that do not print their own banknotes. For central banks with their own presses, it wants to sell them the blank polymer notes on which they can print their own designs.
The RBA and British-based UCB Films Plc, a unit of Belgian chemicals and drugs group UCB, have formed a A$1.5 million (US$1.16 million) equal joint venture, Securency, to market the blank notes. RBA and UCB will split the profits.
Securency is ambitious and is eyeing two of the most prized of all banknote printing jobs -- the new Euro scheduled to come into circulation from 2002, as well as the greenback.
"The two biggest markets to go for other than China and India would be the U.S. one-dollar bill and the Euro. That's what we have set our targets on," Securency general manager Myles Curtis told Reuters in Melbourne.
But Securency has foresaken any hope of persuading European monetary authorities to make their first Euro a plastic one.
"We probably missed the boat first time around because they are already starting to consider the manufacture of the note, but they will have to look at the next generation," Curtis said.
The greenback is also a tantalising prospect, after an attempt to replace the U.S. one-dollar note with a new coin met a hostile public reaction.
"The US$1 note represents 50 percent of their manufacturing capability," he said, adding that a polymer note would allow the Federal Reserve to stay with a note but slash printing costs.
HOT MONEY
Though polymer banknotes are considered rugged enough for the Australian public, they are feeling the heat in Europe.
A man writing from Bratislava has told The Economist magazine how he accidentally tumbled-dried an Australian note in the pocket a pair of jeans.
"The banknote I left in my jeans emerged shrunken and distorted," he wrote.
Undaunted, Securency believes plastic money will eventually find its way into wallets around the world.
There is also an environmental spin-off. In Australia, worn-out banknotes are shredded and recycled to make, among other things -- plastic garbage bins and flower pots.
(A$1 = US$0.7765)
