Australia's powerful Maritime Union launched rolling bans on Indonesian shipping on Wednesday to protest against the arrest of Indonesian labour leaders and Canberra's "failure" to press Jakarta on human rights.
The lightning bans, called at short notice and designed to hold up ships for 24 hours, could apply on an irregular basis to all types of commodity exports to Indonesia, the union said.
Jakarta said the union's move could hurt bilateral ties.
"Such kind of incidents are regretted and will harm the efforts to build up relations between the two countries," Foreign Ministry spokesman Ghaffar Fadyl said in Jakarta.
"Probably this kind of thing will have the strongest reaction from the business sector who are most affected," Fadyl told Reuters. He declined to comment further.
Indonesia, Australia's nearest Asian neighbour, bought A$2.4 billion (US$1.9 billion) worth of Australian commodities in 1995, covering grains, minerals, livestock and refined petroleum.
"The bans are to protest against the recent arrests of independent labour leaders Muchtar Pakpahan and Dita Sari and the continuing repression following the July riots in Jakarta," the union said in a statement.
The bans were also a response to Australian Prime Minister John Howard's failure in Jakarta this week to press Indonesia on the issue of human rights and democracy, the union said.
During his visit to Indonesia, Howard reaffirmed Australia's commitment to close ties.
The first ship to be hit by the rolling bans will be the Bogasari Empat, due to arrive in Fremantle on Australia's west coast late on Wednesday to load 32,500 tonnes of wheat.
The ship will load wheat as scheduled but will be delayed for 24 hours before being able to depart, union assistant secretary Vic Slater told Reuters.
"It delays things," Slater said of the bans. "In terms of the economy, I don't think it has any effect on the Australian economy."
Pakpahan, leader of the Indonesian Labour Welfare Union (SBSI), has been charged with subversion in connection with riots that rocked the Indonesian capital on July 27. The crime of subversion is punishable by death.
Five people died and 149 were injured in the Jakarta riots, Indonesia's official Human Rights Commission has said. Scores of buildings were set ablaze in the unrest, which was the worst in Jakarta since anti-Japanese riots there in 1974.
The riots followed a police raid on the headquarters of the minority Indonesian Democratic Party (PDI) to evict supporters of Megawati Sukarnoputri, who had been ousted as party leader by a government-backed faction the previous month.
Labour activist Dita Sari was arrested before the July 27 riots over a labour strike in Surabaya, media reports have said.
The Australian rolling bans are in line with a world-wide campaign against Pakpahan's arrest by the International Transport Workers' Federation, which represents more than five million workers in 120 countries, the Maritime Union said.
"Muchtar Pakpahan is an independent and moderate union leader who has even won the respect of the U.S. embassy (in Jakarta)," Slater said.
U.S. Assistant Secretary for East Asian and Pacific Affairs Winston Lord met Pakpahan in his Jakarta cell last Friday.
The Maritime Union has 10,000 members working around Australia as seamen and waterside workers.
